Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


GPT AS V ISUAL E XPLAINER
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         In this paper, we present Language Model as Visual Explainer (LVX), a systematic
         approach for interpreting the internal workings of vision models using a tree-
         structured linguistic explanation, without the need for model training. Central
         to our strategy is the collaboration between vision models and LLM to craft
         explanation. On one hand, the LLM is harnessed to delineate hierarchical visual
         attributes, while concurrently, a text-to-image API retrieves images that are most
         align with these textual concepts. By mapping the collected text and image to
         the vision model’s embedding space, we construct a hierarchy-structured visual
         embedding tree. This tree is dynamically pruned and grown by querying the LLM
         using language templates, tailoring the explanation to the model. Such a scheme
         allows us to seamlessly incorporate new attributes while eliminating undesired
         concepts based on the model’s representations. When applied to testing samples,
         our method provides human-understandable explanations in the form of attribute-
         laden trees. Beyond explanation, we retrained the vision model by calibrating
         the model on the generated concept hierarchy, allowing the model to incorporate
         the refined knowledge of visual attributes. To access the effectiveness of our
         approach, we introduce new benchmarks and conduct rigorous evaluations. The
         results unequivocally demonstrate the plausibility, faithfulness, and stability of our
         approach compared to existing interpretability techniques.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Unlocking the secrets of deep neural networks is akin to navigating through an intricate, ever-shifting
maze, as the intricate decision flow within the networks is, in many cases, extremely difficult for
humans to fully interpret. As we delve deeper into safety-critical domains like medical applications
and autonomous driving, the lack of interpretability and the presence of uncertainty pose significant
obstacles to users who need to trust the decisions made by these systems. In this quest, extracting
clear, understandable explanations from these perplexing mazes has become an imperative task.
While efforts have been developed to address the lack of explainability in the domain of computer
vision, these approaches often fall short of providing direct and human-understandable explanations.
Standard techniques, such as attribution methods [Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Ribeiro et al., 2016; Zeiler
& Fergus, 2014; Smilkov et al., 2017], feature importance [Selvaraju et al., 2017; Simonyan et al.,
2013; Shrikumar et al., 2017] and prototype analysis [Chen et al., 2019; Nauta et al., 2021], only
highlight certain pixels or features that are deemed important by the model. As such, these methods
often require the involvement of experts to verify or interpret the outputs for non-technical users.
Natural language explanations [Hendricks et al., 2016; Camburu et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018; Kim
et al., 2018], on the other hand, present an attractive alternative, since the produced texts are better
aligned with human cognition. Nevertheless, these approaches typically rely on labor-intensive and
biased manual annotation of textual rationales for model training.
In this study, we take a bold step toward bridging the gap between human comprehension and
AI decision. We present a systematic approach, Language Model as Visual Explainer (LVX), for
interpreting vision models using tree-structured language explanations, without model training. The
primary challenge we face is that models trained solely on pixel data lack an understanding of the
visual concepts present in an image. For example, if a model predicts one image as a “dog”, it is
unclear whether it truly recognizes the features like the wet nose or floppy ear, or if it is merely
making irrational guesses. To address this challenge, we propose linking the visual model with a
robust, external knowledge provider to establish connections between visual attributes and image


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vision Model              ChatGPT         Vision             Parse                             Text-to-                  Vision            Parse
                                                                               ChatGPT
                                          Model              Tree                             Image API                  Model             Tree
       I can recognize dog.
      What attribute a dog has?
                                                   Concept Prompt                                                  Test
         Dog has tails and
                                                                                     Query Images                Samples          Query Tree
            four legs.

       Wow, I can recognize                                                          Construct Tree
         legs, not tails.            Train
          A dog's legs are
                                    Samples         Query Tree       Refine Prompt
         muscular or slim.                                                                            ×𝒕 iters              Explanation
                                                                                     Query Images
       I see mostly muscular
         legs, not slim legs.                                                         Refine Tree
                                    Construction                          Tree Refinement                         User                    Testing
Figure 1: General workflow of LVX. (Left) A toy example that LLM interacts with vision model to
examine its capability. (Mid) It combines vision, language, and visual-language APIs to create a
parse tree for each visual model. (Right) In testing, embeddings navigate this tree, and the traversed
path provides a personalized explanation for the model’s prediction.
patterns. To this end, we leverage large language models (LLM) such as ChatGPT and GPT4 as our
knowledge providers, combining them with the visual recognition system. Figure 1 (Left) describes a
toy case, where the LLM is interacts with the vision model to explore its capability boundaries. By
doing so, we gain insights into the what visual attributes can be recognized by the model.
The pipeline of our approach is illustrated in Figure 1, which comprises two main stages, the
construction phase and the test phase.
In the construction phase, our goal is to create an attribute parse tree for each category, partitioning
the feature space of a visual model via LLM-defined attribute hierarchy. We begin by extracting
commonsense knowledge about each category and its visual attributes from LLMs using in-context
prompting [Liu et al., 2021] and organize this knowledge into a tree. Utilizing a text-to-image API,
we gather corresponding images. These are subsequently inputted into the vision model to extract
prototype embeddings, which are then mapped to the tree nodes. The parse tree is then refined based
on the properties of the training set. Each training sample is processed by the vision model, with its
features navigating the parse tree based on their proximity to prototype embeddings. Infrequently
visited nodes, representing attributes less recognizable by the model, are pruned. Conversely, nodes
that are visited often, signifying that the model can efficiently recognize the associated concepts,
induce the tree’s growth as the LLM introduces refined concepts. Consequently, LVX yields human-
understandable attribute trees that mirror the model’s understanding of each concept.
In the test phase, we input a test sample into the model to extract its feature. The feature is then
routed in the parse tree by finding the nearest neighbor at each node. The path from the root to the
leaf node serves as a sample-specific rationale for the model’s prediction, offering an explanation of
how the model arrived at its decision.
To validate our approach’s efficacy, we collect new hierarchical annotations and design new metrics
to evaluate the performance of LVX on various real-world datasets. Notably, the dataset is solely used
for evaluation purposes. Beyond interpretation, our study proposes to calibrate the vision model by
utilizing the generated explanation results. By leveraging insights obtained from the tree-structured
explanations, we can improve the model’s performance, leading to reliable decision-making processes.
Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method compared to existing interpretability
techniques, highlighting its potential for advancing explainable AI.
To summarize, Our main contributions are:

   • The paper introduces a novel task, visual explanatory tree parsing, that interprets vision models
     using tree-structured language explanations.
   • We introduce the Language Model as Visual Explainer (LVX) to carry out the visual explanatory
     tree parsing task without model training. The proposed LVX is the first dedicated approach to
     leverage language models to explain the visual recognition system.
   • Our study proposes leveraging the generated explanation results to calibrate the vision model,
     leading to enhanced performance and improved reliability in decision-making processes.
   • To validate the credibility of our tree-structured explanations, we present several new benchmarks
     and design new metrics, facilitating rigorous evaluation of the LVX method’s plausibility,
     faithfulness, and stability on real-world datasets.


                                                                           2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     P ROBLEM D EFINITION
We first define our specialized task,
called visual explanatory tree pars-                               Classifier             “Dog”

ing, which seeks to unravel the
                                                                                               floppy ears that
decision-making process of a vision                                   Vehicles   two ears
                                                                                                 hang down.
model through a tree. Let us consider                     Dog                                    Pointed ears
                                                                      Mammal       A tail
the trained vision model f , defined                                                                short
as a function f : X → Y, where X                                                  Snout
                                                         Visual Tree Parsing                        long
represents the input image space and
Y denotes the output label space. In Figure 2: The illustration of visual explanatory tree parsing
this study, our focus lies on the clas- task, where each input sample is interpreted as a parse tree
sification task, where f = g ◦ h is to represent the model’s logical process.
decomposed into a feature extractor g
and a linear classification head h. The output space Y ∈ Rn , where n signifies the number of classes.
The model is trained on a labeled training set Dtr = {xj , yj }M    j=1 would be evaluated a test set
             L
Dts = {xj }j=1 .
The ultimate objective of our problem is to generate an explanation T for each model-input pair
(f, x) on the test set, illuminating the reasoning behind the model’s prediction ŷ = f (x). This unique
explanation manifests as a tree of attributes, denoted as T = (V, E), comprising a set of L nodes
V = {vi }N                               Ne
           i=1 and M edges E = {ei }i=1 . The root of the tree is the predicted category, ŷ, while each
             v

node vi encapsulates a specific attribute description of the object. These attributes are meticulously
organized, progressing from the holistic to the granular, and from the general to the specific.
Figure 2 provides a visual illustration of our proposed task. Unlike existing approaches [Radford
et al., 2021; Alayrac et al., 2022] that rely on visual-language paired training [Menon & Vondrick,
2022; Mao et al., 2022; Pellegrini et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023], we address the
more challenging scenario, on explaining vision models trained solely on pixel data. While some
models can dissect and explain hierarchical clustering of feature embeddings [Singh et al., 2019; Wan
et al., 2020], they lack the ability to associate each node with a textual attribute. It is important to note
that our explanations primarily focus on examining the properties of the established network, going
beyond training model for reasoning hierarchy [Feinerer & Hornik, 2023] and attributes [Isola et al.,
2015] from the image. Notably, our approach achieves this objective without supervision, eliminating
the need for predefined hierarchical ground truth explanations for model training.


3     L ANGUAGE M ODEL AS V ISUAL E XPLAINER

This section dives deep into the specifics of LVX.At the heart of our approach is the interaction
between the LLM and the vision model to construct the parsing tree. Subsequently, we establish a
rule to route through these tree, enabling the creation of coherent text explanations.


3.1   T REE C ONSTRUCTION VIA LLM

Before constructing our trees, let’s take a moment to examine how humans accomplish this task.
Typically, we already hold a hierarchy of concepts in our minds. When presented with visual stimuli,
we instinctively compare the data to our existing knowledge tree, confirming the presence of distinct
traits. We effortlessly recognize familiar traits and, for unfamiliar ones, we expand our mental
framework. For example, when we think of a dog, we typically know that it has a furry tail. Upon
observing a dog, we naturally check for the visibility of its tail. If we encounter a hairless tail,
previously unknown to us, we incorporate it into our knowledge base, ready to apply it to other dogs.
Our LVX mirrors this methodology. We employ LLM as a “knowledge provider” to construct the
initial conceptual tree. Subsequently, we navigate through the visual model’s feature space to assess
the prevalence of each conceptual node. If a specific attribute is rarely observed, we remove the
corresponding nodes from the tree. Conversely, if the model consistently recognizes an attribute, we
enrich the tree by integrating more nuanced, next-level concepts. This iterative process ensures the
refinement and adaptation of the conceptual tree within our pipeline, which gives rise to our LVX.


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Q: this is a dear because
 A:                                                                 <---- In Context Example ---->
 {                                                                                                                             {
     "Concepts": …,                                             {                                                                  “Concepts”: …,
     "Substance": ["four legs", "two ears",                         "Concepts": …,
                                                                                                                                   "Substance": ["A seal has flippers.", "A seal has fur.", "A seal has
                     "two eyes"],                                   "Substance": ["flippers", "fur",
                                                                                                                               teeth."],
     "Attributes": {                                            "teeth"],                                                          "Attributes": {
          "Head": {                                                 "Attributes": {
                                                                                                                                       "Head": {
               "Ears": ["pointy", "sensitive"],                         "Head": {                                                          "shape": "A seal's head is round in shape.",
               "Eyes": ["large", "brown"]                                   "shape": "round",
                                                                                                                                           "Nose": ["A seal's nose is small.", "A seal's nose is black”],
          },                                                                "Nose": ["small", "black”],                                    "Eyes": ["A seal's eyes are large.", "A seal's eyes are dark."]
          "Body": {                                                         "Eyes": ["large", "dark"]
                                                                                                                                       },
                                                                        },
             "Tail": ["short", "furry"],
             "Legs": ["long", "slender", "hooves"]
                                                     ChatGPT            "Body": {                                    ChatGPT           "Body": {
                                                                                                                                           "Tail": ["A seal's tail is short.", "A seal's tail is rounded."]
        }                                                                   "Tail": ["short", "rounded"]
                                                                                                                                       }
     },                                                                 }                                                          },
     “Environment”: …                                               },
                                                                                                                                   "Environment": ["A seal lives in coastal areas."]
 }                                                                  "Environment": ["coastal areas"]                           }
                      In Context Example                        }
                                                                Instruction: Generate the all sentences that
 Q: this is a seal because
 A:
                                                                describe a concept according to the each attribute
                                                                                                                                                          Prompt Tree
                 Category                                                   Attribute Tree
                                                                                                                                                                                               CLIP

                                                                                                                                                                                              Search
                                                                                                                                                                                              Engine

                                                                                                                                                                                             Stable
       A seal's tail is short.                       A seal‘s nose is small.                      A seal's eyes are dark.          A seal lives in coastal areas.
                                                                                                                                                                                            Diffusion


Figure 3: Crafting text-image pairs for visual concepts. Through in-context prompting, we extract
knowledge from the LLM, yielding visual attributes for each category. These attributes guide the
collection of text-image pairs that encapsulate the essence of each visual concept.

Generating Textual Descriptions for Visual Concepts. We leverage a large language model (LLM)
as our “commonsense knowledge provider” [Li et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2020] to generate textual
descriptions of visual attributes corresponding to each category. The LLM acts as an external database,
providing a rich source of diverse visual concept descriptions. The process is illustrated in Figure 3.
Formally, assume we have a set of category names, denoted as C = {ci }ni=1 , where i represents
the class index. For each of these classes, we prompt an LLM L to produce visual attribute tree.
We represent these attributes as di = L(ci , P), where di is a nested JSON text containing textual
descriptions associated with class ci . To help generate di , we use example input-output pairs, P, as
in-context prompts. The process unfolds in two stages:

• Initial Attribute Generation: We initially generate keywords that embody the attributes of each
  class. The contextual prompt follows a predefined template that instructs the LLM to elaborate on
  the attributes of a visual object. The template is phrased as “This is a <CLSNAME> because” .
  The output JSON contains four primary nodes: Concepts, Substances, Attributes, and
  Environments. As such, the LLM is prompted to return the structured key attributes of a visual
  object. Note that the initial attributes tree may not accurately represent the model; refinements will
  be made in the refinement stage.
• Description Composition: Next, we guide the LLM to create descriptions based on
  these attributes. Again we showcase an in-context example and instruct the model to output
   “Generate sentences that describe a concept according to each attribute.” .


Once the LLM generates the structured attributes di , we parse them into an initial tree, represented as
  (0)       (0)  (0)
Ti = (Vi , Ei ), using the key-value pairs of the JSON text. Those generated JSON tree is then
utilized to query images corresponding to each factor.
Visual Embeddings Tree from Retrieved Images. In order to enable the vision model to understand
attributes generated by the LLM, we employ a two-step approach. The primary step involves the
conversion of textual descriptions, outputted by the LLM, into images. Then, these images are
deployed to investigate the feature region that symbolizes specific attributes within the model.
The transition from linguistic elements to images is facilitated by the use of arbitrary text-to-image
API. This instrumental API enables the generation of novel images or retrieval of existing images that
bear strong relevance to the corresponding textual descriptions. An initial parse tree node, denoted by
v, containing a textual attribute, is inputted into the API to yield a corresponding set of K support
images, represented as {e xi }K
                              i=1 = T2I(v). The value of K is confined to a moderately small range,
typically between 5 to 30. The full information of the collected dataset will be introduced in Section 4.
Our research incorporates the use of search engines such as Bing, or text-to-image diffusion models
like Stable-Diffusion [Rombach et al., 2021], to derive images that correspond accurately to the
provided attributes.


                                                                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Shape    round                  Tree Prune                                                     Tree Grow                                Shape   round

  (%)                                                                                                                                     (%&')
 𝑇!"#        …                          wet                                         …                 Shape    round                     𝑇!"#        …
                                                                                                                                                                               wet

                                       colour         black                                                                                                                   shape    button
                              Nose                                                                                                        Dog
  Dog     Attributes   Head            shape      button                 Dog     Attributes   Head              wet                               Attributes   Head
                                                                                                                                                                                        black
                                                                                                               shape    button                                                          pink
                                              broad                                                                                                                   Nose
                                                                                                      Nose                                           …                        colour
             …                Muzzle                                                …                          colour   black                                                          brown
                                           narrow
                                                                                                                                                                                       mottled
                              Rarely Visited                                            Instruction:
                                 Nodes                                                  Add more visual attribute for the                                                     New Nodes
                                                                                        <nose colour> of a <dog>, to the json.       ChatGPT

        Figure 4: Tree refinement by traversing the embedding tree and querying the LLM model.
Following this, the images are presented to the visual model to extract their respective embeddings,
represented as pi = g(e    xi ). As such, each tree node contains a set of support visual features
P = {pk }K  k=1 . This procedure allows for the construction of an embedding tree, consisting of paired
text and visual features. These pairs are arranged in a concept tree structure as prescribed by the
LLM. It is important to note that the collected images are not employed in training the model. Instead,
they serve as a support set to assist the model in understanding and representing the disentangled
attributes effectively. As such, the visual model uses these embeddings as a map to navigate through
the vast feature space, carving out territories of attributes, and laying down the groundwork for further
exploration and explanation of a particular input.
Tree Refinement Via Refine Prompt. Upon construction, the parse tree structure is refined to better
align with the model’s feature spaces. This stage, termed Tree Refinement, is achieved through passing
training data as a query to traverse the tree. Nodes that are seldom visited indicate that the model
infrequently recognizes their associated attributes. Therefore, we propose a pruning mechanism that
selectively eliminates these attributes, streamlining the tree structure. For nodes that frequently appear
during the traversal, we further grow the tree by introducing additional or more detailed attributes,
enriching the overall context and depth of the tree. The procedure is demonstrated in Figure 4.
Initially, we treat the original training samples, denoted as (xj , yj ) ∈ Dtr , as our query set. Each
sample is passed to the visual model to extract a feature, represented as qj = g(xj ).
Next, the extracted feature traverses the tree corresponding to yj from the root. Its aim is to locate the
closest semantic neighbor among the tree nodes. We define a distance metric between qj to support
set P as the point-to-set distance D(qj , P ). This metric represents the greatest lower bound of the
set of distances from qj to prototypes in P . Therefore, the distance metric is given by:
                                                                   D(qj , P ) = inf{d(qj , p)|p ∈ P }                                                                                      (1)
 where d(·, ·) denotes the Euclidean distance. Following this, we employ a Depth-First Search (DFS)
algorithm to locate the tree node closest to the query point qj . After finding this node, each training
point (xj , yj ) is assigned to a specific node of the tree. Subsequently, we count the number of samples
assigned to a particular node v ∗ , using the following formula:
                                                                           M
                                                                                 1{v∗ = argmin D(qj , Pv )}
                                                                           X
                                                                Cv ∗ =                                                                                                                     (2)
                                                                                                             (0)
                                                                           j=1                       v∈Vyj


 In this formula, 1 is the indicator function and Pv denotes the support feature for node v. Following
this, we rank each node based on the sample counter, which results in two operations to update the
                    (t+1)                      (t)
tree architecture Ti      = Grow(Prune(Ti )), where t stands as the iteration number

• True Pruning. Nodes with the least visits are pruned from the tree, along with their child nodes.
• True Growing. For the top-ranked node, we construct a new inquiry to prompt the LLM to
  generate attributes with finer granularity. The inquiry is constructed with an instruction template
   “Add visual attributes for the <N O D E N A M E > of a <C L A S S N A M E >, to the json” .

The revised concept tree generated by the LLM provides a comprehensive and detailed representation
of the visual attribute. To refine the attribute further, we employ an iterative procedure that involves
image retrieval and the extraction of visual embeddings, as illustrated in Figure 1. This iterative
process enhances the parse tree by incorporating new elements. As each new element is intro-
duced, the attribute areas within the feature space become increasingly refined, leading to improved
interpretability of the model. In our experiment, we performed five rounds of tree refinement.


                                                                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2      ROUTING IN THE T REE

Once the tree is established, the model predicts the class of a new test sample x′ and provides an
explanation for this decision by finding the top-k nearest neighbor nodes.
Specifically, the model predicts the category ŷ for the object in the test sample x′ as ŷ = f (x′ ). The
extracted image feature q′ corresponding to x′ is routed through the tree. Starting from the root, the
tree is traversed to select the top-k nearest neighbor nodes {vi }ki=1 based on the smallest D(q′ , Pvi )
values, representing the highest semantic similarity between q′ and the visual features in the tree’s
nodes. The paths from the root to the selected nodes are merged to construct the explanatory tree T
for the model’s prediction.
This parse tree structure reveals the sequence of visual attributes that influenced the model’s classifica-
tion of x′ as ŷ. It facilitates the creation of precise, tree-structured justifications for these predictions.
Importantly, the routing process involves only a few feature similarity computations per node and
does not require queries to the large language model,resulting in exceptionally fast processing.

3.3      C ALIBRATING THROUGH E XPLAINING

The created parse tree offers a two-fold advantage. Not only does it illustrate the logic of a specific
prediction, but it also serves as a by-product to refine the model’s predictions by introducing hierar-
chical regularization for learned representation. Our goal is to use the parse tree’s explanations as
pseudo-labels, embedding this hierarchical knowledge into the model.
To operationalize this, we employ a hierarchical multi-label contrastive loss (HiMulCon) Zhang et al.
[2022], denoted as LHM C , to fine-tune the pre-trained neural network. This approach enhances the
model by infusing structured explanations into the learning process, thus enriching the representation.
Specifically, we apply the LVX on all training samples. The explanatory path T̂j provides a hierarchi-
cal annotation for each training sample xj . The model is trained with both the cross-entropy loss
LCE and LHM C as follows:
                                   M
                                   X
                             min         LCE f (xj ), yj + λLHM C g(xj ), T̂j                              (3)
                                   j=1

 Here, λ is a weighting coefficient. The explanation T̂j is updated every 10 training epochs to ensure
alignment with the network’s evolving parameters and learning progress. Notably, the support set
isn’t used in model training, maintaining a fair comparison with the baselines.

4       E XPERIMENT
This section offers an in-depth exploration of our evaluation process for the proposed LVX framework
and explains how it can be utilized to gain insights into the behavior of a trained visual recognition
model, potentially leading to performance and transparency improvements.

4.1      E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Data Annotation and Collection. To assess explanation plausibility, data must include human
annotations. Currently, no large-scale vision dataset with hierarchical annotations is available to
facilitate reasoning for visual predictions. To address this, we developed annotations for three
recognized benchmarks: CIFAR10, CIFAR100 [Krizhevsky, 2009], and ImageNet Russakovsky et al.
[2015], termed as H-CIFAR10, H-CIFAR100, and H-ImageNet. These annotations, detailed in
Table 1, serve as ground truth for model evaluation, highlighting our dataset’s unique support for
hierarchical attributes and diverse visual concepts. Note that, we evaluate on hierarchical datasets
only, as our method is specifically designed for structured explanations.
As an additional outcome of our framework, we have gathered three support sets to facilitate model
explanation. In these datasets, each attribute generated by the LLM corresponds to a collection of
images that showcase the specified visual concepts. These images are either retrieved from Bing
search engine 1 using attributes as queries or are generated using Stable-diffusion. We subsequently
    1
        https://www.bing.com/images/


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Data annotation statistics. The ∗ indicates the number of video frames. We compare the
statistics of category, attributes, image and tree depth across different explanatory datasets. Our
dataset stands out as the first hierarchical dataset, offering a wide range of attributes.
Dataset Name                      No. Categories No. Attributes No. Images Avg. Tree Depth Rationales Hierarchy Validation Only
AWA2 Xian et al. [2018]                       50             85      37,322           N/A      ✓          ×            ×
CUB Wah et al. [2011]                        200           N/A       11,788           N/A      ✓          ×            ×
BDD-X Kim et al. [2018]                      906          1,668    26,000*            N/A      ✓          ×            ×
VAW Pham et al. [2021]                      N/A             650      72,274           N/A      ×          ×            ×
COCO Attr Patterson & Hays [2016]             29            196    180,000            N/A      ×          ×            ×
DR-CIFAR-10 Mao et al. [2022]                 10             63       2,201           N/A      ✓          ×            ×
DR-CIFAR-100 Mao et al. [2022]               100            540      18,318           N/A      ✓          ×            ×
DR-ImageNet Mao et al. [2022]              1,000          5,810    271,016            N/A      ✓          ×            ×
H-CIFAR-10                                    10            289      10,000            4.3     ✓         ✓            ✓
H-CIFAR-100                                  100          2,359      10,000            4.5     ✓         ✓            ✓
H-ImageNet                                 1,000         26,928      50,000            4.8     ✓         ✓            ✓

filter the mismatched pairs with the CLIP model, with the threshold of 0.5. Due to the page limit,
extensive details on data collection, false positive removal, limitations, and additional evaluation on
medical data, such as X-ray diagnoses, are available in the supplementary material.
Evaluation Metrics. In this paper, we evaluate the quality of our explanation from three perspectives:
Plausibility, Faithfulness and Stability.
• Plausibility measures how reasonable the machine explanation is compared to the human ex-
  planation. For plausibility assessment, we leverage two conventional metrics for analyzing tree
  similarity: Maximum Common Subgraph (MCS) Raymond & Willett [2002]; Kann [1992], and
  Tree Kernels (TK) Sun et al. [2011]. We calculate their normalized scores respectively. Specifically,
                                                                                         |M CS|×100
  given a predicted tree Tpred and the ground-truth Tgt , the MCS score is computed as √              ,
                                                                                                                |Tpred ||Tgt |
                                                    T K(Tpred ,Tgt )×100
  and the TK score is computed as √                                                . Here, | · | represents the number
                                                T K(Tpred ,Tpred )T K(Tgt ,Tgt )
  of nodes in a tree, and T K(·, ·) denotes the unnormalized TK score. We report the average score
  across all validation samples.
• Faithfulness states that the explanations should reflect the inner working of the model. We
  introduce Model-induced Sample-Concept       Distance (MSCD) to evaluate this, calculated as the
  average of point-to-set distances N1v v∈V D(qj , Pv ) between all test samples and tree nodes,
                                         P
  reflecting the alignment between generated explanation and model’s internal logic. The concept
  is simple: if the explanation tree aligns with the model’s internal representation, the MSCD is
  minimized, indicating high faithfulness.
• Stability evaluates the resilience of the explanation graph to minor input variation, expecting
  minimal variations in explanations. The MCS/TK metrics are used to assess stability by comparing
  explanations derived from clean and slightly modified inputs. We include 3 perturbations, including
  Gaussian additive noise with σ ∈ {0.05, 0.1} and Cutout [DeVries & Taylor, 2017] augmentation.
Baselines. Given the absence of pre-existing models capable of hierarchical explanations without
supervision, we introduce baseline models: Constant, using the full category template tree;
Random, which selects a subtree randomly from the template; and Subtree, choosing the most
common subtree in the test set for explanations. Additionally, we consider TrDec Baseline [Wang
et al., 2018], a strategy utilizing a tree-topology RNN decoder on top of image encoder. Given the
absence of hierarchical annotations, the CLIP model verifies nodes in the template trees, serving as
pseudo-labels for training. We only update the decoder parameters for interpretation purposes. These
models provide a basic comparison for the performance of LVX. More details are in the appendix.
For classification performance, we compare LVX-calibrated model with to neural-tree based solutions,
including a Decision Tree (DT) trained on the neural network’s final layer, DNDF [Kontschieder
et al., 2015], and NBDT [Wan et al., 2020].
Models to be Explained. Our experiments cover a wide range of supervised trained neural networks,
including various convolutional neural networks (CNN) and transformer architectures. These models
consist of VGG [Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014], ResNet [He et al., 2016], DenseNet [Huang et al.,
2017], GoogLeNet [Szegedy et al., 2015], Inceptionv3 [Szegedy et al., 2016], MobileNet-v2 [Sandler
et al., 2018], and Vision Transformer (ViT) [Dosovitskiy et al., 2020]. In total, we utilize 12 networks
for CIFAR-10, 11 networks for CIFAR-100, and 8 networks for ImageNet. For each model, we
perform the tree refinement for 5 iterations.


                                                             7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Plausibility comparison on three visual tree parsing benchmarks. We plot the mean±std
across all networks architectures. For both scores, higher values indicate better performance.

                           Gaussian Gaussian     Cutout
                  Clean                                                     CIFAR-10           CIFAR-100              ImageNet
                          (σ = 0.05) (σ = 0.1) (nholes = 1)   Network
Method Network
                 MCS TK MCS TK MCS TK MCS TK                            TrDec SubTree LVX TrDec SubTree LVX TrDec SubTree LVX
TrDec RN-18      100 100 65.3 86.4 56.2 82.5 65.4 86.0
                                                              RN-18     3.98   2.08    0.61 3.58   1.78   1.29 2.88     1.37     0.93
LVX   RN-18      100 100 69.7 90.8 62.1 86.5 68.1 88.3
                                                              RN-50     3.75   1.86    0.36 3.42   1.54   0.45 2.68     1.25     0.44
TrDec RN-50      100 100 68.3 88.5 59.3 84.2 66.2 86.9
LVX   RN-50      100 100 71.9 92.1 65.6 88.3 69.3 90.1        ViT-S 16 3.62    1.68    0.23 3.28   1.44   0.52 2.56     1.15     0.20


Table 2: Stability comparison in CIFAR10 un- Table 3: Faithfulness comparison by computing the
der input perturbations.                     MSCD score. Smaller the better.

Calibration Model Training. As described in Section 3.3, we finetune the pre-trained neural net-
works with the hierarchical contrastive loss based on the explanatory results. The model is optimized
with SGD for 50 epochs on the training sample, with an initial learning rate in {0.001, 0.01, 0.03}
and a momentum term of 0.9. The weighting factor is set to 0.1. We compare the calibrated model
with the original model in terms of accuracy as well as the explanation performance.


4.2   LLM HELPS V ISUAL I NTERPREBILITY

Plausibility Results. We evaluated LVX against human annotations across three datasets, using
different architectures, and calculating MCS and TK scores. The results, shown in Figure 5, reveal
LVX outperforms baselines, providing superior explanations. Notably, TrDec, even when trained on
CLIP induced labels, fails to generate valid attributes in deeper tree layers—a prevalent issue in long
sequence and structure generation tasks. Meanwhile, SubTree lacks adaptability in its explanations,
leading to lower scores. The insights each individual network are mentioned in the appendix.
Faithfulness Results. We present the MSCD scores for ResNet-18(RN-18), ResNet-50(RN-50), and
ViT-S, contrasting them with SubTree and TrDec in Table 3. Thanks to the incorporation of tree
refinement that explicitly minimizes MSCD, our LVX method consistently surpasses benchmarks,
demonstrating lowest MSCD values, indicating its enhanced alignment with model reasoning.
Stability Results. The stability of our model against minor input perturbations on the CIFAR-10
dataset is showcased in Table 2, where MCS/TK are computed. The “Clean” serves as the oracle
baseline. Our method, demonstrating robustness to input variations, retains consistent explanation
results (MCS>60, TK>85). In contrast, TrDec, dependent on an RNN-parameterized decoder,
exhibits higher sensitivity to feature variations.
Model and Data Diagnosis with Explanation. We visualize the sample explanatory parse tree on
ImageNet validation set induced by ViT-B in Figure 6. The explanations fall into three categories: (1)
correct predictions with explanations, (2) incorrect predictions with explanations, and (3) noisy label
predictions with explanations. We’ve also displayed the 5 nearest neighbor node for each case.
What’s remarkable about LVX is that, even when the model’s prediction is wrong, it can identify
correct attributes. For instance, in a case where a “white shark” was misidentified as a “killer
whale” (b-Row 2), LVX correctly identified “fins”, a shared attribute of both species. Moreover,
the misrecognition of the attribute “wide tail flukes” indicates a potential error in the model,
that could be later addressed to enhance its performance.


                                                              8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                                                                      Aquatic √
                                                                  Scales √                                                                                                                                                            Parasite   ×
                                                                                                                 Concepts
                                Substances                                                                                                                                                             Concepts

                                                                   Tail √                                                                          Cartilaginous   ×                                                              No joint legs

                       Pred:                                                                           Pred: ×
                                                                                                                                                                                           Pred:
                       Green                                                                         Sturgeon
                       lizard   Attributes               Jaws √      Slender √                                   Substance                         Prehistoric   ×                       Nematode
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Substances
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Small      ×
                                              Head                                                                                                                                                                                ×
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mouth


                                                         Eyes √       Ovular √                                   Attributes
                                                                                                                                          Long
                                                                                                                                          snout   ×
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Head×                 Cylindrical√

                                                                                                                              Head √
    Ground-Truth                Environment                                       Ground-Truth                                            Mouth√                         Ground-Truth                  Attribute
    Green lizard
                                                                   Open √            Tench                                                              toothless √         Hook
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Body       Shape      Elongated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     √
                                                                   Woodland



                                                              For Sport √                                                                             Aquatic √
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Object √

                                 Concepts                                                                        Concepts
                                                                                                                                              Black and white                                          Concepts
                                                                    Skis √                                                                    smooth skin with                                                                    Made of
                                                                                                                                              patches    ×                                                                        ceramics √
                       Pred:                                                                          Pred:
                                                                                                                                                                                            Pred:
                       Snow                                                                           Killer ×
                                 Substance                        Narrow √                                       Substance                              Tall √                              Piggy ×                               Slot for
                       mobile                                                                         Whale                                                                                           Substance                   coin           √
                                                                                                                                Dorsal                                                      Bank
                                               Skis √                                                                            Fin √
                                  Attribute
                                                                    1 or 2
                                                                    person√                                        Body
                                                                                                                                   Tail
                                                                                                                                                        Wide   ×                                       Attribute
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Opening    ×
    Ground-Truth
                                               Seats √
                                                                                   Ground-Truth                                 flukes    ×
                                                                                                                                                                          Ground-Truth
    Snowmobile                  Environment
                                                            Frozen Lake √        Great While Shark                                Fin √
                                                                                                                                                       Pectoral
                                                                                                                                                                            Band Aid                                 Colour              Pink √
                                                                                                                                                         Fin √

                   (a) Correct predictions,                                                (b) Error predictions,                                                               (c)
                                                                                                                                                                                (b) Noisy annotations,
                   reasonable explanations.                                          but partially correct explanations.                                                       reasonable explanations.


Figure 6: Explanation visualization for ViT-B on ImageNet-1K. ✓ and × means that the node is
aligned or misaligned with the image. Zoom in for better view.
Surprisingly, LVX is able to identify certain noisy labels in the data, as shown in c-Row 2. In such
cases, even experienced human observers might struggle to decide whether a “pig bank with
band” should be classified “piggy bank” or “band aid”. It again underscores the superior
capabilities of our LVX system in diagnosing the errors beyond model, but also within the data itself.
Calibration Enhances Interpretability and Performance. Our approach involves fine-tuning a
pre-trained model with the loss function outlined in Section 3.3, using parsed explanatory trees to
improve model performance. Table 4 compares the classification performance of our model with that
of other neural tree methods. Our model clearly outperforms the rest.
While neural tree models often struggle to balance between interpretability and performance, our
LVX model circumvents this problem. LVX differs from traditional approaches in that, it doesn’t
necessitate an exact decision tree rule. Instead, the decision is made by the neural network, with
knowledge from the LLM incorporated into the model via Equation.3. This promotes the model’s
capacity to disentangle visual concepts, yielding explainability and awareness of visual attributes, an
edge that other models do not possess.
In addition, we compared the quality of the generated parsed tree with or without calibration, in
Figure 7. The calibration process not only improved model performance, but also led to more precise
tree predictions, indicating enhanced interpretability. We also test the calibrated model on OOD
evaluations in Appendix, where we observe notable improvements.

                                                                                                                 Method                                Network         Expl. CIFAR10 CIFAR100 ImageNet

                                                                                                                 NN                                    ResNet18         ×         94.97%              75.92%                     69.76%
                                                                                                                 DT                                    ResNet18         ✓         93.97%              64.45%                     63.45%
                                                                                                                 DNDF                                  ResNet18         ✓         94.32%              67.18%                      N/A
                                                                                                                 NBDT                                  ResNet18         ✓         94.82%              77.09%                     65.27%

                                                                                                                 LVX (Ours) ResNet18                                    ✓        95.14%               77.33%                     70.28%


Figure 7: Performance and interpretability Table 4: Performance comparison of neural decision
comparison with/without model calibration tree-based methods. Expl. stands for whether the
on CIFAR-100. Higher MCS means better.     prediction is explainable.

5        C ONCLUSION

In this study, we introduced LVX, an approach for interpreting vision models using tree-structured
language explanations without hierarchical annotations. LVX leverages large language models to
connect visual attributes with image features, generating comprehensive explanations. We refined
attribute parse trees based on the model’s recognition capabilities, creating human-understandable
descriptions. Test samples were routed through the parse tree to generate sample-specific rationales.
LVX demonstrated effectiveness in interpreting vision models, offering potential for model calibration.
Our contributions include proposing LVX as the first approach to leverage language models for
explaining the visual recognition system. We hope this study potentially advances interpretable AI
and deepens our understanding of neural networks.


                                                                                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson,
  Karel Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza
  Rutherford, Serkan Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne Mon-
  teiro, Jacob L Menick, Sebastian Borgeaud, Andy Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Shar-
  ifzadeh, Mikoł aj Bińkowski, Ricardo Barreira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Karén
  Simonyan. Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning. In S. Koyejo,
  S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 23716–23736. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022.     URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/960a172bc7fbf0177ccccbb411a7d800-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Oana-Maria Camburu, Tim Rocktäschel, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Phil Blunsom. e-snli: Natural
  language inference with natural language explanations. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 31, 2018.

Chaofan Chen, Oscar Li, Daniel Tao, Alina Barnett, Cynthia Rudin, and Jonathan K Su. This looks
  like that: deep learning for interpretable image recognition. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 32, 2019.

Terrance DeVries and Graham W Taylor. Improved regularization of convolutional neural networks
  with cutout. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04552, 2017.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.

Ingo Feinerer and Kurt Hornik. wordnet: WordNet Interface, 2023. URL https://CRAN.
  R-project.org/package=wordnet. R package version 0.1-16.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.

Lisa Anne Hendricks, Zeynep Akata, Marcus Rohrbach, Jeff Donahue, Bernt Schiele, and Trevor
  Darrell. Generating visual explanations. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European
  Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, October 11–14, 2016, Proceedings, Part IV 14, pp.
  3–19. Springer, 2016.

Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, Laurens Van Der Maaten, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Densely connected
  convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4700–4708, 2017.

Phillip Isola, Joseph J Lim, and Edward H Adelson. Discovering states and transformations in image
  collections. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 1383–1391, 2015.

Viggo Kann. On the approximability of the maximum common subgraph problem. In STACS,
  volume 92, pp. 377–388. Citeseer, 1992.

Jinkyu Kim, Anna Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, John Canny, and Zeynep Akata. Textual explanations
   for self-driving vehicles. Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
   2018.

Peter Kontschieder, Madalina Fiterau, Antonio Criminisi, and Samuel Rota Bulo. Deep neural
  decision forests. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
  1467–1475, 2015.

Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, 2009.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Qing Li, Qingyi Tao, Shafiq Joty, Jianfei Cai, and Jiebo Luo. Vqa-e: Explaining, elaborating, and
  enhancing your answers for visual questions. In Proceedings of the European Conference on
  Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 552–567, 2018.

Xiang Lorraine Li, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Jordan Hoffmann, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Phil
  Blunsom, and Aida Nematzadeh. A systematic investigation of commonsense knowledge in
  large language models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 11838–11855, 2022.

Jiachang Liu, Dinghan Shen, Yizhe Zhang, Bill Dolan, Lawrence Carin, and Weizhu Chen. What
   makes good in-context examples for gpt-3? arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.06804, 2021.

Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Chengzhi Mao, Revant Teotia, Amrutha Sundar, Sachit Menon, Junfeng Yang, Xin Wang, and Carl
  Vondrick. Doubly right object recognition: A why prompt for visual rationales. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.06202, 2022.

Sachit Menon and Carl Vondrick. Visual classification via description from large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07183, 2022.

Meike Nauta, Ron Van Bree, and Christin Seifert. Neural prototype trees for interpretable fine-grained
 image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 14933–14943, 2021.

Genevieve Patterson and James Hays. Coco attributes: Attributes for people, animals, and objects. In
  Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, October
 11-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part VI 14, pp. 85–100. Springer, 2016.

Chantal Pellegrini, Matthias Keicher, Ege Özsoy, Petra Jiraskova, Rickmer Braren, and Nassir
  Navab. Xplainer: From x-ray observations to explainable zero-shot diagnosis. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.13391, 2023.

Khoi Pham, Kushal Kafle, Zhe Lin, Zhihong Ding, Scott Cohen, Quan Tran, and Abhinav Shrivastava.
  Learning to predict visual attributes in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 13018–13028, June 2021.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

John W Raymond and Peter Willett. Maximum common subgraph isomorphism algorithms for the
  matching of chemical structures. Journal of computer-aided molecular design, 16:521–533, 2002.

Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. ”why should I trust you?”: Explaining the
 predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference
 on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA, August 13-17, 2016, pp.
 1135–1144, 2016.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models, 2021.

Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang,
  Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al. Imagenet large scale visual recognition
  challenge. International journal of computer vision, 115:211–252, 2015.

Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, Menglong Zhu, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Liang-Chieh Chen. Mo-
 bilenetv2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
 computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4510–4520, 2018.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 618–626,
  2017.
Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. Learning important features through
  propagating activation differences. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3145–
  3153. PMLR, 2017.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks:
  Visualising image classification models and saliency maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6034, 2013.
Chandan Singh, W. James Murdoch, and Bin Yu. Hierarchical interpretations for neural network
  predictions. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=SkEqro0ctQ.
Daniel Smilkov, Nikhil Thorat, Been Kim, Fernanda Viégas, and Martin Wattenberg. Smoothgrad:
  removing noise by adding noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03825, 2017.
Jun Sun, Min Zhang, and Chew Lim Tan. Tree sequence kernel for natural language. In Proceedings
  of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 25, pp. 921–926, 2011.
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Du-
  mitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1–9, 2015.
Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioffe, Jon Shlens, and Zbigniew Wojna. Rethinking
  the inception architecture for computer vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2818–2826, 2016.
C. Wah, S. Branson, P. Welinder, P. Perona, and S. Belongie. The Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011
  Dataset. Technical Report CNS-TR-2011-001, California Institute of Technology, 2011.
Alvin Wan, Lisa Dunlap, Daniel Ho, Jihan Yin, Scott Lee, Henry Jin, Suzanne Petryk, Sarah Adel Bar-
  gal, and Joseph E Gonzalez. Nbdt: neural-backed decision trees. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.00221,
  2020.
Xinyi Wang, Hieu Pham, Pengcheng Yin, and Graham Neubig. A tree-based decoder for neural
  machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 4772–4777, 2018.
Yongqin Xian, Christoph H Lampert, Bernt Schiele, and Zeynep Akata. Zero-shot learning—a
  comprehensive evaluation of the good, the bad and the ugly. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
  and machine intelligence, 41(9):2251–2265, 2018.
Yue Yang, Artemis Panagopoulou, Shenghao Zhou, Daniel Jin, Chris Callison-Burch, and Mark
  Yatskar. Language in a bottle: Language model guided concept bottlenecks for interpretable image
  classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 19187–19197, 2023.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12,
 2014, Proceedings, Part I 13, pp. 818–833. Springer, 2014.
Shu Zhang, Ran Xu, Caiming Xiong, and Chetan Ramaiah. Use all the labels: A hierarchical multi-
  label contrastive learning framework. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16660–16669, 2022.
Yuhui Zhang, Jeff Z HaoChen, Shih-Cheng Huang, Kuan-Chieh Wang, James Zou, and Serena
  Yeung. Diagnosing and rectifying vision models using language. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023. URL https://openreview.net/pdf?id=
  D-zfUK7BR6c.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xuhui Zhou, Yue Zhang, Leyang Cui, and Dandan Huang. Evaluating commonsense in pre-trained
  language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp.
  9733–9740, 2020.


                                               13
