Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F ED LAP-DP: F EDERATED L EARNING BY S HARING
D IFFERENTIALLY P RIVATE L OSS A PPROXIMATIONS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         This work proposes FedLAP-DP, a novel privacy-preserving approach for feder-
         ated learning. Unlike previous linear point-wise gradient-sharing schemes, such as
         FedAvg, our formulation enables a type of global optimization by leveraging syn-
         thetic samples received from clients. These synthetic samples, serving as loss sur-
         rogates, approximate local loss landscapes by simulating the utility of real images
         within a local region. We additionally introduce an approach to measure effec-
         tive approximation regions reflecting the quality of the approximation. Therefore,
         the server can recover an approximation of the global loss landscape and opti-
         mize the model globally. Moreover, motivated by the emerging privacy concerns,
         we demonstrate that our approach seamlessly works with record-level differen-
         tial privacy (DP), granting theoretical privacy guarantees for every data record on
         the clients. Extensive results validate the efficacy of our formulation on various
         datasets with highly skewed distributions. Our method consistently improves over
         the baselines, especially considering highly skewed distributions and noisy gradi-
         ents due to DP. The source code and setup will be released upon publication.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) is a distributed learning framework that allows
participants to train a model collaboratively without sharing their data. Predominantly, existing
works (McMahan et al., 2017; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020) achieve this by training
local models on clients’ private datasets and sharing only the gradients with the central server. De-
spite extensive research over the past few years, these prevalent gradient-based methods still suffer
from several challenges (Kairouz et al., 2021), such as data heterogeneity, potential risks of privacy
breaches, and high communication costs.
Data heterogeneity (Hsu et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019; Karimireddy et al., 2020) often hurts perfor-
mance and convergence speed. The fundamental reason is that the local updates based on the private
datasets optimize the models for their local minima but tend to be sub-optimal to the global objective.
In this work, we propose FedLAP-DP, a novel differentially private framework designed to approx-
imate local loss landscapes and counteract biased federated optimization through the utilization of
synthetic samples. As illustrated in Fig. 1, unlike the traditional gradient-sharing scheme (McMahan
et al., 2017) which is prone to inherently biased global update directions, our framework transmits
synthetic samples encoding the local optimization landscapes. This enables the server to faithfully
reconstruct the global loss landscape, overcoming the biases incurred by conventional gradient-
sharing schemes and resulting in substantial improvements in convergence speed (refer to Sec. 5).
Additionally, we introduce the usage of a trusted region to faithfully reflect the approximation qual-
ity, further mitigating bias stemming from potential imperfections in the local approximation within
our scheme.
Privacy protection is another crucial aspect of FL. Various studies have uncovered vulnerabilities in
existing federated systems, including the risk of data leakage (Hitaj et al., 2017; Bhowmick et al.,
2018; Geiping et al., 2020) and membership inference (Nasr et al., 2019; Melis et al., 2019). In re-
sponse to these concerns, our framework strategically incorporates record-level differential privacy,
thereby ensuring rigorous privacy guarantees for each individual data record within the system. Built
upon differentially private loss approximation, our method provides reliable utility under privacy-
preserving settings, especially when considering low privacy budgets.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lastly, our framework is more communication
efficient as it enables the execution of multiple
optimization rounds on the server side, and –
particularly for large models – transferring syn-
thetic data is less costly than gradients in each
round. We summarize our contributions as fol-
lows.
• We propose FedLAP-DP that uses synthetic
  images to comprehensively approach feder-
  ated optimization, which has yet to be thor-
  oughly investigated before.
• We demonstrate how to accurately identify
  local approximation and effective regions
  on clients, enabling efficient federated opti-
  mization on the server.                           Figure 1: An overview of FedLAP-DP. It approx-
• FedLAP-DP delivers stringent record-level         imates local neighborhoods with synthetic im-
  DP assurances, maintaining utility and out-       ages on the clients (local approximation, Sec. 4.2)
  performing gradient-sharing counterparts in       and optimizes the model according to the recon-
  privacy-preserving settings.                      structed loss landscape on the server (global op-
• Extensive experiments confirm that our for-       timization, Sec. 4.3). Differential privacy is inte-
  mulation presents superior performance and        grated to introduce privacy barriers (Sec. 4.4).
  convergence speed over existing gradient-
  sharing baselines, even with highly skewed
  data distributions.


2     R ELATED W ORK

Non-IID Data in Federated Learning causes major challenges in FL (Kairouz et al., 2021). Ex-
isting efforts mainly fall into the following categories: variance-reduction techniques (Karimireddy
et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2019), constraining the dissimilarity between clients’ updates (Li et al., 2020;
2021a), and adjusting the global model to a personalized version at the inference stage (Luo et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2021b; Fallah et al., 2020). In contrast, we present a novel scheme that considers
valid approximation regions and effectively resolves non-IID federated optimization. Notably, a
concurrent work FedDM (Xiong et al., 2023) shares a similar idea in approximating loss landscapes
but employs class-wise feature matching. Despite easier synthesis, it neglects the importance of
approximation quality and might introduce additional privacy risks due to class-wise optimization.
Dataset Distillation Our work is largely motivated by recent progress in distilling the necessary
knowledge of model training into a small set of synthetic samples (Wang et al., 2018; Zhao et al.,
2021; Zhao & Bilen, 2023; Cazenavette et al., 2022). Our approach is built on top of DSC (Zhao
et al., 2021) with several key differences. The proposed FedLAP-DP (i) focuses on finding local
approximation and assembling the global loss landscape to facilitate federated optimization, (ii) is
class-agnostic and complements record-level differential privacy while prior works often consider
class-wise alignment and could cause privacy risks, and (iii) is designed for multi-round training with
several critical design choices. The most relevant work is Chen et al. (2022). They also consider
class-agnostic distillation and differential privacy while focusing on one-round distillation rather
than multiple-round federated learning.


3     BACKGROUND

3.1   F EDERATED L EARNING

In federated learning, we consider training a model w that maps the input x to the output prediction
y. We assume K clients participate in the training, and each owns a private dataset Dk with distri-
bution pk . We use the subscript k to represent the indices of clients, and the superscript m and t to
denote the m-th communication round and t-th local step, respectively, unless stated otherwise.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Overall, the learning objective is to find the optimal model w that minimizes the empirical global
loss over the population distribution:
                                                                     N
                                                               1 X
                             L(w) = E(x,y)∼p [ℓ(w, x, y)] =          ℓ(w, xj , yj )                   (1)
                                                               N j=1

where ℓ could be arbitrary loss criteria such as cross-entropy and N is the total dataset size. However,
in federated settings, direct access to the global objective is prohibited as all client data is stored
locally. Instead, the optimization is conducted on local surrogate objectives Lk (w):
                                  K                                Nk
                                  X Nk                             X  1
                         L(w) =             Lk (w) , Lk (w) =                 ℓ(w, xj , yj ),
                                        N                          j=1
                                                                         Nk
                                  k=1

where (xj , yj ) are data samples from the client dataset Dk .
Existing methods, such as FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017), simulate stochastic gradient descent on
the global objective by performing local gradient updates and periodically aggregating and synchro-
nizing them on the server side. Specifically, at the m-th communication round, the server broadcasts
the current global model weights wgm,1 to each client, who then performs T local iterations with
learning rate η.
              wkm,1 ← wgm,1 , ∀k ∈ [K]       and wkm,t+1 = wkm,t − η∇Lk (wkm,t ), ∀t ∈ [T ]           (2)

The local updates ∆wkm are then sent back to the server and combined to construct gc
                                                                                   m , a linear
                                         m
approximation of the true global update g :
                   K                  K
                   X Nk               X Nk
             m =
            gc               ∆wkm =             (wkm,T − wkm,1 )    and wgm+1,1 = wgm,1 − η gc
                                                                                             m        (3)
                         N                  N
                   k=1                k=1


In this work, we focus on the conventional FL setting in which each client retains their private data
locally, and the local data cannot be directly accessed by the server. Every data sample is deemed
private, with neither the server nor the clients using any additional (public) data, which stands in
contrast to previous works that require extra data on the server side (Zhao et al., 2018; Li & Wang,
2019). Furthermore, all clients aim towards a singular global objective (Eq. 1), which is distinct from
personalized approaches wherein evaluations are conducted based on each client’s unique objective
and their own data distribution (Li et al., 2021b; Fallah et al., 2020).

3.2   N ON -IID C HALLENGES

The heterogeneity of client data distributions presents several major challenges to FL, such as a
significant decrease in the convergence speed (and even divergence) and the final performance
when compared to the standard IID training setting (Khaled et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Karim-
ireddy et al., 2020; Li et al., 2019). This can be easily seen from the mismatch between the lo-
cal objectives that are being solved and the global objective that we are indeed aiming for, i.e.,
Lk (w) ̸= E(x,y)∼p [ℓ(w, x, y)] if pk ̸= p for some k. Executing multiple local steps on the local
objective (Eq. 2) makes the local update ∆wkm deviate heavily from the true global gradient ∇L(w),
                                                                                        m ̸= g m , where
inevitably resulting in a biased approximation of the global gradient via Eq. 3, i.e., gc
g m is derived from the true loss L(w) (See Fig. 1 for a demonstration.).
Despite significant advances achieved by existing works in alleviating divergence issues, these meth-
ods still exhibit bias towards optimizing the global objective as they rely on the submitted client
updates ∆wkm , which only indicate the direction towards the client’s local optimum.
In contrast, our method communicates the synthetic samples Sk that encode the local optimization
landscapes, i.e., gradient directions within a trust region around the starting point and summarize on
possible trajectories (wkm,1 , wkm,2 , ..., wkm,T +1 ), as opposed to existing methods that communicate a
single direction ∆wkm = wkm,T +1 −wkm,1 . This fundamental change provides the central server with
a global perspective that faithfully approximates the ground-truth global optimization (See Fig. 1 top
row) than existing approaches.


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3     D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY

Differential Privacy (DP) provides theoretical guarantees of privacy protection while allowing for
quantitative measurement of utility. We review several definitions used in this work in this section.
Definition 3.1 (Differential Privacy (Dwork et al., 2014)). A randomized mechanism M with range
R satisfies (ε, δ)-DP, if for any two adjacent datasets E and E ′ , i.e., E ′ = E ∪ {x} for some x in
the data domain (or vice versa), and for any subset of outputs O ⊆ R, it holds that
                                    Pr[M(E) ∈ O] ≤ eε Pr[M(E ′ ) ∈ O] + δ                                        (4)

Intuitively, DP guarantees that an adversary, provided with the output of M, can only make nearly
identical conclusions (within an ε margin with probability greater than 1 − δ) about any specific
record, regardless of whether it was included in the input of M or not (Dwork et al., 2014). This
suggests that, for any record owner, a privacy breach due to its participation in the dataset is unlikely.
In FL, the notion of adjacent (neighboring) datasets used in DP generally refers to pairs of datasets
differing by either one user (user-level DP) or a single data point of one user (record-level DP).
Our work focuses on the latter. While there are established methods providing record-level DP for
training federated models (Truex et al., 2019; Peterson et al., 2019; Kerkouche et al., 2021), these
primarily operate on the transmitted single client gradients. In contrast, our novel formulation allows
efficient communication of comprehensive information, thereby circumventing biased optimization
and displaying improved training stability and utility.
We use the Gaussian mechanism to upper bound privacy leakage when transmitting information
from clients to the server.
Definition 3.2. (Gaussian Mechanism (Dwork et al., 2014)) Let f : Rn → Rd be an arbitrary func-
tion with sensitivity being the maximum Euclidean distance between the outputs over all adjacent
datasets E and E ′ ∈ E:            ∆2 f = max ∥f (E) − f (E ′ )∥2                            (5)
                                                   E,E ′

The Gaussian Mechanism Mσ , parameterized by σ, adds noise into the output, i.e.,
                                          Mσ (x) = f (x) + N (0, σ 2 I).                                         (6)
                               p
Mσ is (ε, δ)-DP for σ ≥            2 ln (1.25/δ)∆2 f /ε.

Moreover, we use the following theorem to guarantee that the privacy leakage is bounded upon
obtaining gradients from real private data in our framework. This forms the basis for the overall
privacy guarantee of our framework and enables us to enhance the approximation quality without
introducing additional privacy costs.
Theorem 3.3. (Post-processing (Dwork et al., 2014)) If M satisfies (ε, δ)-DP, G ◦ M will satisfy
(ε, δ)-DP for any data-independent function G.

4     F ED LAP-DP
4.1     OVERVIEW

Unlike existing approaches that typically communicate the local update directions to approximate
the global objective (Eq. 3), we propose FedLAP to directly simulate the global optimization by
transmitting a small set of synthetic samples that reflect the local loss landscapes (Fig. 1).
Let pk and the pSk be the distribution of the real client dataset Dk and the corresponding synthetic
dataset Sk , respectively. We formalize our objective and recover the global objective as follows:
                                                                        K                    K
                                                                        X Nk                 X Nk
    E(x,y)∼pk [ℓ(w, x, y)] ≃ E(x̂,ŷ)∼pSk [ℓ(w, x̂, ŷ)]   and L(w) =             Lk (w) ≃             Lbk (w)   (7)
                                                                              N                    N
                                                                        k=1                  k=1

Thus, performing global updates is then equivalent to conducting vanilla gradient descent on the
recovered global objective, i.e., by training on the synthetic set of samples.
We demonstrate our framework in Fig. 1. In every communication round, synthetic samples are op-
timized to approximate the client’s local loss landscapes (Sec 4.2) and then transmitted to the server.


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The server then performs global updates on the synthetic samples to simulate global optimization
(Sec 4.3). Lastly, we show in Sec 4.4 that our method is seamlessly compatible with record-level
differential privacy, resulting in FedLAP-DP. The overall algorithm is depicted in Algorithm 1 with
the indices i being the number of training trajectories observed by the synthetic images and j being
the number of updates on a sampled real batch. We omit the indices in the following for conciseness.

Algorithm 1 FedLAP
                                                      function ClientExecute(k, r, wgm,1 ) :
                                                                                                           m−1
                                                        Initialize Sk : {x̂m k } from Gaussian noise or {x̂k   }, {ŷk }
  function ServerExecute:                               to be a balanced set
                                1,1
    Initialize global weight wg , radius r              for i = 1, . . . , Ri do
    /* Local approximation */                              /* Resample training trajectories */
    for m = 1, . . . , M do                                Reset t ← 1, model wkm,1 ← wgm,1 , and Ski,0 ← Ski−1
       for k = 1, . . . , K do                             while ||wkm,t − wkm,1 || < r do
          Sk , rk ← ClientsExecute(k, r, wgm,1 )              Sample real data batches {(xk , yk )} from Dk
       end for                                                Compute g D = ∇L(wkm,t , {(xk , yk )})
       /* Global optimization */                              for j = 1, . . . , Rb do
       rg ← min{rk }K                                           /* Update synthetic set Sk   given the real gradient */
                          k=1
       t←1                                                      Ski,j+1 = Ski,j − τ ∇Sk Ldis g D , ∇L(wkm,t , Ski,j )
       while ∥wgm,1 − wgm,t ∥ < rg do                         end for
                              PK                              for l = 1, . . . , Rl do
          wgm,t+1 = wgm,t − k=1 η NNk ∇L(wgm,t , Sk )
                                                                /* Update local models from wkm,t to wkm,t+l */
          t←t+1
                                                                wkm,t+1 = wkm,t − η∇L(wkm,t , Sk )
       end while                                                t←t+1
       wgm+1,1 ← wgm,t                                        end for
    end for                                                end while
  Return: global model weight wgM +1,1                  end for
                                                        Measure rk on Dk (See Fig. 2)
                                                      Return: Synthetic set SkRi , calibrated radius rk



4.2   L OCAL A PPROXIMATION

The goal of this step is to construct a set of synthetic
samples Sk that accurately captures necessary local in-
formation for subsequent global updates. A natural ap-
proach would be to enforce similarity between the gra-
dients obtained from the real client data and those ob-
tained from the synthetic set:
∇w E(x,y)∼pk [ℓ(w, x, y)] ≃ ∇w E(x̂,ŷ)∼pSk [ℓ(w, x̂, ŷ)]
We achieve this by minimizing the distance between the
gradients:                                               Figure 2: rk selection. The loss on private
                                                         real and synthetic data decreases initially
        arg min       Ldis ∇L(w, Dk ), ∇L(w, Sk )    (8) but deviates later. rk is defined as the turn-
           Sk
                                                         ing points with the smallest real loss.
where ∇L(w, Dk )) denotes the stochastic gradient of network parameters on the client dataset Dk ,
and ∇L(w, Sk ) the gradient on the synthetic set for brevity. Ldis can be arbitrary metric that mea-
sures the similarity. We follow Zhao et al. (2021) and adopt a layer-wised cosine distance coupled
with a mean square error term to encode the directional information of the gradients and regulate
the discrepancy in their magnitudes (see Sec. B and D.1 for more details and analysis).
While solving Eq. 8 for every possible w would lead to perfect recovery of the ground-truth global
optimization in principle. However, it is practically infeasible due to the large space of (infinitely
many) possible values of w. Additionally, as |SK | is set to be much smaller than Nk (for the sake
of communication efficiency), an exact solution may not exist, resulting in approximation error for
some w. To address this, we explicitly constrain the problem space to be the most achievable region
for further global updates. Specifically, we consider wk that is sufficiently close to the initial point
of the local update and is located on the update trajectories (Eq. 10). Formally,
                      XT
             arg min      Ldis ∇L(wkm,t , Dk ), ∇L(wkm,t , Sk )                                      (9)
                 Sk      t=1

                  s.t. ∥wkm,t − wkm,1 ∥ < r            and wkm,t+1 = wkm,t − η∇L(wkm,t , Sk ),                             (10)


                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where r represents a radius suggested by the server, defining the coverage of update trajectories, and
η denotes the model update learning rate shared among the server and clients.
In the m-th communication round, the clients first synchronize the local model wkm,1 with the global
model wgm,1 and initialize the synthetic features {x̂m  k } either from Gaussian noise or to be the
ones obtained from the previous round {x̂m−1k    }. Synthetic labels {ŷk } are initialized to be a fixed,
balanced set and are not optimized during the training process. The number of synthetic samples |Sk |
is kept equal for all clients in our experiments, though it can be adjusted for each client depending
on factors such as local dataset size and bandwidth in practice.
To simulate the local training trajectories, the clients alternate between updating synthetic features
using Eq. 9 and updating the local model using Eq. 10. This process continues until the current
local model weight wkm,t exceeds a predefined region r determined by the Euclidean distance on the
flattened weight vectors, meaning it is no longer close to the initial point. On the other hand, the
server optimization should take into consideration the approximation quality of Sk . Thus, as illus-
trated in Fig. 2, each client will suggest a radius rk indicating the distance that Sk can approximate
best within the radius r. For the DP training setting, we make the choice of rk data-independent by
setting it to be a constant (the same as r in our experiments).

4.3   G LOBAL O PTIMIZATION

Once the server received the synthetic set Sk and the calibrated radius rk , global updates can be
performed by conducting gradient descent directly on the synthetic set of samples. The global
objective can be recovered by Lbk (w) according to Eq. 7 (i.e., training on the synthetic samples),
while the scaling factor NNk can be treated as the scaling factor of the learning rate when computing
the gradients on samples from each synthetic set Sk , namely:
                             K
                             X          Nk
         wgm,t+1 = wgm,t −         η·      ∇w L(wgm,t , Sk ) s.t. ∥wgm,t − wgm,1 ∥ ≤ min {rk }K
                                                                                              k=1     (11)
                                        N
                             k=1

The constraint in Eq. 11 enforces that the global update respects the vicinity suggested by the clients,
meaning updates are only made within regions where the approximation is sufficiently accurate.

4.4   R ECORD - LEVEL DP

While federated systems offer a basic level of privacy protection, recent works identify various vul-
nerabilities under the existing framework, such as membership inference (Nasr et al., 2019; Melis
et al., 2019). Though Dong et al. (2022) uncovers that distilled datasets may naturally introduce
privacy protection, we further address possible privacy concerns that might arise during the trans-
fer of synthetic data in our proposed method. Specifically, we rigorously limit privacy leakage by
integrating record-level DP, a privacy notion widely used in FL applications. This is especially im-
portant in cross-silo scenarios, such as collaborations between hospitals, where each institution acts
as a client, aiming to train a predictive model and leveraging patient data with varying distributions
across different hospitals while ensuring strict privacy protection for patients.
Threat model. In a federated system, there can be one or multiple colluding adversaries who
have access to update vectors from any party during each communication round. These adversaries
may have unlimited computation power but remain passive or ”honest-but-curious,” meaning they
follow the learning protocol faithfully without modifying any update vectors (Truex et al., 2019;
Peterson et al., 2019; Kerkouche et al., 2021). These adversaries can represent any party involved,
such as a malicious client or server, aiming to extract information from other parties. The central
server possesses knowledge of label classes for each client’s data, while clients may or may not
know the label classes of other clients’ data. While we typically do not intentionally hide label class
information among clients, our approach is flexible and can handle scenarios where clients want to
keep their label class information confidential from others.
We integrate record-level DP into FedLAP to provide theoretical privacy guarantees, which yields
FedLAP-DP. Given a desired privacy budget (ε, δ), we clip the gradients derived from real data
with the Gaussian mechanism, denoted by ∇L(w  e m,t , Dk ). The DP-guaranteed local approximation
                                                  k
can be realized by replacing the learning target of Eq. 9 with the gradients processed by DP while


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


leaving other constraints the same. Formally, we have
                          T
                          X
                arg min             e m,t , Dk ), ∇L(wm,t , Sk )
                              Ldis ∇L(w k             k
                  Sk
                          t=1
                                                                                                     (12)
                   s.t.   ∥wkm,t − wkm,1 ∥ < r   and       wkm,t+1 = wkm,t − η∇L(wkm,t , Sk )

Note that r is set to be a constant here to avoid additional privacy risks. We describe the full
algorithm of FedLAP-DP in Algorithm 2 and present the privacy analysis of FedLAP-DP in the
Sec. A. Our analysis suggests that with equivalent access to private data, FedLAP incurs the same
privacy costs as gradient-sharing approaches. Our method further demonstrates a better privacy-
utility trade-off in Sec. 5.3, confirming its robustness under DP noise.

5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1   S ETUP

We consider a standard classification task by training federated ConvNets (LeCun et al., 2010) on
three benchmark datasets: MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998), FashionMNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), and
CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009). Our study focuses on a non-IID setting where five clients pos-
sess disjoint class sets, meaning each client holds two unique classes. This scenario is typically con-
sidered challenging (Hsu et al., 2019) and mirrors the cross-silo setting (Kairouz et al., 2021) where
all clients participate in every training round while maintaining a relatively large amount of data, yet
exhibiting statistical divergence (e.g., envision the practical scenario for collaborations among hos-
pitals). Our method employs a learning rate of 100 for updating synthetic images and 0.1 with cosine
decay for model updates. We set by default (Ri , Rl , Rb , r) = (4, 2, 10, 1.5) and (1, 0, 5, 10) for DP
and non-DP training, respectively. To prevent infinite loops caused by the neighborhood search, we
upper bound the while loops in Algorithm 1 by 5 iterations. We follow FL benchmarks (McMahan
et al., 2017; Reddi et al., 2021) and the official codes for training the baselines. All experiments are
repeated over three random seeds. More details are provided in the Appendix.

5.2   DATA H ETEROGENEITY

               DSC†          FedSGD       FedAvg            FedProx     SCAFFOLD FedDM             Ours
                               (1×)         (1×)              (1×)         (2×)     (0.96×)      (0.96×)
MNIST        98.90±0.20     87.07±0.65   96.55±0.21        96.26±0.04   97.56±0.06 96.66±0.18   98.08±0.02
Fa.MNIST     83.60±0.40     75.10±0.16   79.67±0.56        79.37±0.29   82.17±0.37 83.10±0.16   87.37±0.09
CIFAR-10     53.90±0.50     60.91±0.19   75.20±0.12        63.84±0.45   56.27±1.19 70.51±0.45   71.91±0.20

Table 1: Performance comparison on benchmark datasets. The relative communication cost of each
method (w.r.t. the model size) is shown in brackets. DSC† is ported from the original paper and
conducted in a one-shot centralized setting.


           Figure 3: Accuracy over communication rounds with extremely non-IID data.

We first demonstrate the effectiveness of FedLAP over various baselines on benchmark datasets in
a non-IID setting. Our method assigns 50 images to each class, resulting in comparable commu-
nication costs to the baselines. The baselines include: DSC (Zhao et al., 2021), the dataset distil-
lation method considering centralized one-shot distillation; FedSGD (McMahan et al., 2017), that
transmits every single batch gradient to prevent potential model drifting; FedAvg (McMahan et al.,
2017), the most representative FL method; FedProx (Li et al., 2020), SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy
et al., 2020), state-of-the-art federated optimization for non-IID distributions, and FedDM (Xiong


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


et al., 2023), a concurrent work that shares a similar idea but without considering approximation
quality. Note that DSC operates in a (one-shot) centralized setting, SCAFFOLD incurs double the
communication costs compared to the others by design, and FedDM requires class-wise optimiza-
tion. As depicted in Table 1, our method surpasses DSC and FedSGD, highlighting the benefits of
multi-round training on the server and client sides, respectively. Moreover, our method presents su-
perior performance over state-of-the-art optimization methods, validating the strength of optimizing
from a global view. We also plot model utility over training rounds in Fig. 3, where our method con-
sistently exhibits the fastest convergence across three datasets. In other words, our methods consume
fewer costs to achieve the same or better performance level and more communication efficiency.

5.3   P RIVACY P ROTECTION

            PSG† Chen et al. (2022)   DP-FedAvg   DP-FedProx     Ours      DP-FedAvg   DP-FedProx     Ours
     ε               32                              2.79                                10.18
 MNIST           88.34±0.8            45.25±6.9    54.58±4.9   60.72±1.3   86.99±0.5    88.75±0.5   87.77±0.8
 FMNIST          67.91±0.3            50.11±4.2    54.57±2.9   59.85±1.5   72.78±1.3    71.67±2.2   73.00±0.7
 CIFAR-10        34.58±0.4            17.11±0.7    19.40±0.7   21.42±1.4   31.15±0.4    35.04±1.1   36.09±0.5

Table 2: Utility and Privacy budgets at varying privacy regimes. The high privacy regime with
ε = 2.79 corresponds to the first communication round, while a privacy level of ε = 10.18 represents
the commonly considered point (ε=10) in private learning literature. PSG† corresponds to a one-shot
centralized setting and is reproduced from the official code with the default configuration that yields
ε = 32 in federated settings.


Figure 4: Privacy-utility trade-off with δ = 10−5 . A smaller value of ε (x-axis) indicates a stronger
privacy guarantee. Evaluation is conducted at each communication round.

We evaluate the trade-off between utility and privacy costs ε on benchmark datasets against two
state-of-the-art methods, DP-FedAvg (the local DP version in Truex et al. (2019)) and DP-FedProx.
Note that FedDM (Xiong et al., 2023) is incomparable since it considers class-wise optimization,
introducing additional privacy risks and a distinct privacy notion. Our method assigns 10 images
per class and is evaluated under the worst-case scenario, i.e., we assume the maximum of 5 while
loops is always reached (Sec. 5.1) for the ε computation, despite the potential early termination (and
thus smaller ε) caused by the radius r (Eq. 10). To ensure a fair and transparent comparison, we re-
quire our method to access the same amount of private data as the baselines in every communication
round and consider a noise scale σ = 1 for all approaches. Fig. 4 demonstrates that our framework
generally exhibits superior performance, notably with smaller ε and more complex dataset such as
CIFAR-10. This superiority is further quantified in Table 1 under two typical privacy budgets of
2.79 and 10.18. Moreover, when compared to the private one-shot dataset condensation method
(PSG (Chen et al., 2022)), our approach presents a better privacy-utility trade-off, effectively lever-
aging the benefits of multi-round training in the challenging federated setting.


                 Figure 5: Ablation study on the number of images per class (#ipc).

                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.4   A BLATION S TUDY

Radius Selection. As in Sec. 4, we assess various server optimization radius selection strategies:
Fixed, Max, Median, and Min. The Fixed strategy employs a static length of 100 iterations regardless
of quality, Max pursues swift optimization with the largest radius, Median moderates by adhering
to the majority, and Min—used in all experiments—targets the safest region agreed by all synthetic
image sets. Table 3 shows that strategies mindful of approximation quality surpass the fixed ap-
proach. Detailed analysis in Sec. D.2 reveals that aggressive strategies yield inferior intermediate
performance, unsuitable for federated applications needing satisfactory intermediate results. Among
the strategies, Min proves optimal.
Size of synthetic datasets. We investigate the impact of         Min     Max      Median Fixed
synthetic dataset size on approximation. In general, higher
                                                                71.90    72.39     72.33    71.26
numbers of synthetic samples submitted by clients lead to
greater information communication. To further explore this Table 3: Performance comparison
concept, we conducted experiments on CIFAR-10, building between radius selection strategies.
upon the previous experiment (shown in Fig. 3) by adding three additional settings in which we
assigned 10, 20, and 100 images to each class (referred to as ”image per class” or #ipc). Our
results, presented in Fig. 5, demonstrate that our method performs best when assigning 100 images,
supporting the hypothesis that more synthetic samples convey more information. Additionally, our
method produces superior outcomes regardless of #ipc when communication costs are restricted,
making it advantageous for resource-constrained devices.


6     D ISCUSSION

Future directions. While the primary contribution of FedLAP-DP lies in utilizing local approxi-
mation for global optimization, we demonstrate in the appendix that its performance can be further
enhanced by improving the quality of the approximation. Moreover, ongoing research in synthetic
data generation (Zhao et al., 2021; Zhao & Bilen, 2023; Cazenavette et al., 2022) represents a po-
tential avenue for future work, which could potentially benefit our formulation.
Computation overhead. Our method suggests an alternative to current research, trading computa-
tion for improved performance and communication costs incurred by slow convergence and biased
optimization. We have empirically measured the computation time needed for a communication
round by a client, using one NVIDIA Titan X, and observed an increase from 0.5 minutes (FedAvg)
to 2.5 minutes (FedLAP). Despite this increase, the computation time is still manageable in cross-
silo environments. A thorough analysis can be found in Section E. We anticipate this work will
motivate the community to further explore the trade-off between computation and communication
beyond local epochs, as we have shown in Fig. 5.
(Visual) privacy. The initiative mentioned in (Dong et al., 2022) indicates that distilled data may
offer enhanced privacy protection compared to plain gradients, and it is crucial to clarify that our
synthetic images are not crafted to produce realistic or class-specific data. Nevertheless, a compre-
hensive privacy analysis concerning prevailing general dataset distillation is yet to be conducted and
necessitates further examination across diverse scenarios.


7     C ONCLUSION

In conclusion, this work introduces FedLAP-DP, a novel approach for privacy-preserving federated
learning. FedLAP-DP utilizes synthetic data to approximate local loss landscapes within calibrated
trust regions, effectively debiasing the optimization on the server. Moreover, our method seam-
lessly integrates record-level differential privacy, ensuring strict privacy protection for individual
data records. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that FedLAP-DP outperforms gradient-
sharing approaches in terms of faster convergence on highly-skewed data splits and reliable utility
under differential privacy settings. We further explore the critical role of radius selection, the influ-
ence of synthetic dataset size, open directions, and potential enhancements to our work. Overall,
FedLAP-DP presents a promising approach for privacy-preserving federated learning, addressing
the challenges of convergence stability and privacy protection in non-IID scenarios.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

Theoretical results. In Sec. 3, we provide the background about federated learning, differential
privacy, and theorems used in this work. We also provide detailed privacy analysis of the proposed
FedLAP-DP in Sec. A, including the necessary definitions and notations, privacy composition for
our iterative operations, and the conversion of our method from RDP to DP. Additional computation
overhead is discussed in Sec. 6 and analyzed in Sec. E.
Empirical results. We provide the main hyper-parameters related to FedLAP-DP and the exper-
iment settings in Sec. 5.1. The remaining details, including other hyper-parameters, architectures,
learning rates, and hyper-parameter search, are provided in Sec. B. A detailed algorithm of FedLAP
is presented in Algorithm 1 and the one of FedLAP-DP is in Algorithm 2. In addition to the hyper-
parameter search in Sec. B, we analyze the necessity of magnitude regularization (Eq. 8) in Sec. D.1
and different radius strategies (Sec. 5.4 and Eq. 11) in Sec. D.2. The source code and setup will be
anonymously provided as the forum opens and publicly available upon publication.

R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
 Computer and Communications Security (CCS), 2016.

Borja Balle, Gilles Barthe, Marco Gaboardi, Justin Hsu, and Tetsuya Sato. Hypothesis testing
  interpretations and renyi differential privacy. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, 2020.

Abhishek Bhowmick, John Duchi, Julien Freudiger, Gaurav Kapoor, and Ryan Rogers. Protec-
  tion against reconstruction and its applications in private federated learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1812.00984, 2018.

George Cazenavette, Tongzhou Wang, Antonio Torralba, Alexei A Efros, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Dataset
  distillation by matching training trajectories. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.

Dingfan Chen, Raouf Kerkouche, and Mario Fritz. Private set generation with discriminative infor-
  mation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.

Tian Dong, Bo Zhao, and Lingjuan Lyu. Privacy for free: How does dataset condensation help
  privacy? In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.

Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Foundations
  and Trends® in Theoretical Computer Science, 2014.

Alireza Fallah, Aryan Mokhtari, and Asuman Ozdaglar. Personalized federated learning with the-
  oretical guarantees: A model-agnostic meta-learning approach. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.

Jonas Geiping, Hartmut Bauermeister, Hannah Dröge, and Michael Moeller. Inverting gradients-
  how easy is it to break privacy in federated learning? Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.

Yang He, Hui-Po Wang, and M Fritz. Cossgd: Communicationefficient federated learning with
  a simple cosine-based quantization. In 1st NeurIPS Workshop on New Frontiers in Federated
  Learning (NFFL), 2021.

Briland Hitaj, Giuseppe Ateniese, and Fernando Perez-Cruz. Deep models under the gan: infor-
  mation leakage from collaborative deep learning. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
  Computer and Communications Security (CCS), 2017.

Tzu-Ming Harry Hsu, Hang Qi, and Matthew Brown. Measuring the effects of non-identical data
  distribution for federated visual classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06335, 2019.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Ad-
  vances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning,
  2021.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning. In
  Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.
Raouf Kerkouche, Gergely Acs, Claude Castelluccia, and Pierre Genevès. Privacy-preserving and
  bandwidth-efficient federated learning: An application to in-hospital mortality prediction. In
  Proceedings of the Conference on Health, Inference, and Learning, 2021.
Ahmed Khaled, Konstantin Mishchenko, and Peter Richtárik. First analysis of local gd on hetero-
  geneous data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.04715, 2019.
Mikhail Khodak, Renbo Tu, Tian Li, Liam Li, Maria-Florina F Balcan, Virginia Smith, and Ameet
 Talwalkar. Federated hyperparameter tuning: Challenges, baselines, and connections to weight-
 sharing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Alexey Kurakin, Shuang Song, Steve Chien, Roxana Geambasu, Andreas Terzis, and Abhradeep
  Thakurta. Toward training at imagenet scale with differential privacy. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.12328, 2022.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 1998.
Yann LeCun, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Clément Farabet. Convolutional networks and applications
  in vision. In Proceedings of 2010 IEEE international symposium on circuits and systems, 2010.
Daliang Li and Junpu Wang. Fedmd: Heterogenous federated learning via model distillation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1910.03581, 2019.
Qinbin Li, Bingsheng He, and Dawn Song. Model-contrastive federated learning. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021a.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith.
  Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Sys-
  tems, 2020.
Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. On the convergence of
  fedavg on non-iid data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02189, 2019.
Xiaoxiao Li, Meirui JIANG, Xiaofei Zhang, Michael Kamp, and Qi Dou. Fedbn: Federated learning
  on non-iid features via local batch normalization. In Proceedings of the International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021b.
Mi Luo, Fei Chen, Dapeng Hu, Yifan Zhang, Jian Liang, and Jiashi Feng. No fear of heterogeneity:
 Classifier calibration for federated learning with non-iid data. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Proceedings of
  the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2017.
Luca Melis, Congzheng Song, Emiliano De Cristofaro, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Exploiting unintended
  feature leakage in collaborative learning. In 2019 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP),
  2019.
Ilya Mironov. Rényi differential privacy. In 2017 IEEE 30th computer security foundations sympo-
   sium (CSF), 2017.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang. R\’enyi differential privacy of the sampled gaussian
   mechanism. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10530, 2019.
Milad Nasr, Reza Shokri, and Amir Houmansadr. Comprehensive privacy analysis of deep learning:
 Passive and active white-box inference attacks against centralized and federated learning. In 2019
 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP), 2019.
Daniel Peterson, Pallika Kanani, and Virendra J Marathe. Private federated learning with domain
  adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06733, 2019.
Sashank J. Reddi, Zachary Charles, Manzil Zaheer, Zachary Garrett, Keith Rush, Jakub Konečný,
  Sanjiv Kumar, and Hugh Brendan McMahan. Adaptive federated optimization. In Proceedings
  of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Stacey Truex, Nathalie Baracaldo, Ali Anwar, Thomas Steinke, Heiko Ludwig, Rui Zhang, and
  Yi Zhou. A hybrid approach to privacy-preserving federated learning. In Proceedings of the 12th
  ACM workshop on artificial intelligence and security, 2019.
Hui-Po Wang, Sebastian Stich, Yang He, and Mario Fritz. Progfed: effective, communication, and
  computation efficient federated learning by progressive training. In Proceedings of the Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.
Tongzhou Wang, Jun-Yan Zhu, Antonio Torralba, and Alexei A Efros. Dataset distillation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1811.10959, 2018.
Yuxin Wu and Kaiming He. Group normalization. In Proceedings of the European Conference on
  Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Yuanhao Xiong, Ruochen Wang, Minhao Cheng, Felix Yu, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Feddm: Iterative
  distribution matching for communication-efficient federated learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.
Hao Yu, Rong Jin, and Sen Yang. On the linear speedup analysis of communication efficient momen-
  tum sgd for distributed non-convex optimization. In Proceedings of the International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
Bo Zhao and Hakan Bilen. Dataset condensation with differentiable siamese augmentation. In
  Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.
Bo Zhao and Hakan Bilen. Dataset condensation with distribution matching. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 2023.
Bo Zhao, Konda Reddy Mopuri, and Hakan Bilen. Dataset condensation with gradient matching. In
  Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Yue Zhao, Meng Li, Liangzhen Lai, Naveen Suda, Damon Civin, and Vikas Chandra. Federated
  learning with non-iid data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00582, 2018.


A     P RIVACY A NALYSIS
A.1   D EFINITIONS

Definition A.1 (Rényi divergence). Let P and Q be two distributions defined over the same prob-
ability space X . Let their respective densities be denoted as p and q. The Rényi divergence, of a
finite order α ̸= 1, between the distributions P and Q is defined as follows:
                                                     Z               α
                                         ∆    1                p(x)
                          Dα (P ∥ Q) =            ln    q(x)            dx .
                                            α−1       X        q(x)

Rényi divergence at orders α = 1, ∞ are defined by continuity.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition A.2 (Rényi differential privacy (RDP) Mironov (2017)). A randomized mechanism M :
E → R satisfies (α, ρ)-Rényi differential privacy (RDP) if for any two adjacent inputs E, E ′ ∈ E it
holds that

                                       Dα (M(E) ∥ M(E ′ )) ≤ ρ

In this work, we call two datasets E, E ′ to be adjacent if E ′ = E ∪ {x} (or vice versa).

Definition A.3 (Sampled Gaussian Mechanism (SGM) Abadi et al. (2016); Mironov et al. (2019)).
Let f be an arbitrary function mapping subsets of E to Rd . We define the Sampled Gaussian mech-
anism (SGM) parametrized with the sampling rate 0 < q ≤ 1 and the noise σ > 0 as
                      ∆
               SGq,σ = f ({x : x ∈ E is sampled with probability q}) + N (0, σ 2 Id ),
where each element of E is independently and randomly sampled with probability q without re-
placement.
The sampled Gaussian mechanism consists of adding i.i.d Gaussian noise with zero mean and vari-
ance σ 2 to each coordinate of the true output of f . In fact, the sampled Gaussian mechanism draws
random vector values from a multivariate isotropic Gaussian distribution denoted by N (0, σ 2 Id ),
where d is omitted if it is unambiguous in the given context.

A.2   A NALYSIS

The privacy analysis of FedLAP-DP and other DP baselines follows the analysis framework used
for gradient-based record level-DP methods in FL Truex et al. (2019); Peterson et al. (2019); Kerk-
ouche et al. (2021). In this framework, each individual local update is performed as a single SGM
(Definition A.3) that involves clipping the per-example gradients on a local batch and subsequently
adding Gaussian noise to the averaged batch gradient (Algorithm 2). The privacy cost accumu-
lated over multiple local updates and global rounds is then quantified utilizing the revisited moment
accountant Mironov et al. (2019), which presents an adapted version of the moments accountant
introduced in Abadi et al. (2016) by adapting to the notion of RDP (Definition A.2). Finally, to ob-
tain interpretable results and enable transparent comparisons to established approaches, we convert
the privacy cost from (α, ρ)-RDP to (ε, δ)-DP by employing Theorem A.7 provided by Balle et al.
(2020).
Theorem A.4. Mironov et al. (2019) Let SGq,σ be the Sampled Gaussian mechanism for some
function f with ∆2 f ≤ 1 for any adjacent E, E ′ ∈ E. Then SGq,σ satisfies (α, ρ)-RDP if

                          ρ ≤ Dα N (0, σ 2 ) (1 − q)N (0, σ 2 ) + qN (1, σ 2 )

                    and ρ ≤ Dα (1 − q)N (0, σ 2 ) + qN (1, σ 2 ) N (0, σ 2 )

Theorem A.4 reduce the problem of proving the RDP bound for SGq,σ to a simple special case of a
mixture of one-dimensional Gaussians.
Theorem A.5. Mironov et al. (2019). Let µ0 denote the pdf of N (0, σ 2 ), µ1 denote the pdf of
N (1, σ 2 ), and let µ be the mixture of two Gaussians µ = (1 − q)µ0 + qµ1 . Let SGq,σ be the
Sampled Gaussian mechanism for some function f and under the assumption ∆2 f ≤ 1 for any
adjacent E, E ′ ∈ E. Then SGq,σ satisfies (α, ρ)-RDP if
                                          1
                                  ρ≤         log (max{Aα , Bα })                                (13)
                                         α−1

           ∆                       α           ∆                     α
where Aα = Ez∼µ0 [(µ(z)/µ0 (z)) ] and Bα = Ez∼µ [(µ0 (z)/µ(z)) ]

Theorem A.5 states that applying SGM to a function of sensitivity (Eq. 5) at most 1 (which also holds
                                                                             1
for larger values without loss of generality) satisfies (α, ρ)-RDP if ρ ≤ α−1   log(max{Aα , Bα }).
Thus, analyzing RDP properties of SGM is equivalent to upper bounding Aα and Bα .


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From Corollary 7 in Mironov et al. (2019), Aα ≥ Bα for any α ≥ 1. Therefore, we can reformulate
13 as
                                                   1
                                 ρ ≤ ξN (α|q) :=        log Aα                             (14)
                                                 α−1
To compute Aα , we use the numerically stable computation approach proposed in Section 3.3 of
Mironov et al. (2019). The specific approach used depends on whether α is expressed as an integer
or a real value.
Theorem A.6 (Composability Mironov (2017)). Suppose that a mechanism M consists of a se-
                                                           Qi−1
quence of adaptive mechanisms M1 , . . . , Mk where Mi : j=1 Rj × E → Ri . If all mechanisms
in the sequence are (α, ρ)-RDP, then the composition of the sequence is (α, kρ)-RDP.

In particular, Theorem A.6 holds when the mechanisms themselves are chosen based on the (public)
output of the previous mechanisms. By Theorem A.6, it suffices to compute ξN (α|q) at each step
and sum them up to bound the overall RDP privacy budget of an iterative mechanism composed of
single DP mechanisms at each step.
Theorem A.7 (Conversion from RDP to DP Balle et al. (2020)). If a mechanism M is (α, ρ)-RDP
then it is ((ρ + log((α − 1)/α) − (log δ + log α)/(α − 1), δ)-DP for any 0 < δ < 1.
Theorem A.8 (Privacy of FedLAP-DP). For any 0 < δ < 1 and α ≥ 1, FedLAP-DP is (ε, δ)-DP,
with

 ε = min M · ξN (α|q1 ) + M (T − 1) · ξN (α|q2 ) + log((α − 1)/α) − (log δ + log α)/(α − 1) (15)
       α


Here, ξN (α|q) is defined in Eq. 14, q1 = minC·Bk |Dk |
                                                        , q2 = minkB|Dk | , M is the number of federated
rounds, T is the total number of local updates (i.e., total accesses to local private data) per federated
round, C is the probability of selecting any client per federated round, B is the local batch size, and
|Dk | denotes the local dataset size.

The proof follows from Theorems A.5, A.6,A.7 and the fact that a record is sampled in the very
first SGD iteration of every round if two conditions are met. First, the corresponding client must be
selected, which occurs with a probability of C. Second, the locally sampled batch at that client must
contain the record, which has a probability of at most minkB|Dk | . However, the adaptive composition
of consecutive SGD iterations are considered where the output of a single iteration depends on the
output of the previous iterations. Therefore, the sampling probability for the first batch is q1 =
    C·B
mink |Dk | , while the sampling probability for every subsequent SGD iteration within the same round
is at most q2 = minkB|Dk | conditioned on the result of the first iteration Kerkouche et al. (2021).

B    S ETUP D ETAILS
We consider a standard classification task by training federated ConvNets LeCun et al. (2010) on
three benchmark datasets: MNIST LeCun et al. (1998), FashionMNIST Xiao et al. (2017), and
CIFAR-10 Krizhevsky et al. (2009). Our study focuses on the non-IID setting where five clients
possess disjoint class sets, meaning each client holds two unique classes. This scenario is typically
considered challenging Hsu et al. (2019) and mirrors the cross-silo setting Kairouz et al. (2021)
where all clients participate in every training round while maintaining a relatively large amount
of data, yet exhibiting statistical divergence (e.g., envision the practical scenario for collaborations
among hospitals).
By default, we set the hyperparameters (Ri , Rl , Rb , r) to be (4, 2, 10, 1.5) and (1, 0, 5, 10, 0.1) for
DP (Differential Privacy) and non-DP training, respectively. Additionally, we include a weight of 0.1
for Mean Squared Error (MSE) regularization in our method (Eq. 9 and 16. To avoid infinite loops
caused by neighborhood search, we limit the iterations in Algorithm 1 (referred to as Algorithm 1
in the original text) to a maximum of 5.
Our method utilizes a learning rate of 100 for updating synthetic images, and we specify the learning
schedulers as described below. For training the baselines, we adhere to the FL (Federated Learning)
benchmarks McMahan et al. (2017); Reddi et al. (2021) and use the official codes. All experiments


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


are conducted on a single Titan RTX GPU and repeated three times with different random seeds.
Further implementation details are provided in the following sections. The source code will be
made publicly available upon publication.


B.1     A RCHITECTURES

We provide the details of the federated ConvNet used in our paper. The network consists of three
convolutional layers, followed by two fully-connected layers. ReLU activation functions are applied
between each layer. Each convolution layer, except for the input layer, is composed of 128 (input
channels) and 128 (output channels) with 3 × 3 filters. Following prior work Wang et al. (2022);
Reddi et al. (2021); Zhao & Bilen (2023); Cazenavette et al. (2022), we attach Group Normaliza-
tion Wu & He (2018) before the activation functions to stabilize training. For classification, the
network utilizes a global average pooling layer to extract features, which are then fed into the fi-
nal classification layer for prediction. The entire network contains a total of 317,706 floating-point
parameters. The model details are listed below.

ConvNet (
  ( features ): Sequential (
      ( 0 ) : Conv2d ( 3 , 1 2 8 , k e r n e l s i z e = ( 3 , 3 ) , s t r i d e = ( 1 , 1 ) , p a d d i n g = ( 1 , 1 ) )
      ( 1 ) : GroupNorm ( 1 2 8 , 1 2 8 , e p s =1e −05 , a f f i n e = T r u e )
      ( 2 ) : ReLU ( i n p l a c e = T r u e )
      ( 3 ) : AvgPool2d ( k e r n e l s i z e =2 , s t r i d e =2 , p a d d i n g = 0 )
      ( 4 ) : Conv2d ( 1 2 8 , 1 2 8 , k e r n e l s i z e = ( 3 , 3 ) , s t r i d e = ( 1 , 1 ) , p a d d i n g = ( 1 , 1 ) )
      ( 5 ) : GroupNorm ( 1 2 8 , 1 2 8 , e p s =1e −05 , a f f i n e = T r u e )
      ( 6 ) : ReLU ( i n p l a c e = T r u e )
      ( 7 ) : AvgPool2d ( k e r n e l s i z e =2 , s t r i d e =2 , p a d d i n g = 0 )
      ( 8 ) : Conv2d ( 1 2 8 , 1 2 8 , k e r n e l s i z e = ( 3 , 3 ) , s t r i d e = ( 1 , 1 ) , p a d d i n g = ( 1 , 1 ) )
      ( 9 ) : GroupNorm ( 1 2 8 , 1 2 8 , e p s =1e −05 , a f f i n e = T r u e )
      ( 1 0 ) : ReLU ( i n p l a c e = T r u e )
      ( 1 1 ) : AvgPool2d ( k e r n e l s i z e =2 , s t r i d e =2 , p a d d i n g = 0 )
  )
  ( c l a s s i f i e r ) : L i n e a r ( i n f e a t u r e s =2048 , o u t f e a t u r e s =10 , b i a s = T r u e )
)


B.2     N ON -DP

We maintain a consistent total of 60 communication rounds for MNIST and FashionMNIST, and 200
rounds for CIFAR-10. Following prior work McMahan et al. (2017); Reddi et al. (2021), we tune the
hyper-parameters for various gradient-sharing schemes, including FedSGD McMahan et al. (2017),
FedAvg McMahan et al. (2017), FedProx Li et al. (2020), and SCAFFOLD Karimireddy et al.
(2020). We use a client learning rate of 0.01 for MNIST and FashionMNIST and 0.1 for CIFAR-10.
All baselines are equipped with a fixed server learning rate of 1 and a cosine learning rate decay
for the clients (potentially diverge, if without decay Reddi et al. (2021)). While hyper-parameter
searching is an active field and requires non-trivial effort Khodak et al. (2021), we explore a proper
number of local epochs by running FedAvg for 200 rounds with {1, 3, 5} local epochs, leading to
69.13, 69.39, and 71.91, respectively. This suggests that 5 local epochs work best for FedAvg. We
also set 5 local epochs for the rest of baselines for a fair comparison regarding data exploitation and
communication efficiency. For FedProx, we assign a weight of 0.1 for the proximal regularization
term.
In the case of FedLAP-DP, we use a server learning rate of 0.01 for MNIST and FashionMNIST, and
0.1 for CIFAR-10. These learning rates match the client learning rates used in the gradient-sharing
baselines, while shifting the potentially biased local optimization to the server side. Additionally,
our method adopts the same cosine learning rate decay as the baselines. These settings ensure a
fair comparison as the parameters are not biased in favor of our method in non-private settings.
Furthermore, in each communication round, we assign 50 images to each class and re-initialize
the synthetic images from scratch. After receiving the images, the server performs full gradient
descent to update the model parameters. This process ensures that the model is updated based on
the collective knowledge obtained from the synthetic images generated by the clients.


                                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 DP-FedAvg (low)   DP-FedAvg (high)     Ours    DP-FedAvg (low)   DP-FedAvg (high)   Ours
        ε                           2.79                                          10.18
MNIST                 16.25                45.25        60.72        51.53                86.99      87.77
FashionMNIST          13.39                50.11        59.85        59.26                72.78      73.00
CIFAR-10               9.37                17.11        21.42        16.16                31.15      36.09

Table 4: Comparison of DP-FedAvg with different learning rates: 0.1 (DP-FedAvg high) and 0.002
(DP-FedAvg low). We use the same initial learning rate as our method (0.002) for DP-FedAvg (low).


B.3     DP

In this experiment, we compare the performance of FedLAP-DP to DP-FedAvg and DP-FedProx.
We set a learning rate of 0.1 with cosine decay for the baselines. Following the approach of Kurakin
et al. (2022), we initially verify that the learning rate works well in non-private settings. Then, we
search for the sensitivity value from a grid of 1.0, 0.5, 0.2, 0.1. This results in a sensitivity of 0.1
for DP-FedAvg, 0.2 for DP-FedProx, and 1.0 for FedLAP-DP. Moreover, our method assigns 10
images to each class to mitigate the negative impact of differential privacy (DP) noise and a lower
learning rate of 0.002, coupled with cosine decay, for all DP experiments.

C     A LGORITHMS
Distance metric Following existing works Zhao et al. (2021), the distance Ldis (in Equation 8 and
9 of the main paper) between the real and synthetic gradients is defined to be the sum of the cosine
distance at each layer. Let w(l) denote the weight at the l-th layer, the distance can be formularized
as:

                               Ldis ∇w L(w, Dk ), ∇w L(w, Sk )
      L
      X
 =      d ∇w(l) L(w(l) , Dk ), ∇w(l) L(w(l) , Sk ) + λ∥∇w(l) L(w(l) , Dk ) − ∇w(l) L(w(l) , Sk )∥22
      l=1
                                                                                                     (16)
d denotes the cosine distance between the gradients at each layer:
                                           out
                                           X            Ai· · Bi·
                               d(A, B) =         1−                                                  (17)
                                           i=1
                                                      ∥Ai· ∥∥Bi· ∥

where Ai· and Bi· represent the flattened gradient vectors corresponding to each output node i. In
FC layers, θ l is a 2D tensor with dimension out × in and the flattened gradient vector has dimension
in, while in Conv layers, θ l is a 4D tensor with dimensionality out × in × h × w and the flattened
vector has dimension in × h × w. Here we use out, in, h, w to denote the number of output and
input channels, kernel height, and width, respectively.

FedLAP-DP We present the pseudocode of the FedLAP-DP with record-level DP in Algorithm 2,
which is supplementary to Sec. 4.4 of the main paper.


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 FedLAP-DP
    function ServerExecute:
      Initialize global weight wg1,1 , Fix the radius r
      /* Local approximation */
      for m = 1, . . . , M do
         for k = 1, . . . , K do
            Sk ← ClientsExecute(k, r, wgm,1 )
         end for
         /* Global optimization */
         t←1
         while ∥wgm,1 − wgm,t ∥ < r do
                                 PK       1
            wgm,t+1 = wgm,t − k=1 η K       ∇w L(wgm,t , Sk )
            t←t+1
         end while
         wgm+1,1 ← wgm,t
      end for
    Return: global model weight wgM +1,1

    function ClientExecute(k, r, wgm,1 ) :
                                                            m−1
      Initialize Sk : {x̂m k } from Gaussian noise or {x̂k       }, {ŷk } to be a balanced set
      for i = 1, . . . , Ri do
        /* Resample training trajectories */
        Reset t ← 1 and model wkm,1 ← wgm,1
        while ||wkm,t − wkm,1 || < r do
            Uniformly sample random batch {(xik , yki )}Bi=1 from Dk
            for each (xik , yki ) do
               /* Compute per-example gradients on client data */
               g D (xik ) = ∇w ℓ(wkm,t , xik , yki )
               /* Clip gradients with bound C */
               gfD (xi ) = g D (xi ) · min(1, C/∥g D (xi )∥ )
                      k            k                      k 2
            end for
            /* Add noise to average gradient by Gaussian mechanism */
            Compute ∇L(w   e m,t , Dk ) = 1 PB (gf      D (xi ) + N (0, σ 2 C2 I))
                                k           B       i=1     k
            for j = 1, . . . , Rb do
               /* Update synthetic set  Sk */
               Sk = Sk − τ ∇Sk Ldis ∇L(w    e m,t , Dk ), ∇L(wm,t , Sk )
                                                   k               k
            end for
            for l = 1, . . . , Rl do
               /* Update local model parameter wk */
               wkm,t+1 = wkm,t − η∇L(wkm,t , Sk )
               t←t+1
            end for
        end while
      end for
    Return: Synthetic set Sk



D      A DDITIONAL A NALYSIS

D.1     M ATCHING C RITERIA

We analyze our design choices by using our method to fit gradients computed on a single batch. We
simplify the learning task by employing only one client that contains all training data, resembling
centralized training or FedSGD with a single client. In this setup, the client immediately communi-
cates the gradients to the central server after computing them on a single batch. This scenario can


                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Discrepancy in gradient magnitudes between real and synthetic data. The noticeable differ-
ence in magnitudes during training highlights the limitation of solely regulating gradient directions,
as optimizing without magnitude information introduces training instability.


be seen as a trivial federated learning task, as it does not involve any model drifting (non-IID) or
communication budget constraints. It is worth noting that the baseline performance in this setting is
an ideal case that does not apply in any practical FL use cases (or out of scope of federated learning).

Gradient Magnitudes While previous re-
search Zhao et al. (2021); Zhao & Bilen
(2021); He et al. (2021) suggests that gradi-
ent directions are more crucial than magnitudes
(Eq. 17), our study demonstrates that as train-
ing progresses, the magnitudes of synthetic gra-
dients (i.e., gradients obtained from synthetic
images) can differ significantly from real gradi-
ents. In Fig. 6, we display the gradient magni-
tudes of each layer in a ConvNet. Our findings
indicate that even with only 500 iterations, the
magnitudes of synthetic gradients (orange) no-
ticeably deviate from the real ones (blue), caus-
ing unnecessary instability during training.      Figure 7: Performance comparison of fitting
                                                  one batch. Baseline: FedSGD with one client.
                                                  Vanilla: our method with cosine similarity. Cal-
Post-hoc Magnitude Calibration To further
                                                  ibration: our method with cosine similarity and
validate the issue, we implement a post-hoc
                                                  magnitude calibration. Regularization: our
magnitude calibration, called Calibration in
                                                  method with cosine similarity and MSE regular-
Fig. 7. It calibrates the gradients obtained from
                                                  ization (i.e., Eq. 16). MSE: gradient matching by
the synthetic images on the server. Specifically,
                                                  solely measuring mean square errors (Eq. 19).
the clients send the layer-wise magnitudes of
real gradients ∥∇w L(w, Dk )∥ to the server, followed by a transformation on the server:
                                   ∇w L(w, Sk )
                                                 ∥∇w L(w, Dk )∥.                                   (18)
                                  ∥∇w L(w, Sk )∥
In Fig. 7, We observe that the synthetic images with the magnitude calibration successfully and
continuously improve over the one without the calibration (Vanilla). It implies that even with the
same cosine similarity, inaccurate gradient magnitudes could dramatically fail the training. It is
worth noting that the performance gap between the baseline and our method in this experiment does
not apply to federated learning since FL models suffer from non-IID problems induced by multiple
steps and clients, the gradient-sharing schemes, such as FedAvg, overly approximate the update


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Figure 8: Training iterations for different ra-
                            dius selection strategies.


  Figure 9: Ablation study on radius selection.    Figure 10: Radius suggested by different strate-
                                                   gies.

signal, further enhancing the problem. Meanwhile, it also suggests an opportunity to improve our
method if future work can further bridge the gap.

Mean Square Error (MSE) Regularization Although calibration can improve performance, it is
not suitable for federated learning due to two reasons. Firstly, when the synthetic images Sk from
different clients are merged into a dataset for server optimization, it remains unclear how to apply
Eq. 18 to the averaged gradients of the merged dataset S, especially when multiple-step optimization
is involved. Secondly, transmitting magnitudes can pose privacy risks. Instead of explicit calibration,
we propose using MSE regularization (Eq. 16, termed Regularization in Fig. 7) to limit potential
magnitude deviations while focusing on the directions. As depicted in Fig. 7, our proposed method
remains close to the calibration method, suggesting that regularization prevents mismatch.
Moreover, we present an additional implementation with an MSE matching criterion (termed MSE
in Fig. 7)). It solely matches the mean square error distance between L(w, Dk ) and L(w, Sk )
regardless of gradient directional information. That is,

                             ∥∇w(l) L(w(l) , Dk ) − ∇w(l) L(w(l) , Sk )∥22                        (19)

Despite the improvement over the vanilla method, it still falls behind Calibration and Regularization,
highlighting the importance of directional information and justifying our design choice.

D.2   R ADIUS S ELECTION

As in Sec. 4, we evaluate different radius selection strategies
for server optimization. We consider four strategies: Fixed,      Min       Max     Median Fixed
Max, Median, and Min. Fixed uses a fixed length of 100 71.90               72.39     72.33      71.26
iterations, ignoring the quality. Max aims for the fastest op- Table 5: Performance comparison
timization by using the largest radius. Median optimizes in a between radius selection strategies.
moderate way by considering the majority. Min, adopted in
all experiments, focuses on the safest region agreed upon by all synthetic image sets. Table 3 reveals
that the proposed strategies consistently outperform the fixed strategy. Meanwhile, Fig. 9 presents
that a more aggressive strategy leads to worse intermediate performance, which may not be suitable
for federated applications requiring satisfactory intermediate performance. Among them, Min de-
livers the best results. Finally, Fig. 10 demonstrates that the radii proposed by different strategies


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


change across epochs, indicating that a naively set training iteration may not be optimal. Addition-
ally, this finding suggests the possibility of designing heuristic scheduling functions for adjusting
the radius in a privacy-preserving way. The corresponding server training iterations can be found in
the appendix.
In Sec. 5.4, we show that the effective approximation regions change across rounds. A fixed pre-
defined training iterations may cause sub-optimal performance. To complement the experiments,
we additionally plot the corresponding training iterations on the server side in Fig. 8. We observed
that Max and Median tend to be more aggressive by updating for more epochs, granting faster im-
provement, while Min optimizes more conservatively. Interestingly, we found that all three proposed
strategies exhibit similar behavior in the later stages of training, which is in stark contrast to the fixed
strategy.


Figure 11: Pixel distributions in non-private settings. The plot illustrates the evolution of pixel values
in synthetic images during training. At the early training stage, the pixel range is wider and gradually
concentrates around zero as the model approaches convergence, implying that the synthetic images
reflects the training status.


Figure 12: Visualization of synthetic images at epochs 5, 50, and 196 in the non-private CIFAR-10
experiment. The pixel values are clipped to the range [0, 1]. Each rows corresponds to airplane,
automobile, bird, and cat, respectively.


Figure 13: Visualization of synthetic images for ε = 6.72, 10.93, and 14.30 in the privacy-
preserving CIFAR-10 experiment. The pixel values are clipped to the range [0, 1]. Each rows corre-
sponds to airplane, automobile, bird, and cat, respectively.



                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3    Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

In this section, we examine the synthetic images. In non-private settings, Fig. 11 displays the pixel
value distributions of all synthetic images at epochs 5, 50, 100, 150, and 195, both on the server and
the clients. We made several observations from these visualizations. Firstly, within the same round,
the distributions of pixel values on each client exhibit distinct behavior, indicating the diversity of
private data statistics across clients. Secondly, the distributions also vary across different epochs. At
earlier stages, the synthetic images present a wider range of values, gradually concentrating around
zero as training progresses. This phenomenon introduces more detailed information for training
and demonstrates that our method faithfully reflects the training status of each client. Additionally,
Fig. 12 displays visual examples of synthetic images corresponding to the labels ”airplane,” ”au-
tomobile,” ”bird,” and ”cat.” These visuals indicate that earlier epoch images exhibit larger pixel
values and progressively integrate more noise during training, reflecting gradient details. It’s cru-
cial to underscore that our method is not intended to produce realistic data but to approximate loss
landscapes.

E     C OMPUTATION C OMPLEXITY
Our method suggests an alternative to current research, trading computation for improved perfor-
mance and communication costs incurred by slow convergence and biased optimization. We present
the computation complexity analysis for one communication round below and conclude with empir-
ical evidence that the additional overhead is manageable, especially for cross-silo scenarios.
We begin with the SGD complexity O(d), where d denotes the number of network parameters.
Suppose synthetic samples contain p trainable parameters; then the complexity can be formulated as
follows.


                            O Ri · 5 · N (d + 2Rb (d + p)) + Rl d

                          = O 5Ri · (2N Rb + Rl + N )d + 10Ri Rb p

                                              Rl
                          = O 5Ri N · (2Rb +     + 1)d + 10Ri Rb p
                                              N

Note that 5Ri N determines how much real data we will see during synthesis. For comparison,
we make 5Ri N equal in both our method and gradient-sharing baselines (i.e., five local epochs in
FedAvg with complexity O(5Ri N d)). Overall, our method introduces 2Rb + R    N + 1 times more
                                                                                l

computation on network parameters and an additional 10Ri Rb term for updating synthetic samples.


                                                   21
