Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S AFE O NLINE B ID O PTIMIZATION WITH R ETURN O N
I NVESTMENT AND B UDGET C ONSTRAINTS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         In online marketing, the advertisers’ goal is balancing between achieving high
         volumes and high profitability. The companies business units address this tradeoff
         by maximizing the volumes while guaranteeing a minimum Return On Investment
         (ROI) level. Technically speaking, such a task can be naturally modeled as a
         combinatorial optimization problem subject to ROI and budget constraints that
         can be solved online. In this picture, the learner’s uncertainty over the constraints’
         parameters plays a crucial role since the algorithms’ exploration choices might lead
         to their violation during the entire learning process. Such violations represent a
         major obstacle to adopting online techniques in real-world applications. Thus, con-
         trolling the algorithms’ exploration during learning is paramount to making humans
         trust online learning tools. This paper studies the nature of both optimization and
         learning problems. In particular, we show that the learning problem is inapprox-
         imable within any factor (unless P = NP) and provide a pseudo-polynomial-time
         algorithm to solve its discretized version. Subsequently, we prove that no online
         learning algorithm can violate the (ROI or budget) constraints a sublinear number
         of times during the learning process while guaranteeing a sublinear regret. We
         provide the GCB algorithm that guarantees sublinear regret at the cost of a linear
         number of constraint violations, and GCBsafe that guarantees w.h.p. a constant
         upper bound on the number of constraints violations at the cost of a linear regret.
         Moreover, we designed GCBsafe (ψ, ϕ), which guarantees both sublinear regret
         and safety w.h.p. at the cost of accepting tolerances ψ and ϕ in the satisfaction
         of the ROI and budget constraints, respectively. Finally, we provide experimental
         results to compare the regret and constraint violations of GCB and GCBsafe .


1    I NTRODUCTION
Nowadays, Internet advertising is de facto the leading advertising medium. Notably, while the
expenditure on physical ads, radio, and television has been stable for a decade, that on Internet
advertising is increasing with a ratio of ≈ 20% per year, reaching the considerable amount of 189
billion USD in 2021 only in the US IAB (2021). Internet advertising has two main advantages over
traditional channels: it provides precise ad targeting and allows an accurate, real-time evaluation
of investment performance. On the other hand, the amount of data the platforms provide and the
plethora of parameters to be set make its optimization impractical without using artificial intelligence.
The advertisers’ goal is usually to set bids in the attempt to balance the tradeoff between achieving high
volumes, corresponding to maximizing the sales of the products to advertise, and high profitability,
corresponding to maximizing Return On Investment (ROI). The companies’ business units need
simple ways to address this tradeoff, and customarily, they maximize the volumes while constraining
ROI to be above a given threshold. The importance of ROI constraints, in addition to standard budget
constraints (i.e., spent per day for advertising), is remarked in several empirical studies. We mention,
e.g., the data analysis on the auctions performed on Google’s AdX by Golrezaei et al. (2021), showing
that many advertisers take into account ROI constraints, particularly in hotel booking. However,
no platform provides features to force the satisfaction of ROI constraints, and some platforms (e.g.,
TripAdvisor, and Trivago) do not even allow the setting of daily budget constraints. Thus, the
problem of satisfying those constraints is a challenge that advertisers must address by designing
suitable bidding strategies. In this picture, uncertainty plays a crucial role as the revenue and cost
of the advertising campaigns are unknown beforehand and need to be estimated online by learning


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


algorithms during the sequential arrival of data. As a result, the constraints are subject to uncertainty,
and wrong parameter estimations can make the ROI and budget constraints arbitrarily violated
when using an uncontrolled exploration like that used by classical online learning algorithms. Such
violations represent today the major obstacles to adopting AI tools in real-world applications, as
advertisers often are unwilling to accept such risks. Remarkably, this issue is particularly crucial in
the early stages of the learning process as adopting algorithms with an uncontrolled exploration when
a small amount of data is available can make the advertising campaigns’ performance oscillate by
a large magnitude, which advertisers negatively perceive. Therefore, to make humans trust online
artificial intelligence algorithms, controlling their exploration accurately to mitigate risks and provide
safety guarantees during the entire learning process is paramount.1
Original Contributions As customary in the online advertising literature, see, e.g., Devanur &
Kakade (2009), we assume stochastic (i.e., non-adversarial) clicks, and we adopt Gaussian Processes
(GPs) to model the problem. Let us remark that the assumption that clicks are generated stochastically
is reasonable in practice as the advertising platforms can limit manipulation due to malicious bidders.
For instance, Google Ads can identify invalid clicks and exclude them from the advertisers’ spending.
In this paper, we study the nature of both the optimization and learning problems. Initially, we
focus on studying our optimization problem without uncertainty, showing that no approximation
within any strictly positive factor is possible with ROI and budget constraints unless P = NP,
even in simple, realistic instances. However, when dealing with a discretized space of the bids as
it happens in practice, the problem admits an exact pseudo-polynomial time algorithm based on
dynamic programming. Most importantly, when the problem is with uncertainty, we show that no
online learning algorithm can violate the ROI and/or budget constraints a sublinear number of times
while guaranteeing a sublinear pseudo-regret. We provide an online learning algorithm, namely GCB,
providing pseudo-regret sublinear in the time horizon T at the cost of a linear number of violations of
the constraints. We also provide its safe version, namely GCBsafe , guaranteeing w.h.p. a constant
upper bound on the number of constraints’ violations at the cost of a regret linear in T . Inspired by the
two previous algorithms, we design a new algorithm, namely GCBsafe (ψ, ϕ), guaranteeing both the
violation w.h.p. of the constraints for a constant number of times and a pseudo-regret sublinear both in
T and the maximum information gain of the GP when accepting tolerances ψ and ϕ in the satisfaction
of the ROI and budget constraints, respectively. Finally, we performed an empirical study of our
algorithms in terms of pseudo-regret/number of constraint violations tradeoff in simulated settings,
showing the importance of adopting safety constraints and the effectiveness of our algorithms.

2    O PTIMIZATION P ROBLEM
We are given an advertising campaign C = {C1 , . . . , CN }, with N ∈ N and where Cj is the j-th
subcampaign and a finite time horizon of T ∈ N rounds (each corresponding to one day in our
application). In this work, as common in the literature on ad allocation optimization, we refer to a
subcampaign as a single ad or a group of homogeneous ads requiring setting the same bid. For every
round t ∈ {1, . . . , T } and every subcampaign Cj , an advertiser needs to specify the bid xj,t ∈ Xj ,
where Xj ⊂ R+ is a finite set of values that can be set for subcampaign Cj . For every round
t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, the goal is to find the values of bids maximizing the overall cumulative expected
revenue while keeping the ROI above a fixed value λ ∈ R+ and the budget below a daily value
β ∈ R+ . Formally, the resulting constrained optimization problem at round t is as follows:
                                                        XN
                                         max                vj nj (xj,t )                         (1a)
                              (x1,t ,...,xN,t )∈X1 ×...×XN
                                                             j=1
                                                             PN
                                                               j=1 vj nj (xj,t )
                                           s.t.              PN                      ≥ λ,                      (1b)
                                                                   j=1 cj (xj,t )
                                                             N
                                                             X
                                                                   cj (xj,t ) ≤ β,                             (1c)
                                                             j=1
where nj (xj,t ) and cj (xj,t ) are the expected number of clicks and the expected cost given the bid
xj,t for subcampaign Cj , respectively, and vj is the value per click for subcampaign Cj . We remark
    1
      A discussion on the literature related to the topic of advertising with ROI and budget constraints is deferred
to Appendix A due to space reasons.


                                                         2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that Constraint (1b) is the ROI constraint, forcing the revenue to be at least λ times the costs, and
Constraint (1c) keeps the daily spend under a predefined overall budget β.
At first, we show that, even if all the values of the parameters of the optimization problem are known,
the optimal solution cannot be approximated in polynomial time within any strictly positive factor
(even depending on the size of the instance) unless P = NP.
Theorem 1 (Inapproximability). For any ρ ∈ (0, 1], there is no polynomial-time algorithm returning
a ρ-approximation to the problem in Equations (1a)-(1c), unless P = NP.

The proof follows from a reduction of our problem from SUBSET-SUM that is an NP-hard prob-
lem.2,3 It is well known that SUBSET-SUM is a weakly NP-hard problem, admitting an exact
algorithm whose running time is polynomial in the size of the problem and the magnitude of the
data involved rather than the base-two logarithm of their magnitude. The same can be shown for our
problem. Indeed, we can design a pseudo-polynomial-time algorithm to find the optimal solution in
polynomial time w.r.t. the number of possible values of revenues and costs. In real-world settings, the
values of revenue and cost are in limited ranges and rounded to the nearest cent, allowing the problem
to be solved in a reasonable time. Therefore, in what follows, we assume to be given a discretization
of the daily costs and revenue value ranges.

3       O NLINE L EARNING P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
We focus on the case in which nj (·) and cj (·) in Equations (1a)-(1c) are unknown functions whose
values need to be estimated online. This goal is achieved using their noisy realizations ñj,h (xj,t )
and c̃j,h (xj,t ) obtained setting the bid xj,t on the j-th subcampaign at time h. Our problem can be
naturally modeled as a multi-armed bandit where the available arms are the different values of the bid
xj,t ∈ Xj satisfying the combinatorial constraints of the optimization problem.4 More specifically,
                                                                                           N
our goal is to design a learning policy U returning, at every round t, a super-arm {x̂j,t }j=1 , i.e., an
arm profile specifying one bid per subcampaign.5 Since the policy U can only use estimates of the
unknown number-of-click and cost functions built using past realizations ñj,h (xj,t ) and c̃j,h (xj,t )
with h < t, the solutions returned by policy U may not be optimal and/or violate Constraints (1b)
and (1c) when evaluated with the true values. Therefore, we must design U so that the violations
occur only for a limited number of rounds over the time horizon T .
We are interested in evaluating learning policies U in terms of revenue losses (a.k.a. pseudo-regret)
and safety regarding ROI and budget constraints violations.
                                                a learning policyU, the pseudo-regret is:
Definition 1 (Learning policy pseudo-regret). Given
                                                 XT X
                                                    N
                                                ∗
                              RT (U) := T G − E      vj nj (x̂j,t ) ,
                                                           t=1 j=1
          ∗
               PN             ∗
where G :=        j=1 vj nj (xj ) is the expected revenue provided by a clairvoyant algorithm, the set
             N
of bids x∗j j=1 is the optimal clairvoyant solution to the problem in Equations (1a)-(1c), and the


expectation E[ · ] is taken w.r.t. the stochasticity of the learning policy U.
Definition 2 (η-safe learning policy). Given η ∈ (0, T ], a learning policy U generating an allocation
        N
{x̂j,t }j=1 is η-safe if the expected number of times it violates at least one of the Constraints (1b)
and (1c) from t = 1 to t =   T is less than η or, formally:                   
                        T       PN                          N
                       X               v
                                   j=1 j jn  (x̂ j,t )     X
                           P  PN                      <λ∨     cj (x̂j,t ) > β  ≤ η.
                       t=1          j=1 cj (x̂j,t )        j=1
    2
      Given a set S of integers  ui ∈ N+ and an integer z ∈ N+ , SUBSET-SUM requires to decide whether there
           ∗            P
is a set S ⊆ S with i∈S ∗ ui = z.
    3
      For space reasons, the proofs are deferred to the Supplementary Material.
    4
      Here, we assume that the value per click vj is known. Refer to Nuara et al. (2018) if it is unknown.
    5
      Even if this setting is closely related to the one studied by Badanidiyuru et al. (2013), the non-matroidal
nature of the constraints does not allow to cast the bid allocation problem above into the bandit-with-knapsack
framework.


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 GCB and GCBsafe pseudo-code
      Input: sets of bid values X1 , . . . , XN , ROI threshold λ, daily budget β
 1: Initialize the GPs for the number of clicks and costs
 2: for t ∈ {1, . . . , T } do
 3:     for j ∈ {1, . . . , N } do
 4:          for x ∈ Xj do
                                           n
 5:              Compute n̂j,t−1 (x) and σ̂j,t−1 (x) according to Eq. equation 2 and equation 3, respec-
      tively
                                          c
 6:             Compute ĉj,t−1 (x) and σ̂j,t−1 (x) according to Eq. equation 4 and equation 5, respec-
    tively
 7:     Compute µ according to Eq. equation 6 or equation 7
                                                                             N
 8:     Call the optimization subroutine Opt(µ, λ) to get a solution {x̂j,t }j=1
                                                 N
 9:       Set the prescribed allocation {x̂j,t }j=1 during round t
                       PN                                PN
10:       Get revenue j=1 vj ñj (x̂j,t ) and pay costs j=1 c̃j (x̂j,t )
11:       Update the GPs using the new information ñj,t (x̂j,t ) and c̃j,t (x̂j,t )



In principle, we would design no-regret algorithms, i.e., whose pseudo-regret RT (U) increases
sub-linearly w.r.t. T , and, at the same time, that are η-safe, with η sublinearly increasing in (or is
independent of) T . However, the following theorem shows that no online learning algorithm can
provide a sublinear pseudo-regret while guaranteeing safety.
Theorem 2 (Pseudo-regret/safety tradeoff). For every ϵ > 0 and time horizon T , there is no algorithm
with pseudo-regret smaller than (1/2 − ϵ) T and that violates (in expectation) the constraints less
than (1/2 − ϵ) T times.

This impossibility result is crucial in practice, showing that no online learning algorithm can theo-
retically guarantee both a sublinear regret and a sublinear number of violations of the constraints.
Therefore, advertisers must accept a tradeoff between the two requirements in real-world applications.


4     P ROPOSED A LGORITHMS

Even if the above-defined problem is closely related to the Combinatorial MAB formulation provided
by Chen et al. (2013), designing algorithms for this setting requires dealing with an additional
challenge. Indeed, in the classical Combinatorial MAB framework, the set of arms can be chosen
from a fixed and known set of arms. Instead, in the framework we defined, the set of constraints
influences the set of arms that are feasible according to the constraints. In the following, we propose
two algorithms that carefully define the feasible set of arms at each round to deal with this issue.
We provide the pseudo-code of our algorithms, namely GCB and GCBsafe , in Algorithm 1, which
solves the problem in Equations (1a)-(1c) online while guaranteeing sublinear regret or η-safety,
respectively. Algorithm 1 is divided into an estimation phase (Lines 3-7) based on Gaussian Processes
(GPs) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006) to model the parameters whose values are unknown, and an
optimization subroutine to solve the optimization problem once given the estimates (Line 8). Finally,
in the last phase, the newly acquired data are used to improve the GP estimates that will be used in
the following round (Lines 10-11).
Estimation Phase In Algorithm 1, GPs are used to model functions nj (·) and cj (·), describing
the expected number of clicks and the costs, respectively. The employment of GPs to model
these functions provides several advantages w.r.t. other regression techniques, such as a probability
distribution over the possible values of the functions for every bid value x ∈ Xj relying on a finite
set of samples. GPs use the noisy realization of the actual number of clicks ñj,h (x̂j,h ) collected
from each subcampaign Cj for every previous round h ∈ {1, . . . , t − 1} to generate, for every bid
x ∈ Xj , the estimates for the expected value n̂j,t−1 (x) and the standard deviation of the number
             n
of clicks σ̂j,t−1 (x). Analogously, using the noisy realizations of the actual cost c̃j,h (x̂j,h ), with
h ∈ {1, . . . , t−1}, GPs generate, for every bid x ∈ Xj , the estimates for the expected value ĉj,t−1 (x)


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         c
and the standard deviation of the cost σ̂j,t−1 (x). Formally, the above values are computed as follows:
                  n̂j,t−1 (x) := kj,t−1 (x) [Kj,t−1 + σ 2 I]−1 kj,t−1 (x),
                                            ⊤
                                                                                                    (2)
                                                ⊤
                      n
                    σ̂j,t−1 (x) := kj (x, x) − kj,t−1 (x)[Kj,t−1 + σ 2 I]−1 kj,t−1 (x),                         (3)
                    ĉj,t−1 (x) := h⊤                     2 −1
                                    j,t−1 (x)[Hj,t−1 + σ I]    hj,t−1 (x),                                      (4)
                       c
                    σ̂j,t−1 (x) := hj (x, x) − h⊤                    2 −1
                                                j,t−1 (x)[Hj,t−1 + σ I]    hj,t−1 (x),                  (5)
where kj (·, ·) and hj (·, ·) are the kernels for the GPs over the number of clicks and costs, respectively,
Kj,t−1 and Hj,t−1 are the Gram matrix over the bids selected during the rounds {1, . . . t − 1} for the
two GPs, σ 2 is the variance of the noise of the GPs, kj,t−1 (x) and hj,t−1 are vectors built computing
the kernel between the training bids and the current bid x, and I is the identity matrix of order t − 1.
For further details on using GPs, we point an interested reader to Rasmussen & Williams (2006).
The estimation subroutine returns the vector µ of parameters characterizing the specific instance of
the optimization problem. More specifically, it is composed as follows:
                                µ := (w̄1 , . . . , w̄N , w1 , . . . , wN , −c̄1 , . . . , −c̄N ),
where w̄j = (w̄j (x1 ), . . . , w̄j (x|Xj | )) and wj = (wj (x1 ), . . . , wj (x|Xj | )), respectively, wj (xj ) :=
vj nj (xj ) and wj (xj ) := vj nj (xj ) denote different estimates for the revenue of a subcampaign Cj ,
and c̄j = (c̄j (x1 ), . . . , c̄j (x|Xj | )) is the vector characterizing the costs for subcampaign Cj . In the
optimization subroutine, wj (xj ) and wj (xj ) will be used to compute the value of Equation (1a)
and Equation (1b), respectively, and cj (xj ) to compute the value of Equations (1b)-(1c). We use h
and h to denote potentially different estimated values of a generic function h used by the learning
algorithms in the next sections. The proposed algorithms are derived from two procedures to compute
µ. Formally, we have that the elements of µ are defined as follows:
                                                                                     p            n

                                       wj (x)=wj (x):= vj n̂           j,t−1 (x) +       b t−1 σ̂ j,t−1 (x)   ,
                       GCB :                                         p         c                                 (6)
                                       cj (x) := ĉj,t−1 (x) − bt−1 σ̂j,t−1 (x),
                                                                          p           n

                                    wj (x) := vj  n̂j,t−1 (x) + pbt−1 σ̂j,t−1 (x)  ,
                                                                                       n
                 GCBsafe :
                                   
                                        wj (x) := vj n̂j,t−1 (x)      p− bt−1  c
                                                                                    σ̂j,t−1  (x) ,               (7)
                                        cj (x) := ĉj,t−1 (x) + bt−1 σ̂j,t−1           (x).
where bt is an uncertainty term that is appropriately set in Section 5.
The GCB and GCBsafe algorithm relies on the idea that the elements in the µ vector represent
the statistical upper/lower bounds to the expected values of the number of clicks and costs. This
follows a common choice in the bandit literature to incentivize exploration for uncertain quantities
(a.k.a. optimism in the face of uncertainty principle).
We remark that Accabi et al. (2018) propose the GCB algorithm to face general combinatorial bandit
problems where the arms are partitioned in subsets and the payoffs of the arms belonging to the same
subset are modeled with a GP. To obtain theoretical sublinear guarantees on the regret for our online
learning problem, we use a specific definition of µ vector, making Algorithm 1 be an extension of
GCB when the payoffs and constraints are functions whose parameters are modeled by multiple
independent GPs. With a slight abuse of terminology, we refer to this extension as GCB.
Optimization Subroutine The pseudo-code of the Opt(µ, λ) subroutine, solving the problem in
Equations (1a)-(1c) with a dynamic programming approach, is provided in Algorithm 2. It takes as
input the set of the possible bid values Xj for each subcampaign Cj , the set of the possible cumulative
cost values Y such that maxy∈Y y = β, the set of the possible revenue values R, an ROI threshold
λ, and a vector µ characterizing the optimization problem. In particular, if the functions are known
beforehand, it holds h = h = h for both h = wj and h = cj . For the sake of clarity, wj (x) is used
in the objective function, while wj (x) and cj (x) are used in the constraints. At first, the subroutine
initializes a matrix M in which it stores the optimal solution for each combination of values y ∈ Y
and r ∈ R, and it initializes the vectors xy,r = xy,r  next = [ ], ∀ y ∈ Y, ∀ r ∈ R (Lines 1 and 2,
respectively). Then, the subroutine generates the set S(y, r) of the bids for subcampaign C1 (Line 3).
More precisely, the set S(y, r) contains only the bids x that induce the overall costs to be lower than
or equal to y and the overall revenue to be higher than or equal to r. The bid in S(y, r) that maximizes
the revenue calculated with parameters wj is included in the vector xy,r , while the corresponding
revenue is stored in the matrix M (Lines 4–5). Then, the subroutine iterates over each subcampaign
Cj , with j ∈ {2, . . . , N }, all the values y ∈ Y , and all the values r ∈ R (Lines 9–11). At each


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Opt(µ, λ) subroutine
    Input: sets of bid values X1 , . . . , XN , set of cumulative cost values Y , set of revenue values R,
    vector µ, ROI threshold λ
 1: Initialize M empty matrix with dimension |Y | × |R|
                y,r
 2: Initialize xS   = xy,r
                         next = [ ], ∀y ∈ Y, r ∈ R
 3: S(y, r) = {x ∈ X1 | c1 (x) ≤ y ∧ w1 (x) ≥ r} ∀y ∈ Y, r ∈ R
 4: xy,r = arg maxx∈S(y,r) w1 (x) ∀y ∈ Y, r ∈ R
 5: M (y, r) = maxx∈S(y,r) w1 (x) ∀y ∈ Y, r ∈ R
 6: for j ∈ {2, . . . , N } do
 7:     for y ∈ Y do
 8:          for r ∈ R do
 9:             Update S(y, r) according to Equation equation 8
                                            Pj
10:             xy,r
                  next = arg maxs∈S(y,r)           wi (si )
                                            Pji=1
11:             M (y, r) = maxs∈S(y,r) i=1 wi (si )
12:     xy,r = xy,r
                  next
13: Choose (y ∗ , r ∗ ) according to Equation (9)
                 ∗ ∗
14: Output: xy ,r



iteration, for every pair (y, r), the subroutine stores in xy,r the optimal set of bids for subcampaigns
C1 , . . . , Cj that maximizes the objective function and stores the corresponding optimum value in
M (y, r). At every j-th iteration, the computation of the optimal bids is performed by evaluating a set
of candidate     solutions S(y, r), computed as follows:
    [n              ′ ′
                                                                                                 o
             s = [xy ,r , x] s.t. y ′ + cj (x) ≤ y ∧ r′ + wj (x) ≥ r ∧ x ∈ Xj ∧ y ′ ∈ Y ∧ r′ ∈ R . (8)
                                                        ′   ′
This set is built by combining the optimal bids xy ,r computed at the (j − 1)-th iteration with one of
the bids x ∈ Xj available for the j-th subcampaign, such that these combinations satisfy the ROI and
budget constraints. Then, the subroutine assigns the element of S(y, r) that maximizes the revenue to
xy,r
 next and the corresponding revenue to M (y, r). At the end, the subroutine computes the optimal pair
(y ∗ , r∗ ) as follows:n
                                          r                                                 o
          (y ∗ , r∗ ) = y ∈ Y, r ∈ R s.t. ≥ λ ∧ M (y, r) ≥ M (y ′ , r′ ), ∀y ′ ∈ Y, ∀r′ ∈ R ,      (9)
                                         y
                                        ∗ ∗
and the corresponding set of bids xy ,r , one bid per subcampaign.6 The following property holds:
Theorem 3 (Optimality). The Opt(µ, λ) subroutine returns the optimal solution to the problem in
Equations (1a)-(1c) when wj (x) = wj (x) = vj nj (x) and cj (x) = cj (x) for each j ∈ {1, . . . , N }
and the values of revenues and costs are in R and Y , respectively.


5       T HEORETICAL G UARANTEES

In what follows, we provide the theoretical guarantees of the GCB and GCBsafe algorithms in terms
of pseudo-regret and η-safety. Moreover, we will show how to have sublinear guarantee on both of
them by allowing small violations of the constraints. Let us first define the maximum information
gain γj,t of the GP modeling the number of clicks of subcampaign Cj at round t, formally defined as:
                                      1                                 Φ(xj,1 , . . . , xj,t )
                          γj,t :=                  max             It +                         ,
                                      2 (xj,1 ,...,xj,t ),xj,h ∈Xj              σ2
where It is the identity matrix of order t, Φ(xj,1 , . . . , xj,t ) is the Gram matrix of the GP computed
on the vector (xj,1 , . . . , xj,t ), and σ ∈ R+ is the noise standard deviation.

5.1       G UARANTEEING S UBLINEAR P SEUDO - REGRET: GCB

The GCB algorithm, which is based on the optimist in the face of uncertainty principle, provides the
following pseudo-regret bound:
    6
        An analysis of the running time of Algorithm 1 is provided in Appendix C.


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 4 (GCB pesudo-regret). Given δ ∈ (0, 1), GCB applied to the problem in Equations (1a)-
(1c), with probability at least 1 − δ, suffers v
                                               from a pseudo-regret of:
                                               u
                                                      2          N
                                               u 8T vmax N 3 bT X
                              RT (GCB ) ≤      t                    γj,T ,
                                                   ln(1 + σ 2 ) j=1
                   2
                        QT t2
where bt := 2 ln π N3δ          is an uncertainty term used to guarantee the confidence level required
by GCB, vmax := maxj∈{1,...,N } vj is the maximum value per click over all subcampaigns, and
Q := maxj∈{1,...,N } |Xj | is the number of bids in a subcampaign.
We remark that the upper bound provided in the above theorem is expressed in terms of the maximum
information gain γj,T of the GPs over the number of clicks. The problem of bounding γj,T for
a generic GP has already been addressed by Srinivas et al. (2010), where the authors present the
bounds for the squared exponential kernel γj,T = O((ln T )2 ) for 1-dimensional GPs. Notice that,
thanks to the previous result, the GCB algorithm using squared exponential kernels suffers from a
                                                                   2
        3/2      5/2
                     √ since the terms γj,T is bounded by O((ln T ) ), and the bound in Theorems 4
sublinear pseudo-regret
is O(N (ln T ) ) T ). However, the GCB algorithm violates (in expectation) the constraints a
linear number of times in T .
Theorem 5 (GCB   safety).  Given δ ∈ (0, 1), GCB applied to the problem in Equations (1a)-(1c)
                      2      2
with bt := 2 ln π N3δ  QT t
                                 is η-safe where η ≥ T − 2NδQT and, therefore, the number of constraints
violations is linear in T .
This result states that if we apply the GCB algorithm, we expect to have a large revenue over the
time horizon T at the cost of violating the ROI and/or the budget constraints most of the time over
the learning period. Therefore, in practical cases, such an algorithm might perform poorly regarding
ROI over the entire time horizon T . As highlighted before, this behaviour might lead to a premature
stop of the algorithm from the business unit. In what follows, we overcome this issue by being more
conservative in estimating the constraint satisfaction.

5.2      G UARANTEEING S AFETY: GCBsafe

The GCBsafe algorithm uses different bounds than GCB to evaluate the constraints and have stronger
guarantees about their satisfaction. In particular, while the estimates for the revenue of the algorithm
(Equation (1a)) are estimated using upper bounds, for the constraints (Equation (1b)-(1c)), we used
statistical lower bounds to guarantee they are satisfied at every round with high probability. This
choice comes at the cost of a linear worst-case performance in terms of pseudo-regret:
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                  QT t2
Theorem 6 (GCBsafe pseudo-regret). Given δ ∈ (0, 1), GCBsafe with bt := 2 ln π N3δ                        ,
applied to the problem in Equations (1a)-(1c) suffers from a pseudo-regret Rt (GCBsafe ) = Θ(T ).
However, GCBsafe violates the ROI and budget constraints only a constant number of times w.r.t. T .
                                                                               2
                                                                                   QT t2
Theorem 7 (GCBsafe safety). Given δ ∈ (0, 1), GCBsafe with bt := 2 ln π N3δ                , applied to
the problem in Equations (1a)-(1c) is δ-safe and the number of constraints violations is constant in T .
In the experimental section, we will see that in practical cases, the loss due to the safety requirement
does not impact the performance in terms of regret too much. Conversely, in what follows, we show
that when a tolerance in the violation of the constraints is accepted, an adaptation of GCBsafe can be
exploited to obtain a sublinear pseudo-regret.

5.3      G UARANTEEING S UBLINEAR P SEUDO - REGRET AND S AFETY WITH T OLERANCE :
         GCBsafe (ψ, ϕ)

Given an instance of the problem in Equations (1a)-(1c) that we call original problem, we build
an auxiliary problem in which we slightly relax the ROI and budget constraints. Formally, the
GCBsafe (ψ, ϕ) is the GCBsafe applied to the auxiliary problem in which the parameters λ and β
have been substituted with λ − ψ and β + ϕ, respectively.7 Thanks to the results in Section 5.2,
   7
       A formal definition of the auxiliary problem is provided in Appendix B.4.


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


GCBsafe (ψ, ϕ), w.h.p., does not violate the ROI constraint of the original problem by more than the
tolerance ψ and the budget constraint of the original problem by more than the tolerance ϕ.
Theorem 8 (GCBsafe (ψ, ϕ) pseudo-regret and safety with tolerance). Setting
                                s                                             s
                         N               2
                                        π N QT 3
                                                                                       2
                                                                                      π N QT 3

         βopt + nmax X
   ψ=2         2      σ     v j   2 ln                   and       ϕ =  2N  σ   2 ln            ,
             βopt       j=1
                                            3δ ′                                         3δ ′
where δ ′ ≤ δ, GCBsafe (ψ, ϕ)
                              provides a pseudo-regret w.r.t. the optimal solution to the original
               q P
                    N                                              δ′
problem of O     T j=1 γj,T with probability at least 1 − δ − QT      2 , while being δ-safe w.r.t. the


constraints of the auxiliary problem.
The above result states that if we allow a violation of at most ψ of the ROI constraint and of ϕ of the
budget one, the result provided in Theorem 1 can be circumvented.8
Notice that the magnitude of the violation ψ increases linearly in the maximum number of clicks
           PN
nmax and j=1 vj , that, in turn, increases linearly in the number of sub-campaigns N . This suggests
that in large instances, this value may be large. However, in practice, the maximum number of
clicks of a sub-campaign nmax is a sublinear function in the optimal budget βopt , and usually, it
goes to a constant as the budget spent goes to infinity. Moreover, the number of sub-campaigns N
usually depends on the budget, i.e., the budget planned by the business units is linear in the number
                                                              PN
of sub-campaigns. As a result, βopt is of the same order of j=1 vj , and therefore, since nmax is
                      PN
sublinear in βopt and j=1 vj is of the order of βopt , the final expression of ψ is sub-linear in βopt .
This means that the lower bound to ψ to satisfy the assumption needed by Theorem 8 goes to zero as
βopt increases.
Conversely, the most relevant dependence on the magnitude of ϕ is the number of campaigns N .
This is reasonable since the more the subcampaigns, the more we have potential variance over the
costs, which should be balanced with a larger violation of the constraint. This suggests that the
GCBsafe (ψ, ϕ) will not be effective for large instances of the analysed optimization problem.

6       E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
We experimentally evaluate our algorithms in terms of pseudo-regret and safety in synthetic settings.
The adoption of synthetic settings allows us to evaluate our algorithms in realistic scenarios and, at the
same time, to have an optimal clairvoyant solution necessary to measure the algorithms’ pseudo-regret
and safety. In the following experiment, we show that GCB suffers from significant violations of
both ROI and budget constraints even in simple settings, while GCBsafe does not.9

Setting We simulate N = 5 subcampaigns, with |Xj | = 201 bid values evenly spaced in [0, 2],
|Y | = 101 cost values evenly spaced in [0, 100], and |R| = 151 revenue values evenly spaced in
[0, 1200]. For a generic subcampaign Cj , at every t, the daily number of clicks is returned by the
function ñj (x) := θj (1−e−x/δj )+ξjn and the daily cost by the function c̃j (x) = αj (1−e−x/γj )+ξjc ,
where θj ∈ R+ and αj ∈ R+ represent the maximum achievable number of clicks and cost for
subcampaign Cj in a single day, δj ∈ R+ and γj ∈ R+ characterize how fast the two functions reach
a saturation point, and ξjn and ξjc are noise terms drawn from a N (0, 1) Gaussian distribution (these
functions are customarily used in the advertising literature, e.g., by Kong et al. (2018)). We assume a
unitary value for each click, i.e., vj = 1 for each j ∈ {1, . . . , N }. The values of the parameters of
cost and revenue functions of the subcampaigns are specified in Table 2 reported in Appendix D.5.
We set a daily budget β = 100, λ = 10 in the ROI constraint, and a time horizon T = 60. Notice that
in this setting at the optimal solution, the budget constraint is active, while the ROI constraint is not.
                                                                        ′
For both GCB and GCBsafe , the kernels for the number of clicks
                                                             n GPs k(x,
                                                                     o x ) and for the costs
                                                                                   ′ 2
GPs hj (x, x′ ) are squared exponential kernels of the form σf2 exp − (x−x
                                                                         l
                                                                           )
                                                                                         for every x, x′ ∈ Xj ,
    8
     Theoretical results in settings in which we have a priori information on the looseness of either one of the
constraints and we allow a violation of either one of the constraints are provided in Appendix B.4.
   9
     Additional experiments and details useful for the complete reproducibility of our results are provided in
Appendix D. Code available at https://github.com/oi-tech/safe_bid_opt.


                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



             2,000                                                   12                                               250
                                              GCB                                                                                                    GCB
                                              GCBsafe                                                                                                GCBsafe
                                              {x∗j }N                11                                               200                            βopt = β
             1,500                                  j=1


                                                          ROIt (U)
    Pt (U)


                                                                                                             St (U)
                                                                     10                                               150
             1,000                                                                                 GCB
                                                                                                   GCBsafe            100
                                                                     9                             λopt
                                                                                                   λ
              500                                                                                                      50
                                                                     8
                     0   10   20   30    40     50                        0   10   20   30    40     50                     0   10   20   30    40     50
                                   t                                                    t                                                 t

                                   (a)                                                  (b)                                               (c)
Figure 1: Daily revenue (a), ROI (b), and spend (c) obtained by GCB and GCBsafe . Dashed lines
correspond to the optimal values for the revenue and ROI, while dash-dotted lines correspond to the
values of the ROI and budget constraints.


where the parameters σf ∈ R+ and l ∈ R+ are estimated from data, as suggested by Rasmussen
& Williams (2006). The confidence for the algorithms is δ = 0.2. We evaluate  PN
                                                                                 the algorithms in
                                                                                j=1 vj nj (x̂j,t )
                                 PN
terms of daily revenue Pt (U) := j=1 vj nj (x̂j,t ), daily ROI: ROIt (U) :=    P N                 , and
                                                                                 j=1 cj (x̂j,t )
                      PN
daily spend: St (U) := j=1 cj (x̂j,t ). We perform 100 independent runs for each algorithm.

Results In Figure 1, for the daily revenue, ROI, and spend achieved by GCB and GCBsafe at every
t, we show the 50th percentile (i.e., the median) with solid lines and the 90th and 10th percentiles
with dashed lines surrounding the semi-transparent area. While GCB achieves a larger revenue than
GCBsafe , it violates the budget constraint over the entire time horizon and the ROI constraint in the
first 7 days in more than 50% of the runs. This happens because, in the optimal solution, the ROI
constraint is not active, while the budget constraint is. Conversely, GCBsafe satisfies the budget and
ROI constraints over the time horizon for more than 90% of the runs and has a slower convergence to
the optimal revenue. If we focus on the median revenue, GCBsafe has a similar behaviour to that of
GCB for t > 15. This makes GCBsafe a good choice, even in terms of overall revenue. However, it
is worth noticing that, in the 10% of the runs, GCBsafe does not converge to the optimal solution
before the end of the learning period. These results confirm our theoretical analysis showing that
limiting the exploration to safe regions might lead the algorithm to get a large regret. Furthermore,
let us remark that the learning dynamics of GCBsafe are much smoother than those of GCB, which
present, instead, oscillations.

7            C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORKS
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for Internet advertising campaigns. While previous
works available in the literature focus only on the maximization of the revenue provided by the
campaign, we introduce the concept of safety for the algorithms choosing the bid allocation each
day. More specifically, we want that the bidding satisfies, with high probability, some daily ROI and
budget constraints fixed by the business units of the companies. Our goal is to maximize the revenue
satisfying w.h.p. the uncertain constraints (a.k.a. safety). We model this setting as a combinatorial
optimization problem, proving that such a problem is inapproximable within any strictly positive
factor unless P = NP, but it admits an exact pseudo-polynomial-time algorithm. Most interestingly,
we prove that no online learning algorithm can provide sublinear pseudo-regret while guaranteeing a
sublinear number of violations of the uncertain constraints. We show that the GCB algorithm suffers
from a sublinear pseudo-regret, but it may violate the constraints a linear number of times. Thus,
we design GCBsafe , a novel algorithm that guarantees safety at the cost of a linear pseudo-regret.
Remarkably, a simple adaptation of GCBsafe , namely GCBsafe (ψ, ϕ), guarantees a sublinear pseudo-
regret and safety at the cost of tolerances ψ and ϕ on the ROI and budget constraints, respectively.
Finally, we evaluate the empirical performance of our algorithms with synthetically advertising
problems that confirmed the theoretical results provided before.
An interesting open research direction is the design of an algorithm that adopts constraints changing
during the learning process, i.e., that identifies the active constraint and relaxes those that are not
active. Moreover, understanding the relationship between the relaxation of one of the constraints and
the increase in revenue constitutes an interesting line of research.


                                                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
G. M. Accabi, F. Trovò, A. Nuara, N. Gatti, and M. Restelli. When gaussian processes meet
  combinatorial bandits: Gcb. In EWRL, pp. 1–11, 2018.
S. Amani, M. Alizadeh, and C. Thrampoulidis. Regret bound for safe gaussian process bandit
   optimization. In L4DC, pp. 158–159, 2020.
Ashwinkumar Badanidiyuru, Robert Kleinberg, and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Bandits with knapsacks. In
  FOCS, pp. 207–216, 2013.
Ashwinkumar Badanidiyuru, Robert Kleinberg, and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Bandits with knapsacks.
  Journal of the ACM (JACM), 65(3):1–55, 2018.
C. Borgs, J. Chayes, N. Immorlica, K. Jain, O. Etesami, and M. Mahdian. Dynamics of bid
  optimization in online advertisement auctions. In WWW, pp. 531–540, 2007.
X. Cao and K. J. Ray Liu. Online convex optimization with time-varying constraints and bandit
  feedback. IEEE T AUTOMAT CONTR, 64(7):2665–2680, 2019.
W. Chen, Y. Wang, and Y. Yuan. Combinatorial multi-armed bandit: General framework and
  applications. In ICML, pp. 151–159, 2013.
S.R. Chowdhury and A. Gopalan. On kernelized multi-armed bandits. In ICML, pp. 844–853, 2017.
N. R. Devanur and S. M. Kakade. The price of truthfulness for pay-per-click auctions. In ACM EC,
  pp. 99–106, 2009.
W. Ding, T. Qin, X.-D. Zhang, and T.Y. Liu. Multi-armed bandit with budget constraint and variable
  costs. In AAAI, pp. 232–238, 2013.
J. Feldman, S. Muthukrishnan, M. Pal, and C. Stein. Budget optimization in search-based advertising
   auctions. In ACM EC, pp. 40–49, 2007.
Zhe Feng, Swati Padmanabhan, and Di Wang. Online bidding algorithms for return-on-spend
  constrained advertisers. In Proceedings of the Web Conference (WWW), pp. 3550–3560, 2023.
N. Galichet, M. Sebag, and O. Teytaud. Exploration vs exploitation vs safety: Risk-aware multi-armed
  bandits. In ACML, pp. 245–260, 2013.
J. Garcia and F. Fernández. Safe exploration of state and action spaces in reinforcement learning. J
   ARTIF INTELL RES, 45:515–564, 2012.
Negin Golrezaei, Ilan Lobel, and Renato Paes Leme. Auction design for roi-constrained buyers. In
 WWW, pp. 3941–3952, 2021.
A. Hans, D. Schneegaß, A. M. Schäfer, and S. Udluft. Safe exploration for reinforcement learning.
  In ESANN, pp. 143–148, 2008.
IAB. Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) internet advertising revenue report, Full year 2021 re-
  sults. https://www.iab.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/IAB_Internet_
  Advertising_Revenue_Report_Full_Year_2021.pdf, 2021. Online; accessed 30
  April 2023.
D. Kong, X. Fan, K. Shmakov, and J. Yang. A combinational optimization approach for advertising
  budget allocation. In WWW, pp. 53–54, 2018.
Solomon Kullback and Richard A Leibler. On information and sufficiency. The annals of mathemati-
  cal statistics, 22(1):79–86, 1951.
S. Mannor, J. N. Tsitsiklis, and J. Y. Yu. Online learning with sample path constraints. J MACH
   LEARN RES, 10:569–590, 2009.
A. Moradipari, C. Thrampoulidis, and M. Alizadeh. Stage-wise conservative linear bandits. In
  NeurIPS, pp. 11191–11201, 2020.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A. Nuara, F. Trovò, N. Gatti, and M. Restelli. A combinatorial-bandit algorithm for the online joint
  bid/budget optimization of pay-per-click advertising campaigns. In AAAI, pp. 2379–2386, 2018.
A. Nuara, N. Sosio, F. Trovò, M. C. Zaccardi, N. Gatti, and M. Restelli. Dealing with interde-
  pendencies and uncertainty in multi-channel advertising campaigns optimization. In WWW, pp.
  1376–1386, 2019.
Alessandro Nuara, Francesco Trovò, Nicola Gatti, and Marcello Restelli. Online joint bid/daily
  budget optimization of internet advertising campaigns. Artificial Intelligence, 305:103663, 2022.
M. Pirotta, M. Restelli, A. Pecorino, and D. Calandriello. Safe policy iteration. In ICML, pp. 307–315,
  2013.
C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. Williams. Gaussian processes for machine learning, volume 1. MIT
  Press, 2006.
Karthik Abinav Sankararaman and Aleksandrs Slivkins. Combinatorial semi-bandits with knapsacks.
  In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 1760–1770,
  2018.
N. Srinivas, A. Krause, M. Seeger, and S. M. Kakade. Gaussian process optimization in the bandit
  setting: No regret and experimental design. In ICML, pp. 1015–1022, 2010.
Y. Sui, A. Gotovos, J. Burdick, and A. Krause. Safe exploration for optimization with gaussian
  processes. In ICML, pp. 997–1005, 2015.
B. K. Szymanski and J. Lee. Impact of roi on bidding and revenue in sponsored search advertisement
  auctions. In Workshop on Sponsored Search Auctions, volume 1, pp. 1–8, 2006.
S. Thomaidou, K. Liakopoulos, and M. Vazirgiannis. Toward an integrated framework for automated
   development and optimization of online advertising campaigns. INTELL DATA ANAL, 18(6):
   1199–1227, 2014.
F. Trovò, S. Paladino, M. Restelli, and N. Gatti. Budgeted multi-armed bandit in continuous action
   space. In ECAI, pp. 560–568, 2016.
V. V. Vazirani, N. Nisan, T. Roughgarden, and E. Tardos. Algorithmic Game Theory. Cambridge
   University Press, 2007.
W. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Gao, Y. Yu, X. Yuan, and T.-Y. Liu. Joint optimization of bid and budget
  allocation in sponsored search. In SIGKDD, pp. 1177–1185, 2012.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Supplementary Material for Paper ID: 5352


A     R ELATED W ORKS



Many works study Internet advertising, both from the publisher perspective (e.g., Vazirani et al.
(2007) design auctions for ads allocation and pricing) and from the advertiser perspective (e.g.,
Feldman et al. (2007) study the budget optimization problem in search advertising). Only a few works
deal with ROI constraints, and, to the best of our knowledge, they focus on the design of auction
mechanisms. In particular, Szymanski & Lee (2006) and Borgs et al. (2007) show that ROI-based
bidding heuristics can lead to cyclic behavior and reduce the allocation’s efficiency, while Golrezaei
et al. (2021) propose more efficient auctions with ROI constraints. The learning algorithms for daily
bid optimization available in the literature address only budget constraints in the restricted case in
which the platform allows the advertisers to set a daily budget limit (notice that some platforms, such
as TripAdvisor and Trivago, do not even allow the setting of the daily budget limit). For instance,
Zhang et al. (2012) provide an offline algorithm that exploits accurate models of the campaigns’
performance based on low-level data rarely available to the advertisers. Feng et al. (2023) propose an
online auto-bidding algorithm for a single advertiser maximizing value under the Return-on-Spend
constraint. However, the constraint violation is evaluated on the cumulated value of the violation over
the entire time horizon (which is a condition much weaker than ours). Nuara et al. (2018) propose an
online learning algorithm that combines combinatorial multi-armed bandit techniques (Chen et al.,
2013) with regression by Gaussian Processes (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006). This work provides no
guarantees on ROI. More recent works also present pseudo-regret bounds (Nuara et al., 2022) and
study subcampaigns interdependencies offline (Nuara et al., 2019). Thomaidou et al. (2014) provide
a genetic algorithm for budget optimization of advertising campaigns. Ding et al. (2013) and Trovò
et al. (2016) address the bid optimization problem in a single subcampaign scenario when the budget
constraint is cumulative over time.
A research field strictly related to our work is learning with safe exploration and constraints subject
to uncertainty. The goal is to guarantee w.h.p. the constraints satisfaction during the entire learning
process. The only known results on safe exploration in multi-armed bandits address the case with
continuous, convex arm spaces and convex constraints. The learner can converge to the optimal
solution in these settings without violating the constraints (Moradipari et al., 2020; Amani et al.,
2020). Conversely, the case with discrete and/or non-convex arm spaces or non-convex constraints,
such as ours, is unexplored in the literature. We remark that some bandit algorithms address uncertain
constraints where the goal is their satisfaction on average (Mannor et al., 2009; Cao & Liu, 2019).
However, the per-round violation can be arbitrarily large (particularly in the early stages of the
learning process), not fitting with our setting as humans could be alarmed and, thus, give up on
adopting the algorithm. Moreover, several works in reinforcement learning (Hans et al., 2008; Pirotta
et al., 2013; Garcia & Fernández, 2012) and multi-armed bandit (Galichet et al., 2013; Sui et al., 2015)
investigate safe exploration, providing safety guarantees on the revenue provided by the algorithm,
but not on the satisfaction w.h.p. of uncertain constraints.
Finally, another line of research dealing with bandits with constraints is the one related to Com-
binatorial MAB with knapsack constraints, e.g., the works by Sankararaman & Slivkins (2018);
Badanidiyuru et al. (2018). However, they cannot be applied to our setting for two main reasons.
First, they provide theoretical guarantees in the case the decision sets are matroidal-shaped. How-
ever, the set of arms in our setting is non-matroidal. More specifically, all the feasible actions
St = (xi,t , . . . , xN,t ) have exactly N elements (one per subcampaign), and removing one element
from a feasible superarm generates a new superarm St′ = (xi,t , . . . , xi−1,t , xi+1,t , . . . , xN,t ) that is
not an acceptable allocation of the campaign. Second, they guarantee the satisfaction of the budget
constraints over a given time horizon. That is, the bandit algorithm cannot spend more than a given
threshold within the given time horizon. Conversely, in our work, we bound, with high probability,
the violation of the constraint in every single round.


                                                      12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     O MITTED P ROOFS
B.1    P ROOFS O MITTED FROM S ECTION 2

Theorem 1 (Inapproximability). For any ρ ∈ (0, 1], there is no polynomial-time algorithm returning
a ρ-approximation to the problem in Equations (1a)-(1c), unless P = NP.
                                                               P
Proof. We restrict to the instances of SUBSET-SUM such that z ≤ j∈S uj . Solving these instances
                                               P
is trivially NP-hard, as any instance with z > j∈S uj is not satisfiable, and we can decide it in
                                                                            P
                                                                                     uj +1
polynomial time. Given an instance of SUBSET-SUM, let ℓ = j∈Sρ             . Let us notice that, the
lower the degree of approximation we aim, the larger the value of ℓ. For instance,
                                                                           P        when study the
problem of computing an exact solution, we set ρ = 1 and therefore ℓ = j∈S uj + 1, whereas,
                                                                          P
when we require a 1/2-approximation, we set ρ = 1/2 and therefore ℓ = 2( j∈S ui + 1). We have
|S| + 1 subcampaigns, each denoted with Cj . The available bid values belong to {0, 1} for every
subcampaign Cj . The parameters of the subcampaigns are set as follows.

        • Subcampaign C0 : we set v0 = 1, and

                                2ℓ + z if x = 1                                      ℓ   if x = 1
                     c0 (x) =                       ,                 n0 (x) =                     .
                                0         otherwise                                  0   otherwise
        • Subcampaign Cj for every j ∈ S: we set vj = 1, and

                               uj ℓ + z if x = 1                     uj                      if x = 1
                    cj (x) =                        ,     nj (x) =                                     .
                               0         otherwise                   0                       otherwise

We set the daily budget β = 2(z + ℓ) and the ROI limit λ = 12 .10
We show that if a SUBSET-SUM instance is satisfiable, then the corresponding instance of our
problem admits a solution with revenue larger than ℓ, while if a SUBSET-SUM instance is not
satisfiable, the maximum revenue in the corresponding instance of our problem is at most ρ ℓ − 1.
Thus, the application of any polynomial-time ρ-approximation algorithm to instances of our problem
generated from instances of SUBSET-SUM as described above would return a solution whose value
is not smaller than ρ ℓ when the SUBSET-SUM instance is satisfiable, and it is not larger than ρ ℓ − 1
when the SUBSET-SUM instance is not satisfiable. As a result, whenever such an algorithm returns a
solution with a value that is not smaller than ρ ℓ, we can decide that the corresponding SUBSET-SUM
instance is satisfiable. Analogously, whenever such an algorithm returns a solution with a value that
is in the range [ρ(ρ ℓ − 1), ρ ℓ − 1], we can decide that the corresponding SUBSET-SUM instance is
not satisfiable. Let us noticePthat the range [ρ(ρ ℓ − 1), ρ ℓ − 1] is well defined for every ρ ∈ (0, 1],
as, by construction, ρ ℓ = j∈S uj + 1 ≥ 1 and therefore ρ ℓ − 1 ≥ ρ(ρ ℓ − 1). Hence, such an
algorithm would decide in polynomial time whether or not a SUBSET-SUM instance is satisfiable,
but this is not possible unless P = NP. Since this holds for every ρ ∈ (0, 1], then no ρ-approximation
to our problem is allowed in polynomial time unless P = NP.
If. Suppose that SUBSET-SUM is satisfied by the set S ∗ ⊆ S and that its solution assigns xj = 1 if
j ∈ S ∗ and xj = 0 otherwise, and it assigns x0 = 1. The total revenue is ℓ+z ≥ ℓ and the constraints
                                                                                          ℓ+z
are satisfied. In particular, the sum of the costs is 2ℓ + z + z = 2(ℓ + z), while ROI = 2ℓ+2z = 12 .
Only if. Assume by contradiction that the instance of our problem admits a solution with a revenue
strictly larger than ρ ℓ − 1 and that SUBSET-SUM is not satisfiable. Then, P it is easy to see that we
need x0 = 1 for campaign C0 as the maximum achievable revenue is j∈S uj = ρ ℓ − 1 when
                                                              P
x0 = 0. Thus, since x0 = 1, the budget constraint forces j∈S:xj =1 ci (xj ) ≤ z, thus implying
                                                                         P
P                                                                         j∈S:xj =1 uj +l    1
   j∈S:xj =1 u j ≤ z. By  the satisfaction of the ROI constraint, i.e., P
                                                                                  uj +2l+z ≥ 2 , it must
                                                                                  j∈S:xj =1

   10
      For the sake of clarity, the proof uses simple instances. Adopting these instances is crucial to identify the
most basic settings in which the problem is hard, and it is customarily done in the literature. Let us notice that it
is possible to prove the theorem using more realistic instances. For example, we can build a reduction in which
the costs are smaller than the values, i.e., cj (x) < nj (x)vj . In particular, the reduction holds even if we set
c0 (1) = ϵ(2l + z), cj (1) = ϵuj , β = 2ϵ(z + l), and λ = 1/(2ϵ) for an arbitrary small ϵ.


                                                        13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


hold i∈S:xi =1 ui ≥ z. Therefore, the set S ∗ = {i ∈ S : xi = 1} is a solution to SUBSET-SUM,
     P
thus reaching a contradiction. This concludes the proof.

B.2    P ROOFS O MITTED FROM S ECTION 3

Theorem 2 (Pseudo-regret/safety tradeoff). For every ϵ > 0 and time horizon T , there is no algorithm
with pseudo-regret smaller than (1/2 − ϵ) T and that violates (in expectation) the constraints less
than (1/2 − ϵ) T times.


Proof. In what follows, we provide an impossibility result for the optimization problem in Equa-
tions (1a)-(1c). For the sake of simplicity, our proof is based on the violation of (budget) Con-
straint (1c), but its extension to the violation of (ROI) Constraint (1b) is direct. Initially, we show that
an algorithm satisfying the two conditions of the theorem can be used to distinguish between N (1, 1)
and N (1 + δ, 1) with an arbitrarily large probability using a number of samples independent from
δ.11 Consider two instances of the bid optimization problem defined as follows. Both instances have
a single subcampaign with x ∈ {0, 1}, c(0) = 0, r(0) = 0, r(1) = 1, β = 1, and λ = 0. The first
instance has cost c1 (1) = N (1, 1), while the second one has cost c2 (1) = N (1 + δ, 1). With the first
instance, the algorithm must choose x = 1 at least T (1/2 + ϵ) times in expectation otherwise, the
pseudo-regret would be strictly greater than T (1/2 − ϵ), while with the second instance, the algorithm
must choose x = 1 at most than T (1/2 − ϵ) times in expectation. Otherwise, the constraint on the
budget would be violated strictly more than T (1/2 − ϵ) times. Standard concentration inequalities im-
ply that, for each γ > 0, there exists a n(ϵ, γ) such that, given n(ϵ, γ) runs of the learning algorithm,
with the first instance the algorithm plays x = 1 strictly more than T n(ϵ, γ)/2 times with probability
at least 1 − γ, while with the second instance, it is played strictly less than T n(ϵ, γ)/2 times with
probability at least 1 − γ. This entails that the learning algorithm can distinguish with arbitrarily large
success probability (independent of δ) between the two instances using (at most) n(ϵ, γ)T samples
from one of the normal distributions. However, the Kullback-Leibler divergence (Kullback & Leibler,
1951) between the two normal distributions is KL(N (1, 1), N (1 + δ, 1)) = δ 2 /2 and each algorithm
needs at least Ω(1/δ 2 ) samples to distinguish between the two distributions with arbitrarily large
probability. Since δ can be arbitrarily small, we have a contradiction. Thus, such an algorithm cannot
exist. This concludes the proof.12

B.3    P ROOFS O MITTED FROM S ECTION 4

Theorem 3 (Optimality). The Opt(µ, λ) subroutine returns the optimal solution to the problem in
Equations (1a)-(1c) when wj (x) = wj (x) = vj nj (x) and cj (x) = cj (x) for each j ∈ {1, . . . , N }
and the values of revenues and costs are in R and Y , respectively.


Proof. Since all the possible values for the revenues and costs are taken into account in the subroutine,
the elements in S(y, r) satisfy the two inequalities in Equation (8) with the equal sign. Therefore,
all the elements in S(y, r) would contribute to the computation of the final value of the ROI and
budget constraints, i.e., the ones after evaluating all the N subcampaigns, with the same values for
revenue and costs, being their overall revenue equal to r and their overall cost equal to y. Notice
that Constraint (1c) is satisfied as long as it holds max(Y ) = β. The maximum operator in Line 11
excludes only solutions with the same costs and lower revenue, and, therefore, the subroutine excludes
only solutions that would never be optimal (and, for this reason, said dominated). The same reasoning
also holds for the subcampaign C1 analysed by the algorithm. Finally, after all the dominated
allocations have been discarded, the solution is selected by Equation (9), i.e., among all the solutions
satisfying the ROI constraints, the one with the largest revenue is selected.

  11
     With N (a, b) we denote the Gaussian distribution with mean a and variance b.
  12
     Notice that the theorem can be modified to hold even with instances that satisfy real-world assumptions,
e.g., with costs much smaller than the budget. Indeed, we can apply the same reduction in which the costs
are arbitrary, e.g., c(0) = c(1) = q with an arbitrary small q and β = 1, while the utilities are r(0) = 0,
r(1) = N (1, 1) or r(1) = N (1 − δ, 1), and the ROI limit is λ = 1/q.


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.4    O MITTED P ROOFS FROM S ECTION 5

Theorem 4 (GCB pesudo-regret). Given δ ∈ (0, 1), GCB applied to the problem in Equations (1a)-
(1c), with probability at least 1 − δ, suffers v
                                               from a pseudo-regret of:
                                               u
                                                      2          N
                                               u 8T vmax N 3 bT X
                              RT (GCB ) ≤ t                         γj,T ,
                                                   ln(1 + σ 2 ) j=1
                   2
                        QT t2
where bt := 2 ln π N3δ          is an uncertainty term used to guarantee the confidence level required
by GCB, vmax := maxj∈{1,...,N } vj is the maximum value per click over all subcampaigns, and
Q := maxj∈{1,...,N } |Xj | is the number of bids in a subcampaign.

Proof. This proof extends the proof provided by Accabi et al. (2018) to the case in which multiple
independent GPs are present in the optimization problem.
Let us define rµ (x) as the expected reward provided by a specific allocation x = (x1 , . . . , xN ) under
              that the parameter vector of the optimization problem is µ. Moreover, let
the assumption
       η := w1 (x1 ), . . . , wN (x|XN | ), w1 (x1 ), . . . , wN (x|XN | ), −c1 (x1 ), . . . , −cN (x|XN | ) ,
be the vector characterizing the optimization problem in Equations (1a)-(1c), xt be the allocation
chosen by the GCB algorithm at round t, x∗η the optimal allocation—i.e., the one solving the
discrete version of the optimization problem in Equations (1a)-(1c) with parameter η—, and rη∗ the
corresponding expected reward.
To guarantee that GCB provides a sublinear pseudo-regret, we need a few assumptions to be satisfied.
More specifically, we need a monotonicity property, stating that the value of the objective function
increases as the values of the elements in µ increase and a Lipschitz continuity assumption between
the parameter vector µ and the value returned by the objective function in Equation (1a). Formally:
                                                                    PN
Assumption 1 (Monotonicity). The expected reward rµ (S) := j=1 vj nj (xj,t ), where S is the
bid allocation, is monotonically non decreasing in µ, i.e., given µ, η s.t. µi ≤ ηi for each i, we have
rµ (S) ≤ rη (S) for each S.
Assumption 2 (Lipschitz continuity). The expected reward rµ (S) is Lipschitz continuous in the
infinite norm w.r.t. the expected payoff vector µ, with Lipschitz constant Λ > 0. Formally, for
each µ, η we have |rµ (S) − rη (S)| ≤ Λ||µ − η||∞ , where the infinite norm of a payoff vector is
||µ||∞ := maxi |µi |.

Our problem satisfies both of the above assumptions. Indeed, we have that the Lipschitz continuity
holds with constant Λ = vmax N . Instead, the monotonicity property holds by definition of µ, as the
increase of a value of wj (x) would increase the value of the objective function, and the increase of
the values of wj (x) or cj (x) would enlarge the feasibility region of the problem, thus not excluding
optimal solutions.
Let us now focus on the per-step expected regret, defined as:
                                       regt := rη∗ − rη (xt ).
Let us recall a property of the Gaussian distribution which will be useful in what follows. Be
r ∼ N (0, 1) and c ∈ R+ , we have:
                                                 Z ∞
                                        1     c2         (r−c)2
                          P[r > c] = √ e− 2            e− 2 −c(r−c) dr
                                        2π         c
                                c2
                              − 2              1 − c2
                          ≤e       P[r > 0] = e 2 ,
                                               2
since e−c(r−c) ≤ 1 for r ≥ c. For the symmetry of the Gaussian distribution, we have:
                                                              c2
                                            P[|r| > c] ≤ e− 2 .                                          (10)
Let us focus on the GP modeling the number of clicks. Following Lemma 5 in the work by Srinivas
et al. (2010), we have that conditioned on the number of clicks (ñj,1 (xj,1 ), . . . , ñj,t (xj,t )), the
selected bids (xj,1 , . . . , xj,1 ), with xj,h ∈ Xj , are deterministic and the estimated number of clicks
follows:
                                                                    n
                                        nj,t (x) ∼ N (n̂j,t (x), (σ̂j,t (x))2 ),


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         n̂ (x)−n (x)            √
for all x ∈ Xj . Thus, substituting r = j,t σ̂n (x)j,t and c = bt in Equation (10), we obtain:
                                               j,t
                             h                        p           i    bt
                                                           n
                           P |n̂j,t (x) − nj,t (x)| > bt σ̂j,t (x) ≤ e− 2 .                    (11)

Recall that, after n rounds, each arm can be chosen a number of times from 1 to n. Applying the
union bound over the rounds (h ∈ {1, . . . , T }), the sub-campaigns Cj (Cj with j ∈ {1, . . . , N }), the
number of times the arms in Cj are chosen (t ∈ {1, . . . , n}), and the available arms in Cj (x ∈ Xj ),
and exploiting Equation (11),
                             we obtain:                                    
                               [                              p
                                                                    n
                          P         |n̂j,t (x) − nj,t (x)| > bt σ̂j,t (x)                          (12)
                                  h,j,t,x
                                 T X
                                   N X
                                     n
                                 X                          bt
                             ≤                     |Xj |e− 2 .                                        (13)
                                 h=1 j=1 t=1
                              2
                              π N QT t2
Thus, choosing bt = 2 ln         3δ             , we obtain:
                           T X
                             N X
                               n                               T X
                                                                 N X
                                                                   n
                           X                          bt       X                       3δ
                                            |Xj |e− 2 ≤                      Q
                                                                                  π 2 N QT t2
                           h=1 j=1 t=1                         h=1 j=1 t=1
                            ∞
                           X    2δ    δ
                                2  2
                                     = ,
                           n=1
                               π t    2
where we used the fact that Q ≥ |Xj | for each j ∈ {1, . . . N }.
Using the same proof on 
                        the GP defined over the costs leads to:        
                           [                            p
                                                              c
                                                                         δ
                      P        |ĉj,t (x) − cj,t (x)| > bt σ̂j,t (x)  ≤ .
                                                                         2
                              h,j,t,x
The above proof implies that the union of the event that all the bounds used in the GCB algorithm
holds with probability at least 1 − δ. Formally, for each t ≥ 1, we know that with probability at least
1 − δ the following holds for all xj ∈ Xj , j ∈ {1, . . . N }, and number of times the the arm xj has
been pulled over t rounds:                                 p
                                                                 n
                                  |n̂j (xj ) − nj (xj )| ≤ bt σ̂j,t  (xj ),                        (14)
                                                           p
                                                                 c
                                   |ĉj (xj ) − cj (xj )| ≤ bt σ̂j,t (xj ).                        (15)
From now on, let us assume we are in the clean event that the previous bounds hold.
Let us focus on the term rµ (xt ). The following holds:
                                           ∗
                               rµ (xt ) ≥ rµ ≥ rµ (x∗µ ) ≥ rη (x∗µ ) = rη∗ ,                   (16)
                                   ∗
where we use the definition of rµ , and the monotonicity property of the expected reward (Assump-
tion 1), being (µ)i ≥ (η)i , ∀i. Using Equation (16), the instantaneous expected pseudo-regret regt
at round t satisfies the following inequality:
                              regt = rη∗ − rη (xt ) ≤ rµ (xt ) − rη (xt ) =                    (17)
                                        ≤ rµ (xt ) − rµ̂ (xt ) + rµ̂ (xt ) − rη (xt ),                (18)
                                          |        {z       } |            {z      }
                                                     ra                      rb
where
           µ̂ := ŵ1,t−1 (x1 ), . . . , ŵN,t−1 (x|XN | ),ŵ1,t−1 (x1 ), . . . , ŵN,t−1 (x|XN | ),
                                                                                                 (19)

                                                   − ĉ1,t−1 (x1 ), . . . , −ĉN,t−1 (x|XN | ) ,
is the vector composed of the estimated average payoffs for each arm x ∈ Xj and each campaign Cj ,
where ŵj,t−1 (x) := vj n̂j,t−1 (x).
We use the Lipschitz property of the expected reward function (see Assumption 2) to bound the terms
in Equation (18) as follows:
                                                               p
                                                                        n
                   ra ≤ Λ||µ − µ̂||∞ = Λ max              vmax bt max σ̂j,t (x)                 (20)
                                            j∈{1,...,N }           x∈Xj
                                 p
                                                           n
                       ≤ N vmax bt max             max σ̂j,t (x)                                (21)
                                             j∈{1,...,N }      x∈Xj



                                                            16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   p X N
                                                 n
                           ≤ N vmax bt     max σ̂j,t (x) ,                                                   (22)
                                                       x∈Xj
                                              j=1

                         rb ≤ Λ||µ̂ − η||∞
                                         p X N
                                                       n
                           ≤ N vmax       bt     max σ̂j,t (x) ,                                             (23)
                                                       x∈Xj
                                              j=1
where Equation (20) holds by the definition of µ, Equation (22) holds since the maximum over a set
is not greater than the sum of the elements of the set, if they are all non-negative, and Equation (23)
directly follows from Equation (14). Plugging Equations (22) and (23) into Equation (18), we obtain:
                                              p X   N
                                                                  n
                             regt ≤ 2N vmax bt             max σ̂j,t (x) .                         (24)
                                                       x∈Xj
                                                j=1
                             n
We need now to upper bound σ̂j,t (x). Consider a realization nj (·) of a GP over Xj and recall that,
thanks to Lemma 5.3 in (Srinivas et al., 2010), under the Gaussian assumption we can express the
information gain IGj,t provided by (ñj (x̂j,1 ), . . . , ñj (x̂j,|Xj | )) corresponding to the sequence of
arms (x̂j,1 , . . . , x̂j,|Xj | ) as:
                                                 t
                                              1X
                                                    log 1 + σ −2 (σ̂j,t
                                                                    n
                                                                        (x̂j,h ))2 .

                                      IGj,t =                                                           (25)
                                              2
                                                h=1
We have that:
                                                               log 1 + σ −2 (σ̂j,t
                                                                                     n

                        n           2     2
                                              −2 n         2
                                                                                       (x̂j,h ))2
                   (σ̂j,t (x̂j,h )) = σ σ (σ̂j,t (x̂j,h )) ≤                                        ,   (26)
                                                                          log (1 + σ −2 )
                −2          2
since s2 ≤ σ log(1+σlog (1+s )
                          −2 ) for all s ∈ [0, σ −1 ], and σ −2 (σ̂j,t
                                                                   n
                                                                       (x̂j,h ))2 ≤ σ −2 k(x̂j,h , x̂j,h ) ≤ σ −2 ,
where k(·, ·) is the kernel of the GP. Since Equation (26) holds for any x ∈ Xj and for any
                                                                                          n
j ∈ {1, . . . N }, then it also holds for the arm x̂max maximizing the variance (σ̂j,t       (x̂j,h ))2 over Xj .
                             2
                       8N
Thus, setting c̄ = log(1+σ −2 ) and exploiting the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we obtain:

                                              T
                                              X
                         R2T (GCB) ≤ T              regt2
                                              t=1
                                                                         2
                                                                       
                                T
                                X                    XN
                         ≤T            4N 2 vmax
                                             2
                                                 bt            n
                                                          max σ̂j,t (x) 
                                                               x∈Xj
                                 t=1                   j=1
                                                                                  
                                              T
                                              X              N
                                                             X
                         ≤ 4N 2 vmax
                                 2
                                     T bT            N                   n
                                                                   max (σ̂j,t (x))2 
                                                                   x∈Xj
                                               t=1           j=1
                                             N  T
                                             X 1X
                                2
                                                       max log 1 + σ −2 (σ̂j,t
                                                                           n
                                                                               (x̂j,h ))2

                         ≤ c̄N vmax T bT
                                             j=1
                                                 2 t=1
                                                       x∈Xj

                                             N
                                             X
                                2
                         ≤ c̄N vmax T bT            γj,T .
                                             j=1
We conclude the proof by taking the square root on both the r.h.s. and the l.h.s. of the last inequality.


              safety).  Given δ ∈ (0, 1), GCB applied to the problem in Equations (1a)-(1c)
Theorem 5 (GCB
                     2        2
with bt := 2 ln π N3δ  QT t
                                   is η-safe where η ≥ T − 2NδQT and, therefore, the number of constraints
violations is linear in T .

Proof. Let us focus on a specific day t. Consider the case in which Constraints (1b) and (1c) are
                                                            PN                   PN
active, and, therefore, the left side equals the right side: j=1 wj (xj,t ) − λ j=1 cj (xj,t ) = 0 and
PN
   j=1 cj (xj,t ) = β. For the sake of simplicity, we focus on the costs cj (xj,t ), but similar arguments
also apply to the revenues wj (xj,t ). A necessary condition for which the two constraints are valid


                                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


also for the actual (non-estimated) revenues and costs is that for at least one of the costs it holds
cj (xj,t ) ≤ cj (xj,t ). Indeed, if the opposite holds, i.e., cj (xj,t ) < cj (xj,t ) for each j ∈ {1, . . . , N }
                                                                                             PN
and xj,t ∈ Xj , the budget constraint would be violated by the allocation since j=1 cj (xj,t ) >
PN                                                                                                        3δ
    j=1 cj (xj,t ) = β. Since the event cj (xj,t ) ≤ cj (xj,t ) occurs with probability at most π 2 N QT t2 ,
over the t ∈ N, formally:
                     P                                                
                           N                       N
                           j=1 vj nj (x̂j,t )     X                                     3δ
                   P  PN                     <λ∨     cj (x̂j,t ) > β  ≥ 1 − 2                .
                            j=1 cj (x̂j,t )       j=1
                                                                                  π   N  QT t2
Finally, summing over the time horizon T the probability that the constraints are not violated is at
most 2NδQT , formally:
                     P                                              
                T       N                         N
               X             v
                        j=1 j j n  (x̂ j,t )     X                             δ
                   P  PN                    <λ∨     cj (x̂j,t ) > β  ≥ T −       .
               t=1        j=1 jc (x̂ j,t )       j=1
                                                                             2N QT
This concludes the proof.
Theorem 9 (GCB cumulated violation). The cumulated violation of the two constraints provided by
the GCB algorithm satisfies:
                                           q
        PT PN                                  PN    c
      •   t=1       c
                j=1 j (x  j,t ) − T β ≤ O    T     γ
                                                j=1 j,T ,

                           PN                           q
                 PT          j=1    vj nj (xj,t )          PN            c
       • Tλ −       t=1
                             PN                     ≤O    T j=1 (γj,t + γj,t ) ,
                                 j=1 cj (xj,t )


       c
where γj,t is the maximum information gain of the GPs modeling the costs of j-th subcampaign after
t samples.

Proof. We analyse the violation of the ROI constraint vrt at a specific day t and the one of the budget
constraint vbt .
Focusing on the budget constraint, we have:
                  XN                   N
                                       X               p       c
            vbt =     cj (xj,t ) − y ≤   (ĉj (xj,t ) + bt−1 σ̂j,t−1 (xj,t )) − β                             (27)
                       j=1                           j=1
                       N
                       X                                             N
                                                                     X
                                       p       c
                                                                       p        c
                   =     (ĉj (xj,t ) − bt−1 σ̂j,t−1 (xj,t )) − β +2     bt−1 σ̂j,t−1 (xj,t )                 (28)
                       j=1                                                j=1
                       |                            {z               }
                                                    ≤0
                           N
                           X p             c
                   ≤2               bt−1 σ̂j,t−1 (xj,t ),                                                     (29)
                           j=1
where the inequality in Equation (28) holds from the fact that   p the solution selected by GCB has to
satisfy the budget constraint. Define nj (xj,t ) := n̂j (xj,t ) + bt−1 σ̂jn (xj,t ). Notice that the previous
bound holds w.p. at least 1 − δ since this is the probability for which the bounds on the number of
clicks and the costs hold.
                       PN
                                 vj nj (xj,t )
Since we have λ ≤ Pj=1 N              :
                       j=1 cj (xj,t )
               PN                        PN                       PN
                 j=1 vj nj (xj,t )          j=1 vj nj (xj,t )        j=1 vj nj (xj,t )
    vrt = λ − PN                      ≤ PN                     − PN                                            (30)
                   j=1 cj (xj,t )            j=1 cj (xj,t )           j=1 cj (xj,t )
          PN                PN                      PN                PN
             j=1 cj (xj,t )   j=1 vj nj (xj,t ) −      j=1 cj (xj,t )     j=1 vj nj (xj,t )
        ≤                       PN                 PN                                                          (31)
                                    j=1 cj (xj,t )   j=1 cj (xj,t )
                                        
                                          N               N                    N              N
                      1                  X               X                    X              X
        ≤ 2                  √               cj (xj,t )      vj nj (xj,t ) −     cj (xj,t )     vj nj (xj,t )
          N cmin (cmin − bT σ) j=1                       j=1                  j=1            j=1



                                                             18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                             
             N
             X                  N
                                X                       N
                                                        X                  N
                                                                           X
         +         cj (xj,t )         vj nj (xj,t ) −         cj (xj,t )         vj nj (xj,t )                                (32)
             j=1                j=1                     j=1                j=1
                                                                                                
                                                  N              N                 N
                            1                    X              X                  X
         ≤                    √                    cj (xj,t )    vj nj (xj,t ) −   vj nj (xj,t )
           N 2 cmin (cmin − bT σ) j=1                 j=1                                     j=1
                                                         
           N
           X                   N
                               X              N
                                              X
         +     vj nj (xj,t )    cj (xj,t ) −   cj (xj,t )                                                                   (33)
             j=1                       j=1               j=1
                         PN p                                     PN p
             N cmax vmax 2 j=1   bt−1 σ̂jn (xj,t ) + N nmax vmax 2 j=1 bt−1 σ̂jc (xj,t )
       ≤                                                √                                    (34)
                                    N 2 cmin (cmin − bT σ)
                      PN p                                    PN p
           2cmax vmax j=1 bt−1 σ̂jn (xj,t ) + 2nmax vmax j=1 bt−1 σ̂jc (xj,t )
       =                                             √                            ,          (35)
                                  N cmin (cmin − bT σ)
      PN                    PN
where j=1 vj n̂j (xj,t ) ≥     j=1 vj nj√(x∗j ) by definition of the GCB selection rule, vmax :=
    N
maxj=1 vj , and we assume that cmin − bT σ > 0.
Using arguments similar to what has been used to bound the instantaneous regret rt in Srinivas et al.
(2010) and Accabi et al. (2018), and summing over the time horizon T , provides the final statement
of the theorem.
                                                                                         2
                                                                                             QT t2
Theorem 6 (GCBsafe pseudo-regret). Given δ ∈ (0, 1), GCBsafe with bt := 2 ln π N3δ                   ,
applied to the problem in Equations (1a)-(1c) suffers from a pseudo-regret Rt (GCBsafe ) = Θ(T ).

Proof. At the optimal solution, at least one of the constraints is active, i.e., it has the left-hand side
                                                                                   N
equal to the right-hand side. Assume that the optimal clairvoyant solution x∗j j=1 to the optimization


problem has a value of the ROI λopt equal to λ. We showed in the proof of Theorem 7 that for any
                                                                                         PN                       PN
                                                                                                  vj nj (xj,t )         vj n (xj,t )
allocation, with probability at least 1 − π2 N3δ
                                               QT t2 , it holds that
                                                                     j=1
                                                                     P N              > Pj=1
                                                                                           N
                                                                                                      j
                                                                                                             .
                                                                       j=1 cj (xj,t )      j=1 cj (xj,t )
                                                                                       PN               ∗
                                                             ∗ N                            v j  n j (x   )
This is true also for the optimal clairvoyant solution xj j=1 , for which λ = Pj=1       N
                                                                                                c (x∗ )
                                                                                                            >
                                                                                                                  j=1    j
PN            ∗
 j=1 vj nj (x )
 P N
       c  (x ∗)    , implying that the values used in the ROI constraint make this allocation not feasible
   j=1  j

for the Opt(µ, λ) procedure. As shown before, this happens with probability at least 1 − π2 N3δ QT t2 at
day t, and 1 − δ over the time horizon T . To conclude, with probability 1 − δ, not depending on the
time horizon T , we will not choose the optimal arm during the time horizon and, therefore, the regret
of the algorithm cannot be sublinear. Notice that the same line of proof is also holding in the case the
budget constraint is active, therefore, the previous result holds for each instance of the problem in
Equations (1a)-(1c).
                                                                                 2
                                                                                     QT t2
Theorem 7 (GCBsafe safety). Given δ ∈ (0, 1), GCBsafe with bt := 2 ln π N3δ                 , applied to
the problem in Equations (1a)-(1c) is δ-safe and the number of constraints violations is constant in T .

Proof. Let us focus on a specific day t. Constraints (1b) and (1c) are satisfied by the solution
of Opt(µ, λ) for the properties of the optimization procedure. Define nj (xj,t ) := n̂j (xj,t ) −
p
   bt−1 σ̂jn (xj,t ). Thanks to the specific construction of the upper bounds, we have that cj (xj,t ) ≤
cj (xj,t ) and nj (xj,t ) ≥ nj (xj,t ), each holding with probability at least 1 − π2 N3δ
                                                                                        QT t2 . Therefore, we
have:                           PN                     PN
                                   j=1 vj nj (xj,t )      j=1 vj nj (xj,t )
                                 PN                  > PN                   ≥λ
                                     j=1 cj (xj,t )        j=1 cj (xj,t )
and
                                             N
                                             X                    N
                                                                  X
                                                   cj (xj,t ) <            cj (xj,t ) ≤ β.
                                             j=1                   j=1


                                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using a union bound over:

        • the two GPs (number of clicks and costs);
        • the time horizon T ;
        • the number of times each bid is chosen in a subcampaign (at most t);
        • the number of arms present in each subcampaign (|Xj |);
        • the number of subcampaigns (N );

we have:                                                  
      T     PN                          N                         N |X j| T   t
    X        j=1 v j n j (x̂ j,t )     X                         X   X   XX         3δ
         P  PN                    <λ∨     cj (x̂j,t ) > β  ≤ 2                                    (36)
     t=1      j=1 cj (x̂j,t )          j=1                       j=1 k=1 h=1 l=1
                                                                                 π N QT l2
                                                                                  2


               Q X
             N X T X
                   +∞
             X                      3δ
        ≤2                                 = δ.                                                     (37)
             j=1 k=1 h=1 l=1
                               π 2 N QT l2
This concludes the proof.

The definition of the auxiliary problem that GCBsafe (ψ, ϕ) algorithm is solving is the following:
                                               XN
                                  max              vj nj (xj,t )                               (38a)
                          (x1,t ,...,xN,t )∈X1 ×...×XN
                                                         j=1
                                                         PN
                                                           j=1 vj nj (xj,t )
                                       s.t.              PN                     ≥ λ − ψ,           (38b)
                                                               j=1 cj (xj,t )
                                                         N
                                                         X
                                                               cj (xj,t ) ≤ β + ϕ.                 (38c)
                                                         j=1

Theorem 10 (GCBsafe (ψ, 0) pseudo-regret and safety with tolerance). When:
                         s                                                 PN
                    N
                                                                               j=1 vj
                                 2
                                 π N QT 3

       βopt + nmax X
 ψ≥2        2          vj 2 ln          ′
                                              σ     and      βopt < β N βopt ψ     PN    ,
           βopt    j=1
                                     3δ                                         + j=1 vj
                                                                                      βopt +nmax
where δ ′ ≤ δ, βopt is the spend at the optimal solution of the original problem, and nmax :=
maxj,x nj (x) is the maximum over the sub-campaigns and the admissible bids of the expected
              qGCBsafe (ψ, 0)
number of clicks,               provides a pseudo-regret w.r.t. the optimal solution to the original
                                                                    δ′
                    PN
problem of O      T j=1 γj,T with probability at least 1 − δ − QT      2 , while being δ-safe w.r.t. the


constraints of the auxiliary problem.

Proof. In what follows, we show that, at a specific day t, since the optimal solution of the original
               N
problem x∗j j=1 is included in the set of feasible ones, we are in a setting analogous to the one


of GCB, in which the regret is sublinear. Let us assume that the upper bounds on all the quantities
(number of clicks and costs) holds. This has been shown before to occur with overall probability δ over
the whole time horizon T . Moreover, notice that combining the properties of the
                                                                             r budget   of the optimal
                                                                                       2
                                                         βopt +nmax PN                π N QT 3
solution of the original problem βopt and using ψ = 2 β 2             j=1 vj    2 ln     3δ ′    σ, we
                                                                        opt

have:                                     PN
                                             j=1 vj
                       βopt < β     N βopt ψ     PN                                                 (39)
                                   βopt +nmax +     j=1 vj
                                                   
                                              N         N
                         N βopt ψ +
                                              X        X
                                         vj  βopt < β     vj                                       (40)
                         βopt + nmax j=1               j=1



                                                         20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                            s
                                 N                                           N                 N
                                                           π 2 N QT 3
                                 X                                          X                 X
                         2N            vj       2 ln                    σ +     v j β opt < β     vj         (41)
                                 j=1
                                                               3δ ′         j=1               j=1
                                                   s
                                                                   π 2 N QT 3

                         β > βopt + 2N                 2 ln                     σ.                           (42)
                                                                       3δ ′
First, let us evaluate the probability that the optimal solution is not feasible. This occurs if its bounds
are either violating the ROI or budget constraints. First, we show that analysing the budget constraint,
the optimal solution of the original problem is feasible with high probability. Formally, it is not
feasible withprobability:                                                                                
                                                                                   s
                  N                               N                                         2          3

                 X                               X                                            π  N QT
            P       cj (x∗j ) > β  ≤ P             cj (x∗j ) > βopt + 2N 2 ln                     ′
                                                                                                           σ (43)
                 j=1                             j=1
                                                                                                  3δ
                                                                                     
                     N                  N
                                                             r
                    X                 X                                π 2 N QT 3
             = P        cj (x∗j ) >        cj (x∗j ) + 2N 2 ln                ′
                                                                                     σ                       (44)
                    j=1                j=1
                                                                            3δ
                 N
                                                     r                        !
                X
                               ∗            ∗                 π 2 N QT 3
             ≤      P cj (xj ) > cj (xj ) + 2 2 ln                          σ                                 (45)
                j=1
                                                                  3δ ′
                 N
                                                                                      r                    !
                X
                                    ∗            ∗
                                                          p
                                                                  c          ∗                π 2 N QT 3
             =      P ĉj,t−1 (xj ) − cj (xj ) > − bt σ̂j,t−1 (xj ) + 2 2 ln                             σ    (46)
                j=1
                                                                                                  3δ ′
                 N
                                                       r                                     !
                X
                                    ∗            ∗               π 2 N QT 3 c             ∗
             ≤      P ĉj,t−1 (xj ) − cj (xj ) > 2 ln                           σ̂j,t−1 (xj )                 (47)
                j=1
                                                                      3δ ′
                 N
                                                                                 !
                         ĉj,t−1 (x∗j ) − cj (x∗j )
                                                        r
                X                                                 π 2 N QT 3
             ≤      P                                 > 2 ln                                                  (48)
                j=1
                                  c
                               σ̂j,t−1  (x∗j )                         3δ ′
                 N
                 X        3δ ′                  3δ ′
            ≤                          =                   ,                                                 (49)
                 j=1
                       π 2 N QT 3           π 2 QT 3
where, in the inequality in Equation (43) we used Equation (42), in Equation (48) we used the fact that
π 2 N Qt2 T    2      3

     3δ     ≤ π N3δQT
                   ′
                                                        c
                        for each t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, σ̂j,t−1 (x∗j ) ≤ σ for each j and t, and the inequality
in Equation (49) is from Srinivas et al. (2010). Summing over the time horizon T , we get that the
                                                    N
optimal solution of the original problem x∗j j=1 is excluded from the set of the feasible ones with

                            ′
probability at most π23δ
                      QT 2 .

Second, we derive a bound over the probability that the optimal solution of the original problem is
feasible due to the newly defined ROI constraint. Let us notice that since the ROI constraint is active
                                                      N
we have λ = λopt . The probability that x∗j j=1 is not feasible due to the ROI constraint is:

       PN                ∗
                                       !
          j=1 vj nj (xj )
   P     PN                   <λ−ψ                                                                       (50)
                       ∗
           j=1 cj (xj )
        P                                                                               
              N                                                 N
                   vj nj (x∗j )
                                                                       r
                                              β     +   n                    π 2 N QT 3
              j=1                               opt       max
                                                              X
   ≤ P  PN                      < λopt − 2           2             vj 2 ln         ′
                                                                                        σ               (51)
               j=1   c j (x ∗)
                            j
                                                   β  opt     j=1
                                                                                 3δ
        P                                                                                             
              N                     PN                                        N
                   vj nj (x∗j )             vj nj (x∗j )
                                                                                    r
                                                              β     +  n                  π 2 N QT 3
              j=1                       j=1                     opt      max
                                                                             X
   = P  PN                      < PN                     −2         2           vj 2 ln         ′
                                                                                                     σ  (52)
               j=1   c j (x ∗)
                            j             j=1 cj (x ∗)
                                                    j
                                                                   β opt     j=1
                                                                                              3δ
        
           N
           X             XN                   N
                                              X             N
                                                            X
   = P        cj (x∗j )      vj nj (x∗j ) <      cj (x∗j )     vj nj (x∗j )
           j=1            j=1                          j=1              j=1


                                                                      21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                              
                        N             N              N
                                                          r
         βopt + nmax X               X              X             π 2 N QT 3
      −2       2           cj (x∗j )      cj (x∗j )     vj 2 ln              σ                                                      (53)
             βopt      j=1           j=1            j=1
                                                                      3δ ′
      
       XN            N
                     X                 XN            XN
   = P    cj (x∗j )   vj nj (x∗j ) −      cj (x∗j )     vj nj (x∗j )+
            j=1            j=1                           j=1               j=1
              N                   N                  N
                                                                r
         2    X                   X                  X                    π 2 N QT 3
                      cj (x∗j )          cj (x∗j )         vj    2 ln                σ
        βopt j=1                  j=1                j=1
                                                                              3δ ′
            N
            X                  N
                               X                         N
                                                         X                  N
                                                                            X
        +          cj (x∗j )         vj nj (x∗j ) −             cj (x∗j )           vj nj (x∗j )+
             j=1               j=1                       j=1                j=1
                                                                                              
               N              N              N
                                                                    r
        2nmax X          ∗
                             X
                                        ∗
                                            X                                 π 2 N QT 3
          2       c j (x j )     c j (x j )     vj                       2 ln            σ < 0                                      (54)
         βopt j=1            j=1            j=1
                                                                                  3δ ′
                                                                                                                              
         N                  N                                        PN            ∗ X N
                                                                                                      r
                                                                          j=1 cj (xj )                           π 2 N QT 3
      X                   X                                                                                                     
   ≤ P     vj nj (x∗j ) −     vj nj (x∗j ) + 2                                                  vj       2 ln              σ < 0
                                                                                                                                
                                                                            βopt                                     3δ ′
                                                                                                                                 
       j=1                j=1
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                     |       {z          } j=1
                                                                               ≥1
     
      XN           N
                   X                N
                                    X           N
                                                X
  + P   cj (x∗j )   vj nj (x∗j ) −   cj (x∗j )   vj nj (x∗j )
          j=1              j=1                           j=1               j=1
                                                                                                                     
              PN            ∗
                                PN        ∗ X N
                                                                                    r
                   j=1 cj (xj )  j=1 cj (xj )                                                  π 2 N QT 3      
        +2                                                          vj nmax             2 ln              σ < 0                      (55)
                                                                                                               
                                   2
                                  βopt                                 | {z }                      3δ ′        
                                                                                                               
              |                    {z                    } j=1           ≥nj (x∗
                                                                               j)
                                  ≥1
     N
                                                     r        !
     X                                       π 2 N QT 3
   ≤     P        nj (x∗j ) − nj (x∗j ) + 2
                                      2 ln                σ≤0
     j=1
                                                 3δ ′
           N
                                         r                       !
         X
                       ∗         ∗                π 2 N QT 3
       +      P cj (xj ) − cj (xj ) + 2 2 ln                 σ<0                                                                     (56)
          j=1
                                                      3δ ′
                                                                                   
      N
                                                              r
     X                     p                                       π 2 N QT 3      
   ≤     P n̂j,t−1 (x∗j ) − bt σ̂j,t−1
                                   n
                                        (x∗j ) − nj (x∗j ) + 2 2 ln            σ < 0
                                                                                   
                                                                       3δ ′        
                                                                                    
     j=1
                                                                                           √
                                                              |      {z        }
                                                                                                 n
                                                                                          ≥ bt σ̂j,t−1 (x∗
                                                                                                         j)
                                                                                                                          
           N
                                                                r
          X     
                      ∗               ∗
                                           p
                                                 c       ∗            π 2 N QT 3       
        +     P cj (xj ) − ĉj,t−1 (xj ) − bt σ̂j,t−1 (xj ) + 2 2 ln            σ < 0                                               (57)
                                                                                      
                                                                         3δ ′         
                                                                                       
          j=1
                                                                                                 √
                                                                |      {z        }
                                                                                                       c
                                                                                                ≥ bt σ̂j,t−1 (x∗
                                                                                                               j)

     N
                                                         r                 !
     X                                         π 2 N QT 3
   ≤     P nj (x∗j ) < n̂j,t−1 (x∗j ) + 2 ln                   n
                                                             σ̂j,t−1 (x∗j )
     j=1
                                                   3δ ′
           N
                                            r                                   !
         X                                          π 2 N QT 3
       +      P cj (x∗j ) < ĉj,t−1 (x∗j ) − 2 ln           ′
                                                                    c
                                                                  σ̂j,t−1 (x∗j )                                                     (58)
          j=1
                                                         3δ
      N
                                                              !
             nj (x∗j ) − n̂j,t−1 (x∗j )
                                          r
     X                                         π 2 N QT 3
   =     P                              > 2 ln
     j=1
                      n
                   σ̂j,t−1 (x∗j )                   3δ ′



                                                                          22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            N
                                                                       !
                      ĉj,t−1 (x∗j ) − cj (x∗j )
                                                     r
            X                                             π 2 N QT 3
        +         P                              >   2 ln                                             (59)
            j=1
                              c
                            σ̂j,t−1  (x∗j )                   3δ ′
        N
        X       3δ ′        6δ ′
   ≤2                  =          ,                                                                   (60)
        j=1
            π 2 N QT 3   π 2 QT 3
                                                          2     2          2       3
where in Equation (58) we used the fact that π N3δ      Qt T
                                                              ≤ π N3δQT
                                                                      ′     for each t ∈ {1, . . . , T },
  n       ∗
σ̂j,t−1 (xj ) ≤ σ for each j and t, and the inequality in Equation (60) is from Srinivas et al. (2010).
                                                                                                     N
Summing over the time horizon T ensures that the optimal solution of the original problem x∗j j=1

                                                                               ′
is excluded from the feasible solutions at most with probability π26δ QT 2 . Finally, using a union bound,
we have that the optimal solution can be chosen over the time horizon with probability at least
         ′
                 6δ ′          δ′
1 − π23δ
       QT 2 − π 2 QT 2 ≤ 1 − QT 2 .
                                                                                             N
Notice that here we want to compute the regret of the GCBsafe algorithm w.r.t. x∗j j=1 , which is


not optimal for the analysed relaxed problem. Nonetheless, the proof on the pseudo-regret provided
in Theorem 4 is also valid for suboptimal solutions in the case it is feasible with high probability.
This can be trivially shown using the fact that the regret w.r.t. a generic solution cannot be larger than
the one computed w.r.t. the optimal one. Thanks to that, using a union bound over the probability that
                               N                                                                       δ′
the bounds hold and that x∗j j=1 is feasible, we conclude that with probability at least 1 − δ − QT

                                                                                                          2
                                            q
                                                  PN
the regret GCBsafe is of the order of O         T j=1 γj,T . Finally, thanks to the property of the
GCBsafe algorithm shown in Theorem 7, the learning policy is δ-safe for the relaxed problem.
Theorem 11 (GCBsafe (0, ϕ) pseudo-regret and safety with tolerance). When:
                                            s        2
                                                     π N QT 3

                                    ϕ ≥ 2N 2 ln                   σ
                                                         3δ ′
and                                                          PN
                                             (β + nmax )ϕ j=1 vj
                                 λopt > λ +                           ,
                                                       N β2
where δ ′ ≤ δ, and nmax := maxj,x nj (x) is maximum expected number of clicks,     q GCBsafe (0, ϕ)

                                                                                      PN
provides a pseudo-regret w.r.t. the optimal solution to the original problem of O   T j=1 γj,T
                                             ′
with probability at least 1 − δ − π26δ
                                    QT 2 , while being δ-safe w.r.t. the constraints of the auxiliary
problem.

                                                                                               N
Proof. We show that at a specific day t since the optimal solution of the original problem x∗j j=1 is


included in the set of feasible ones, we are in a setting analogous to the one of GCB, in which the
regret is sublinear. Let us assume that the upper bounds to all the quantities (number of clicks and
costs) holds. This has been shown before to occur with overall probability δ over the whole time
horizon T .
First, let us evaluate the probability that the optimal solution is not feasible. This occurs if its bounds
are either violating the ROI or budget    constraints. From the fact that the ROI of the optimal solution
                                  P    N
                        (β+nmax )ϕ    j=1  vj
satisfies λopt > λ +             N β2      , we have:
         PN             ∗
                                  !
           j=1 vj nj (xj )
    P     PN                 <λ                                                                       (61)
                      ∗
             j=1 cj (xj )
            PN               ∗
                                                          PN        !
               j=1 vj nj (xj )             (β + nmax )ϕ j=1 vj
     ≤P       PN                 < λopt −                                                             (62)
                           ∗
                j=1 cj (xj )
                                                     N β2
          P                                                                                
               N             ∗
                                     PN            ∗                   N
                                                                            r
                   v
               j=1 j jn   (x j )          v  n
                                       j=1 j j  (x j )    βopt + nmax X          2
                                                                                π N QT 3
     = P  PN                     < PN                 −2       2         vj ln           σ           (63)
                           ∗
                j=1 cj (xj )
                                                 ∗
                                        j=1 cj (xj )
                                                              β opt   j=1
                                                                                   3δ ′


                                                         23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         3δ ′
    ≤          ,                                                                               (64)
      π 2 QT 3
where the derivation uses arguments similar to the ones applied in the proof for the ROI constraint
in Theorem 10. Summing over the time horizon T ensures that the optimal solution of the original
              N                                                                       ′
problem x∗j j=1 is excluded from the feasible solutions at most with probability π23δ

                                                                                     QT 2 .

                                                                                                   N
Second, let us evaluate the probability for which the optimal solution of the original problem x∗j j=1


is excluded due
               to the budget constraint,
                                       formally:
              XN
           P    cj (x∗j ) > β + ϕ                                                                      (65)
                j=1
                                                                      
                   N
                                              r
                  X                                     2
                                                       π N QT    3
            ≤ P      cj (x∗j ) > β + 2N 2 ln                       σ                                    (66)
                  j=1
                                                           3δ ′
                                                                                 
                   N                 N
                                                          r
                  X                X                                  2
                                                                    π N QT   3
            = P      cj (x∗j ) >         cj (x∗j ) + 2N 2 ln                   σ                        (67)
                  j=1               j=1
                                                                        3δ ′
               N
                                                  r                  !
              X
                            ∗            ∗              12N T 3
            ≤     P cj (xj ) > cj (xj ) + 2 ln                    σ                                      (68)
              j=1
                                                          π2 δ′
               N
                                                                                r                    !
              X
                                 ∗            ∗
                                                       p
                                                               c        ∗               π 2 N QT 3
            =     P ĉj,t−1 (xj ) − cj (xj ) ≥ − bt σ̂j,t−1 (xj ) + 2 2 ln                         σ     (69)
              j=1
                                                                                            3δ ′
               N
                                                     r                                 !
              X
                                 ∗            ∗              π 2 N QT 3 c           ∗
            ≤     P ĉj,t−1 (xj ) − cj (xj ) ≥ 2 ln                       σ̂j,t−1 (xj )                  (70)
              j=1
                                                                  3δ ′
               N
                                                                            !
                      ĉj,t−1 (x∗j ) − cj (x∗j )
                                                     r
              X                                               π 2 N QT 3
            ≤     P                                ≥ 2 ln                                                (71)
              j=1
                               c
                            σ̂j,t−1  (x∗j )                       3δ ′
                N
                X        3δ ′               3δ ′
            ≤                         =              ,                                                   (72)
                j=1
                      π 2 N QT 3          π 2 QT 3
where we use the fact that β = βopt , and the derivation uses arguments similar to the ones applied in
the proof for the budget constraint in Theorem 10. Summing over the time horizon T , we get that
                                                    N
the optimal solution of the original problem x∗j j=1 is excluded from the set of the feasible ones

                                2 ′
with probability at most π6Tδ2 . Finally, using a union bound, we have that the optimal solution can be
                                                                  ′
chosen over the time horizon with probability at least 1 − π23δ  QT 2 .
                                                                                        N
Notice that here we want to compute the regret of the GCBsafe algorithm w.r.t. x∗j j=1 which is not


optimal for the analysed relaxed problem. Nonetheless, the proof on the pseudo-regret provided in
Theorem 4 is valid also for suboptimal solutions in the case it is feasible with high probability. This
can be trivially shown using the fact that the regret w.r.t. a generic solution cannot be larger than the
one computed on the optimal one. Thanks to that, using a union bound over the probability that the
                            N                                                                         ′
bounds hold and that x∗j j=1 is feasible, we conclude that with probability at least 1 − δ − π26δ

                                                                                                    QT 2
                                              q
                                                   PN
the regret GCBsafe is of the order of O          T j=1 γj,T . Finally, thanks to the property of the
GCBsafe algorithm shown in Theorem 7, the learning policy is δ-safe for the relaxed problem.


Theorem 8 (GCBsafe (ψ, ϕ) pseudo-regret and safety with tolerance). Setting
                           s                                            s
                      N            2
                                   π N QT 3
                                                                              2
                                                                             π N QT 3

       βopt + nmax X
  ψ=2       2      σ     vj 2 ln                     and      ϕ = 2N σ 2 ln            ,
           βopt      j=1
                                       3δ ′                                     3δ ′


                                                         24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where δ ′ ≤ δ, GCBsafe (ψ, ϕ)
                              provides a pseudo-regret w.r.t. the optimal solution to the original
               q P
                    N                                              δ′
problem of O     T j=1 γj,T with probability at least 1 − δ − QT      2 , while being δ-safe w.r.t. the


constraints of the auxiliary problem.

Proof. The proof follows from combining the arguments about the ROI constraint used in Theorem 10
and those about the budget constraint used in Theorem 11.


C           RUNNING T IME

The asymptotic running time of the GCB and GCBsafe algorithms is given by the summation of the
running time of the estimation and optimization subroutine.
The asymptotic running time of the estimation procedure, whose main component is the estimation
                                               PN
of the quantities in Equations (2)-(5) is Θ( j=1 |Xj | t2 ), where t is the number of samples (corre-
sponding to the rounds), and the asymptotic space complexity is Θ(N t2 ), i.e., the space required
to store the Gram matrix. A better (linear) dependence on the number of days t can be obtained by
using the recursive formula for the GP mean and variance computation (see Chowdhury & Gopalan
(2017) for details).
                                                               P
                                                                  N             2   2
The asymptotic running time of the Opt procedure is Θ             j=1 |Xj | |Y | |R| , where |Xj | is the
cardinality of the set of bids Xj , since it cycles over all the subcampaigns and, for each one of them,
finds the maximum bids and compute the values in the matrix S(y, r). Moreover,           the asymptotic
space complexity of the Opt procedure is Θ maxj={1,...,N } |Xj | |Y | |R| since it stores the values
in the matrix S(y, r) and finds the maximum over the possible bids x ∈ Xj .


D            A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS AND E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS D ETAILS

D.1            E XPERIMENT #2: EVALUATING GCBsafe (ψ, 0) WHEN THE BUDGET CONSTRAINT IS
               ACTIVE

In real-world scenarios, the business goals in terms of volumes-profitability tradeoff are often blurred,
and sometimes it can be desirable to slightly violate the constraints (usually, the ROI constraint)
in favor of a significant volume increase. However, analyzing and acquiring information about
these tradeoff curves requires exploring volumes of opportunities by relaxing the constraints. In this
experiment, we show how our approach can be adjusted to address this problem in practice.
           1,200

                                                                       11                                                    100
           1,000
                                                           ROIt (U)


                                                                                                                    St (U)
  Pt (U)


                                       GCBsafe (0, 0)                                           GCBsafe (0, 0)               80                         GCBsafe (0, 0)
                                                                      10.5
            800                        GCBsafe (0.05, 0)                                        GCBsafe (0.05, 0)                                       GCBsafe (0.05, 0)
                                       GCBsafe (0.10, 0)                                        GCBsafe (0.10, 0)                                       GCBsafe (0.10, 0)
                                       GCBsafe (0.15, 0)                                        GCBsafe (0.15, 0)            60                         GCBsafe (0.15, 0)
            600                        {x∗j }N                         10                       λopt                                                    βopt = β
                                             j=1
                                                                                                λ
                   0   10   20   30      40      50                          0   10   20   30      40      50                      0   10   20     30     40      50
                                 t                                                         t                                                     time

                                 (a)                                                       (b)                                                    (c)
Figure 2: Results of Experiment #2: Median values of the daily revenue (a), ROI (b) and spend (c)
obtained by GCBsafe (ψ, 0) with different values of ψ.


Setting We use the same setting of Experiment #1, except that we evaluate GCBsafe and
GCBsafe (ψ, ϕ) algorithms. More precisely, we relax the ROI constraint by a tolerance ψ ∈
{0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15} (while keeping ϕ = 0). Notice that GCBsafe (0, 0) corresponds to the use
of GCBsafe in the original problem. As a result, except for the case ϕ = 0, we allow GCBsafe (ψ, ϕ)
to violate the ROI constraint, but, with high probability, the violation is bounded by at most 0.5%, 1%,
1.5% of λ, respectively. Instead, we do not introduce any tolerance for the daily budget constraint β.


                                                                                      25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       GCB                                                    GCB                                                   GCB
           2,500                       GCBsafe                        12                      GCBsafe                      300                      GCBsafe
                                       GCBsafe (0.05, 0)                                      GCBsafe (0.05, 0)                                     GCBsafe (0.05, 0)
           2,000                       {x∗j }N
                                             j=1
                                                                                              λopt = λ                                              βopt
                                                                      11                                                                            β


                                                           ROIt (U)
                                                                                                                           200
  Pt (U)


                                                                                                                  St (U)
           1,500
                                                                      10
           1,000
                                                                                                                           100
                                                                      9
            500


                   0   10   20   30       40     50                        0   10   20   30      40     50                       0   10   20   30      40     50
                                 t                                                       t                                                     t

                                 (a)                                                     (b)                                                   (c)

Figure 3: Results of Experiment #3: Median values of the daily revenue (a), ROI (b) and spend (c) of
GCB, GCBsafe , and GCBsafe (0.05, 0).


Results In Figures 2, we show the median values, on 100 independent runs, of the performance in
terms of daily revenue, ROI, and spend of GCBsafe (ψ, 0) for every value of ψ. The 10% and 90%
quantiles are reported in Figure 4, 5, 6, and 7 in Appendix D.6. The results show that by allowing a
small tolerance in the ROI constraint violation, we can improve the exploration and, therefore, lead to
faster convergence. We note that if we set a value of ψ ≥ 0.05, we achieve better performance in
the first learning steps (t < 20), still maintaining a robust behavior in terms of constraint violations.
Most importantly, the ROI constraint is always satisfied by the median and also by the 10% and 90%
quantiles. Furthermore, a few violations are present only in the early stages of the learning process.

D.2          E XPERIMENT #3: COMPARING GCB, GCBsafe , AND GCBsafe (ψ, 0) WHEN THE ROI
             CONSTRAINT IS ACTIVE

We study a setting in which the ROI constraint is active at the optimal solution, i.e., λ = λopt , while
the budget constraint is not. This means that, at the optimal solution, the advertiser would have an
extra budget to spend. However, if such a budget is not spent, the ROI constraint would be violated
otherwise.

Setting The experimental setting is the same as Experiment #1, except that we set the budget
constraint as β = 300. The optimal daily spend is βopt = 161.

Results In Figure 3, we show the median values of the daily revenue, the ROI, and the spend of
GCB, GCBsafe , GCBsafe (0.05, 0) obtained with 100 independent runs. The 10% and 90% of the
quantities provided by GCB, GCBsafe , and GCBsafe (0.05, 0) are reported in Figures 8, 9, and 10
in D.7. We notice that, even in this setting, GCB violates the ROI constraint for the entire time horizon,
and the budget constraint in t = 6 and t = 7. However, it achieves a revenue larger than that of the
optimal constrained solution. On the other side, GCBsafe and always satisfies both the constraints,
but it does not perform enough exploration to quickly converge to the optimal solution. We observe
that it is sufficient to allow a tolerance in the ROI constraint violation by slightly perturbing the
input value λ (ψ = 0.05, corresponding to a violation of the constraint by at most 0.5%) to make
GCBsafe (ψ, ϕ) capable of approaching the optimal solution while satisfying both constraints for
every t ∈ {0, . . . , T }. This suggests that, in real-world applications, GCBsafe (ψ, ϕ) with a small
tolerance represents an effective solution, providing guarantees on the violation of the constraints
while returning high values of revenue.

D.3          E XPERIMENT #4: COMPARING GCB, GCBsafe , AND GCBsafe (ψ, ϕ) WITH MULTIPLE ,
             HETEROGENEOUS SETTINGS

In this experiment, we extend the experimental activity we conduct in Experiments #1 and #3 to other
multiple, heterogeneous settings.

Setting We simulate N = 5 subcampaigns with a daily budget β = 100, with |Xj | = 201 bid
values evenly spaced in [0, 2], |Y | = 101 cost values evenly spaced in [0, 100], being the daily


                                                                                    26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                Table 1: Results of Experiment #4.
                                                                                                                                     WT      WT /2    σT     σT /2   MT      MT /2    UT     UT /2    LT     LT /2   VROI   VB
Setting #10 Setting #9 Setting #8 Setting #7 Setting #6 Setting #5 Setting #4 Setting #3 Setting #2 Setting #1
                                                                                                                 GCB                 57481   30767    556     376    57497   30811   58081   31239   56758   30288   1.00   0.62
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe             44419   21549    4766   2474    45348   21972   46783   23163   42287   20324   0.02   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.05, 0)   48028   23524    4902   2487    48626   23831   50388   24827   46307   22506   0.21   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.10, 0)   52327   25859    829     611    52338   25887   53324   26605   51316   25104   0.94   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCB                 63664   35566    1049    679    63701   35573   64984   36524   62249   34675   1.00   0.14
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe             34675   16290    8541   4448    37028   17647   39594   19473   27748   11141   0.03   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.05, 0)   40962   19564    6013   3122    41823   20152   44468   21698   38640   17645   0.04   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.10, 0)   46694   22099    6382   3112    47749   22433   51564   24776   44099   19929   0.72   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCB                 54845   30213    757     478    54816   30177   55734   30885   54006   29638   1.00   0.25
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe             35726   16577    8239   4361    38302   18114   40746   19882   27279    8791   0.03   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.05, 0)   38757   18370    8492   4594    41422   19808   43337   21092   30413   12678   0.07   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.10, 0)   42184   19993    9652   5056    44820   21574   47659   23118   36570   14450   0.75   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCB                 71404   37383    351     262    71399   37387   71877   37732   70930   37021   0.98   0.98
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe             29101   13817    7052   3646    30992   14680   35602   17256   20509    9562   0.00   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.05, 0)   39802   18270   10232   4955    38296   17994   53375   24962   25197   11341   0.01   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.10, 0)   51515   24095   11094   5639    56621   24902   61992   30020   35642   16198   0.56   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCB                 74638   39523    642     392    74693   39529   75405   40049   73756   39063   0.98   0.31
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe             48956   23230    6715   3486    50021   23838   53644   26266   42946   19287   0.00   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.05, 0)   56205   27003    2578   1742    56554   27211   58839   28802   53278   24987   0.00   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.10, 0)   63411   30207    5636   2916    64364   30665   66764   32212   60519   28260   0.59   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCB                 67118   35775    327     260    67130   35795   67536   36111   66726   35424   0.98   0.98
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe             14448    7707    6006   3065    15019    8075   18581   9800     6781    3926   0.02   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.05, 0)   14968    7710    6174   2974    15161    8157   20548   10351    7954    3860   0.02   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.10, 0)   34716   15507   16133   7280    37409   16601   55236   25366    9895    5188   0.19   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCB                 63038   35330    873     401    63088   35367   64226   35793   61754   34823   1.00   0.41
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe             31662   14806    5651   3090    33009   15570   35004   16922   28296   11338   0.04   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.05, 0)   37744   17606    4173   2619    38321   18161   41184   19805   33914   15276   0.03   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.10, 0)   42528   20046    7497   3624    43765   20683   47187   22301   38988   18314   0.70   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCB                 79571   42322    476     375    79581   42317   80073   42743   78969   41913   1.00   0.98
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe             48046   22478   11779   6000    52094   24180   57321   28024   30655   13338   0.02   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.05, 0)   58450   27477   10296   5605    61404   28845   66902   32883   41196   18222   0.02   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.10, 0)   68252   33255    3436   2417    68886   33857   70758   35377   65394   30696   0.07   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCB                 70280   37363    672     347    70275   37352   71123   37811   69379   36942   1.00   0.34
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe             40116   18895    5522   3047    40673   19357   43850   21161   37310   17222   0.03   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.05, 0)   51138   23683    3110   2036    50984   23375   54545   26174   47465   21385   0.03   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.10, 0)   63574   29675    3810   3323    64011   30112   66658   32559   60970   27280   0.80   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCB                 80570   41973    435     344    80568   42019   81127   42388   80023   41496   1.00   0.98
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe             58965   28785    3097   1465    60033   28917   62353   30535   54590   26931   0.02   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.05, 0)   63685   31004    3787   1876    65273   31550   67364   33105   57860   28349   0.02   0.00
                                                                                                                 GCBsafe (0.10, 0)   68480   33358    4224   2181    70388   33998   72730   35838   61971   30317   0.65   0.00



budget β = 100, and |R| evenly spaced revenue values depending on the setting. We generate
10 scenarios that differ in the parameters defining the cost and revenue functions and in the ROI
parameter λ. Recall that the number-of-click functions coincide with the revenue functions since
vj = 1 for each j ∈ {1, . . . , N }. Parameters αj ∈ N+ and θj ∈ N+ are sampled from discrete
uniform distributions U{50, 100} and U{400, 700}, respectively. Parameters γj and δj are sampled
from the continuous uniform distributions U[0.2, 1.1). Finally, parameters λ are chosen such that the
ROI constraint is active at the optimal solution. Table 3 in D.8 specifies the values of such parameters.

Results We compare the GCB, GCBsafe , GCBsafe (0.05, 0), and GCBsafe (0.10, 0) algorithms in
terms of:
                  Pt
       • Wt :=      h=1 Pt (U): average (over 100 runs) cumulative revenue at round t (and the
          corresponding standard deviation σt );
                                                                                                                   • Mt : median (over 100 runs) of the cumulative revenue at round t;
                                                                                                                   • Ut : 90-th percentile (over 100 runs) of the cumulative revenue at round t;
                                                                                                                   • Lt : 10-th percentile (over 100 runs) of the cumulative revenue at round t;
                                                                                                                   • VROI : the fraction of days in which the ROI constraint is violated;
                                                                                                                   • VB : the fraction of days in which the budget constraint is violated.


                                                                                                                                                                     27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Table 2: Parameters of the synthetic settings used in Experiment #1.

                                      C1        C2         C3        C4        C5
                θj                    60        77         75        65        70
                δj                    0.41      0.48       0.43      0.47      0.40
                αj                    497       565        573       503       536
                γj                    0.65      0.62       0.67      0.68      0.69
                σf GP revenue         0.669     0.499      0.761     0.619     0.582
                l GP revenue          0.425     0.469      0.471     0.483     0.386
                σf GP cost            0.311     0.443      0.316     0.349     0.418
                l GP cost             0.76      0.719      0.562     0.722     0.727

Table 1 reports the algorithms’ performances at ⌈T /2⌉ = 28 and at the end of the learning process
t = T = 57. As already observed in the previous experiments, GCB violates the ROI constraint
at every round, run, and setting. More surprisingly, GCB violates the budget constraint most of
the time (60% on average) even if that constraint is not active at the optimal solution. Interestingly,
GCBsafe (ψ, 0) never violates the budget constraints (for every ψ). As expected, the violation of the
ROI constraint is close to zero with GCBsafe , while it increases as ψ increases. In terms of average
cumulative revenue, at T , we observe that GCBsafe gets about 56% of the revenue provided by GCB,
while the ratio related to GCBsafe (0.05, 0) is about 66% and that related to GCBsafe (0.10, 0) is
about 78%. At T /2, we the ratios are about 52% for GCB, 61% for GCBsafe (0.05, 0), and 73% for
GCBsafe (0.10, 0), showing that those ratios increase as T increases. The rationale is that in the early
stages of the learning process, safe algorithms learn more slowly than non-safe algorithms. Similar
performances can be observed when focusing on the other indices. Summarily, the above results
show that our algorithms provide advertisers with a wide spectrum of effective tools to address the
revenue/safety tradeoff. A small value of ψ (and ϕ) represents a good tradeoff. The choice of the
specific configuration to adopt in practice depends on the advertiser’s aversion to the violation of the
constraints.

D.4   A DDITIONAL I NFORMATION FOR R EPRODUCIBILITY

In this section, we provide additional information for the full reproducibility of the experiments
provided in the main paper.
The code has been run on an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7 − 4710M Q CPU with 16 GiB of system memory.
The operating system was Ubuntu 18.04.5 LTS, and the experiments have been run on Python 3.7.6.
The libraries used in the experiments, with the corresponding versions, were:

       • matplotlib==3.1.3
       • gpflow==2.0.5
       • tikzplotlib==0.9.4
       • tf_nightly==2.2.0.dev20200308
       • numpy==1.18.1
       • tensorflow_probability==0.10.0
       • scikit_learn==0.23.2
       • tensorflow==2.3.0

On this architecture, the average execution time of each algorithm takes an average of ≈ 30 sec for
each day t of execution.

D.5   PARAMETERS AND S ETTING OF E XPERIMENT #1 ( MAIN PAPER )

Table 2 specifies the values of the parameters of cost and number-of-click functions of the subcam-
paigns used in Experiment #1.


                                                  28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.6           A DDITIONAL R ESULTS OF E XPERIMENT #2

In Figures 4, 5, 6, and 7 we report the 90% and 10% of the quantities related to Experiment #2
provided by the GCBsafe , GCBsafe (0, 0.05), GCBsafe (0, 0.10), and GCBsafe (0, 0.15), respectively.


                                                                                                                          120
                       GCBsafe                                                                       GCBsafe                                               GCBsafe
           1,200                                                                                     λopt                                                  βopt = β
                       {x∗j }N
                             j=1                                    12                               λ                    100
           1,000


                                                         ROIt (U)
  Pt (U)


                                                                                                                 St (U)
                                                                    11
                                                                                                                          80
            800
                                                                    10                                                    60
            600

                                                                    9
                   0    10         20    30    40   50                   0   10   20   30       40     50                       0   10   20   30      40     50
                                         t                                             t                                                      t

                                        (a)                                            (b)                                                    (c)

Figure 4: Results of Experiment #2: daily revenue (a), ROI (b), and spend (c) obtained by GCBsafe .
The dash-dotted lines correspond to the optimum values for the revenue and ROI, while the dashed
lines correspond to the values of the ROI and budget constraints.



                                                                                                                          120
                       GCBsafe (0, 0.05)                                                    GCBsafe (0, 0.05)                                      GCBsafe (0, 0.05)
           1,200                                                                            λopt                                                   βopt = β
                       {x∗j }N
                             j=1                                    12
                                                                                            λ                             100
           1,000
                                                         ROIt (U)


                                                                    11
  Pt (U)


                                                                                                                 St (U)


                                                                                                                          80
            800
                                                                    10
                                                                                                                          60
            600
                                                                     9
                   0    10         20    30    40   50                   0   10   20   30       40     50                       0   10   20   30      40     50
                                         t                                             t                                                      t

                                        (a)                                            (b)                                                    (c)

Figure 5: Results of Experiment #2: daily revenue (a), ROI (b), and spend (c) obtained by and
GCBsafe (0, 0.05). The dash-dotted lines correspond to the optimum values for the revenue and ROI,
while the dashed lines correspond to the values of the ROI and budget constraints.



                                                                                                                          120
                       GCBsafe (0, 0.10)                                                    GCBsafe (0, 0.10).                                     GCBsafe (0, 0.10)
           1,200
                       {x∗j }N                                                              λopt                                                   βopt = β
                             j=1                                    12
                                                                                            λ                             100
           1,000
                                                         ROIt (U)


                                                                    11
  Pt (U)


                                                                                                                 St (U)


                                                                                                                          80
            800
                                                                    10
                                                                                                                          60
            600
                                                                     9
                   0    10         20     30   40   50                   0   10   20   30       40     50                       0   10   20   30      40     50
                                        time                                           t                                                      t

                                        (a)                                            (b)                                                    (c)

Figure 6: Results of Experiment #2: daily revenue (a), ROI (b), and spend (c) obtained by and
GCBsafe (0, 0.10). The dash-dotted lines correspond to the optimum values for the revenue and ROI,
while the dashed lines correspond to the values of the ROI and budget constraints.



                                                                                  29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                            120
                       GCBsafe (0, 0.15)                                                       GCBsafe (0, 0.15)                                     GCBsafe (0, 0.15)
           1,200
                       {x∗j }N                                                                 λopt                                                  βopt = β
                             j=1                                       12
                                                                                               λ                            100
           1,000


                                                            ROIt (U)
                                                                       11
  Pt (U)


                                                                                                                   St (U)
                                                                                                                            80
            800
                                                                       10
                                                                                                                            60
            600
                                                                       9
                   0    10     20     30   40     50                        0   10   20   30      40     50                       0   10   20   30      40     50
                                    time                                                  t                                                     t

                                     (a)                                                  (b)                                                   (c)

Figure 7: Results of Experiment #2: daily revenue (a), ROI (b), and spend (c) obtained by and
GCBsafe (0, 0.15). The dash-dotted lines correspond to the optimum values for the revenue and ROI,
while the dashed lines correspond to the values of the ROI and budget constraints.


D.7           A DDITIONAL R ESULTS OF E XPERIMENT #3

In Figures 8, 9, and 10 we report the 90% and 10% of the quantities analysed in the experimental
section for Experiment #3 provided by the GCB, GCBsafe , and GCBsafe (0.05, 0), respectively.
These results show that the constraints are satisfied by GCBsafe , and GCBsafe (0.05, 0) also with
high probability. While for GCBsafe this is expected due to the theoretical results we provided, the
fact that also GCBsafe (0.05, 0) guarantees safety w.r.t. the original optimization problem suggests
that in some specific setting GCBsafe is too conservative. This is reflected in a lower cumulative
revenue, which might be negative from a business point of view.


           2,500                                                                                       GCB                                                       GCB
                                                                                                                            300
                                                                       12                              λopt = λ                                                  βopt
           2,000                                                                                                                                                 β

                                                                       11
                                                            ROIt (U)


                                                                                                                            200
           1,500
  Pt (U)


                                                                                                                   St (U)


                                                                       10
           1,000
                                                                                                                            100
                                                GCB                     9
            500
                                                {x∗j }N
                                                      j=1


                   0    10     20     30   40     50                        0   10   20   30      40     50                       0   10   20   30      40     50
                                      t                                                   t                                                     t

                                     (a)                                                  (b)                                                   (c)

Figure 8: Results of Experiment #3: daily revenue (a), ROI (b), and spend (c) obtained by GCB. The
dash-dotted lines correspond to the optimum values for the revenue and ROI, while the dashed lines
correspond to the values of the ROI and budget constraints.


D.8           PARAMETERS OF S ETTINGS OF E XPERIMENT #4

We report in Table 3 the values of the parameters of cost and number-of-click functions of the
subcampaigns used in Experiment #4.


                                                                                     30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Table 3: Values of the parameters used in the 10 different settings of Experiment #4.

                                     C1      C2       C3       C4       C5       λ
              Setting 1    θj       530      417      548      571      550     10.0
                           δj      0.356    0.689    0.299    0.570    0.245
                           αj        83       97      72       100       96
                           γj      0.939    0.856    0.484    0.661    0.246
              Setting 2    θj       597      682      698      456      444     14.0
                           δj      0.202    0.520    0.367    0.393    0.689
                           αj        83       98      56        60       51
                           γj      0.224    0.849    0.726    0.559    0.783
              Setting 3    θj       570      514      426      469      548     10.5
                           δj      0.217    0.638    0.694    0.391    0.345
                           αj        97       78      53        80       82
                           γj      0.225    0.680    1.051    0.412    0.918
              Setting 4    θj       487      494      467      684      494     12.0
                           δj      0.348    0.424    0.326    0.722    0.265
                           αj        62       79      76        69       99
                           γj      0.460    1.021    0.515    0.894    1.056
              Setting 5    θj       525      643      455      440      600     14.0
                           δj      0.258    0.607    0.390    0.740    0.388
                           αj        52       87      68        99       94
                           γj      0.723    0.834    1.054    1.071    0.943
              Setting 6    θj       617      518      547      567      576     11.0
                           δj      0.844    0.677    0.866    0.252    0.247
                           αj        71       53      87        98       59
                           γj      0.875    0.841    1.070    0.631    0.288
              Setting 7    θj       409      592      628      613      513     11.5
                           δj      0.507    0.230    0.571    0.359    0.307
                           αj        77       78      91        50       71
                           γj      0.810    0.246    0.774    0.516    0.379
              Setting 8    θj       602      605      618      505      588     13.0
                           δj      0.326    0.265    0.201    0.219    0.291
                           αj        67       80      99        77       99
                           γj      0.671    0.775    0.440    0.310    0.405
              Setting 9    θj       486      684      547      419      453     13.0
                           δj      0.418    0.330    0.529    0.729    0.679
                           αj        53       82      58        96      100
                           γj      0.618    0.863    0.669    0.866    0.831
              Setting 10   θj       617      520      422      559      457     14.0
                           δj      0.205    0.539    0.217    0.490    0.224
                           αj        51       86      93        61       84
                           γj     1.0493    0.779    0.233    0.578    0.562


                                                31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           2,500       GCBsafe                                                                     GCBsafe                                               GCBsafe
                                                                                                                        300
                       {x∗j }N                                     12                              λopt = λ                                              βopt
                             j=1
           2,000                                                                                                                                         β

                                                                   11


                                                        ROIt (U)
                                                                                                                        200
           1,500
  Pt (U)


                                                                                                               St (U)
                                                                   10
           1,000
                                                                                                                        100
                                                                   9
            500


                   0    10         20   30    40   50                   0   10   20   30      40     50                       0   10   20   30      40     50
                                        t                                             t                                                     t

                                        (a)                                           (b)                                                   (c)

Figure 9: Results of Experiment #3: daily revenue (a), ROI (b), and spend (c) obtained by GCBsafe .
The dash-dotted lines correspond to the optimum values for the revenue and ROI, while the dashed
lines correspond to the values of the ROI and budget constraints.


           2,500       GCBsafe (0.05, 0)                                                   GCBsafe (0.05, 0)                                     GCBsafe (0.05, 0)
                                                                                                                        300
                       {x∗j }N                                     12                      λopt = λ                                              βopt
                             j=1
           2,000                                                                                                                                 β

                                                                   11
                                                        ROIt (U)


                                                                                                                        200
           1,500
  Pt (U)


                                                                                                               St (U)


                                                                   10
           1,000
                                                                                                                        100
                                                                    9
            500


                   0    10         20   30    40   50                   0   10   20   30      40     50                       0   10   20   30      40     50
                                        t                                             t                                                     t

                                        (a)                                           (b)                                                   (c)

Figure 10: Results of Experiment #3: daily revenue (a), ROI (b), and spend (c) obtained by
GCBsafe (0.05, 0). The dash-dotted lines correspond to the optimum values for the revenue and ROI,
while the dashed lines correspond to the values of the ROI and budget constraints.


                                                                                 32
