Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Q UANTIFYING Z ERO - SHOT C OORDINATION C APABIL -
ITY WITH B EHAVIOR P REFERRING PARTNERS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review


                                             A BSTRACT

         Zero-shot coordination (ZSC) is a new challenge focusing on generalizing learned
         coordination skills to unseen partners in cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement
         Learning. Existing methods train the ego agent with partners from pre-trained
         or evolving populations. The agent’s ZSC capability is typically evaluated with
         a few evaluation partners, including humans and agents, and reported by mean
         returns. Current evaluation methods for ZSC capability still need improvement
         in constructing diverse evaluation partners and comprehensively measuring ZSC
         capability. In this paper, we aim to create a reliable, comprehensive, and efficient
         evaluation method for ZSC capability. We formally define the ideal ‘diversity-
         complete’ evaluation partners and propose the best response (BR) diversity, which
         is the population diversity of the BRs to the partners, to approximate the ideal
         evaluation partners. We propose an evaluation workflow including ‘diversity-
         complete’ evaluation partners construction and a multi-dimensional metric, the
         Best Response Proximity (BR-Prox) metric. BR-Prox quantifies the ZSC capa-
         bility as the performance similarity to each evaluation partner’s approximate best
         response, demonstrating generalization capability and improvement potential. We
         re-evaluate strong ZSC methods in the Overcooked environment using the pro-
         posed evaluation workflow. Surprisingly, the results in some of the most used
         layouts fail to distinguish the performance of different ZSC methods. Moreover,
         the evaluated ZSC methods lack the ability to produce enough diverse and high-
         performing training partners. Our proposed evaluation workflow calls for a change
         in how we efficiently evaluate ZSC methods as a supplement to human evaluation.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Zero-shot Coordination (ZSC) is a new challenge in training an agent named ego agent to have the
capability to coordinate with unseen partners in cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
(MARL) (Hu et al., 2020). The prevailing population-based training (PBT) (Jaderberg et al., 2017)
methods always train the ego agent to be the common best response (BR) to the pre-trained popula-
tion and evaluate the ego agents with a number of evaluation partners including humans and agents
(Strouse et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2023). It is imperative to recognize that the diversity within the pre-
trained population is crucial for an ego agent to obtain ZSC capability (Zhao et al., 2023; Charakorn
et al., 2023). Concurrently, the diversity within the pool of evaluation partners is pivotal in mani-
festing the ZSC capability effectively (McKee et al., 2022b). Since human evaluation is expensive
and unrepeatable, human proxy agents(Carroll et al., 2019), trained agents (Li et al., 2023a; Strouse
et al., 2021), random agents (Xue et al., 2022) and rule-based agents (Charakorn et al., 2023) are
used as supplemental evaluation.
However, current evaluation methods exhibit deficiencies that make it difficult to assess the ZSC
capability fully. Specifically, the widely used human proxy agents are not similar to human (Yu et al.,
2023). Moreover, we observe that current training-based methods of constructing evaluation partners
using different training hyper-parameters, such as seeds and learning rates (Strouse et al., 2021),
inevitably lead to the similarity between the training and evaluation populations. As summarized in
Table 1, such defects of the current evaluation partners indicate that we urgently need a new method
to construct evaluation partners for a comprehensive ZSC capability evaluation.
The Best Response (BR) classes hypothesis (Lupu et al., 2021; Rahman et al., 2023) means that
the ego agent with strong ZSC capability can emulate any policy in the set of BRs to testing-time
unknown partners. Based on the hypothesis, we formalize the concepts describing an ideal set of


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Our Evaluation Workflow for ZSC. 1) Generation: generating behavior preferring agents
and their best responses; 2) Selection: selecting evaluation partners by maximizing the BR diversity;
3) Measurement: evaluating the ego agent with evaluation partners and compute BR-Prox. The
detailed workflow is described in Section 4.
evaluation partners and highlight the concept of ‘diversity-complete’. A set of evaluation partners
with ‘diversity-complete’ BRs means the BRs to these evaluation partners also best respond to all
other policies, thereby facilitating a comprehensive evaluation of ZSC capability. To approximate
‘diversity-complete’ evaluation partners, we establish the desiderata that evaluation partners need to
be reasonable and diverse in skill styles and skill levels. We propose the Best Response Diversity
(BR Diversity), which is the population diversity (Parker-Holder et al., 2020) of the partners’ BRs
to fulfill the desiderata. We justify that growing BR Diversity is more effective than growing the
population diversity of the partners in selecting ‘diversity-complete’ partners from the given policies.
In this paper, we aim at a comprehensive and fair evaluation method, including the evaluation part-
ners construction and the metric for ZSC capability measurement. As shown in Figure 1, we propose
an evaluation workflow that includes generating a large number of evaluation partner candidates with
diverse event-based behavior preferences, selecting the most representative ones as evaluation part-
ners, and measuring the ZSC capability via our proposed BR-Prox metric. Our BR-Prox quantifies
the ZSC capability as the performance similarity between the ego agent and approximate BRs to the
evaluation partners. Realizing that the ego agent trained by ZSC methods aims to generalize learned
skills to evaluation partners, BR-Prox can illustrate both the generalization capability and the im-
provement potential as a multi-dimensional metric. Using this evaluation workflow, we re-evaluate
the ZSC methods in the Overcooked environment Carroll et al. (2019). The results show that the
performance of current methods cannot be distinguished in the most used layouts, which indicates
the effectiveness of our evaluation workflow in revealing the improvement potential. We also quan-
tify the effects of population sizes on the population diversity, and our findings indicate that existing
methods cannot produce enough diverse and high-performing partners for training.
To sum up, our main contributions are as follows: 1) To the best of our knowledge, we are the
first to investigate the evaluation of ZSC capability and formally define the concepts of ideal eval-
uation partners; 2) We propose an evaluation workflow including ‘diversity-complete’ evaluation
partners construction and the BR-Prox metric that multi-dimensionally measures the ZSC capabil-
ity, in which BR Diversity, a novel population diversity metric, is proposed and justified; 3) We
provide a benchmark of ZSC methods with a reliable and comprehensive evaluation.

2   R ELATED W ORKS
ZSC Problem and Methods. Most existing ZSC methods are developed based on Self-play (SP)
(Tesauro, 1994; Yu et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022), which learns conventions between players and
produces agents that lack coordination with unseen partners (Carroll et al., 2019). Representative
methods aim to reduce the overfitting of conventions by using randomization over the game structure
to break the known symmetries (Hu et al., 2020) and designing diversity-based reward shaping
for robust strategies (Lucas & Allen, 2022). The most prevalent ZSC solution is population-based
training (PBT) (Jaderberg et al., 2017) like Population Play (PP) (Carroll et al., 2019), which aims
to train an ego agent by allowing the ego agent to interact within a population to ensure that the
ego agent encounters multiple partners during training. Fictitious co-play (FCP) (Strouse et al.,
2021) proposes a widely used two-stage framework, which we named as Co-Play Methods, pre-
training a population via self-play and then training the ego agent with the pre-trained population.
Most of the co-play methods pay attention to training a diverse population in the first stage by


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Table 1: Evaluation partners used in recent works under the Overcooked environment.
    Evaluation Methods         Utilized by                                                    Defects
                               Overcook-AI (Carroll et al., 2019); MEP (Zhao et al., 2023);
    Human Players              FCP (Strouse et al., 2021); HSP (Yu et al., 2023);             Expensive, time-consuming
                               PECAN (Lou et al., 2023); HiPT (Loo et al., 2023);             and unrepeatable
                               COLE (Li et al., 2023b)
                               Overcook-AI (Carroll et al., 2019); MAZE (Xue et al., 2022);
    Human Proxy Agents         FCP (Strouse et al., 2021); MEP (Zhao et al., 2023);           Divergent from human behaviors
                               HSP (Yu et al., 2023); PECAN (Lou et al., 2023);               and not diverse
                               COLE (Li et al., 2023a) HiPT (Loo et al., 2023);
                               FCP (Strouse et al., 2021); MAZE (Xue et al., 2022);
    Trained Self-play Agents                                                                  Similar to the training populations
                               LIPO (Charakorn et al., 2023); HiPT (Loo et al., 2023)
    Trained Adaptable Agents   MAZE (Xue et al., 2022); COLE (Li et al., 2023a)               Unfair in cross-play
    Rule-based Specialist      HSP (Yu et al., 2023); LIPO (Charakorn et al., 2023)           Inextensible and expert-needed
    Random Agents              FCP (Strouse et al., 2021); MAZE (Xue et al., 2022)            Lack of high-level skills



using population entropy-shaped reward (Zhao et al., 2023), using hidden-utility reward functions
that model human behaviors (Yu et al., 2023), and training incompatible agents (Charakorn et al.,
2023). The contextual encoding method to identify the partners’ policies has also been used to
encourage self-play agents to discover diverse behaviors in the pre-training stage (Lou et al., 2023;
Loo et al., 2023). The other method is Evolution Methods, in which the ego agent is trained with an
evolving population of partners. Current evolution methods keep updating the partners pool during
the training by promoting unique behaviors among the strategies (Lupu et al., 2021), co-evolving
(Xue et al., 2022) and open-ended learning (Li et al., 2023a;b).
ZSC Evaluation and Analysis. Many researchers have focused on the ZSC evaluation and analysis
in both Human-agent team and agent-agent team. McKee et al. (2022b) present the empirical studies
to evaluate agents’ generalization gap and propose the expected action variation metric to measure
the population diversity. Knott et al. (2021) suggested that the average training or validation reward
cannot represent the agents’ robustness. Otherwise, some studies discussed the subjective evaluation
of Human-AI Team performance but did not focus on ZSC capability (Siu et al., 2021; McKee
et al., 2022a). Unlike the above studies, we focus on evaluating ZSC capability. The current ZSC
capability evaluation methods usually use different evaluation partners to showcase the ego agent’s
ZSC capability, including human and agents, as summarized in Table 1. The defects and other details
are discussed in Section 3.2 and Appendix C. Due to the defects listed in Table 1, previous evaluation
methods cannot provide a comprehensive and fair evaluation. To overcome these shortages, our
method can build partners with diverse behaviors which are unseen during the training process to
ensure comprehensive evaluation of ZSC capabilities. And the BR-Prox we introduced enables a
fair comparison of different algorithms’ ZSC performance by quantifying their capability in terms
of generalization capability and improvement potential. To the best of our knowledge, we are the
first to investigate the construction of evaluation partners and the measurement of ZSC capability.

3       P ROBLEM S ETTING AND M OTIVATION
3.1      T WO - PLAYER M ARKOV D ECISION P ROCESS
We model the ZSC problem as a two-player Markov Decision Process (Boutilier, 1996) denoted by
M =< S, A1 , A2 , ρ, P, r, γ >, where S is the state space, A1 and A2 are the action spaces for the
two players, ρ : S 7→ [0, 1] is the distribution of the initial state s0 , P : S × A1 × A2 × S 7→ [0, 1]
is the dynamics function that indicates the transition probability, r : S × A1 × A2 7→ R is the
reward function, and γ is a reward discount factor. For two policies π 1 and π 2 , a joint action at
is sampled from the joint policy π 1 (·|st ) × π 2 (·|st ) at each step t P given state st ∈ S. With the
expected discounted return denoted as J (π 1 , π 2 ) = Eτ ∼(ρ,π1 ,π2 ) [ t γ t r(st , at )], we define
                                                                                                      the
objective considering the position permutation as U(π 1 , π 2 ) = 21 (J π 1 , π 2 ) + J (π 2 , π 1 ) . For
convenience, we denote the Best Response (BR) of a policy π as BR(π) = argmaxπ′ U(π ′ , π). Let
Πtest be the set of potential unseen partners, and π e be the policy of the ego agent. The optimization
objective of the ZSC problem can be represented as: maxπe Eπp ∼U(Πtest ) [U(π e , π p )], where we
assume partners are sampled uniformly. As we focus on population-based ZSC methods, we further


                                                                3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


formalize the objective considering the construction of the training population:
                                    max Eπp ∼U(Πtest ) [U (O(Πtrain ), π p )] ,                   (1)
                                   Πtrain ,O
where Πtrain is the population constructed during training and O is an approximate oracle
function that computes the common best response for partners in Πtrain . For instance, the
oracle function can be defined to maximize the objective with U(Πtrain ), i.e., O(Πtrain ) =
argmaxπ Eπp ∼U(Πtrain ) [U(π, π p )].

3.2      D ESIDERATA FOR E VALUATION PARTNERS

Note that agents in ZSC problem encounter unknown partners in test-time, and thus the construc-
tion of the evaluation partners plays a significant role in evaluating ZSC capability. The BR classes
hypothesis (Lupu et al., 2021; Rahman et al., 2023) supposes the common BR policy to a large set
of partners is robust to a large number of unknown partners, which means the ego agent with strong
ZSC capability can emulate any policy in the set of BRs to testing-time unknown partners. There-
fore, an ideal evaluation method should expose the ego agent to evaluation partners with ‘diversity-
complete’ BRs. We can intuitively define a ‘diversity-complete’ set of BRs as the set contains all
possible BRs. However, the ego agent is trained to coordinate with human or other agents to ac-
complish the given tasks in the ZSC problem (Hu et al., 2020; Lucas & Allen, 2022; Lupu et al.,
2021). Thus the agents that sabotage the game are not targeted partners. We reduce the BRs to those
sabotaging agents by defining a ‘diversity-complete’ set of BRs in an MDP M as DCSBR (M):
                    ∀π ′ ∈ Π, (U(π ′ , BR(π ′ )) ≥ η(M) → BR(π ′ ) ∈ DCSBR (M)) ,
where Π is the policy space in M, η(M) is the threshold for identifying the sabotaging agents and
depends on the environment. We remark that there is a similar concept in Rahman et al. (2023),
while we outline the concept in the context of ZSC problem. Accordingly, we formally define the
set of evaluation partners with ‘diversity-complete’ BRs as DCS(M):
 ∃ DCS′BR (M), {BR(π)}π∈DCS(M) = DCS′BR (M) ∧ (∀π ∈ DCS(M), U(π, BR(π)) ≥ η(M)) ,


which means that BRs to the set of evaluation partners DCS(M) is ‘diversity-complete’ and that
DCS(M) does not include sabotaging agents. We briefly describe such set of evaluation partners as
‘diversity-complete’.
Problems of previous evaluaton methods. Currently, the researchers use different ways to con-
struct the evaluation partners. We categorize the partner agents in Table 1 and provide more details
in Appendix C. Considering the substantial expense and time consumption in human evaluation,
current evaluation methods employ partners generated by training or rule-based methods. However,
current methods still need to work on producing reasonable partners with diverse skill styles and
levels. Specifically, Yu et al. (2023) highlighted that the most widely used human proxy agents for
evaluation do not have human-like behaviors. The trained self-play agents used for evaluation may
not be distinct from the training partners. As shown in Figure 2, we demonstrate that the populations
trained with MEP under different training settings learn similar behaviors1 . The cross-play evalua-
tion method is flawed because evaluation partners overlap with training partners, and excluding the
overlapped partners disrupts the control tests, which may have led to an unfair comparison. The
manually built rule-based specialists are impractical to implement in complex environments. The
random agents lack high-level performance to ensure the evaluation partners are diverse enough.
Therefore, we urgently need ‘diversity-complete’ evaluation partners to help evaluate the ZSC algo-
rithm more efficiently. Unfortunately, we cannot precisely obtain a ‘diversity-complete’ evaluation
partners set since whether the partners are ‘diversity-complete’ or not depends on the environment
and the given task and may be intractable in complex environments. Instead, we can establish the
desiderata of the evaluation partners to approach ‘diversity-complete’ evaluation partners:
Reasonable. We require evaluation partners to be reasonable in an informal sense. First, as ex-
plained above, partners should not minimize the episode return or have the potential to sabotage
the game. Secondly, we require the partners not to be random since the performance with random
behaviors and conventions does not contribute to the evaluation of ZSC capability. Therefore, we
need to approximate the BRs to the generated partners to verify the partners’ reasonableness.
   1
       The details of this experiment can be found in Appendix B.3.


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                ×104   Population Diversity
                                                                                          4.0
                                                                                                                              P-Div
                                                                                          3.5
                                                                                                                              BR-Div


                                                                   Population Diversity
                                                                                          3.0
                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                          2.0
                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                                                                                          Population Size

Figure 2: Visualization of the high-level behaviors of differ-     Figure 3: Population diversity of
ent self-play populations and our evaluation partner candi-        subsets with different sizes. Near 0
dates. The evaluation partner selections are sampled accord-       values mean that linearly correlated
ing to partner diversity and BR diversity respectively.            evaluation partners are included.

Skill Style and Skill Level Diverse. Previous studies have proposed methods for producing a
variety of agents by optimizing the divergence in their low-level behaviors (Zhao et al., 2023; Lupu
et al., 2021). Nevertheless, the number of possible low-level behaviors is frequently so large that
it may be simple to maximize diversity objectives without learning qualitatively distinct policies.
Moreover, locally different decisions do not necessarily exhibit distinct high-level behaviors. For
a comprehensive evaluation, we require evaluation partners with diverse skill styles. Diverse skill
levels are also essential when constructing evaluation partners. Fortunately, by selecting earlier
checkpoints of evaluation partners, it is simple to acquire evaluation partners with diverse skill levels.
3.3   B EST R ESPONSE P ROXIMITY
Previous evaluation methods showcase the ego agents’ ZSC capability by the mean episode returns
across the evaluation partners. In contrast, multi-dimensional metrics should be adopted to measure
the agents’ capability to generalize the learned coordination skills to the unseen partners and the
agents’ improvement potential (Kirk et al., 2023). Given the evaluation partners and their approxi-
mate BRs, we are able to propose our Best Response Proximity (BR-Prox) metric that measures the
performance similarity between the ego agent and the approximate BRs to the evaluation partners.
Formally, we define:
            BR-Prox (π, {πwi }i∈P ) := Aggri∈P U(π, πwi )/U BR(π  d wi ), πwi         ,        (2)
where Aggr means the aggregator across the evaluation partners, such as the most common ‘mean’
and ‘median’ aggregators. According to Agarwal et al. (2021), we use the inter-quartile mean as
our aggregator, which is the mean of the middle 50% of data and is statistically reliable. Note
that BR-Prox measures the ZSC capability by illustrating both the generalization capability and
the improvement potential. Moreover, a single score can not provide a comprehensive profile of
the performance distribution across the evaluation partners (Knott et al., 2021), as shown in Ap-
pendix B.3. To present an overall performance profile, we recommend reporting the results with the
95% confidence intervals (Nathaniel, 2021) and the inter-quartile ranges, e.g., the middle 50% of
the disaggregated BR-Prox scores, as presented in Figure 4.
4     E VALUATION W ORKFLOW
In this section, we first discuss constructing ‘diversity-complete’ evaluation partners using the best
response diversity (BR Diversity), assuming access to the whole policy space. Then we propose our
evaluation partners construction method, including evaluation partner candidates generation based
on learning different behavior preferences and evaluation partners selection based on BR Diversity.
4.1   B EST R ESPONSE D IVERSITY
Following Parker-Holder et al. (2020), we first define the population diversity of a population
{πi }M                                                          M
     i=1 as the determinant of the similarity matrix: PD({πi }i=1 ) := det(K), where Kij = θi · θj
is the pair-wise similarity matrix of the population, and θi is the behavior feature of policy πi . The
details of the behavioral feature are described in section 4.2.
Assuming the access to the whole policy space Π, one may intuitively construct ‘diversity-complete’
evaluate partners by repeating sampling subsets from the policy space and select the subset with the


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


maximum population diversity of the sampled partners, i.e., max{πi }M   i=1
                                                                            PD({πi }Mi=1 ). However,
maximizing the diversity amongst partners may not necessarily produce policies with specific con-
ventions, particularly when a policy adheres to conventions that result in high returns when playing
with the best-response policy to another evaluation partner (Rahman et al., 2023).
According to the definition of ‘diversity-complete’, we select ‘diversity-complete’ evaluation
partners through maximizing the Best Response Diversity (BR Diversity, BR-Div), which is
the population diversity of the approximate BRs to the selected partners. We define Best Re-
sponse Diversity as BR-Div({πi }M                               M
                                      i=1 ) = PD({BR(πi )}i=1 ) and Partner Diversity (P-Div) as
                                                      d
             M                   M
P-Div({πi }i=1 ) = PD({πi }i=1 ). To verify the effectiveness of constructing ‘diversity-complete’
policy subset from a given policy set, we present the maximum population diversity of the evaluation
partner subsets with different sizes in the Overcooked environment (Carroll et al., 2019), as illus-
trated in Figure 3. We first pre-train a diverse pool of evaluation partner candidates and compare the
subset selections according to P-Div and BR-Div. According to Figure 3, sampling based on BR-Div
reaches higher population diversity before the population diversity diminishes, meaning that maxi-
mizing the best response diversity is more effective in constructing ‘diversity-complete’ evaluation
partners than maximizing partners population diversity. We further demonstrate the effectiveness
of maximizing BR diversity in Figure 2. The evaluation partners selected via maximizing BR-Div
exhibit the most diverse behaviors while maximizing P-Div leads to inferior behavior discovering.
Details of these experiments can be found in Appendix B.

4.2   E VALUATION PARTNERS C ONSTRUCTION
We have justified the effectiveness of BR diversity in selecting a diverse subset from a set of policies.
However, the whole policy space is generally unknown. In this section, we first generate candidates
with diverse high-level behaviors through event-based reward shaping, which approximate the whole
policy space and then select the most representative subset as the evaluation partners.
Event-based Behavior Preferring Partners. We expect the partners to have diverse and reason-
able behaviors, while the the behavior space is intractably large. Inspired by Yu et al. (2023) in
which human preferences are regarded to be event-centric and modeled as event-based reward func-
tions, we apply the event-based reward shaping method (Abel et al., 2021) to encourage behavior
discovering and generate behavior preferring partners. We formulate the reward space that approx-
imatesP the human preferences by R = {rw |rw (st , at ) = r + ϕ(st , at )T w, w ∈ Rm , ∥w∥∞ ≤
Bmax , i 1(wi ̸= 0) ≤ Cmax }, where w is an m-dimensional weight vector and rw is the reward
function encouraging behavior indicated by w. The original game reward is added to prevent the
behavior preferring agents from being sabotaging. ϕ : S × A1 × A2 7→ Rm embeds the event-based
feature that counts the occurrences of each pre-defined event, i.e., wj is the number of occurrences
of the j-th event. Bmax bounds the norm of w and Cmax restricts the number of events which w con-
cerns. Under these constraints, ∀r ∈ R indicate diverse behaviors but still encourage cooperation
for solving the given tasks. Given such a reward space, partners with different behavior preferences
could be generated and it is possible to derive diverse human behaviors. Given a specific rw , one
player receives rw and the other player receives the original game reward r. The procedure of the
two players optimizing their objectives can be formulated as finding a Nash Equilibrium (NE) (Os-
borne & Rubinstein, 1994) in a two-player Markov Game (Van Der Wal, 1980). We can approximate
an NE of such a two-player Markov Game by that two agents independently perform the Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) algorithm since rw ∈ R still guides the behavior
preferring agent to cooperate for solving the given task (Ding et al., 2022). After approximating the
NE, we obtain the πw which learns the behavior indicated by w. We also obtain the approximate BR
of πw , denoted as BR(π
                    d w ). Line 1 to Line 3 in Algorithm 1 summarize the process of constructing
agents that cover a set of diverse behaviors as the evaluation partner candidates by sampling reward
functions rw from R.
Evaluation Partners Selection. The generated candidates may still be unbalanced distributed in
cooperative conventions and behaviors as shown in Figure 2. To prevent the overestimation of the
agents that coordinate well with those conventions and behaviors, we further select a representa-
tive subset of the candidates via maximizing the BR-Div. The policy behavior features used in the
computation of BR-Div are environment-dependent and task-specific, pertaining to the skills under
assessment. For simplicity, we count the occurrence of the pre-defined events of BR(π
                                                                                 d wi ) along-
side the episodes generated by BR(πwi ) and πwi as the high-level behavior feature θwi ∈ Rm of
                                d


                                                   6
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Algorithm 1: Behavior Preferring Evaluation Partners Construction
  Input: Reward Space R, Number of Candidates N , Number of Evaluation Partners M .
  Output: Evaluation Partners {πwi }i∈P and Best Responses {BR(πd wi )}i∈P .
1 for i = 1, . . . , N do
2     Sample rwi from R.
3     Obtain πwi and BR(π d wi ) by solving the two-player Markov Game.
4     Evaluate πwi with BR(π
                           d wi ) and embed BR(π
                                               d wi )’s high-level behavior features
          PT                           m
        E[ t=1 ϕ(st , at )] as θwi ∈ R .
                                      d wi )}N as K, where an element Kij = θwi · θwj .
5 Compute the similarity matrix of {BR(π         i=1
6 Sample a subset S of size M as S = argmax{π
                                                  wi }i∈P
                                                          BR-Div({πwi }i∈P ) via DPP sampling
   based on K, where P ⊂ {1, . . . , N }.
7 Select checkpoints as {π̇w i }i∈S with U(BR(
                                           d π̇wi ), π̇wi ) ≈ U(BR(π
                                                                d wi ), πwi )/2, ∀i ∈ S.


 d wi ) for calculating the BR-Div, as summarized in Line 4 to Line 6 in Algorithm 1. Recall that
 BR(π
 the population diversity is defined as a determinant function. To search for the candidate subset of
 size M with the maximum determinant, we apply the Determinantal Point Process (DPP) (Kulesza
 et al., 2012), which samples proportionally to the determinant of the candidate subsets. Due to
 the fact that candidate subsets are usually inexhaustible, we repeat the DPP sampling to search for
 the representative candidate subset with different subset initializations. Furthermore, we collect the
 earlier checkpoints of the selected evaluation partners to construct evaluation partners at different
 skill levels and additionally train the corresponding approximate BRs by PPO. The obtained eval-
 uation partners approximate a ‘diversity-complete’ set of partners by meeting the desiderata since
 the selected evaluation partners are reasonable and diverse in skill-styles under the measurement of
 BR-Div and that the checkpoints at different skill levels are also included. Finally, these evaluation
 partners and approximate BRs are used to compute BR-Prox.
  5     OVERHAULING E VALUATION IN OVERCOOKED
 In this section, we implement the strong ZSC methods in the Overcooked (Carroll et al., 2019)
 environment to quantify the performance of the current methods with different population sizes and
 compare the performance of the ZSC methods cooperating with the evaluation partners at different
 skill levels to show the effectiveness of our evaluation method and BR-Prox.
 Overcooked Environment. We retain four layouts, including Asymmetric Advantages (Asymm.
 Adv.), Coordination Ring (Coord. Ring), Forced Coordination (Forced Coord.), and Counter Cir-
 cuit (Counter Circ.) and add three new layouts which are Bothway Coordination (Bothway Coord.),
 Blocked Corridor (Blocked Corr.) and Asymmetric Coordination (Asymm. Coord.). The environ-
 ment details and layout descriptions can be found Appendix A.
 Experiment Setup We implement five strong methods, including FCP (Strouse et al., 2021), MEP
 (Zhao et al., 2023), TrajeDi (Lupu et al., 2021), COLE (Li et al., 2023a) and HSP (Yu et al., 2023),
 and additionally add self-play (SP) (Carroll et al., 2019) as a baseline2 . For co-play methods, we
 collect the trained self-play agents and their earlier checkpoints as the training population following
 Strouse et al. (2021). For evolution methods, we initialize the population with a number of random
 agents. We adopt modern MARL techniques detailed in Appendix B.1, which help the implemented
 ZSC methods obtain higher episode returns different from results reported in original papers 3 , as
 shown in Appendix B.3. We use a set of 14 events and Cmax = 3 to construct the event-based
 reward space, generate up to 194 candidates by traversing the reward space, and finally select up to
 30 evaluation partners. More experiment setup details and full results can be found in Appendix B.
  5.1   T HE E FFECTIVENESS OF O UR E VALUATION W ORKFLOW
 We re-evaluate five implemented methods in the Overcooked environment to show the effectiveness
 of our evaluation workflow. The main results and findings are as follows:
    2
      We implement TrajeDi as a co-play method for a fair comparison and implement COLE without the bandit
 process for high parallelization.
    3
      For example, self-play agents obtain nearly 500 episode returns in the Asymm. Adv. layout.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                             Coordination with Conflicts Layouts
                                             Coord. Ring                                     Counter Circ.                               Blocked Corr.
                          1.00

                          0.75
                BR-Prox
                          0.50

                          0.25

                          0.00
                                         12\25     24\50             36\75               12\25       24\50    36\75                  12\25      24\50       36\75
                                                                                            Population Size
                                                                           Coordination without Conflicts Layouts
                                            Forced Coord.                                  Bothway Coord.                                Asymm. Adv.
                          1.00

                          0.75
                BR-Prox


                          0.50

                          0.25

                          0.00
                                         12\25     24\50             36\75               12\25       24\50    36\75                  12\25      24\50       36\75
                                                                                            Population Size
                                     SP            FCP                     MEP           TrajeDi             COLE                HSP            Inter-quartile Range

Figure 4: BR-Prox performance with 95% confidence intervals of ZSC methods with different pop-
ulation sizes in the Overcooked environment. ‘12\25’, ‘24\50’ and ‘36\75’ mean that the co-play
methods (FCP, MEP, TrajeDi and HSP) are trained with populations of 12, 24 and 36 sizes and that
the evolution method (COLE) is trained with populations of 25, 50, 75 sizes.
                     Moderate Evaluation Partners                            Expert Evaluation Partners                       All Evaluation Partners
          1.0                                                        1.0                                                1.0
                                                                                                                                                                    SP
          0.8                                                        0.8                                                0.8
                                                                                                                                                                    FCP
                                                                                                                                                                    MEP
BR-Prox


                                                           BR-Prox


                                                                                                              BR-Prox


          0.6                                                        0.6                                                0.6
                                                                                                                                                                    TrajeDi
                                                                                                                                                                    COLE
          0.4                                                        0.4                                                0.4
                                                                                                                                                                    HSP
                                                                                                                                                                    Inter-quartile
          0.2                                                        0.2                                                0.2                                         Range

          0.0                                                        0.0                                                0.0
                            12\25     24\50       36\75                        12\25     24\50       36\75                    12\25     24\50       36\75
                                Population Size                                    Population Size                                Population Size

Figure 5: We compare the BR-Prox performance with 95% confidence intervals obtained with eval-
uation partners at different skill levels and aggregated from all layouts.

Layouts Defects in Lack of Potential Skill Style Diversity. Since BR-Prox reveals the improve-
ment potential of ZSC methods, we find defects in the current environment layouts. As shown in
Figure 4, we find that the most used layouts, including Forced Coord. and Asymm. Adv., cannot
show the ZSC capability difference among the ZSC methods. We design the Bothway Coord. layout
based on Forced Coord. to include more skill styles by encouraging the players to pass ingredients
bidirectionally, which requires more coordination capability but still cannot tell the performance
difference among the strong baselines. We believe that some current layouts cannot showcase the
agent’s ZSC capabilities due to the simple design and mechanisms. We used the inter-quartile range
introduced in Section 3.3 to illustrate the variability of ZSC method performance in Figure 4. In-
terestingly, the self-play as a baseline method exhibits a high performance and a constricted inter-
quartile range in the Forced Coord. and Bothway Coord. layouts, suggesting that the layouts lacking
potential skill styles diversity allow agents to easily learn the majority of styles for interacting with
unfamiliar partners. We find that resource sharing mechanism contributes the most to the amount of
potential skill styles in a layout. To verify, we further name the layouts where the players need to
share resources, such as the pot and the onion, and may have physically collision in movement as
the ‘coordination with conflicts’ and the opposite as ‘coordination without conflicts.’ In the ‘coor-
dination with conflicts’ layouts including Coord. Ring, Counter Circ. and Blocked Corr., a massive
performance gap exists between methods. Such results indicate that there is still a considerable
improvement potential for the ZSC problem in the scenarios where coordination leads to conflicts.
Performance Gap with Evaluation Partners at Different Skill Levels. Our evaluation work-
flow’s effectiveness is also reflected in the performance gap of the methods with different skill levels
evaluation partners. We investigate how the ZSC methods perform when facing unseen partners at


                                                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     ×103     Counter Circ.                                       ×102    Forced Coord.


          Population Diversity


                                                                     Population Diversity
                                 3                                                          1.0
                                                                                                                                  FCP
                                                                                                                                  MEP
                                 2                                                                                                TrajeDi
                                                                                            0.5
                                 1                                                                                                Pop. Size 5
                                                                                                                                  Pop. Size 10
                                 0                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                  Pop. Size 15
                                      2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415                                 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415
                                            Agent Subset Size                                            Agent Subset Size
Figure 6: Effect of the population size on the population diversity. Near 0 values mean that linearly
correlated evaluation partners are included.
different skill levels by regarding the evaluation partners with self-play performance        less than the
median, i.e., {π P |π P ∈ Πeval , U(π P , π P ) ≤ MedianΠπP ′ ∈eval U(π P ′ , π P ′ ) }, as moderate evalu-


ation partners, and the left ones as expert evaluation partners. Results in Figure 5 reveal that ZSC
methods have worse performance with the expert evaluation partners, including the lower BR-Prox
values and larger variations. The deficiency may result from the ZSC methods failing to generate
enough diverse and high-performing agents, which is elaborated in Section 5.2. Such a result in-
dicates our evaluation partners at different skill levels show whether the ZSC methods can learn
to cooperate with partners of different levels during the training process, which is what existing
evaluation methods lack.
5.2   T RAINING P OPULATION S IZE AND BR D IVERSITY
Besides, the proposed BR Diversity can also be an analysis tool for the effectiveness of ZSC methods
generating training population. According to Figure 4 and 5, performance can be enhanced by in-
creasing population size, provided that the population also increases in diversity, i.e., the population
diversity is effectively enlarged by ZSC methods. Some ZSC methods lack an explicit mechanism
to promote the population diversity, including FCP and COLE. Thus the performance of FCP and
COLE is not benefited from increasing the population size from 24 to 36.
On the other hand, ZSC methods may sometimes fail to expand the population diversity. We pro-
vide a case study in the Counter Circ. and Forced Coord. layouts. Using the definition of population
diversity in Section 4.2, we demonstrate the maximum diversity of the subsets of different sizes. For
example, we compute the diversity of all the subset combinations with sizes ranging from 2 to 15
within a high-performing training population of MEP with a size of 15. The maximum diversities
over the subset combinations of all subset sizes, respectively, are collected to plot the curve. Large
diversities at the subset sizes close to the population size mean that the ZSC method effectively
produces diverse agents. Results in Figure 6 illustrate that existing ZSC methods fail to effectively
produce enough diverse high-performing agents, e.g., only eight diverse agents are produced after
training a population of size 15 using MEP or TrajeDi. We can also explain the effects of popula-
tion sizes on performance through the corresponding changes in population diversity: the increased
population size leads to performance improvement when more diverse agents are produced (as in
Counter Circ.) and vice versa (as in Forced Coord.).
6 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigate the evaluation of the zero-shot coordination capability. We are the first
to formalize concepts describing the ideal evaluation partners for ZSC capability evaluation and
highlight the shortages of existing evaluation partners. We design the BR-Prox metric to measure
generalization capability and improvement potential. We justify the effectiveness of constructing
‘diversity-complete’ evaluation partners via maximizing our proposed BR diversity. Our evaluation
workflow includes constructing the ‘diversity-complete’ evaluation partners by generating candidate
agents with behavior preferences and their BRs, selecting the most representative ones by maximiz-
ing the BR diversity, and measuring the ego agent via BR-Prox. Five ZSC methods are re-evaluated
in the Overcooked environment using the proposed evaluation workflow. Our evaluation workflow
reveals that the most common layouts need more complexity to distinguish the performance of cur-
rent ZSC methods. Results verify the effectiveness of our evaluation workflow in measuring the
improvement potential. The BR diversity is further used to analyze the effectiveness of ZSC meth-
ods’ training population generation, revealing their scarcity. For future work, we plan to reduce gap
between the set of evaluation partners generated in our workflow and an ideal ‘diversity-complete’
set which mainly results from the events designed based on human knowledge. We also plan to in-
troduce complex mechanisms into the Overcooked environment and apply our evaluation workflow
to more environments for promoting the development of ZSC methods.


                                                                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ethics Statement. Our method and algorithm do not involve any adversarial attack, and will not
endanger human security. All our experiments are performed in the simulation environment, which
does not involve ethical and fair issues.
Reproducibility Statement.        The source code of this paper is available at https://
anonymous.4open.science/r/ZSCBench. We specify all the experiments implementation
details including our implementation details of all baselines we evaluation and the experiments setup
in Appendix B.1 The experiment additional results are in the Appendix B.3.

R EFERENCES
David Abel, Will Dabney, Anna Harutyunyan, Mark K Ho, Michael Littman, Doina Precup,
  and Satinder Singh. On the expressivity of markov reward. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:7799–7812, 2021.
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C. Courville, and Marc G. Belle-
  mare. Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. In NeurIPS, pp. 29304–
  29320, 2021.
Craig Boutilier. Planning, learning and coordination in multiagent decision processes. In TARK,
  volume 96, pp. 195–210. Citeseer, 1996.
Micah Carroll, Rohin Shah, Mark K Ho, Tom Griffiths, Sanjit Seshia, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca
 Dragan. On the utility of learning about humans for human-ai coordination. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Rujikorn Charakorn, Poramate Manoonpong, and Nat Dilokthanakul. Generating diverse coopera-
  tive agents by learning incompatible policies. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2023.
Brandon Cui, Andrei Lupu, Samuel Sokota, Hengyuan Hu, David J Wu, and Jakob Nicolaus Fo-
  erster. Adversarial diversity in hanabi. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Dongsheng Ding, Chen-Yu Wei, Kaiqing Zhang, and Mihailo Jovanovic. Independent policy gra-
  dient for large-scale markov potential games: Sharper rates, function approximation, and game-
  agnostic convergence. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5166–5220. PMLR,
  2022.
George H Dunteman. Principal components analysis, volume 69. Sage, 1989.
Hengyuan Hu, Adam Lerer, Alex Peysakhovich, and Jakob N. Foerster. "other-play" for zero-shot
  coordination. In ICML, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4399–
  4410. PMLR, 2020.
Max Jaderberg, Valentin Dalibard, Simon Osindero, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Jeff Donahue, Ali
 Razavi, Oriol Vinyals, Tim Green, Iain Dunning, Karen Simonyan, Chrisantha Fernando, and
 Koray Kavukcuoglu. Population based training of neural networks, 2017.
Robert Kirk, Amy Zhang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. A survey of zero-shot gener-
  alisation in deep reinforcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 76:201–264,
  2023.
Paul Knott, Micah Carroll, Sam Devlin, Kamil Ciosek, Katja Hofmann, Anca D. Dragan, and Rohin
  Shah. Evaluating the robustness of collaborative agents. In AAMAS, pp. 1560–1562. ACM,
  2021.
Ilya Kostrikov and Matin Raayai Ardakani.     Pytorch implementations of rein-
   forcement  learning algorithms.       https://github.com/matinraayai/
   pytorch-a2c-trpo-ppo-acktr-gail, 2020.
Alex Kulesza, Ben Taskar, et al. Determinantal point processes for machine learning. Foundations
  and Trends® in Machine Learning, 5(2–3):123–286, 2012.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yang Li, Shao Zhang, Jichen Sun, Yali Du, Ying Wen, Xinbing Wang, and Wei Pan. Cooperative
  open-ended learning framework for zero-shot coordination. In ICML, volume 202 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 20470–20484. PMLR, 2023a.
Yang Li, Shao Zhang, Jichen Sun, Wenhao Zhang, Yali Du, Ying Wen, Xinbing Wang, and Wei
  Pan. Tackling cooperative incompatibility for zero-shot human-ai coordination. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.03034, 2023b.
Yi Loo, Chen Gong, and Malika Meghjani. A hierarchical approach to population training for
  human-ai collaboration. In IJCAI, pp. 3011–3019. ijcai.org, 2023.
Xingzhou Lou, Jiaxian Guo, Junge Zhang, Jun Wang, Kaiqi Huang, and Yali Du. Pecan: Leveraging
  policy ensemble for context-aware zero-shot human-ai coordination. In Proceedings of the 2023
  International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pp. 679–688, 2023.
Keane Lucas and Ross E. Allen. Any-play: An intrinsic augmentation for zero-shot coordination. In
  AAMAS, pp. 853–861. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
  (IFAAMAS), 2022.
Andrei Lupu, Brandon Cui, Hengyuan Hu, and Jakob N. Foerster. Trajectory diversity for zero-shot
  coordination. In ICML, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 7204–
  7213. PMLR, 2021.
Kevin R. McKee, Xuechunzi Bai, and Susan T. Fiske. Warmth and competence in human-agent co-
  operation. In Piotr Faliszewski, Viviana Mascardi, Catherine Pelachaud, and Matthew E. Taylor
  (eds.), 21st International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, AAMAS
  2022, Auckland, New Zealand, May 9-13, 2022, pp. 898–907. International Foundation for Au-
  tonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (IFAAMAS), 2022a. doi: 10.5555/3535850.3535951.
  URL https://www.ifaamas.org/Proceedings/aamas2022/pdfs/p898.pdf.
Kevin R McKee, Joel Z Leibo, Charlie Beattie, and Richard Everett. Quantifying the effects of
  environment and population diversity in multi-agent reinforcement learning. Autonomous Agents
  and Multi-Agent Systems, 36(1):21, 2022b.
E.     Helwig Nathaniel. Bootstrap confidence intervals, 2021. URL                       http:
     //users.stat.umn.edu/~helwig/notes/npboot-notes.html#
     bootstrap-confidence-intervals.
Martin J Osborne and Ariel Rubinstein. A course in game theory. MIT press, 1994.
Fabio Pardo, Arash Tavakoli, Vitaly Levdik, and Petar Kormushev. Time limits in reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4045–4054. PMLR, 2018.
Jack Parker-Holder, Aldo Pacchiano, Krzysztof M Choromanski, and Stephen J Roberts. Effective
  diversity in population based reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:18050–18062, 2020.
Arrasy Rahman, Jiaxun Cui, and Peter Stone. Minimum coverage sets for training robust ad hoc
  teamwork agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09595, 2023.
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder De Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster,
  and Shimon Whiteson. Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement
  learning. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):7234–7284, 2020.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Ho Chit Siu, Jaime Daniel Peña, Edenna Chen, Yutai Zhou, Victor J. Lopez, Kyle Palko, Kimber-
  lee C. Chang, and Ross E. Allen. Evaluation of human-ai teams for learned and rule-based agents
  in hanabi. In NeurIPS, pp. 16183–16195, 2021.
DJ Strouse, Kevin McKee, Matt Botvinick, Edward Hughes, and Richard Everett. Collaborating
  with humans without human data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  14502–14515, 2021.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gerald Tesauro. Td-gammon, a self-teaching backgammon program, achieves master-level play.
  Neural computation, 6(2):215–219, 1994.
Johannes Van Der Wal. Stochastic dynamic programming: successive approximations and nearly
  optimal strategies for markov decision processes and markov games. Mathematical Centre Tracts
  139, 1980.
Xihuai Wang, Zheng Tian, Ziyu Wan, Ying Wen, Jun Wang, and Weinan Zhang. Order mat-
  ters: Agent-by-agent policy optimization. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Ke Xue, Yutong Wang, Lei Yuan, Cong Guan, Chao Qian, and Yang Yu. Heterogeneous multi-agent
  zero-shot coordination by coevolution. CoRR, abs/2208.04957, 2022.
Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Jiaxuan Gao, Yu Wang, Alexandre Bayen, and Yi Wu. The
  surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative multi-agent games. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:24611–24624, 2022.
Chao Yu, Jiaxuan Gao, Weilin Liu, Botian Xu, Hao Tang, Jiaqi Yang, Yu Wang, and Yi Wu. Learning
  zero-shot cooperation with humans, assuming humans are biased. In ICLR. OpenReview.net,
  2023.
Rui Zhao, Jinming Song, Yufeng Yuan, Haifeng Hu, Yang Gao, Yi Wu, Zhongqian Sun, and Wei
  Yang. Maximum entropy population-based training for zero-shot human-ai coordination. In
  AAAI, pp. 6145–6153. AAAI Press, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Supplementary Material
Table of Contents
      A Overcooked Environment                                                                     13

      B Experiments Details and Additional Results                                                 15
        B.1 Important Implementation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     15
        B.2 Visualization of Behavior Preferring Partners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    16
        B.3 Additional Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19

      C Current Evaluation Methods                                                                 20


A    OVERCOOKED E NVIRONMENT

We re-evaluate in the Overcooked environment (Carroll et al., 2019). Overcooked is a simulation en-
vironment for reinforcement learning derived from the Overcooked!2 video game. The Overcooked
environment features a two-player collaborative game structure with shared rewards, where each
player assumes the role of a chef in a kitchen, working together to prepare and serve soup for a team
reward. We retained 4 layouts including Asymmetric Advantages (Asymm. Adv.), Coordination
Ring (Coord. Ring), Forced Coordination (Forced Coord.), and Counter Circuit (Counter Circ.) and
added 3 new layouts: Bothway Coordination (Bothway Coord.), Blocked Corridor (Blocked Corr.)
and Asymmetric Coordination (Asymm. Coord.). Visual representations of these layouts can be
found in Figure 7.
Forced Coordination. The Forced Coordination environment is designed to necessitate cooperation
between the two players, as they are situated in separate, non-overlapping sections of the kitchen.
Furthermore, the available equipment is distributed between these two areas, with ingredients and
plates located in the left section and pots and the serving area in the right section. Consequently,
the players must work together and coordinate their actions to complete a recipe and earn rewards
successfully.
Counter Circuit. The Counter Circuit layout features a ring-shaped kitchen with a central, elon-
gated table and a circular path between the table and the operational area. In this configuration, pots,
onions, plates, and serving spots are positioned in four distinct directions within the operational area.
Although the layout does not explicitly require cooperation, players may find themselves obstructed
by narrow aisles, prompting the need for coordination to maximize rewards. One example of an
advanced technique players can learn is to place onions in the middle area for quick and efficient
passing, thereby enhancing overall performance.
Asymmetric Advantages. In the Asymmetric Advantages layout, players are divided into two sep-
arate areas, but each player can independently complete the cooking process in their respective areas
without cooperation. However, the asymmetrical arrangement of the left and right sides encourages
collaboration to achieve higher rewards. Specifically, two pots are placed in the central area, ac-
cessible to both players. The areas for serving and ingredients, however, are completely distinct.
The serving pot is placed near the middle on the left side and far from the middle on the right side,
with the ingredients area arranged oppositely. Players can minimize their walking time and improve
overall efficiency by learning how to collaborate effectively.
Coordination Ring. The Coordination Ring layout is another ring-shaped kitchen, similar to the
Counter Circuit. However, this layout is considerably smaller than Counter Circuit, with a close
arrangement that makes it easier for players to complete soups. The ingredients, serving area, and
plates are all in the bottom left corner, while the two pots are in the top right. As a result, this layout
allows more easily achieving high rewards.


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bothway Coordination. Compared to the Forced Coordination, Bothway Coordination enables
both left and right agents to have access to onions and pots, giving them more policy space and
cooperation forms, which decreases the long waiting time in Forced Coordination and enriches their
policy diversity. Meanwhile, the plates and the serving spot are still placed to one side, thus the two
players still need to cooperate to finish an order.
Blocked Corridor. In the Block Corridor layout, the most challenging part is the corridor which
is the only connection between the left and right parts with the small throughput of one person in
the middle. Both onions and plates are placed at the upper edge of U-Shape corridor, while pot and
serving spot are placed at two bottom corner. If there is no cooperation at all, the onion need to be
carried from upper left to lower right while the teammate needs to stay at the spare place at right side
to avoid conflict. If we want to implement cooperation, there are a lot of options of spare counter,
which provides many alternatives for how to cooperate. The agent needs to show its diversity and
be able to response well to all possible behaviors of the player. Additionally, conflicting positions
within small corridors is a challenge that needs to be addressed. Definitely, it is the most challenging
layout of our setup.
Asymmetric Coordination. Modified from Asymmetric Advantage, this layout expands the map
and changes the plates to be asymmetric. The first change expand the trajectory space. The second
change make the right player have a shorter distance to pick a plate while the left player have a
shorter to serve the soup, yielding a new cooperation form where right player pass the plate to left
through the center counter.


       (a) Forced Coordination                  (b) Bothway Coordination                          (c) Coordination Ring
               random0                               random0_medium                                     random1


                 (d) Counter Circuit                                       (e) Blocked Corridor
                      random3                                                  small_corridor


                (f) Asymmetric Advantages                                         (g) Asymmetric Coordination
                        unident_s                                                        unident_s_hard


                                       Figure 7: Used layouts in Overcooked.


                                                          14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B       E XPERIMENTS D ETAILS AND A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

We implement 5 methods in Overcooked environment including self-play (Carroll et al., 2019), FCP
(Strouse et al., 2021), MEP (Zhao et al., 2023), TrajeDi (Lupu et al., 2021) and COLE (Li et al.,
2023a) based on the implementation of Yu et al. (2023) 4 . For each ZSC method and each layout,
we evaluate the ZSC capability by the BR-Prox metric across 5 random seeds. For each seed, we
evaluate the ego agent with 30 evaluation partners for the Asymm. Adv. and Asymm. Coord.
layouts and 20 evaluation partners for other layouts, and for 50 episodes each partner. The code can
be found in https://anonymous.4open.science/r/ZSCBench.
Self-play. Self-play (SP) is a general approach in reinforcement learning, where agents only learn
through playing against themselves. While it can yield high returns during training, agents trained
using this method often struggle to coordinate with diverse policies. We training 10, 000, 000 steps
for SP agents.
FCP. Fictitious Co-Play (FCP) is a two-stage training framework. In the first stage, it creates a di-
verse partner population through self-play agents pre-trained with different seeds and their previous
checkpoints. In the second stage, it iteratively trains an FCP agent by having it play against sampled
partners from the population. For the co-play methods including FCP, MEP and TrajeDi, we train
5e7, 8e7, 1e8 steps for population sizes of 12, 24, 36 respectively.
MEP. Maximum Entropy Population-based training (MEP) is a variant of FCP. It adopts the maxi-
mum entropy as a population diversity bonus added to the task reward, which is used as the objective
to train a maximum entropy population in the first stage. In the second stage, it trains an robust agent
by prioritized sample agents from the population. We observe that β for prioritized sampling should
be small when the population size is large. Thus we use β = 0.5 in our experiments.
TrajeDi. Trajectory Diversity PBT (TrajeDi) aims to improve the policy diversity by adding a
diversity measure to PBT losses. In details, it introduces the Jensen-Shannon divergence to the loss
when training the population. We implement TrajeDi as a two-stage algorithm. We first train a
population with the Jensen-Shannon divergence to encourage diversity and then train the ego agent
with uniformly sampling the population. Due to the time consumption problem, we calculate the
JSD by sampling the population instead of traversing the population.
COLE. Cooperative Open-ended Learning (COLE) constructs open-ended objectives in two-player
cooperative games from the perspective of graph theory. With the objective functions calculated
using the cooperative incompatibility distribution, it approximates the local best-preferred strategy to
expand the population, which overcomes the cooperative incompatibility problem disclosed by other
approaches. We implement the mete-solver using a reward-based ranking instead of the Shapley
Value due to the time consumption. We train 50, 100 and 150 generations for population size of 25,
50 and 75 respectively and train 1,000,000 steps for a generation.
HSP. Hidden-utility Self-Play (HSP) constructs the training population is analogously to how we
construct evaluation. HSP constructs a pool of behavior preferring agents using event-based rewards
and select half of them by greedy-selection. The population is then used to train the ego agent
with a mixture of behavior-preferring and MEP-trained partners. The main difference in population
construction is that we use BR-Div to select evaluation companions and restrict the event-based
reward space in order to promote reseaonable behavior.


B.1      I MPORTANT I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Parallel Partner Sampling. When training the PPO algorithm, we sampling the episodes in which
the ego agent plays with different partners in a batch, which makes the training framework more
scalable.
Centralized Critic. Recent works have verified that a centralized critic function benefits the perfor-
mance in fully cooperative games (Yu et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Rashid et al., 2020).


    4
        https://github.com/samjia2000/HSP


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Overcooked is an Truncated Infinite Game. As emphasized in Gymnasium5 , Kostrikov &
Raayai Ardakani (2020) and Pardo et al. (2018), wrong calculation of the truncated returns leads
may break the MDP properties of the environments. We choose to discard the value function itera-
tion from the truncated states.
Available Actions. We implement basic available action indications in the Overcooked environ-
ment, such as avoiding keeping hitting the counter and null interaction, to accelerate the exploration.
Entropy Coefficients Decay. To encourage discovering more high-performing coordination con-
ventions, we choose to use large entropy coefficients and decay the entropy coefficients during
training. The linear entropy coefficients decay mechanism is summaried in Table 2.


                             Table 2: Entropy coefficient schedulers.
 Method       Population Size Entropy Coefficient Schedules Entropy Coefficient Milestones
              12                  0.2 0.05 0.01                     0 2.5e7 5e7
  Co-play     24                  0.2 0.05 0.01                     0 4e7 8e7
              36                  0.2 0.05 0.01                     0 5e7 10e7
              25                  0.2 0.05 0.01                     0 2.5e7 5e7
 Evolution    50                  0.2 0.05 0.01                     0 5e7 10e7
              75                  0.2 0.05 0.01                     0 7.5e7 1.5e8

Population Size. We choose the population size as 12, 24 and 36 for the co-play methods to demon-
strate the effects of population size. While choose the population size as 25, 50, 75 for COLE since
the evolution methods generate the ego agent end-to-end without pre-trained populations and thus
require large populations to achieve better performance.
Important Hyperparameters. We use mostly the same hyperparamters as in Yu et al. (2023),
except for the mentioned details such as the entropy coefficients.
Event-based Reward Space Design and Policy Behavior Feature. We design a set of events and
their corresponding range of weights, as summarized in Table 3. Using Bmax = 20 and Cmax = 3,
we generate up to 194 candidates and select up to 30 evaluation partners. The generated candidates
are excluded if they cannot complete a delivery when cooperating with their BRs. The behavior
feature of a policy is embedded as the occurrence of these events during the episodes.

                 Events                                                    Weights
                 Put an onion or a dish or a soup onto the counter             0
                 Pickup an onion or a dish or a soup from the counter          0
                 Pickup an onion from the onion dispenser                  -20,0,10
                 Pickup a dish from the dish dispenser                     -20,0,10
                 Pickup a soup                                            -20,0,5,10
                 Place an ingredient into the pot                         -20,0,3,10
                 Deliver a soup                                              -20,0
                 Stay                                                     -0.1,0,0.1
                 Movement                                                      0
                 Order Reward                                                0.1,1

                    Table 3: Designed events and weights used in Overcooked.


B.2   V ISUALIZATION OF B EHAVIOR P REFERRING PARTNERS

Figure 8 and Figure 9 show the heatmap of the evaluation partners’ high-level behaviors in Coordi-
nation Ring and Asymmetric Coordination.
  5
    https://gymnasium.farama.org/tutorials/gymnasium_basics/handling_time_
limits.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                Partners Diversity
                          pic pic pic pic p p p p pi pi USE USE                                P P
put put pu pu pu pu kup_o kup_o kup_onkup_onickup_ickup_ickup_ickup_ckup_sckup_s FUL_DFUL_D S SLACEMLACEM
   _on _on t_d t_d t_so t_so nion nion ion ion dish dish dish dish oup oup ISH ISH OUP OUP ENT ENT
      ion_ ion_ ish_ ish_ up_ up_ _fr _fr _fro _fro _fr _fr _fro _fro _fr _fr _PI _PI _PI _PI _IN _IN de de       s s
          on_ on_ on_ on_ on_ on_ m_ m_ m_ m_ m_ m_ m_ m_ m_ m_ KU KU CKU CKU _PO _PO liver liver STA STAparse_parse_
                                     o   o               o     o                o     o    C C
             X_b X_b X_b X_b X_b X_b X_b X_b O_b O_b X_b X_b D_b D_b X_b X_b P_b P_b P_b P_b T_b T_b y_b y_b Y_b Y_b r_b r_b
                y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a
                   gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen
                      t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1
        partner1
        partner2
                                                                                                                                     0.8
        partner3


                                                                                                                                           Normalized Event Count
        partner4
                                                                                                                                     0.6
        partner5
        partner6
                                                                                                                                     0.4
        partner7
        partner8
                                                                                                                                     0.2
        partner9
       partner10
                                                                                                                                     0.0

                                                            Best Responses Diversity
                          pic pic pic pic p p p p pi pi USE USE                               P P
put put pu pu pu pu kup_o kup_o kup_onkup_onickup_ickup_ickup_ickup_ckup_sckup_s FUL_DFUL_D S SLACEMLACEM
   _on _on t_d t_d t_so t_so nion nion ion ion dish dish dish dish oup oup ISH ISH OUP OUP ENT ENT
      ion_ ion_ ish_ ish_ up_ up_ _fr _fr _fro _fro _fr _fr _fro _fro _fr _fr _PI _PI _PI _PI _IN _IN de de       s s
          on_ on_ on_ on_ on_ on_ om_ om_ m_ m_ om_ om_ m_ m_ om_ om_ CKU CKU CKU CKU _PO _PO liver liver STA STAparse_parse_
             X_b X_b X_b X_b X_b X_b X_b X_b O_b O_b X_b X_b D_b D_b X_b X_b P_b P_b P_b P_b T_b T_b y_b y_b Y_b Y_b r_b r_b
                y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a
                   gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen
                      t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1
        partner1
        partner2
                                                                                                                                     0.8
        partner3



                                                                                                                                           Normalized Event Count
        partner4
                                                                                                                                     0.6
        partner5
        partner6
                                                                                                                                     0.4
        partner7
        partner8
                                                                                                                                     0.2
        partner9
       partner10
                                                                                                                                     0.0


Figure 8: Heatmap of the evaluation partners’ high-level behaviors of the Coord. Ring scenario in
the Overcooked Environment. The BR-based Diversity maximization produces evaluation partners
that use the counter more frequently.


                                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                Partners Diversity
                          pic pic pic pic p p p p pi pi USE USE                               P P
put put pu pu pu pu kup_o kup_o kup_onkup_onickup_ickup_ickup_ickup_ckup_sckup_s FUL_DFUL_D S SLACEMLACEM
   _on _on t_d t_d t_so t_so nion nion ion ion dish dish dish dish oup oup ISH ISH OUP OUP ENT ENT
      ion_ ion_ ish_ ish_ up_ up_ _fr _fr _fro _fro _fr _fr _fro _fro _fr _fr _PI _PI _PI _PI _IN _IN de de       s s
          on_ on_ on_ on_ on_ on_ om_ om_ m_ m_ om_ om_ m_ m_ om_ om_ CKU CKU CKU CKU _PO _PO liver liver STA STAparse_parse_
             X_b X_b X_b X_b X_b X_b X_b X_b O_b O_b X_b X_b D_b D_b X_b X_b P_b P_b P_b P_b T_b T_b y_b y_b Y_b Y_b r_b r_b
                y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a
                   gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen
                      t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1
        partner1
        partner2
        partner3
        partner4
        partner5                                                                                                                     0.8
        partner6


                                                                                                                                           Normalized Event Count
        partner7                                                                                                                     0.6
        partner8
        partner9                                                                                                                     0.4
       partner10
       partner11                                                                                                                     0.2
       partner12
       partner13                                                                                                                     0.0
       partner14
       partner15


                                                            Best Responses Diversity
                          pic pic pic pic p p p p pi pi USE USE                               P P
put put pu pu pu pu kup_o kup_o kup_onkup_onickup_ickup_ickup_ickup_ckup_sckup_s FUL_DFUL_D S SLACEMLACEM
   _on _on t_d t_d t_so t_so nion nion ion ion dish dish dish dish oup oup ISH ISH OUP OUP ENT ENT
      ion_ ion_ ish_ ish_ up_ up_ _fr _fr _fro _fro _fr _fr _fro _fro _fr _fr _PI _PI _PI _PI _IN _IN de de       s s
          on_ on_ on_ on_ on_ on_ om_ om_ m_ m_ om_ om_ m_ m_ om_ om_ CKU CKU CKU CKU _PO _PO liver liver STA STAparse_parse_
             X_b X_b X_b X_b X_b X_b X_b X_b O_b O_b X_b X_b D_b D_b X_b X_b P_b P_b P_b P_b T_b T_b y_b y_b Y_b Y_b r_b r_b
                y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a y_a
                   gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen gen
                      t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1 t0 t1
        partner1
        partner2
        partner3
        partner4
        partner5                                                                                                                     0.8
        partner6                                                                                                                           Normalized Event Count
        partner7                                                                                                                     0.6
        partner8
        partner9                                                                                                                     0.4
       partner10
       partner11                                                                                                                     0.2
       partner12
       partner13                                                                                                                     0.0
       partner14
       partner15


Figure 9: Heatmap of the high-level behaviors of the Asymm. Coord. scenario in the Overcooked
Environment. The BR-based Diversity maximization produces evaluation partners that use the
counter more frequently and deliver the soup in both sides.


                                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3            A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

In Figure 2, we visualize the statistic data of the high-level events (Section 4.2) collected in Over-
cooked through principal components analysis (Dunteman, 1989). As is shown in the visualization
result, populations trained using the MEP (Zhao et al., 2023) method differ in random initialization
seeds, hyper-parameters and network architectures but learn similar behaviors.


                                                 Table 4: Percentage of Rank
                           %      Rank
                                                1       2            3           4       5         6
                           Algo
                               SP           0.0        5.56      11.11        5.56       5.56   72.22
                              FCP          5.56       16.67      44.44        5.56      22.22   5.56
                             MEP           38.89      22.22      22.22         5.56     11.11     0.0
                             TrajDi        11.11      16.67      16.67        33.33      5.56   16.67
                             COLE           0.0       11.11       0.0         27.78     55.56    5.56
                              HSP          44.44      27.78       5.56        22.22       0.0     0.0

Figure 10 and Figure 11 show the performance of ZSC methods in all the 7 layouts. The black line
marked on each bar is the interquartile mean of the data.
Table 4 summarizes the performance rank under BR-Prox with 3 different population sizes.

                                                Coordination with Conflicts Layouts
                          Coord. Ring                         Counter Circ.                       Blocked Corr.
         200
Return


           0
                    12\25      24\50    36\75            12\25       24\50      36\75           12\25   24\50     36\75
                                                              Population Size
                                           Coordination without Conflicts Layouts
                      Forced Coord.                         Bothway Coord.                        Asymm. Adv.
         400
Return


         200

                    12\25      24\50    36\75            12\25       24\50      36\75           12\25   24\50     36\75
                                                              Population Size


                     Asymm. Coor.                                    SP                         MEP                  COLE
         300
                                                                     FCP                        TrajeDi              HSP
Return


         200
         100                                                         Inter-quartile
                                                                     Range
                  12\25      24\50      36\75
                     Population Size


Figure 10: Episode return performance with 95% confidence intervals of ZSC methods with different
population sizes in the Overcooked environment.

Figure 12 shows the diaggregated BR-Prox performance distribution with different population size
in all the 7 layouts.


                                                                19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 Coordination with Conflicts Layouts
                           Coord. Ring                      Counter Circ.                Blocked Corr.
          1.0
BR-Prox
          0.5

          0.0
                     12\25     24\50     36\75            12\25        24\50   36\75   12\25   24\50     36\75
                                                            Population Size
                                            Coordination without Conflicts Layouts
                       Forced Coord.                       Bothway Coord.                Asymm. Adv.
          1.0
BR-Prox


          0.5

          0.0
                     12\25     24\50     36\75            12\25        24\50   36\75   12\25   24\50     36\75
                                                            Population Size



          1.0
                      Asymm. Coor.                                 SP                  MEP                  COLE
BR-Prox


                                                                   FCP                 TrajeDi              HSP
          0.5
                                                                   Inter-quartile
          0.0                                                      Range
                   12\25      24\50      36\75
                      Population Size


Figure 11: BR-Prox performance with 95% confidence intervals of ZSC methods with different
population sizes in the Overcooked environment.


C               C URRENT E VALUATION M ETHODS

We categorize the partner agents involved in the evaluation of these algorithms, referred to as evalu-
ation partners, and offer a comprehensive analysis of the limitations associated with these partners.
Human Players. The human player in ZSC problem is a ‘perfect’ candidate for evaluation because
human are strictly qualify as unseen partners. Many works present a human evaluation as a main
contribution (Carroll et al., 2019; Strouse et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2023b; Lou et al., 2023; Loo et al., 2023). The most challenge is that during the training, a long-cycle
human evaluation is not repeatable and cannot be replicated in large numbers to advance algorithm
iterations. We need a more efficient evaluation method as a supplement for human evaluation.
Human Proxy Agents. The most widely used evaluation partners is human proxy agents proposed
by Carroll et al. (2019). The human proxy agents were trained by imitation learning method with
a human datasets, which aims to represent human behaviors and human diversity (Carroll et al.,
2019). And (Strouse et al., 2021) used a similar way to construct a human proxy agents pool for
evaluation. The availability and cost of human data are constrained. Yu et al. (2023) highlighted that
these human proxy agents in overcooked environment do not account for human behaviors, which
shows that using human proxy agents does not represent the diversity from humans and does not
validate the ZSC capabilities of the algorithm and fully compare various methods.
Trained Self-play Agents. The trained self-play agents are also a widely used partners for ZSC
capability evaluation (Strouse et al., 2021; Xue et al., 2022; Charakorn et al., 2023; Loo et al.,
2023). However, through our experiment that comparing the similarities between two SP agents
pools using different seeds (refer to Figure 2), we find that the diverse SP pool for evaluation which
constructed using same algorithm in pre-training stage is similar to the pre-trained population in
co-play methods.
Trained Adapted Agents. The evaluation via cross-play with other trained adapted agents is in-
evitable to have a part of evaluation that is tested on algorithm’s own training set (even including
their own ego) (Charakorn et al., 2023; Xue et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023a). We revisit again the core
challenge of the ZSC problem: collaborating with an unseen partner. The own training set even
including own ego may leads to a higher performance and they are not unseen partners. Therefore,
the performance of cross-play does not completely reflect the capabilities of ZSC, and may cause the


                                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Forced Coord. with Population Size: 12\25
Fraction



           0.25
           0.00
                     0   0.5   1   0            0.5          1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                           BR-Prox

                                       BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Forced Coord. with Population Size: 24\50
Fraction


           0.25
           0.00
                     0   0.5   1   0            0.5          1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                           BR-Prox

                                       BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Forced Coord. with Population Size: 36\75
Fraction


           0.25
           0.00
                     0   0.5   1   0            0.5          1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                           BR-Prox

                                       BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Bothway Coord. with Population Size: 12\25
Fraction


           0.25

           0.00
                     0   0.5   1   0            0.5          1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                           BR-Prox

                                       BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Bothway Coord. with Population Size: 24\50
Fraction


           0.25

           0.00
                     0   0.5   1   0            0.5          1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                           BR-Prox

                                       BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Bothway Coord. with Population Size: 36\75
Fraction


           0.25

           0.00
                     0   0.5   1   0            0.5          1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                           BR-Prox

                                        BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Coord. Ring with Population Size: 12\25
               0.2
    Fraction


               0.0
                     0   0.5   1   0            0.5          1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                           BR-Prox

                                        BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Coord. Ring with Population Size: 24\50
               0.2
    Fraction


               0.0
                     0   0.5   1   0            0.5          1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                           BR-Prox

                                        BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Coord. Ring with Population Size: 36\75
               0.2
    Fraction


               0.0
                     0   0.5   1   0            0.5          1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                           BR-Prox

                                        BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Counter Circ. with Population Size: 12\25
Fraction


           0.25

           0.00
                     0   0.5   1   0            0.5          1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                           BR-Prox

                                        BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Counter Circ. with Population Size: 24\50
Fraction


           0.25

           0.00
                     0   0.5   1   0            0.5          1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                           BR-Prox

                                        BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Counter Circ. with Population Size: 36\75
Fraction


           0.25

           0.00
                     0   0.5   1   0            0.5          1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                           BR-Prox
                                          SP              FCP               MEP               TrajeDi              COLE


                                                                         21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Blocked Corr. with Population Size: 12\25
    Fraction


               0.5

               0.0
                     0      0.5     1   0            0.5         1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                               BR-Prox

                                            BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Blocked Corr. with Population Size: 24\50
    Fraction


               0.5

               0.0
                     0      0.5     1   0            0.5         1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                               BR-Prox

                                            BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Blocked Corr. with Population Size: 36\75
    Fraction


               0.5

               0.0
                     0      0.5     1   0            0.5         1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                               BR-Prox

                                            BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Asymm. Adv. with Population Size: 12\25
Fraction


           0.25
           0.00
                     0      0.5     1   0            0.5         1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                               BR-Prox

                                            BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Asymm. Adv. with Population Size: 24\50
Fraction


           0.25
           0.00
                     0      0.5     1   0            0.5         1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                               BR-Prox

                                            BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Asymm. Adv. with Population Size: 36\75
Fraction


           0.25
           0.00
                     0      0.5     1   0            0.5         1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                               BR-Prox

                                            BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Asymm. Coor. with Population Size: 12\25
    Fraction


               0.5

               0.0
                     0      0.5     1   0            0.5         1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                               BR-Prox

                                            BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Asymm. Coor. with Population Size: 24\50
    Fraction


               0.5

               0.0
                     0      0.5     1   0            0.5         1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                               BR-Prox

                                            BR-Prox Performance Distributions in Asymm. Coor. with Population Size: 36\75
    Fraction


               0.5

               0.0
                     0      0.5     1   0            0.5         1    0          0.5          1    0          0.5            1   0   0.5   1
                                                                               BR-Prox
                                               SP             FCP               MEP               TrajeDi              COLE



                         Figure 12: Distributions of 5 Algorithms with 3 Population Sizes in 7 Layouts.


                                                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


performance to be falsely improved. And if excluding the performance from own training population
to avoid the seen partners, the cross-play evaluation leads to a potential unfairness.
Rule-based Specialist. As a controllable method, using rule-based agents to evaluate the ZSC ca-
pability is also been used by some studies (Yu et al., 2023; Charakorn et al., 2023). The most prob-
lem is that compared to other methods, ruled-based agents evaluation is not extendable. Manually
building expert rules is difficult to implement in complex environments and may not meet diversity
requirements.
Random Agents. Another choice is using random initial agents as evaluation partners (Strouse
et al., 2021; Xue et al., 2022). The first problem is that the diversity of the random initialization
cannot be ensure. Furthermore, evaluate agent diversity is not only presenting in low level behaviors
but also need a high level performance (Cui et al., 2022). Random initialization lacks of a high level
performance to ensure the evaluation pool is diverse enough.


                                                 23
