Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T HEORETICAL U NDERSTANDING
OF L EARNING FROM A DVERSARIAL P ERTURBATIONS

 Soichiro Kumano                                                                          Hiroshi Kera
 The University of Tokyo                                                                  Chiba University
 kumano@cvm.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp                                                               kera@chiba-u.jp

 Toshihiko Yamasaki
 The University of Tokyo
 yamasaki@cvm.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp



                                                    A BSTRACT

             It is not fully understood why adversarial examples can deceive neural net-
             works and transfer between different networks. To elucidate this, several stud-
             ies have hypothesized that adversarial perturbations, while appearing as noises,
             contain class features. This is supported by empirical evidence showing that net-
             works trained on mislabeled adversarial examples can still generalize well to cor-
             rectly labeled test samples. However, a theoretical understanding of how per-
             turbations include class features and contribute to generalization is limited. In
             this study, we provide a theoretical framework for understanding learning from
             perturbations using a one-hidden-layer network trained on mutually orthogonal
             samples. Our results highlight that various adversarial perturbations, even per-
             turbations of a few pixels, contain sufficient class features for generalization.
             Moreover, we reveal that the decision boundary when learning from perturba-
             tions matches that from standard samples except for specific regions under mild
             conditions. The code is available at https://github.com/s-kumano/
             learning-from-adversarial-perturbations.


1       I NTRODUCTION

It is well known that a small malicious perturbation, or an adversarial perturbation, can change a
classifierвҖҷs prediction from the correct class to an incorrect class (Szegedy et al., 2014). An inter-
esting observation by Ilyas et al. (2019) has shown that a neural network, trained on adversarial
examples labeled by such incorrect classes, can generalize to correctly labeled test samples. Specif-
ically, the training procedure is as follows:1

Definition 1.1 (Learning from adversarial perturbations (later redefined) (Ilyas et al., 2019)). Let
D := {(xn , yn )}N n=1 be a training dataset, where xn denotes an input (e.g., an image) and yn
denotes the corresponding label. Let f be a classifier trained on D. For each n, an adversarial
example xadvn is produced by imposing an adversarial perturbation on xn to increase the probability
for a target label ynadv Мё= yn given by f , constructing Dadv := {(xadv      adv N
                                                                        n , yn )}n=1 . Training a
classifier from scratch on Dadv is called learning from adversarial perturbations.

Notably, a training sample xadv appears almost identical to x to humans, but is always labeled
as a different class y adv Мё= y (e.g., an adversarially perturbed, yet semantically unchanged, horse
image with a cat label). Counterintuitively, networks can learn to classify correctly labeled test
samples (e.g., a cat image with a cat label) from such mislabeled adversarial samples.
The unexpected success of training on mislabeled adversarial examples suggests that adversarial
perturbations may contain label-aligned features. For example, frog adversarial images labeled as
horses have perturbations that appear as noises to humans but contain horse features. This feature
    1
        This is neither adversarial training nor training with (partially) noisy labels (cf. Appendix A).


                                                           1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


hypothesis not only explains the counterintuitive generalization of learning from perturbations, but
also sheds light on several puzzling phenomena of adversarial examples, such as why adversarial
examples can fool classifiers and transfer among them (cf. Section 2).
While the feature hypothesis is considered a potential explanation for adversarial perturbations, a
theoretical understanding of this hypothesis and its empirical foundation, learning from perturba-
tions, remains limited. For example, it is still unknown how adversarial perturbations contain class
features. The similarity in decision boundaries between the network trained on clean and mislabeled
adversarial samples is also unknown.
In this study, we provide the first theoretical validation of the learnability from adversarial perturba-
tions. Using recent results on the decision boundary of a one-hidden-layer neural network trained on
mutually orthogonal samples (Frei et al., 2023), we show that perturbations contain sufficient class
features for generalization. In addition, we demonstrate that the decision boundary when learn-
ing from perturbations is consistent with that from natural samples except for specific regions under
mild conditions. While Ilyas et al. (2019) empirically considered only the case where L2 -constrained
perturbations were superimposed on natural data, our theory covers broader settings. We reveal that
even sparse perturbations, perturbations of a few pixels, contain class features and enable gener-
alization. Moreover, we show that the alignment of decision boundaries derived from adversarial
perturbations and natural samples becomes stronger when perturbations are superimposed on ran-
dom noises. The main contributions are summarized as follows:

       вҖў We theoretically justified the feature hypothesis and learning from perturbations with one-
         hidden-layer neural networks trained on mutually orthogonal training samples.
       вҖў We showed that various adversarial perturbations including sparse perturbations can be rep-
         resented by the weighted sum of benign training samples. This suggests that perturbations,
         yet apparently uninterpretable, contain sufficient class features for generalization.
       вҖў We demonstrated that classifiers learning from mislabeled adversarial samples produce
         consistent predictions with those from clean samples under mild conditions. Moreover,
         classifiers trained on random noises with perturbations provide accurate predictions for
         natural data even though the classifiers do not see any natural data during training.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Ilyas et al. (2019) first claimed that an adversarial perturbation contains class features, called non-
robust features. These features are highly predictive and generalizable, yet brittle and incomprehen-
sible to humans. This idea is supported by neural networks that learn from perturbations (cf. Def-
inition 1.1) achieving good test accuracies on standard datasets (Ilyas et al., 2019). The hypothesis
that perturbations contain features elucidates several phenomena of adversarial examples (Szegedy
et al., 2014). For example, models misclassify adversarial examples because they react to features in
perturbations. Transferability (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015) is also explained: dif-
ferent models respond to the same features in perturbations. Moreover, adversarially robust models
focus on robust (semantic) features and ignore highly predictive non-robust (non-semantic) features,
providing insights into the trade-off between robustness and accuracy (Su et al., 2018; Tsipras et al.,
2019; Raghunathan et al., 2019; 2020; Yang et al., 2020), the human-aligned image gradients of
robust models (Engstrom et al., 2019b; Kaur et al., 2019; Santurkar et al., 2019; Tsipras et al., 2019;
Augustin et al., 2020), and the enhanced transfer learning ability of robust models (Aggarwal et al.,
2020; Salman et al., 2020; Deng et al., 2021; Utrera et al., 2021).
Subsequent studies deepened the discussion of non-robust features. While Ilyas et al. (2019) con-
sidered robust and non-robust features separately, Springer et al. (2021b) claimed their potential
entanglement. Some studies have attempted to separate robust and non-robust features using the
information bottleneck (Kim et al., 2021) and neural tangent kernel (Tsilivis & Kempe, 2022). En-
gstrom et al. (2019a) provided a broad discussion about robust neural style transfer and feature
leakage. Other studies have used the feature hypothesis to generate highly transferable adversarial
examples (Springer et al., 2021a;b;c), understand the behavior of batch normalization in adversar-
ial training (Benz et al., 2021), and degrade the robustness of adversarially trained models (Tao
et al., 2022). However, the nature of adversarial perturbations as class features and the theoretical
explanation for the counterintuitive success of learning from perturbations remain unclear.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this study, we justify learning from perturbations, which is an essential foundation of the fea-
ture hypothesis. Our results support the above studies based on the feature hypothesis. We do not
consider whether adversarial perturbations are robust or non-robust. We discuss the nature of per-
turbations as class features and why classifiers can obtain generalization ability from perturbations.

3     P RELIMINARY
3.1   S ETTINGS

Notations. For a positive integer n вҲҲ N, let [n] := {1, . . . , n}. For a vector x вҲҲ Rd , we denote the
Euclidean norm by вҲҘxвҲҘ. We use в„Ұ( В· ), Оҳ( В· ), and O( В· ) for the standard big Omega, big Theta, and
big O notation. To hide polylogarithmic factors, we use в„ҰМғ( В· ), ОҳМғ( В· ), and OМғ( В· ).
Network. Our network settings follow Frei et al. (2023). Let f : Rd вҶ’ R be a one-hidden-layer
neural network. The number of hidden neurons is even and is denoted by m. We assume that the
                                                                                 m
                     вҲҡ and the last layer is frozenвҲҡto constant weights a вҲҲ R . The first half
hidden layer is trainable
elements of a are 1/ m and the latter half are вҲ’1/ m. Let W := (w1 , . . . , wm )вҠӨ вҲҲ RmГ—d be
the weights of the hidden layer. Let П•(z) := max(z, Оіz) be the element-wise leaky ReLU for a
constant Оі вҲҲ (0, 1). Namely, f (x) := aвҠӨ П•(W x). The assumption that the positive and negative
values of a are equal is introduced for notational simplicity and is fundamentally unnecessary. In
Appendix G, we derive some results without this assumption.
Training. Let D := {(xn , yn )}N          d
                                  n=1 вҠӮ R Г— {Вұ1} be a training dataset. With the exponential loss
в„“(z) = exp(вҲ’z) or logistic loss в„“(z) = ln(1 + exp(вҲ’z)), a loss over D is defined as L(W ; D) :=
PN
   n=1 в„“(yn f (xn ; W ))/N . The network parameters are updated by gradient flow, gradient descent
with an infinitesimal step size, as dW (t)/dt = вҲ’вҲҮW L(W (t); D), where t вүҘ 0 is a continuous
training step. Finally, we summarize the training setting.

Setting 3.1 (Training). Consider training a one-hidden-layer neural network f on a dataset D. The
network parameter W is updated by minimizing the exponential or logistic loss over the dataset,
L(W ; D), using gradient flow. The training runs for a sufficiently long time, i.e., t вҶ’ вҲһ.

Learning from Adversarial Perturbations. We formalize and extend Definition 1.1.

Definition 3.2 (Learning from adversarial perturbations). Let D := {(xn , yn )}N        d
                                                                                n=1 вҠӮ R Г— {Вұ1}
                                d
be a training dataset. Let f : R вҶ’ R be a one-hidden-layer neural network trained on D following
Setting 3.1. Let N adv вҲҲ N be the number of samples with perturbations. For each n вҲҲ [N adv ], a
perturbed sample xadv
                    n    вҲҲ Rd targeting a new label ynadv вҲҲ {Вұ1} is produced as either:
      (a) (Perturbation on natural sample) N adv = N and xadv  n  := xn + О·n .
      (b) (Perturbation on uniform noise) xadv
                                             n   := X n +О· n , where Xn is sampled from the uniform
          distribution U ([вҲ’1, 1]d ). For any n Мё= k, Xn and Xk are independent. The target label
          ynadv is randomly sampled from {Вұ1}.
The perturbation О·n is given by an adversarial attack. Training a classifier from scratch on a new
                adv N adv
dataset {(xadv
           n , yn )}n=1 following Setting 3.1 is called learning from adversarial perturbations.

This definition has two differences from Definition 1.1. First, we added a noise data case. In this
scenario, we can justify learning from perturbations under milder conditions than in the natural
sample scenario. Second, we removed the restriction of ynadv Мё= yn to consider broader cases. In
addition to the uniform noise case, we examine the sub-Gaussian noise case in Appendix F.

3.2   D ECISION B OUNDARY OF O NE -H IDDEN -L AYER N EURAL N ETWORK

To understand learning from perturbations, we employ the following result on the implicit bias of
gradient flow (Frei et al., 2023).

Theorem 3.3 (Rearranged from Frei et al. (2023)). Let {(xn , yn )}N      d
                                                                  n=1 вҠӮ R Г— {Вұ1} be a train-
ing dataset. Let Rmax := maxn вҲҘxn вҲҘ, Rmin := minn вҲҘxn вҲҘ, and pmax := maxnМё=k |вҹЁxn , xk вҹ©|.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A one-hidden-layer neural network f : Rd вҶ’ R is trained on the dataset with Setting 3.1.
If Оі 3 Rmin
        4         2
            /(3N Rmax ) вүҘ pmax , then sgn(f (z)) = sgn(f bdy (z)) holds with t вҶ’ вҲһ, where
                N                                    3
f bdy (z) := n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ© and О»n вҲҲ 2R12 , 2Оі 2 R
              P
                                                       2   for every n вҲҲ [N ].
                                                    max        min


Appendix B provides a more detailed background. This theorem claims that the binary decision of
f (z) equals that of the linear function f bdy (z); namely, f (z) has a linear decision boundary. This
theorem requires training samples to be nearly orthogonal, which is a common property of high-
dimensional data. Although this theorem is not related to learning from perturbations, we utilize it
to easily observe the decision boundary of learning from perturbations as follows:
                                                                                                       adv
Corollary 3.4 (Decision Boundary when learning from perturbations). Let {(xadv               adv N
                                                                                       n , yn )}n=1 be
                                                                                                   adv
a mislabeled training dataset with adversarial perturbations (cf. Definition 3.2). Let Rmax             :=
maxn вҲҘxadv
         n  вҲҘ, R adv
                 min  :=   min   n  вҲҘxadv
                                      n   вҲҘ, and p adv
                                                   max := max nМё=k |вҹЁxadv
                                                                      n   , x adv
                                                                              k   вҹ©|.  A one-hidden-layer
                                                                        adv 4              adv 2
neural network f is trained on the dataset with Setting 3.1. If Оі 3 Rmin      /(3N adv Rmax      ) вүҘ padv
                                                                                                       max ,
                                                                                   adv
                           bdy                                   bdy         P  N        adv adv    adv
then sgn(f (z)) = sgn(fadv (z))       holds with t вҶ’ вҲһ, where fadv (z) := n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©
                1           3
and О»adv
      n  вҲҲ 2Radv   2,
                       2Оі 2 R adv 2  for every n вҲҲ [N ].
                  max        min


4     T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
4.1   P ERTURBATION AS C LASS F EATURES

Recall that a one-hidden-layer network trained on orthogonal samples with Setting 3.1 has a linear
decision boundary (cf. Theorem 3.3). We focus on adversarial attacks on this boundary rather than
the network itself, called geometry-inspired attacks (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016; Croce & Hein,
2020), which simplify notation.2 Let Пө > 0 be the perturbation constraint. A geometry-inspired
adversarial example xadvn     maximizes ynadv f bdy (xadv           adv
                                                      n ) under вҲҘxn вҲ’ xn вҲҘ вүӨ Пө as follows:
                                                                                               3

                                                          bdy
                                                                                PN
                                              adv вҲҮxn f       (xn )              k=1 О»k yk xk
       xadv
         n    := x n +  О· n ,      О· n :=  Пөy n                      =  Пөyn
                                                                           adv
                                                                                                 . (1)
                                                  вҲҘвҲҮxn f bdy (xn )вҲҘ
                                                                                PN
                                                                               вҲҘ k=1 О»k yk xk вҲҘ
Without loss of generality, we consider a single step of the gradient calculation because multiple
steps also produce the same perturbation form due to the linearity of f bdy . The perturbation О·n
is represented as a weighted sum of the training samples. Since the training samples {xn }Nn=1 are
nearly orthogonal (i.e., xn and xk do not negate each other for n Мё= k), the perturbation contains
class features of the training samples. This observation supports the hypothesis that adversarial
perturbations contain class features, enabling generalization from them.

4.2   L EARNING FROM A DVERSARIAL P ERTURBATIONS ON NATURAL S AMPLES

We consider learning from geometry-inspired perturbations on natural samples. Appendix C pro-
vides the proofs of the theorems. Using Corollary 3.4, the decision boundary can be derived as:

Theorem 4.1 (Decision boundary when learning from geometry-inspired perturbations on natural
samples). Let f be a one-hidden-layer neural network trained on geometry-inspired perturbations
on natural samples (cf. Eq. (1) and Definition 3.2(a)) with Setting 3.1. If N > C 2 /Rmin
                                                                                      2
                                                                                          and
                           Оі 3 (Rmin
                                 2
                                     вҲ’ 2 вҲҡCN Пө + Пө2 )2         C
                                                          вҲ’ 2 вҲҡ Пө вҲ’ Пө2 вүҘ pmax                                (2)
                                2
                           3N (Rmax + 2 вҲҡCN Пө + Пө2 )           N

    2
      In Appendix E, we discuss geometry-inspired L0 and LвҲһ attacks and a gradient-based L2 attack that
targets the network itself, such as fast gradient sign method (Goodfellow et al., 2015) and projected gradient
descent (Madry et al., 2018).
    3
      Geometry-inspired perturbations Eq. (1) can be defined only if О»n can be determined by Eq. (A11). If
training samples satisfy Оі 3 Rmin
                               4
                                  /(3N Rmax2
                                               ) вүҘ pmax , Eq. (A11) is always consistent; thus, the definition
is valid. Note that Eq. (A11) is consistent for some sample sets that do not satisfy Оі 3 Rmin
                                                                                           4          2
                                                                                              /(3N Rmax   ) вүҘ
pmax (cf. the proof of Lemma C.1).


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               4
            3Rmax   +Оі 3 Rmin
                          4
with C :=         3
             Оі 2 Rmin
                      вҲҡ
                        1вҲ’Оі
                              , then, with t вҶ’ вҲһ, the decision boundary of f is given by
                           PN       adv adv
   bdy                         n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©                                    f bdy (z)
  fadv (z) :=                     PN                                 +          Пө PN                             . (3)
                                         adv
                                    n=1 О»n                                        вҲҘ n=1 О»n yn xn вҲҘ
                           |           {z            }                          |       {z       }
                Effect of learning from mislabeled natural samples       Effect of learning from perturbations


The decision boundary, Eq. (3), includes two components that explain the effects of mislabeled
samples and geometry-inspired perturbations. The sign of the first term is determined by the sum of
                               PN
the weighted inner products, n=1 О»adv       adv
                                       n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©. Because yn
                                                                   adv
                                                                       is mislabeled, the sign (binary
decision) of the first term is not always consistent with human perception. The sign of the second
term depends only on the sign of the standard decision boundary f bdy (z). When the magnitude
                                        bdy
of the second term is dominant, sgn(fadv    (z)) matches sgn(f bdy (z)). This suggests that although
the dataset appears mislabeled to humans, the classifier can still provide a reasonable prediction. A
more general version of Theorem 4.1, without assuming N > C 2 /Rmin    2
                                                                           is given in Theorem C.2.
Perturbation Constraint. The assumption, Ineq. (2), requirespmutually orthogonal adversarial sam-
ples, which restricts the perturbation constraint to Пө = O( d/N ). The perturbation constraint
Пө linearly increases the dominance of the perturbation effect. If we ignore the restriction, then
      bdy
sgn(fadv  (z)) = sgn(f bdy (z)) holds for any z with Пө вҶ’ вҲһ. This aligns with the intuition that
large perturbations restore the standard decision boundary.
Consistent Growth of Two Effects. Here, we provide a short summary of the limiting behavior
of Eq. (3). A detailed analysis can be found in Proposition C.4. Let g(N, d) and h(N, d) be pos-
itive functions of the number of training samples N and input dimension d. In addition, let T1 (z)
and T2 (z) be the first and second terms of Eq. (3), respectively. Given the labels yn and ynadv
freely selected from {Вұ1}, estimating the growth rate for T1 (z) and T2 (z) is challenging. There-
                        PN                                      PN
fore, we assume that | n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(g(N, d)) if n=1 О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(g(N, d)) and
                                     PN                                  PN
instead estimate the growth rate of n=1 О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| rather than | n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©|. A simi-
                            PN
lar assumption applies to | n=1 О»adv       adv
                                     n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©|. Note that these assumptions are removed in
noise data scenarios. Interestingly, under these conditions, for any z, |T1 (z)| = Оҳ(h(N, d)) вҮ”
|T2 (z)| = Оҳ(h(N, d)) holds, indicating consistent growth of the two terms. For вҲҡ     example, if a
                                                                            PN
test sample is weakly
                  вҲҡ    correlated with all  the training
                                                вҲҡ        samples, e.g., z =  n=1 Оҳ(1/ вҲҡN )xn , then
|T1 (z)| = вҲҡОҳ(d/ N ) and |T2 (z)| = Оҳ(d/ N ). Note that the scaling factor Оҳ(1/ N ) ensures
Оҳ(вҲҘzвҲҘ) = d. This consistent growth implies that the effect of mislabeled data, T1 (z), is not dom-
inant even with a large input dimension d and sample size N . Thus, learning from perturbations is
feasible for high-dimensional datasets with numerous samples.
Random Label Learning. Next, we consider the limiting behavior of T1 (z) and T2 (z) when ynadv is
randomly sampled from {Вұ1}. A detailed analysis is provided in Proposition C.8. Intuitively, if ynadv
randomly takes Вұ1 independently of the sample xn and its original label yn , the magnitude of the nu-
merator of T1 (z) does not increase significantly, while the denominator consistently increases as the
sample size N increases. Consequently, the growth rate of |T1 (z)| is lower than that of |T2 (z)|. Fol-
lowing this reasoning, we can demonstrate that |T2 (z)| surpasses |T1 (z)| except for a specific
                                                                                         вҲҡ       z. For
                                                                           PN
example, if z is weakly correlated with allвҲҡthe training samples, e.g., z = n=1 Оҳ(1/ N )xn , then
|T1 (z)| = O(d/N ) and |T2 (z)| = Оҳ(d/ N ). With enough training samples, |T2 (z)| > |T1 (z)|
           bdy
and sgn(fadv   (z)) = sgn(f bdy (z)) hold. That is, classifiers trained on an apparently mislabeled
dataset produce reasonable decisions for samples that are weakly correlated with the training sam-
ples. In contrast, if a test sample has a strong correlation with particular training samples, e.g.,
z = Оҳ(1)x1 , the consistent growth of |T1 (z)| = O(d/N ) and |T2 (z)| = Оҳ(d/N ) persists. These
results can be summarized and generalized as follows:

Theorem 4.2 (Consistent decision of learning from geometry-inspired
                                                              вҲҡ perturbations on natu-
ral samples).вҲҡ Suppose that Ineq. (2) holds. Assume вҲҘxn вҲҘ = Оҳ( d) for any n вҲҲ [N ] and
вҲҘzвҲҘ = Оҳ( d). Suppose that ynadv is randomly sampled from {Вұ1} for each n. Assume
 PN                                    PN
| n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(g(N, d)) if n=1 О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(g(N, d)), where g is a positive


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                              P
function of N and d. If there is no n such that |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(d) or
                                                                 n:|вҹЁxn ,zвҹ©|Мё=Оҳ(d) |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| =
                                             bdy             bdy
O(d) does not hold, with N, d вҶ’ вҲһ, then sgn(fadv (z)) = sgn(f (z)) holds with probability at
least 99.99%.

This theorem suggests that classifiers trained on an apparently mislabeled dataset can produce de-
cisions consistent with standard classifiers, except for specific inputs P
                                                                         that satisfy the following two
conditions: (A) there exists n such that |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(d), and (B) n:|вҹЁxn ,zвҹ©|Мё=Оҳ(d) |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| =
O(d) holds. Such exceptional inputs could be, for example, z = x1 , x1 + x2 + x3 , and
x1 + O(1/N )1, where 1 denotes an all-ones vector. Condition (A) represents a strong correla-
tion with a few samples. Note that a strongвҲҡ correlation with many samples is invalid due to the
orthogonality of {xn }N n=1 and вҲҘzвҲҘ = Оҳ( d) (cf. Lemma C.5). Condition (B) indicates that z has
no weak correlation with many samples. For such z, the impact of learning from mislabeled sam-
ples, T1 (z), becomes dominant, and the decisions are not always aligned. Essentially, for inputs that
do not strongly correlate with a few samples or weakly correlate with many samples, the network
decisions align with those of a standard network. Because test datasets typically exclude samples
similar to the training samples, a network learning from perturbations is expected to produce rea-
sonable predictions for many test samples. This confirms the high test accuracy of learning from
perturbations (Ilyas et al., 2019).
Others. In Appendix E, we derive similar results for other perturbation forms. In Appendix G, we
establish Theorem 4.1 without the assumption on the last layer of a network. Moreover, Theorem 4.2
explains the success of learning from perturbations using random labels. In Appendix H, we attempt
to delve into a flipped label scenario (i.e., ynadv = вҲ’yn ) through an empirically supported assumption
that standard classifiers focus on non-robust features (Etmann et al., 2019; Tsipras et al., 2019; Zhang
& Zhu, 2019; Chalasani et al., 2020).

4.3   L EARNING FROM A DVERSARIAL P ERTURBATIONS ON U NIFORM N OISES

In this section, we consider a noise data scenario in which adversarial perturbations are superim-
posed on uniform noises. The proofs of the theorems can be found in Appendix D. This scenario
provides two advantages. First, this scenario prevents the unintentional leakage of useful features.
For example, a frog image labeled as a horse may contain horses in the background. Second,
                                                                           PN adv
this scenario can justify learning from perturbations without assuming | n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| =
                PN adv
Оҳ(g(N, d)) if n=1 О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(g(N, d)). Similarly to Theorem 4.1, we can derive the
following decision boundary in the noise data scenario:4

Theorem 4.3 (Decision boundary when learning from geometry-inspired perturbations on uniform
noises). Assume Оі 3 Rmin
                      4
                          /(3N Rmax  2
                                        ) вүҘ pmax . Let f be a one-hidden-layer neural network trained
on geometry-inspired perturbations on natural data (cf. Eq. (1) and Definition 3.2(b)) with Set-
ting 3.1. For any n Мё= k, if
            вҲҡ                           вҲҡ
       d      Cd             2      d     Cd                    вҲҡ                        вҲҡ
          вҲ’       вүӨ вҲҘXn вҲҘ вүӨ +                , |вҹЁXn , Xk вҹ©| вүӨ 2Cd, |вҹЁXn , О·/Пөвҹ©| вүӨ 2C, (4)
       3      2                     3     2
                                          вҲҡ          вҲҡ
                               Оі 3 (2d вҲ’ 3 Cd вҲ’ 12 2CПө + 6Пө2 )2          вҲҡ         вҲҡ
                                             вҲҡ          вҲҡ             вүҘ 2Cd + 2 2CПө + Пө2 (5)
                                   adv
                           18N (2d + 3 Cd + 12 2CПө + 6Пө )           2


with C := ln 1000N adv , then, with t вҶ’ вҲһ, the decision boundary of f is given by:
                        PN adv adv adv
         bdy               n=1 О»n yn вҹЁXn , zвҹ©                      f bdy (z)
        fadv (z) :=            PN adv adv            +       Пө PN                                       .   (6)
                                  n=1 О»n
                                                               вҲҘ n=1 О»n yn xn вҲҘ
                        |            {z         }            |        {z        }
                       Effect of learning from uniform noises   Effect of learning from perturbations



    4
      In Theorem 4.3, we assume Оі 3 Rmin
                                      4          2
                                         /(3N Rmax   ) вүҘ pmax to define geometry-inspired perturbations. To
derive the decision boundary Eq. (6), we require only Ineqs. (4) and (5) and need not assume the orthogonality
of natural training samples.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Standard
                           u                                              Input dimension d        (Adversarial) noise sample N adv
      Noise                                                        100       500    1,000 10,000     1       10       100 10,000


                                            Adversarial Standard
      N adv = 10
      N adv = 20
      N adv = 100                                                  100%     100%   100%   100%     100%     100%    100%    100%
                                        v
      Positive
      Negative
                                                                   63%      69%    80%     99%      52%     54%      65%     99%


                                            Noise
                                                                   49%      47%    50%     50%      49%     48%      50%     50%

Figure 1: Decision boundaries of classifiers trained on multidimensional artificial datasets. The axis
vectors v and u are defined in Theorem B.1. Left: Boundaries from standard data and noises with
and without adversarial perturbations (d = 10, 000). The blue circles and orange crosses indicate
standard data projections onto this plane. Right: Boundaries across varying input dimensions (fix
N adv = 10, 000) and number of noise samples (fix d = 10, 000). First row: results from standard
data; second and third rows: results from noises with and without adversarial perturbations, respec-
tively. Percentages indicate the classification accuracy for the standard data.


Similar to Eq. (3), the decision boundary, Eq. (6), consists of two terms, representing the effects of
uniform noises and geometry-inspired perturbations. Although we assume Ineq. (4), each inequal-
ity holds with probability at least 99.8% (cf. Lemma D.1). Similarly to Ineq. (2), the assumption,
Ineq. (5), requires the training adversarial samples to be nearly orthogonal and restricts the pertur-
                             p                        2
bation constraint to Пө = OМғ( d/N adv ) if d > N adv . Next, we examine the growth rate of the two
terms in Eq. (6) and the alignment between the decision boundaries.

Theorem 4.4 (Consistent decision of learning from geometry-inspired perturbations on uniform
noises). Assume Оі 3 Rmin4         2
                          /(3N Rmax  ) вүҘ pmax . Suppose that Ineqs. (4) and (5) hold. Assume
            вҲҡ                                      2
вҲҘzвҲҘ = Оҳ( d), |f (z)| = в„Ұ(1), and d > N adv . Then, the following equations hold with
                     bdy

probability at least 99.99%:
     PN adv adv adv                     вҲҡ !
                                                      |f bdy (z)|

        n=1   О» n  y n  вҹЁX n , zвҹ©         d                                    d
            PN adv adv            =O         ,   Пө PN                =в„ҰМғ вҲҡ             .  (7)
                                       N adv      вҲҘ n=1 О»n yn xn вҲҘ           N adv N
                n=1 О»n

In addition, if d and N adv are sufficiently large and N adv вүҘ N holds, then for any z вҲҲ Rd ,
     bdy
sgn(fadv  (z)) = sgn(f bdy (z)) holds with probability at least 99.99%.

This theorem indicates a strong alignment between the decision boundaries derived from natural
samples and adversarial perturbations on uniform noises. Recall that in the natural sample scenario,
consistent decisions are obtained, except for samples that are strongly correlated with a few training
samples and not weakly correlated with many training samples (cf. Theorem 4.2). In contrast,
Theorem 4.4 claims that consistent decisions can be obtained for any input with high probability. A
large input dimension
                 вҲҡ       d and number of adversarial samples N adv make the alignment stronger with
                      adv
the speed of в„ҰМғ( N d) at least.
                                                                               PN
The assumption |f bdy (z)| = в„Ұ(1) is mild due to its definition f bdy (z) = n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©. We
introduce this assumption because the order of f bdy (z) cannot be determined owing to the uncer-
                                       PN adv                                     PN adv
tainty of yn . Note that we assume | n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(g(N, d)) if n=1 О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| =
Оҳ(g(N, d)) in the natural sample scenario. Interestingly, even though we underestimate the order of
f bdy (z), the effect of learning from perturbations still grows faster than that from uniform noises.
The theorem fails in at most 0.01% of cases where the randomly generated Xn and the input z are
strongly correlated. For example, the theorem does not hold if Xn is identical to z. However, these
cases are rare if d is sufficiently large.
In addition, as a corollary of Theorem 4.4, we can derive the following theorem:


                                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           1.00                                                         1.00


Accuracy


                                                             Accuracy
           0.75                                                         0.75                                  Adversarial
                                                                                                              Noise

           0.50                                                         0.50

                  0   2,000   4,000   6,000   8,000 10,000                     0      2,000   4,000   6,000    8,000 10,000
                          Input dimension d                                        (Adversarial) noise sample N adv

Figure 2: Accuracy of classifiers trained on uniform noises with or without adversarial perturbations
for standard data in artificial dataset. The blue solid and orange dashed lines represent the results
from noises with and without perturbations (i.e., pure noises), respectively. We fix N adv = 10, 000
on the left and d = 10, 000 on the right.


Corollary 4.5 (Complete classification for natural training samples when learning from geome-
try-inspired perturbations on uniform noises). Assume Оі 3 Rmin 4         2
                                                                  /(3N Rmax  ) вүҘ pmax . Suppose that
                                     adv                                    adv 2
                                                                                    вҲҡ
Ineqs. (4) and (5) hold. If d and N       are sufficiently large and d > N        вүҘ N holds, then
a one-hidden-layer neural network trained on geometry-inspired perturbations on uniform noises
with Setting 3.1 can completely classify the natural dataset {(xn , yn )}N
                                                                         n=1 with probability at least
99.99%.

This corollary claims that a classifier learning from perturbations on uniform noises can accurately
classify the natural training samples even though the classifier does not see any natural data during
training. This result highlights abundant class features in adversarial perturbations and justifies
learning from them.

5           E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

In this section, we empirically verify our theoretical results. Detailed experimental settings and
additional results for other norms (L0 and LвҲһ ) and Gaussian noises can be found in Appendix I.

5.1          A RTIFICIAL DATASET

In this section, we validate Theorem 4.4 and Corollary 4.5 using one-hidden-layer neural networks
on artificial datasets. The standard dataset D := {(xn , yn )}N n=1 consists of xn and yn sam-
pled from U ([вҲ’1, 1]d ) and U ({Вұ1}), respectively. Our theorems only require the orthogonality
of training samples; thus, using uniform noises as training samples poses no problem. The noise
              adv
data {Xn }N n=1 , on which perturbations were superimposed, were also uniformly distributed, i.e.,
Xn вҲј U ([вҲ’1, 1]d ). Using a network trained on D and L2 -constrained attack, we generated the
                                       adv N adv
adversarial dataset Dadv := {(xadv
                                 n , yn )}n=1 with random target labels yn
                                                                            adv
                                                                                вҲҲ {Вұ1}. Visual-
                           adv
izations of xn , Xn , and xn can be found in Fig. A3.
In Fig. 1, the decision boundaries for each scenario are shown in a two-dimensional space spanned
by the vectors v вҲҲ Rd and u вҲҲ Rd (cf. Theorem B.1). Theoretically, v and u draw the stan-
dard classifierвҖҷs boundary diagonally from the top right to bottom left.5 The left panel shows the
boundaries of the networks trained on various datasets with d = 10, 000. Although the boundary
derived from pure noises (orange) differed significantly from the standard boundary (light blue), the
boundary derived from adversarial perturbations (blue, green, and red for N adv = 10, 20, and 100,
respectively) became more aligned with the standard boundary as the number of samples increased.
The right panel shows the decision boundaries across various input dimensions and numbers of
noise samples. While the boundaries from noises deviated markedly from the standard, those from
perturbations closely mirrored the standard. As the input dimension and adversarial noise samples
increased, the alignment became stronger. This boundary alignment is consistent with Theorem 4.4.
    5
      The standard boundary deviates from the theoretical prediction when d = 100 because Theorem 3.3 is
difficult to hold in low-dimensional data.


                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Accuracy in each scenario. вҖңRвҖқ denotes random selection of adversarial target labels, while
вҖңDвҖқ denotes deterministic selection. In the noise data scenario, ynadv is always chosen randomly
from ten labels. Accuracies above 15% are highlighted in bold. The underlined scenarios were also
considered in Ilyas et al. (2019).
                 On natural samples                                          On noise data
                 L0 (R)    L0 (D)     L2 (R)    L2 (D)    LвҲһ (R)      LвҲһ (D)      L0      L2     LвҲһ
    MNIST         28.4      0.71       92.9      38.4       89.1        10.3     33.2    27.9    31.9
    FMNIST        10.5      1.31       54.8      25.1       61.4        22.9     26.2    30.2    26.2
    CIFAR-10      54.9      16.8       77.1      42.8       77.2        51.5     9.87    10.2    9.74


In Fig. 2, we illustrate the accuracy of classifiers learning from perturbations on uniform noises for
standard data. The accuracy improved as the input dimensions or number of adversarial samples
increased. Given enough of these values, the classifiers could achieve near-perfect classification
even though they had not seen any standard data. This counterintuitive success of learning from
perturbations aligns with Corollary 4.5.

5.2   MNIST/FASHION -MNIST/CIFAR-10

Table 1 shows accuracy in each scenario for MNIST (Deng, 2012), Fashion-MNIST (Xiao et al.,
2017), and CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2009). We used a six-layer convolutional neural network for
MNIST and Fashion-MNIST and WideResNet (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016) for CIFAR-10.
Examples of adversarial images are shown in Figs. A16 to A18. In the table, вҖңRвҖқ indicates that a
target label was randomly chosen from the nine labels that differ from an original label and вҖңDвҖқ
indicates that a target label was deterministically chosen as the next sequential label after an original
label. Random selection eliminates feature-label correlations, clarifying the learning impact from
perturbations. Under deterministic selection, an anti-correlation between features and labels exists,
and high test accuracy emphasizes that perturbations contain label-aligned features.
Table 1 indicates that classifiers learning from perturbations can achieve high test accuracy, beyond
the cases in Ilyas et al. (2019). Remarkably, even L0 perturbations, which appear to lack natural
data structures, enable network generalization. These results support our theory that even sparse
perturbations contain class features. Furthermore, successful learning in the noise data scenario is
not limited to the artificial datasets in Section 5.1 but also extends to natural data distributions such
as MNIST and Fashion-MNIST, supporting the validity of Theorem 4.3.
Consider counterexamples. For Fashion-MNIST, learning from L0 perturbations was successful in
the noise data scenario, but not in the natural sample scenario. This may be due to the nature of
Fashion-MNIST, where a few pixels may not sufficiently overwrite the inherent features of objects
spanning large regions of an image. For CIFAR-10, the noise data scenarios were challenging,
possibly because of the domain gap between noise data and natural images, and the classifierвҖҷs
inability to extract generalizable features for natural data from noises.

6     C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATION

We provided the first theoretical justification for learning from adversarial perturbations for one-
hidden-layer networks trained on mutually orthogonal samples. We revealed that various perturba-
tions, even sparse perturbations, contain sufficient class features for generalization. Moreover, we
demonstrated that in natural sample and noise data scenarios, networks learning from perturbations
produce decisions consistent with those of normally trained networks, except for specific inputs.
Our major limitations are the assumptions of a simple model, i.e., a one-hidden-layer neural net-
work, and orthogonal training samples. In particular,p     the orthogonality assumptions, Ineqs. (2)
andвҲҡ(5), restrict the perturbation constraint Пө to O( d/N ). However, in practice, Пө is typically set to
O( d). Relaxing these conditions enhances the applicability of our theorems. Nevertheless, our re-
search provides the first fundamental insight and justification of learning from perturbations, which
supports the feature hypothesis and various puzzling phenomena of adversarial examples.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Huishuai Zhang for useful discussions. S. Kumano was supported by JSPS
KAKENHI Grant Number JP23KJ0789, by JST, ACT-X Grant Number JPMJAX23C7, JAPAN,
and by Microsoft Research Asia. H. Kera was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number
JP22K17962. T. Yamasaki was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP22H03640 and
Institute for AI and Beyond of The University of Tokyo.

R EFERENCES
Gunjan Aggarwal, Abhishek Sinha, Nupur Kumari, and Mayank Singh. On the benefits of models
  with perceptually-aligned gradients. In ICLR WS, 2020.
Maximilian Augustin, Alexander Meinke, and Matthias Hein. Adversarial robustness on in-and
 out-distribution improves explainability. In ECCV, pp. 228вҖ“245, 2020.
Philipp Benz, Chaoning Zhang, and In So Kweon. Batch normalization increases adversarial vul-
  nerability and decreases adversarial transferability: A non-robust feature perspective. In ICCV,
  pp. 7818вҖ“7827, 2021.
Prasad Chalasani, Jiefeng Chen, Amrita Roy Chowdhury, Xi Wu, and Somesh Jha. Concise expla-
  nations of neural networks using adversarial training. In ICML, pp. 1383вҖ“1391, 2020.
Francesco Croce and Matthias Hein. Minimally distorted adversarial examples with a fast adaptive
  boundary attack. In ICML, pp. 2196вҖ“2205, 2020.
Li Deng. The MNIST database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. Signal
  Process. Mag., 29(6):141вҖ“142, 2012.
Zhun Deng, Linjun Zhang, Kailas Vodrahalli, Kenji Kawaguchi, and James Y Zou. Adversarial
  training helps transfer learning via better representations. In NeurIPS, volume 34, pp. 25179вҖ“
  25191, 2021.
John Duchi. Lecture notes on statistics and information theory, 2023. URL https://web.
  stanford.edu/class/stats311/lecture-notes.pdf.
Logan Engstrom, Justin Gilmer, Gabriel Goh, Dan Hendrycks, Andrew Ilyas, Aleksander Madry,
  Reiichiro Nakano, Preetum Nakkiran, Shibani Santurkar, Brandon Tran, Dimitris Tsipras, and
  Eric Wallace. A discussion of вҖҷadversarial examples are not bugs, they are featuresвҖҷ. Distill,
  2019a. doi: 10.23915/distill.00019. https://distill.pub/2019/advex-bugs-discussion.
Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Brandon Tran, and Aleksander
  Madry. Adversarial robustness as a prior for learned representations. arXiv:1906.00945, 2019b.
Christian Etmann, Sebastian Lunz, Peter Maass, and Carola-Bibiane SchoМҲnlieb. On the connection
  between adversarial robustness and saliency map interpretability. In ICML, 2019.
Spencer Frei, Gal Vardi, Peter L Bartlett, Nathan Srebro, and Wei Hu. Implicit bias in leaky relu
  networks trained on high-dimensional data. In ICLR, 2023.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. In ICLR, 2015.
Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Logan Engstrom, Brandon Tran, and Aleksander
  Madry. Adversarial examples are not bugs, they are features. In NeurIPS, pp. 125вҖ“136, 2019.
Simran Kaur, Jeremy Cohen, and Zachary C Lipton. Are perceptually-aligned gradients a general
  property of robust classifiers? In NeurIPS WS, 2019.
Junho Kim, Byung-Kwan Lee, and Yong Man Ro. Distilling robust and non-robust features in
  adversarial examples by information bottleneck. In NeurIPS, volume 34, pp. 17148вҖ“17159, 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, University
  of Toronto, 2009.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In ICLR, 2018.
Apostolos Modas, Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, and Pascal Frossard. SparseFool: a few pixels
  make a big difference. In CVPR, pp. 9087вҖ“9096, 2019.
Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Alhussein Fawzi, and Pascal Frossard. DeepFool: a simple and
  accurate method to fool deep neural networks. In CVPR, pp. 2574вҖ“2582, 2016.
Aditi Raghunathan, Sang Michael Xie, Fanny Yang, John C Duchi, and Percy Liang. Adversarial
  training can hurt generalization. In ICML WS, 2019.
Aditi Raghunathan, Sang Michael Xie, Fanny Yang, John Duchi, and Percy Liang. Understanding
  and mitigating the tradeoff between robustness and accuracy. In ICML, 2020.
Philippe Rigollet and Jan-Christian HuМҲtter. High-dimensional statistics. arXiv:2310.19244, 2023.
Hadi Salman, Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Ashish Kapoor, and Aleksander Madry. Do adver-
  sarially robust imagenet models transfer better? In NeurIPS, volume 33, pp. 3533вҖ“3545, 2020.
Shibani Santurkar, Andrew Ilyas, Dimitris Tsipras, Logan Engstrom, Brandon Tran, and Aleksander
  Madry. Image synthesis with a single (robust) classifier. In NeurIPS, volume 32, 2019.
Roei Sarussi, Alon Brutzkus, and Amir Globerson. Towards understanding learning in neural net-
  works with linear teachers. In ICML, pp. 9313вҖ“9322, 2021.
Jacob Springer, Melanie Mitchell, and Garrett Kenyon. A little robustness goes a long way: Lever-
  aging robust features for targeted transfer attacks. In NeurIPS, volume 34, pp. 9759вҖ“9773, 2021a.
Jacob M Springer, Melanie Mitchell, and Garrett T Kenyon. Adversarial perturbations are
  not so weird: Entanglement of robust and non-robust features in neural network classifiers.
  arXiv:2102.05110, 2021b.
Jacob M Springer, Melanie Mitchell, and Garrett T Kenyon. Uncovering universal features: How
  adversarial training improves adversarial transferability. In ICML WS, 2021c.
Dong Su, Huan Zhang, Hongge Chen, Jinfeng Yi, Pin-Yu Chen, and Yupeng Gao. Is robustness
  the cost of accuracy?вҖ“a comprehensive study on the robustness of 18 deep image classification
  models. In ECCV, pp. 631вҖ“648, 2018.
Jiawei Su, Danilo Vasconcellos Vargas, and Kouichi Sakurai. One pixel attack for fooling deep
   neural networks. TEVC, 23(5):828вҖ“841, 2019.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. In ICLR, 2014.
Lue Tao, Lei Feng, Hongxin Wei, Jinfeng Yi, Sheng-Jun Huang, and Songcan Chen. Can adversarial
  training be manipulated by non-robust features? In NeurIPS, volume 35, pp. 26504вҖ“26518, 2022.
Nikolaos Tsilivis and Julia Kempe. What can the neural tangent kernel tell us about adversarial
  robustness? In NeurIPS, volume 35, pp. 18116вҖ“18130, 2022.
Dimitris Tsipras, Shibani Santurkar, Logan Engstrom, Alexander Turner, and Aleksander Madry.
  Robustness may be at odds with accuracy. In ICLR, 2019.
Francisco Utrera, Evan Kravitz, N Benjamin Erichson, Rajiv Khanna, and Michael W Mahoney.
  Adversarially-trained deep nets transfer better: Illustration on image classification. In ICLR,
  2021.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-MNIST: a novel image dataset for bench-
  marking machine learning algorithms. arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Yao-Yuan Yang, Cyrus Rashtchian, Hongyang Zhang, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Kamalika Chaud-
  huri. A closer look at accuracy vs. robustness. In NeurIPS, volume 33, pp. 8588вҖ“8601, 2020.
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. In BMVC, pp. 1вҖ“12, 2016.
Tianyuan Zhang and Zhanxing Zhu. Interpreting adversarially trained convolutional neural net-
  works. In ICML, pp. 7502вҖ“7511, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     L EARNING FROM A DVERSARIAL P ERTURBATIONS
In this study, we provide theoretical insights into learning from adversarial perturbations (cf. Defi-
nitions 1.1 and 3.2). Here, we clarify our research focus in comparison with adversarial training and
training with noisy labels, and delve into the implications of learning from perturbations.

A.1    C OMPARISON WITH A DVERSARIAL T RAINING

Learning from perturbations, which aims to verify the feature hypothesis that perturbations contain
class features, is not related to adversarial training, which aims to train classifiers to be robust against
adversarial attacks. Learning from perturbations does not focus on (adversarial) robustness. Their
concepts and procedures are summarized as follows:
Learning from adversarial perturbations (Ilyas et al., 2019): Given a dataset D := {(xn , yn )}
and a classifier f trained on D, we create adversarial examples xadv   n   such that f вҖҷs prediction
becomes ynadv Мё= yn , i.e., f (xn ) = yn and f (xadv            adv
                                                     n ) = yn , thereby forming a new dataset
Dadv := {(xadv      adv
               n , yn )}. These adversarial examples xn
                                                            adv
                                                                appear indistinguishable from natu-
                                           adv
ral images x to the human eye, making D        seemingly mislabeled. However, a classifier g trained
from scratch on Dadv surprisingly yields high test accuracy on standard datasets that are correctly
labeled from a human perspective. This counterintuitive generalization suggests that adversarial
perturbations, while appearing as noises, contain label-aligned features.
Adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018): Given a dataset D := {(xn , yn )} and an initialized
classifier f , adversarial training updates f вҖҷs parameters to minimize losses over {(xadv
                                                                                       n , yn )}, which
is regenerated at each training iteration. The trained classifier f achieves high test accuracy on
standard datasets under adversarial attacks.
Although both methods use adversarial examples, their goals and procedures are different. Our
work attempts to provide a theoretical explanation for the success of learning from perturbations.
This is a novel endeavor that differs from extensive studies on adversarial training. To the best of
our knowledge, the reasons for the success of learning from adversarial perturbations have not been
explained theoretically.

A.2    C OMPARISON WITH T RAINING WITH N OISY L ABELS

Learning from perturbations is not training with noisy labels with adversarial examples. While in
training with noisy labels, labels are partially mislabeled (e.g., 20% labels of whole data are misla-
beled), in learning from perturbations, all labels are mislabeled. In this study, we do not focus on
obtaining classifiers with high accuracy under mislabeled adversarial examples. Our study provides
a theoretical explanation for why classifiers can obtain generalization ability to correctly labeled test
samples from completely mislabeled adversarial examples.

A.3    I MPLICATIONS OF L EARNING FROM A DVERSARIAL P ERTURBATIONS

In this section, we introduce the implications of learning from adversarial perturbations using simple
examples. The training, test, and adversarial datasets are defined as follows:
                     D :={(frog img, frog), (horse img, horse), (cat img, cat)},                      (A8)
                    test
                D          :={(frog imgвҲ—, frog), (horse imgвҲ—, horse), (cat imgвҲ—, cat)},               (A9)
                    adv
                D          :={(frog img+, horse), (horse img+, cat), (cat img+, frog)}.              (A10)
A trained classifier f can predict the correct labels for natural images (e.g., f (frog img) = frog
and f (frog imgвҲ—) = frog) but not for adversarial examples (e.g., f (frog img+) = horse). Note
that frog img+ still appears to be a frog to humans. Counterintuitively, another classifier g trained
from scratch on Dadv can correctly predict the classes of the natural test images in Dtest (e.g.,
g(frog imgвҲ—) = frog).
Ilyas et al. (2019) hypothesized that adversarial perturbations contain imperceptible class features
to humans. For example, frog img+ contains not only visible frog features but also invisible horse
features.


                                                     12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Table A2: Example of adversarial dataset.
                        Data index Visible features Invisible features Label
                        1                   Frog                 Horse                   Horse
                        2                   Horse                Cat                     Cat
                        3                   Cat                  Frog                    Frog
                        4                   Frog                 Cat                     Cat
                        5                   Horse                Frog                    Frog
                        6                   Cat                  Horse                   Horse
                        В·В·В·                 В·В·В·                  В·В·В·                     В·В·В·


Consider training on the adversarial dataset Dadv defined as Table A2. Through training, a clas-
sifier g ignores visible features that are uncorrelated with labels and learns invisible features that
are correlated with labels. Since natural test images contain invisible features of the correspond-
ing classes (e.g., a frog image contains human-invisible frog features), this classifier can provide
correct predictions for them. As a result, the classifier trained on a dataset that appears completely
mislabeled to humans achieves high accuracy on natural test datasets.


B     D ECISION B OUNDARY OF O NE -H IDDEN -L AYER N EURAL N ETWORK

B.1   S TANDARD T RAINING

To formulate learning from adversarial perturbations, we use the theorems presented in Frei et al.
(2023) (similar results are shown in Sarussi et al. (2021)), which addresses the implicit bias of
one-hidden-layer neural networks under gradient flow with an exponential loss. This theorem does
not directly address adversarial attacks, adversarial examples, or learning from perturbations. We
leverage this because of the tractable form of a decision boundary. The main results of their study
are summarized as follows:

Theorem B.1 (Rearranged from Frei et al. (2023)). Let D := {(xn , yn )}N                d
                                                                               n=1 вҠӮ R Г— {Вұ1}
be a training dataset. Let Rmax := maxn вҲҘxn вҲҘ, Rmin := minn вҲҘxn вҲҘ, and pmax :=
maxnМё=k |вҹЁxn , xk вҹ©|. A one-hidden-layer neural network f : Rd вҶ’ R is trained on D with Set-
                                                                                         W (t)
ting 3.1. If Оі 3 Rmin
                  4         2
                      /(3N Rmax ) вүҘ pmax , then gradient flow on f converges to limtвҶ’вҲһ вҲҘW (t)вҲҘF =
 W std
вҲҘW std вҲҘF
          , where W std := (v1 , . . . , vm/2 , u1 , . . . , um/2 )вҠӨ satisfies

                                                    вҲҖn вҲҲ [N ] : yn f (xn ; W std ) = 1,                    (A11)
                                            1    X                 Оі      X
                  v1 = В· В· В· = vm/2 = v := вҲҡ           О»n xn вҲ’ вҲҡ                О»n xn ,                    (A12)
                                             m n:y =+1              m n:y =вҲ’1
                                                  n                        n

                                            1    X                 Оі      X
                  u1 = В· В· В· = um/2 = u := вҲҡ           О»n xn вҲ’ вҲҡ                О»n xn ,                    (A13)
                                             m n:y =вҲ’1              m n:y =+1
                                                             n                           n

                    1          3
where О»n вҲҲ          2
                  2Rmax , 2Оі 2 R 2         for every n вҲҲ [N ]. The binary decision of f (z; W std ) is also given
                                 min
by:
                                                                                   N
                                                                                   X
       sgn f z; W std              = sgn f bdy (z) ,                f bdy (z) :=

                                                          where                          О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©.   (A14)
                                                                                   n=1


The theorem provides three insights: (i) Although there might be many possible directions
W /вҲҘW вҲҘF that can accurately classify the training dataset, gradient flow consistently converges
in direction to W std regardless of initial weight configurations. (ii) Given that W std consists of a
maximum of two unique row vectors, its rank is constrained to two or less, highlighting the implicit
bias of the gradient flow. (iii) The binary decision of f (z; W std ) is the same as the sign of the linear


                                                            13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


function f bdy (z), indicating that f (z; W std ) has a linear decision boundary. This theorem requires
nearly orthogonal data, which is a typical characteristic of high-dimensional data.
Note that in Frei et al. (2023), the binary decision boundary is given by:
                                                    вҲҡ       вҲҡ
                                                      m       m
                                     f bdyalt (z) =     vвҲ’       u.                                             (A15)
                                                     2       2
To derive Eq. (A14), we rearrange the above equation as follows:
                                     вҲҡ                                           !
                    bdyalt          m     1    X                Оі    X
                f            (z) =       вҲҡ            О»n xn вҲ’ вҲҡ            О»n xn                                (A16)
                                    2      m n:y =+1             m n:y =вҲ’1
                                                n                     n
                                      вҲҡ                                             !
                                        m    1    X               Оі     X
                                   вҲ’        вҲҡ            О»n xn вҲ’ вҲҡ            О»n xn                             (A17)
                                       2      m n:y =вҲ’1            m n:y =+1
                                                   n                    n
                                                                        !
                                   1+Оі      X                X
                                 =                О»n xn вҲ’         О»n xn                                         (A18)
                                     2    n:y =+1         n:y =вҲ’1
                                                       n                       n

                                                   N
                                     1+Оі X
                                 =          О»n yn xn .                                                          (A19)
                                      2 n=1

Thus,
                                                                                        N
                                                                                                      !
                                                                                        X
                                       std                      bdyalt

                    sgn f z; W                     = sgn f               (z) = sgn            О»n yn xn .        (A20)
                                                                                        n=1


B.2     L EARNING FROM A DVERSARIAL P ERTURBATIONS

Theorem B.1 does not impose any assumptions on training dataset other than orthogonality. Thus,
it can be adapted to a dataset with adversarial perturbations as follows:

                                                                                                                adv
Corollary B.2 (Learning from adversarial perturbations). Let Dadv := {(xadv                 adv N
                                                                                       n , yn )}n=1 вҠӮ
                                           adv
Rd Г— {Вұ1} be a training dataset. Let Rmax        := maxn вҲҘxadv    n   вҲҘ,  R adv
                                                                            min    :=  min     adv
                                                                                           n вҲҘxn вҲҘ, and
padv                  adv   adv                                                  d
  max := maxnМё=k |вҹЁxn , xk вҹ©|. A one-hidden-layer neural network f : R вҶ’ R is trained on the
                              3 adv 4       adv 2        adv
dataset with Setting 3.1. If Оі Rmin /(3N Rmax ) вүҘ pmax , then gradient flow on f converges to
           W (t)       W adv            adv                                           adv вҠӨ
limtвҶ’вҲһ вҲҘW   (t)вҲҘF = вҲҘW adv вҲҘF , where W     := (v1adv , . . . , vm/2
                                                                 adv
                                                                     , uadv
                                                                         1 , . . . , um/2 ) satisfies

                                                                 вҲҖn вҲҲ [N ] : ynadv f (xadv
                                                                                       n ;W
                                                                                            adv
                                                                                                ) = 1,          (A21)
                                1                      X                       Оі       X
         v1adv = В· В· В· = vm/2
                          adv
                              =вҲҡ                                О»adv adv
                                                                 n xn вҲ’ вҲҡ                  О»adv   adv
                                                                                             n xn ,             (A22)
                                 m                    adv =+1
                                                                                m adv
                                                   n:yn                              n:yn     =вҲ’1
                                1                      X                 Оі               X
         uadv
          1   = В· В· В· = uadv
                         m/2 = вҲҡ                                О»adv adv
                                                                 n xn вҲ’ вҲҡ                           О»adv adv
                                                                                                     n xn ,     (A23)
                                 m                    adv =вҲ’1
                                                                          m             adv =+1
                                                   n:yn                              n:yn

                      1
where О»adv
        n  вҲҲ         adv 2
                   2Rmax
                             , 2Оі 2 R3adv 2       for every n вҲҲ [N ]. The binary decision of f (z; W adv ) is also
                                     min
given by:
                                                                                        N
                                    bdy                                    bdy
                                                                                        X
   sgn f z; W adv                                                                             О»adv adv adv

                             = sgn fadv (z) ,              where          fadv (z) :=          n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©.   (A24)
                                                                                        n=1


This theorem establishes the foundation for learning from adversarial perturbations. The orthog-
onality assumption, model weights, and decision boundary depend on a definition of adversarial
perturbations.


                                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C       P ROOFS OF T HEOREMS IN S ECTION 4.2

C.1     D ECISION B OUNDARY OF L EARNING FROM G EOMETRY-I NSPIRED P ERTURBATIONS ON
        NATURAL S AMPLES

In this section, we derive the decision boundary when learning from geometry-inspired perturba-
tions on natural samples, Theorem C.2. Theorem 4.1 is a special case of Theorem C.2 with the
assumption of many training samples. Lemma C.1 shows an orthogonality condition of training
samples with geometry-inspired perturbations, which is required to derive the decision boundary
using Corollary 3.4.

Lemma C.1 (Orthogonality condition for learning from geometry-inspired perturbations on natural
samples). Consider the geometry-inspired perturbations defined in Eq. (1). Let
                                                      4
                                                  3Rmax   + Оі 3 Rmin
                                                                 4
                                          C :=          3
                                                            вҲҡ        .                                         (A25)
                                                   Оі 2 Rmin   1вҲ’Оі
Suppose that the following inequalities hold:
             пЈұ 3
                          вҲ’Пө)4
                                                                                    2

                Оі (R                            2
             пЈҙ 3N (Rmin
             пЈҙ
                       max +Пө)
                              2 вҲ’ 2ПөRmax вҲ’ Пө вүҘ pmax                       N вүӨ RC2
             пЈҙ
             пЈҙ                                                                  max
                       3          4

                      Оі (Rmin вҲ’Пө)                                          C2            2
             пЈІ
                       2
                3N (Rmax   +2 вҲҡC Пө+Пө2 )
                                        вҲ’ 2 вҲҡCN Пө вҲ’ Пө2 вүҘ pmax              2
                                                                          Rmax < N вүӨ RC2          .            (A26)
                                N                                                      min
                Оі 3 (R2 вҲ’2 вҲҡC Пө+Пө2 )2
             пЈҙ
             пЈҙ                                                                    2
             пЈі 3N (Rmin        N
                                        вҲ’ 2 вҲҡCN Пө вҲ’ Пө2 вүҘ pmax             N > RC2
             пЈҙ
             пЈҙ
                       2
                        max+2 вҲҡC Пө+Пө2 )                                         min
                                 N

                                                                   adv N
Then, the following inequality holds for any {(xn , yn )}N
                                                         n=1 and {yn }n=1 :
                                                         4
                                              Оі 3 Rmin
                                                   adv
                                                              adv
                                                 adv     2 вүҘ pmax .                                            (A27)
                                             3N Rmax


Proof. The proof flow is as follows:

                                                                    adv N
        1. Ineq. (A27) does not hold for some {(xn , yn )}N
                                                          n=1 and {yn }n=1 if Пө > Rmin .

                                                                    adv N                             Оі 3 R4
        2. Ineq. (A27) does not hold for some {(xn , yn )}N
                                                          n=1 and {yn }n=1 if pmax > 3N R2
                                                                                         min
                                                                                             .
                                                                                                           max

                                                             adv N
        3.   Ineq. (A27) holds for any {(xn , yn )}N
                                                   n=1 and {yn }n=1 if Ineq. (A26), Пө вүӨ Rmin , and
                       3 4
                      Оі R
             pmax вүӨ 3N Rmin
                          2   hold.
                          max


        4. Ineq. (A26) includes Пө вүӨ Rmin .
                                             Оі 3 R4
        5. Ineq. (A26) includes pmax вүӨ 3N Rmin
                                           2   .
                                                  max


              PN
With q :=        n=1 О»n yn xn , we can represent the geometry-inspired adversarial example as follows:
                                                                   q
                                          xadv
                                           n   := xn + Пөynadv         .                                        (A28)
                                                                  вҲҘqвҲҘ

1. Assume Пө > Rmin . Let l := arg minn вҲҘxn вҲҘ. We show that Ineq. (A27) does not hold if
yn = yk = ynadv = ykadv , yladv := вҲ’ sgn(вҹЁxl , qвҹ©) = вҲ’yl , and pmax = 0.6 A lower bound of the
maximum inner product is

                                            q                     q
   padv
    max вүҘ вҹЁx adv
             n   , x adv
                     k   вҹ© = Пөyn
                                adv
                                      xk ,       + Пөyk
                                                      adv
                                                            xn ,       + Пө2 ynadv ykadv вүҘ Пө2 . (A29)
                                           вҲҘqвҲҘ                   вҲҘqвҲҘ
    6
    For example, x1 := (2, 0, 0, 0), x2 := (0, 2, 0, 0), x3 := (0, 0, 1, 0), x4 := (0, 0, 0, 2), y1 := 1, y2 := 1,
y3 := 1, y4 := вҲ’1, y1adv := 1, y2adv := 1, y3adv := вҲ’1, y4adv := вҲ’1, n = 1, k = 2, and l = 3.


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that

                                               q
                                   sgn   xn ,        = sgn(О»n yn вҲҘxn вҲҘ) = yn .                             (A30)
                                              вҲҘqвҲҘ
An upper bound of the minimum norm is

                  adv      2                                              q
                 Rmin вүӨ вҲҘxadv
                          l   вҲҘ2 = Rmin
                                    2
                                        вҲ’ 2Пө                      xl ,             + Пө2 вүӨ Rmin
                                                                                           2
                                                                                               + Пө2 .      (A31)
                                                                         вҲҘqвҲҘ
We can rearrange Ineq. (A27) using the above two bounds as follows:
                               4                       2
                Оі 3 Rmin
                     adv
                                    adv
                                                   adv
                                                  Rmin           2
                                                                Rmin + Пө2         Пө2
                               2 вҲ’ pmax вүӨ              вҲ’ padv
                                                          max вүӨ           вҲ’ Пө2 < вҲ’ < 0.                    (A32)
                    adv
                3N Rmax                             3              3              3

2. Assume pmax > Оі 3 Rmin 4         2
                             /3N Rmax   . Note that the decision boundary of a classifier trained on
                                                          PN
such samples does not always converge to f bdy (z) := n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ© since the assumption
of Theorem C.2 is not satisfied. However, for the definition of geometry-inspired perturbations, it
is irrelevant whether the decision boundary converges to f bdy . We can define geometry-inspired
perturbations as long as О»n is (uniquely) determined by Eq. (A11).
Let x1 := 1, x2 := вҲ’1, y1 := 1, and y2 := вҲ’1, which satisfy pmax > Оі 3 Rmin
                                                                        4        2
                                                                            /3N Rmax . As
defined in Theorem C.2,
                                   О»1 + ОіО»2                                           О»2 + ОіО»1
                           v :=      вҲҡ      ,                              u := вҲ’       вҲҡ      .           (A33)
                                       m                                                  m
Thus,
                                 П•((О»1 + ОіО»2 )x) П•(вҲ’(О»2 + ОіО»1 )x)
                                   f (x) =         вҲ’                   .                                   (A34)
                                          2                   2
As defined in Theorem C.2, О»1 and О»2 satisfy the following simultaneous equations:
                            (
                               П•(О»1 +ОіО»2 )
                                    2      вҲ’ П•(вҲ’(О»22+ОіО»1 )) = 1
                               П•(вҲ’(О»1 +ОіО»2 ))                      .                                       (A35)
                                      2       вҲ’ П•(О»2 +ОіО»
                                                     2
                                                         1)
                                                            = вҲ’1
Solving this,
                                                                       2
                                                               1вҲ’Оі
                                                  О»1 = О»2 = 2            .                                 (A36)
                                                               1 вҲ’ Оі2
                                         2
Note that these satisfy О»1 , О»2 вҲҲ (1/2Rmax   , 3/2Оі 2 Rmin
                                                       2
                                                           ). Let y1adv := вҲ’1 and y2adv := 1. Then,
q/вҲҘqвҲҘ = 1, x1 := 1 вҲ’ Пө, x2 := вҲ’1 + Пө, Rmin = Rmax = |1 вҲ’ Пө|, and padv
              adv             adv               adv      adv                               2
                                                                             max = (1 вҲ’ Пө) . In this
situation, Ineq. (A27) does not hold for any Пө > 0.
3. Assume Пө вүӨ Rmin and pmax вүӨ Оі 3 Rmin
                                   4         2
                                       /3N Rmax . We write the lower and upper bounds of О»n
               2                    2 2
as О»min := 1/2Rmax and О»max := 3/2Оі Rmin , respectively (cf. Theorem B.1).
(Preliminary) A lower bound of the norm of q is
                           v          пЈ«                                пЈ¶
                           u
                           uX  N
                                                2
                                                  X
                     вҲҘqвҲҘ =t        О»n пЈӯО»n вҲҘxn вҲҘ +   О»k yn yk вҹЁxn , xk вҹ©пЈё
                           u
                                                                                                           (A37)
                                            n=1                     kМё=n
                                        q
                                    вүҘ                2
                                       N О»min (О»min Rmin вҲ’ N О»max pmax )                                   (A38)
                                          p
                                      Rmin (1 вҲ’ Оі)N
                                    =       2
                                                      .                                                    (A39)
                                          2Rmax
An upper bound of the inner product between xn and q is
                     N                                                                    2        2
                     X
                                                    2                                 3Rmax      ОіRmin
        вҹЁxn , qвҹ© =         О»k yk вҹЁxn , xk вҹ© вүӨО»max (Rmax + N pmax ) =                        2  +       .   (A40)
                                                                                     2Оі 2 Rmin     2
                                                                                                 2Rmax
                     k=1



                                                            16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A naive upper bound of the inner product between xn and q/вҲҘqвҲҘ is

                                             q
                                       xn ,       вүӨ Rmax .                                                                    (A41)
                                            вҲҘqвҲҘ
That can be also obtained as follows:
                                             4
                                                 + Оі 3 Rmin
                                                        4

                                   q       3Rmax                C
                             xn ,       вүӨ       p           =: вҲҡ .                                                            (A42)
                                  вҲҘqвҲҘ      2 3
                                          Оі Rmin (1 вҲ’ Оі)N       N
Note that
                             пЈұ                                                  2

                             пЈҙ вҲҡCN вүҘ Rmax
                             пЈҙ
                             пЈҙ                                     N вүӨ RC2
                                                                               max
                             пЈІ
                                                                  C2             2
                              Rmin вүӨ вҲҡCN < Rmax                  R 2   < N вүӨ RC2                         .                    (A43)
                             пЈҙ                                     max         min
                             пЈҙ                                                  2
                             пЈі вҲҡC < Rmin
                             пЈҙ
                                                                   N > RC2
                                 N                                             min

Thus,
                                                        (                                2

                                                         Rmax            N вүӨ RC2

                                           q
                                     xn ,           вүӨ                                max         .                            (A44)
                                          вҲҘqвҲҘ            вҲҡC          (otherwise)
                                                          N

(Upper bound of inner product) An upper bound of the inner product is

                       adv  adv                      q
                    вҹЁxn , xk вҹ© вүӨpmax + 2Пө xn ,            + Пө2                                                                (A45)
                                                   вҲҘqвҲҘ
                                                                       2
                                   (
                                     pmax + 2ПөRmax + Пө2 (N вүӨ RC2 )
                                 вүӨ                                    max .                                                   (A46)
                                     pmax + 2 вҲҡCN Пө + Пө2     (otherwise)

(Lower and upper bounds of norm) The norm of the geometry-inspired adversarial example is
                                 s
                          adv           2                  q
                        xn     = вҲҘxn вҲҘ + 2Пөynadv xn ,           + Пө2 .                   (A47)
                                                         вҲҘqвҲҘ
Under Пө вүӨ Rmin , trivial lower and upper bounds of the above norm are
                                      Rmin вҲ’ Пө вүӨ xadv
                                                  n   вүӨ Rmax + Пө.                                                             (A48)
                                                                                                             p
Now, we have the following three lower bounds of the norm of xn : (i)                                             2
                                                                                                                 Rmin вҲ’ 2ПөRmax + Пө2
                2
                   q                                                      2
for N вүӨ RC2         . (ii)    2
                             Rmin вҲ’ 2 вҲҡCN Пө + Пө2 for N > RC2                   . (iii) Rmin вҲ’ Пө for Пө вүӨ Rmin . Since
            max                                                          max
            2    2
(Rmin вҲ’ Пө) вҲ’ (Rmin  вҲ’ 2ПөRmax + Пө2 ) вүҘ 0, (iii) is always tighter than (i). In addition, since
                                                 2          2
(Rmin вҲ’ Пө) вҲ’ (Rmin вҲ’ 2 вҲҡCN Пө + Пө2 ) вүҘ 0 under RC2 < N вүӨ RC2 , (iii) is always tighter than (ii).
          2    2
                                                max        min
Thus, under Пө вүӨ Rmin ,
                                       пЈұ                                                             2
                                       пЈІRmin вҲ’ Пө                                (N вүӨ RC2 )
                             xadv
                              n       вүҘ q 2                                                      min
                                                                                                             .                (A49)
                                       пЈі Rmin вҲ’ 2 вҲҡC Пө + Пө2                     (otherwise)
                                                   N

An upper bound of the norm is
                                      пЈұ                                                              2
                                      пЈІRmax + Пө                                 (N вүӨ RC2                 )
                             xadv
                              n      вүӨ q 2                                                       max
                                                                                                             .                (A50)
                                      пЈі Rmax + 2 вҲҡC Пө + Пө2                      (otherwise)
                                                  N


(Orthogonality condition) Using the above bounds, we can derive Ineq. (A26) where Ineq. (A27)
                                           adv N
always holds for any {(xn , yn )}N
                                 n=1 and {yn }n=1 .

4. We prove that Ineq. (A26) implies Пө вүӨ Rmin . A common upper bound of the left term of
Ineq. (A26) is Оі 3 (Rmin
                     2
                         + Пө2 )/3N вҲ’ Пө2 . This bound monotonically decreases with Пө and is below
zero at Пө = Rmin . Thus, Ineq. (A26) does not hold for Пө > Rmin .


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5. Here, we prove that Ineq. (A26) implies pmax вүӨ Оі 3 Rmin
                                                       4        2
                                                           /3N Rmax . From the above discussion,
                                                                       2        2
we assume Пө вүӨ Rmin . In this case, Rmin вҲ’Пө вүӨ Rmin , Rmax вүӨ Rmax +Пө, Rmax   вүӨ Rmax  +2 вҲҡCN Пө+Пө2 ,
pmax вүӨ pmax +2Пө max +Пө2 , and pmax вүӨ pmax +2 вҲҡCN Пө+Пө2 are trivial. Thus, the first two inequalities
include pmax вүӨ Оі 3 Rmin
                    4        2
                        /3N Rmax . Then, we consider the following inequality:

                        Оі 3 Rmin
                             4     Оі 3 (Rmin
                                         2
                                             вҲ’ 2 вҲҡCN Пө + Пө2 )2      C
                             2
                                 вүҘ                 C
                                                               вҲ’ 2 вҲҡ Пө вҲ’ Пө2 .                 (A51)
                       3N Rmax            2
                                   3N (Rmax + 2 вҲҡN Пө + Пө )  2       N

With A := 2 вҲҡCN Пө + Пө2 (вүҘ 0),

                Оі 3 Rmin
                     4
                           Оі 3 (Rmin
                                 2
                                     + A)2       Оі 3 (Rmin
                                                        2
                                                           вҲ’ 2 вҲҡCN Пө + Пө2 )2
                     2
                         вүҘ        2
                                           вҲ’ A вүҘ            2
                                                                             вҲ’ A.             (A52)
               3N Rmax     3N (Rmax   + A)             3N (Rmax  + A)
Rearranging this,
                Оі 3 Rmin
                     4          2
                         + (3N Rmax вҲ’ 2Оі 3 Rmin
                                            2     2
                                                )Rmax + (3N вҲ’ Оі 3 )Rmax
                                                                    2
                                                                        A > 0.                (A53)
Thus, the above inequality holds. Finally, the claim is established.
                                                        вҲҡ
We have represented an upper bound of вҹЁxn , q/вҲҘqвҲҘвҹ© as C/ N . Alternatively, we can use pmax to
represent an upper bound of вҹЁxn , q/вҲҘqвҲҘвҹ© as follows:
                                        3R2 (R2 + N pmax )

                          q
                    xn ,       вүӨ        p max max                     =: C вҖІ .          (A54)
                         вҲҘqвҲҘ                      4
                                   ОіRmin N (Оі 2 Rmin       2
                                                     вҲ’ 3N Rmax pmax )
Using this bound, for a sufficiently large N , we can obtain a similar result as follows:
                           Оі 3 (Rmin
                                 2
                                     вҲ’ 2C вҖІ Пө + Пө2 )2
                                                      вҲ’ 2C вҖІ Пө вҲ’ Пө2 вүҘ pmax .                  (A55)
                                  2
                           3N (Rmax   + 2C вҖІ Пө + Пө2 )
As Ineq. (A54) is tighter than Ineq. (A42), Ineq. (A55) is tighter than Ineq. (A26). However, to
interpret the restriction on pmax , we employ Ineq. (A26), which contains pmax only in the right
term. The left and right terms of Ineq. (A55) include pmax , and it is more complex to determine the
constraint on pmax .

Theorem C.2 (Decision boundary when learning from geometry-inspired perturbations on natural
samples). Let f be a one-hidden-layer neural network trained on geometry-inspired perturbations
on natural samples (cf. Eq. (1) and Definition 3.2(a)) with Setting 3.1. If Ineq. (A26) holds, then,
with t вҶ’ вҲһ, the decision boundary of f is given by Eq. (3).

Proof. By Lemma C.1, if Ineq. (A26) holds, we can use Corollary 3.4. The decision boundary is
                               N
                                                    !
                              X
               adv                 adv adv   adv
    sgn(f (z; W )) = sgn         О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©                                          (A56)
                                 n=1
                                 N                        N                               !
                                 X                        X                      q
                        = sgn          О»adv adv
                                        n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ© +       О»adv adv adv
                                                               n yn Пөyn             ,z        (A57)
                                 n=1                      n=1
                                                                                вҲҘqвҲҘ
                                  N                         N
                                                                      !            !
                                 X
                                      adv adv
                                                            X
                                                                  adv       q
                        = sgn        О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ© +           О»n     Пө       ,z             (A58)
                                 n=1                       n=1
                                                                           вҲҘqвҲҘ
                                 PN                                   !
                                         adv adv
                                        О»
                                    n=1 n   y n   вҹЁxn , zвҹ©    вҹЁq,  zвҹ©
                        = sgn          PN                  +Пө                                 (A59)
                                          n=1 О»n
                                                adv            вҲҘqвҲҘ
                                 PN                                     !
                                         adv adv
                                    n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©        f bdy (z)
                        = sgn          PN                  +Пө            .                    (A60)
                                          n=1 О»n
                                                adv              вҲҘqвҲҘ


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 4.1 (Decision boundary when learning from geometry-inspired perturbations on natural
samples). Let f be a one-hidden-layer neural network trained on geometry-inspired perturbations
on natural samples (cf. Eq. (1) and Definition 3.2(a)) with Setting 3.1. If N > C 2 /Rmin
                                                                                      2
                                                                                          and
                            Оі 3 (Rmin
                                  2
                                      вҲ’ 2 вҲҡCN Пө + Пө2 )2             C
                                                               вҲ’ 2 вҲҡ Пө вҲ’ Пө2 вүҘ pmax                                 (2)
                                2
                           3N (Rmax + 2 вҲҡCN Пө + Пө2 )                N
               4
            3Rmax   +Оі 3 Rmin
                          4
with C :=         3
             Оі 2 Rmin
                      вҲҡ
                        1вҲ’Оі
                              , then, with t вҶ’ вҲһ, the decision boundary of f is given by
                           PN       adv adv
   bdy                         n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©                                    f bdy (z)
  fadv (z) :=                     PN                                 +          Пө PN                             . (3)
                                         adv
                                    n=1 О»n                                        вҲҘ n=1 О»n yn xn вҲҘ
                           |           {z                 }                     |       {z       }
                Effect of learning from mislabeled natural samples       Effect of learning from perturbations



Proof. This is the special case of Theorem C.2 for N > C 2 /Rmin
                                                             2
                                                                 .

C.2   L IMITING B EHAVIOR OF L EARNING FROM G EOMETRY-I NSPIRED P ERTURBATIONS ON
      NATURAL S AMPLES WITH D ETERMINISTIC L ABELS

In this section, we consider learning from geometry-inspired perturbations on natural samples with
deterministic adversarial labels. In Proposition C.4, we show that the effects of perturbations and
mislabeled natural samples grow at the same speed with respect to an input dimension and the num-
ber of training samples, suggesting that learning from perturbations is feasible on a high-dimensional
dataset with many samples. To prove Proposition C.4, we first prepare Lemma C.3.
                                                                   3 4        2
              вҲҡ of norm of weighted sum of training data). Assume Оі Rmin /3N Rmax вүҘ pmax
Lemma C.3 (Order
and вҲҘxn вҲҘ = Оҳ( d) for any n вҲҲ [N ]. Then,
                                 N                  r !
                                X                     N
                                     О»n yn xn = Оҳ          .                       (A61)
                                n=1
                                                       d


Proof. By definition in Theorem 3.3, О»n = Оҳ(1/d). By the assumption, pmax = O(d/N ). A lower
bound is
                                  v        пЈ«                                   пЈ¶
                                  u
                   N              uX  N
                                                    2
                  X                                     X
                       О»n yn xn =t      О»n пЈӯО»n вҲҘxn вҲҘ +      О»k yn yk вҹЁxn , xk вҹ©пЈё
                                  u
                                                                                      (A62)
                    n=1                     n=1                      kМё=n
                                       v      пЈ«                     пЈ¶
                                       u
                                       uXN
                                                       2
                                                          X
                                      вүҘt   О»n пЈӯО»n вҲҘxn вҲҘ вҲ’   О»k pmax пЈё
                                       u
                                                                                                                 (A63)
                                            n=1                      kМё=n
                                            r         !
                                                  N
                                      =в„Ұ              .                                                          (A64)
                                                  d
                                 p
Similarly, an upper bound is O( N/d). Note that the radicand of the lower bound is positive
because the following inequality holds:
                        2
                           X              R2       2
                                                 ОіRmin              2
                                                          (1 вҲ’ Оі)Rmin
                О»n вҲҘxn вҲҘ вҲ’      О»k pmax вүҘ min
                                           2
                                               вҲ’   2
                                                        вүҘ       2
                                                                       > 0.         (A65)
                                         2Rmax   2Rmax       2Rmax
                               kМё=n


Proposition C.4 (Limiting behavior of learning from geometry-inspired perturbations
                                                                                 вҲҡ on natural
samples (deterministic label)). Suppose that Ineq. (2) holds. Assume вҲҘxn вҲҘ = Оҳ( d) for any


                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     вҲҡ
n вҲҲ [N ] and вҲҘzвҲҘ = Оҳ( d). Assume
               N
               X                                         N
                                                         X
                     О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(g1 (N, d)) вҮ’            О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ© = Оҳ(g1 (N, d)),   (A66)
               n=1                                       n=1
               N
               X                                         N
                                                         X
                     О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(g2 (N, d)) вҮ’            О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ© = Оҳ(g2 (N, d)).   (A67)
               n=1                                       n=1

where g1 and g2 are positive functions of N and d. Then, the following statements hold:
       (a) For any z, |T1 (z)| = Оҳ(g3 (N, d)) вҮ” |T2 (z)| = Оҳ(g3 (N, d)), where g3 is a positive
           function of N and d.
                    PN          вҲҡ                       вҲҡ                     вҲҡ
       (b) For z = n=1 Оҳ(1/ N )xn , |T1 (z)| = Оҳ(d/ N ) and |T2 (z)| = Оҳ(d/ N ).
       (c) For z = Оҳ(1)x1 , |T1 (z)| = Оҳ(d/N ) and |T2 (z)| = Оҳ(d/N ).

                              p
       Under Ineq. (2), Пө = O( d/N ). Because we can set Пө freely under Ineq. (2), we consider
Proof. p
Пө = Оҳ( d/N ) which maximizes the effect of learning from perturbations.
(a) By О»n = Оҳ(1/d) and О»adv
                        n   = Оҳ(1/d) (cf. Theorem 3.3 and Corollary 3.4),
                  N
                  X                                    N
                                                       X
                        О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(g(N, d)) вҮ”           О»adv
                                                                n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(g(N, d)).      (A68)
                  n=1                                  n=1

Under the assumption,
                     N
                     X                                     N
                                                           X
                           О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(g(N, d)),           О»adv
                                                                  n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(g(N, d))     (A69)
                     n=1                                   n=1
            N
            X                                       N
                                                    X
        вҮ’         О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ© = Оҳ(g(N, d)),            О»adv adv
                                                           n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ© = Оҳ(g(N, d)).          (A70)
            n=1                                     n=1
       PN                       p
By вҲҘ     n=1 О»n yn xn вҲҘ = Оҳ(       N/d) (cf. Lemma C.3)

                                      Оҳ(g(N, d))       dg(N, d)
                           |T1 (z)| =          =Оҳ                 ,                             (A71)
                                        Оҳ Nd              N
                                         r !
                                            d Оҳ(g(N, d))          dg(N, d)
                           |T2 (z)| =Оҳ              q   = Оҳ                 .                   (A72)
                                            N    Оҳ    N              N
                                                      d

          PN                     вҲҡ       PN                     вҲҡ                  вҲҡ
(b) Since n=1 О»nвҲҡ |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ( N ) and n=1 О»adv
                                               n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ( N ), T1 (z) = Оҳ(d/ N )
and T2 (z) = Оҳ(d/ N ).
          PN                            PN
(c) Since n=1 О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(1) and n=1 О»adv
                                              n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(1), T1 (z) = Оҳ(d/N ) and
T2 (z) = Оҳ(d/N ).

C.3     L IMITING B EHAVIOR OF L EARNING FROM G EOMETRY-I NSPIRED P ERTURBATIONS ON
        NATURAL S AMPLES WITH R ANDOM L ABELS

In this section, we consider learning from geometry-inspired perturbations on natural samples with
random adversarial labels ynadv вҲј U (Вұ1). To prove the key theorem, Proposition C.8, we prepare
Lemmas C.6 and C.7. In addition, we consider Lemma C.5 to prove Lemma C.6. Finally, based
on Proposition C.8, we demonstrate the matching of decision boundaries between learning from
standard samples and adversarial perturbations, Theorem 4.2.
                                             вҲҡ
First, we show that assumptions вҲҘzвҲҘ = Оҳ( d) and |вҹЁxn , xk вҹ©| = O(d/N ) restrict the correla-
tion between z and {xn }N n=1 . In other words, z cannot be strongly correlated with many training
samples. This lemma is used to prove Lemma C.6.


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                              вҲҡ
Lemma C.5  вҲҡ (Restriction on correlation). For any n, k вҲҲ [N ], n Мё= k, assumeвҲ’2Оұ
                                                                               вҲҘxn вҲҘ = Оҳ( d),
вҲҘzвҲҘ = Оҳ( d), and |вҹЁxn , xk вҹ©| = O(d/N ). Then, there exist at most O(min(N        , N )) instances
of n that satisfy |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(N Оұ dОІ ) with Оұ вүӨ 0 and ОІ вүӨ 1.


Proof. For each n, let ПҲn := sgn(вҹЁxn , zвҹ©). For Оұ вүӨ 0 and ОІ вүӨ 1, denote the number of samples
such that |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(N Оұ dОІ ) holds by [N ]Оұ,ОІ := {n вҲҲ [N ] : |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(N Оұ dОІ )}. We define
Оҙ вүӨ 1 such that |[N ]Оұ,ОІ | = Оҳ(N Оҙ ). Then,
          X                    X                      X
                 |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| =         вҹЁПҲn xn , zвҹ© =         Оҳ(N Оұ dОІ ) = Оҳ(N Оұ+Оҙ dОІ ).         (A73)
       nвҲҲ[N ]Оұ,ОІ                 nвҲҲ[N ]Оұ,ОІ                     nвҲҲ[N ]Оұ,ОІ

By the CauchyвҖ“Schwarz inequality,
                                             *                           +
                   X                               X                                 X
                           вҹЁПҲn xn , zвҹ© =                     ПҲn xn , z       вүӨ               ПҲn xn вҲҘzвҲҘ.          (A74)
               nвҲҲ[N ]Оұ,ОІ                         nвҲҲ[N ]Оұ,ОІ                       nвҲҲ[N ]Оұ,ОІ

Note that
                                          s X
                                                                  2
                     X                                                     X         X
                               ПҲn x n =                  вҲҘxn вҲҘ +                         ПҲn ПҲk вҹЁxn , xk вҹ©        (A75)
                   nвҲҲ[N ]Оұ,ОІ                 nвҲҲ[N ]Оұ,ОІ                nвҲҲ[N ]Оұ,ОІ kМё=n
                                          s
                                                                                 d
                                      = Оҳ(N Оҙ d) Вұ Оҳ(N 2Оҙ )O                                                     (A76)
                                                                                 N
                                  вҲҡ
                               =Оҳ( N Оҙ d).                                           (A77)
     P                          вҲҡ
Thus, nвҲҲ[N ]Оұ,ОІ вҹЁПҲn xn , zвҹ© = O( N Оҙ d). Comparing this with Eq. (A73), Оұ + Оҙ вүӨ Оҙ/2 вҮ” Оҙ вүӨ
вҲ’2Оұ.

                                          PN          PN
Then we compare the growth rates of n=1 |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| and n=1 вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 to evaluate the growth
rates of |T1 (z)| and |T2 (z)| in Proposition C.8.

Lemma C.6 (Comparison between                   вҲҡ and squared inner products). For any n, k вҲҲ
                               вҲҡ sums of absolute
[N ], n Мё= k, assume вҲҘxn вҲҘ = Оҳ( d), вҲҘzвҲҘ = Оҳ( d), and |вҹЁxn , xk вҹ©| = O(d/N ). Then, the growth
          PN                         PN
rates of n=1 |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| and Оҳ(1/d) n=1 вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 are the same
                                                          P if and only if |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = 0 for
every n, or there exists n such that |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(d) and n:|вҹЁxn ,zвҹ©|Мё=Оҳ(d) |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = O(d).
             PN                                     PN
Otherwise, n=1 |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| grows faster than Оҳ(1/d) n=1 вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 .


Proof. First, we summarize the content of this proof as follows:

                                                    PN                                   PN              2
    (A) If |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = 0 for every n, then            n=1 |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(1/d)               n=1 вҹЁxn , zвҹ© = 0.

    (B) Assume that there exists n such that |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| > 0.
                                                                PN
       (B-a) If there is no n such that |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(d), then n=1 |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| grows faster than
                      PN
             Оҳ(1/d) n=1 вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 .
       (B-b) Assume that there exists n such that |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(d).
                    P                                           PN
         (B-b-I) If n:|вҹЁxn ,zвҹ©|Мё=Оҳ(d) |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| > в„Ұ(d), then n=1 |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| grows faster than
                          PN
                 Оҳ(1/d) n=1 вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 .
                    P                                             PN
        (B-b-II) If    n:|вҹЁxn ,zвҹ©|Мё=Оҳ(d) |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = O(d), then     n=1 |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(d) and
                          PN               2
                 Оҳ(1/d) n=1 вҹЁxn , zвҹ© = Оҳ(d).


                                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We use [N ]Оұ,ОІ in the proof of Lemma C.5. Denote the number of elements in [N ]Оұ,ОІ by C(Оұ, ОІ) :=
                                                                                  PN
|[N ]Оұ,ОІ |. Denote the set of (Оұ, ОІ) by S := {(Оұ, ОІ) : C(Оұ, ОІ) > 0}. We can write n=1 |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©|
              PN
and Оҳ(1/d) n=1 вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 as follows:
                                    N
                                    X                     X
                                          |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| =             C(Оұ, ОІ)Оҳ(N Оұ dОІ ),            (A78)
                                    n=1                  (Оұ,ОІ)вҲҲS
                                 XN
                               1                X
                          Оҳ         вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 =   C(Оұ, ОІ)Оҳ(N 2Оұ d2ОІвҲ’1 ).                         (A79)
                               d n=1
                                                         (Оұ,ОІ)вҲҲS


(A) This is trivial.
(B-a) Assume that there exists n such that |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| > 0. Because N Оұ dОІ grows faster than
                                                  PN
or equal to N 2Оұ d2ОІвҲ’1 for Оұ вүӨ 0 and ОІ вүӨ 1,           n=1 |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| grows faster than or equal to
        PN
Оҳ(1/d) n=1 вҹЁxn , zвҹ© . The growth rates of N d and N 2Оұ d2ОІвҲ’1 are consistent if and only if
                       2                        Оұ ОІ

Оұ = 0 and ОІ = 1. Thus, if there is no n such that |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(d), i.e., C(0, 1) > 0, then
PN                                         PN           2
   n=1 |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| grows faster than Оҳ(1/d)  n=1 вҹЁxn , zвҹ© .

(B-b-I and -II) Assume that there exists n such that |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(d). By Lemma C.5, C(0, 1) =
Оҳ(1). Let S вҖІ := S \ {(0, 1)}. The above equations can be rearranged as follows:
                              N
                              X                                 X
                                    |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| =Оҳ(d) +                  C(Оұ, ОІ)Оҳ(N Оұ dОІ ),       (A80)
                              n=1                           (Оұ,ОІ)вҲҲS вҖІ
                            XN
                          1                                     X
                       Оҳ       вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 =Оҳ(d) +                        C(Оұ, ОІ)Оҳ(N 2Оұ d2ОІвҲ’1 ).   (A81)
                          d n=1
                                                            (Оұ,ОІ)вҲҲS вҖІ

Since N Оұ dОІ grows faster than N 2Оұ d2ОІвҲ’1 for Оұ < 0 and ОІ < 1, (Оұ,ОІ)вҲҲS вҖІ C(Оұ, ОІ)Оҳ(N Оұ dОІ )
                                                                      P

grows faster than (Оұ,ОІ)вҲҲS вҖІ C(Оұ, ОІ)Оҳ(N 2Оұ d2ОІвҲ’1 ). If (Оұ,ОІ)вҲҲS вҖІ C(Оұ, ОІ)Оҳ(N Оұ dОІ ) determines
                   P                                      P
                   PN                                                            PN
the growth rate of n=1 |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©|, i.e., (Оұ,ОІ)вҲҲS вҖІ C(Оұ, ОІ)Оҳ(N Оұ dОІ ) > в„Ұ(d), then n=1 |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©|
                                        P
                          PN
grows faster than Оҳ(1/d) n=1 вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 . In contrast, if (Оұ,ОІ)вҲҲS вҖІ C(Оұ, ОІ)Оҳ(N Оұ dОІ ) does not
                                                            P
                            PN                       P                     Оұ ОІ
change the growth rate of      n=1 |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©|, i.e.,   (Оұ,ОІ)вҲҲS вҖІ C(Оұ, ОІ)Оҳ(N d ) = O(d), then
PN                                      PN           2
   n=1 |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(d) and Оҳ(1/d)      n=1 вҹЁxn , zвҹ© = Оҳ(d); namely, their growth rates are the
same.

Then we prepare a concentration inequality to evaluate an upper bound of T1 (z) in Proposition C.8.

Lemma C.7 (Concentration inequality). Let {xn }N   n=1 be N вҲҲ N independent random variables.
Assume that xn is sampled from [an , bn ] and E[xn ] = 0 for each n вҲҲ [N ]. Then, for t > 0,
                       " N             #               N
                                                                         !
                         X                          1X
                     P       xn вүҘ t вүӨ 2 exp               (bn вҲ’ an )2 вҲ’ t .                  (A82)
                         n=1
                                                    8 n=1


Proof. By MarkovвҖҷs inequality, for t > 0,
                                      h     P         i
                                              N
                                     E exp    n=1 xn
                 "N            #                         QN
                   X                                         E[exp(xn )]
               P       xn вүҘ t вүӨ               t
                                                        = n=1 t          .                       (A83)
                   n=1
                                            e                 e
By HoeffdingвҖҷs lemma,
       "N           # QN                                   N
                                                                           !
                                             2

                           n=1 exp (bn вҲ’ an ) /8        1X
         X
                                                                       2
      P      xn вүҘ t вүӨ                             = exp      (bn вҲ’ an ) вҲ’ t .                    (A84)
         n=1
                                      et                8 n=1
                                         PN
We can derive the same inequality for P[вҲ’ n=1 xn вүҘ t].


                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


While the concentration inequality, Lemma C.7, is weaker than HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality, we use it for
a simple proof of Proposition C.8. The proof of Proposition C.8 requires us to consider the probabil-
       PN                          PN
ity P[| n=1 О»adv    adv
               n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| >       n=1 О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©|]. Using Lemma C.7, this can be represented
as follows:
                           " N                            N
                                                                         #
                              X                          X
                                   adv adv
                          P       О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ© >          О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©|
                              n=1                          n=1
                                     N                      N
                                                                              !
                                    1X    adv 2         2
                                                           X
                         вүӨ2 exp          О»      вҹЁxn , zвҹ© вҲ’     О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©|    .              (A85)
                                    2 n=1 n                n=1

Using HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality, it can also be represented as follows:
     " N                           N
                                                   #               PN                    !
       X
            adv adv
                                  X                               ( n=1 О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©|)2
   P       О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ© >           О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’ PN             2            .    (A86)
       n=1                        n=1                            2 n=1 О»adv
                                                                         n     вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2
                                         PN          2               PN
In the former case, the growth rates of n=1 О»adv  n    вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 and n=1 О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| are the main
                                                                                PN        2
concern (cf. Lemma C.6). In the latter case, the focus is on the growth rates of n=1 О»adv
                                                                                       n    вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2
     PN
and ( n=1 О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©|)2 , which present a more complex scenario than the former. Thus, we use
Lemma C.7 to prove Proposition C.8.
Proposition C.8 describes the limiting behavior of the two components of the decision boundary:
the effect of learning from mislabeled natural samples T1 (z) and from perturbations T2 (z).

Proposition C.8 (Limiting behavior of learning from geometry-inspired perturbations
                                                                          вҲҡ          on natural
samples (random
             вҲҡ  label)). Suppose that Ineq. (2) holds. Assume вҲҘx n вҲҘ = Оҳ(   d) for any n вҲҲ [N ]
and вҲҘzвҲҘ = Оҳ( d). Suppose that ynadv is randomly sampled from {Вұ1} for each n. Assume
               N
               X                                     N
                                                     X
                     О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(g(N, d)) вҮ’          О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ© = Оҳ(g(N, d)).       (A87)
               n=1                                   n=1

where g is a positive function of N and d. Then, the following statements hold with probability at
least 99.99%:
                   P there exists n such that |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| > 0. If there is no n such that |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| =
     (a) Assume that
         Оҳ(d) or      n:|вҹЁxn ,zвҹ©|Мё=Оҳ(d) |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = O(d) does not hold, with N, d вҶ’ вҲһ, then
         |T2 (z)| > |T1 (z)|.
                  PN             вҲҡ                                                вҲҡ
     (b) For z = n=1 Оҳ(1/ N )xn , |T1 (z)| = O(d/N ) and |T2 (z)| = Оҳ(d/ N ).
     (c) For z = Оҳ(1)x1 , |T1 (z)| = O(d/N ) and |T2 (z)| = Оҳ(d/N ).

                                                        PN
Proof. Similarly to the proof of Proposition C.4, if     n=1 О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(g(N, d)),
                       XN
                     d                                                         dg(N, d)
        |T1 (z)| = Оҳ      О»adv y adv вҹЁxn , zвҹ© ,                  |T2 (z)| = Оҳ             .    (A88)
                     N n=1 n n                                                    N

(a) By Lemma C.7,
              " N                     #           N
                                                                     !
                X
                     adv adv                   1 X adv 2         2
            P       О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ© > t вүӨ 2 exp      О»    вҹЁxn , zвҹ© вҲ’ t .                        (A89)
                n=1
                                               2 n=1 n

                                                               adv 2
         PN                                          PN
Thus, | n=1 О»adv     adv
                n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = O(h(N, d)) if          n=1 О»n       вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 = O(h(N, d)), where
h(N, d) is a positive function of N and d, withP  sufficiently  high  probability. By Lemma C.6, if
there is no n such that |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(d) or n:|вҹЁxn ,zвҹ©|Мё=Оҳ(d) |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = O(d) does not hold,
g(N, d) grows faster than h(N, d). Thus, |T2 (z)| grows faster than |T1 (z)|; namely, if N, d вҶ’ вҲһ,
|T2 (z)| becomes larger than |T1 (z)|.


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                 вҲҡ
(b) The proof of |T2 (z)| = Оҳ(d/ N ) can be found in the proof of Proposition C.4. For
     PN        вҲҡ          PN      2
z = n=1 Оҳ(1/ N )xn , n=1 О»adv  n    вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 = O(1). Thus, h(N, d) = O(1), and |T1 (z)| =
O(d/N ).
(c) The proof of |T2 (z)| = Оҳ(d/N ) can be found in the proof of Proposition C.4. For z = Оҳ(1)x1 ,
        adv 2
PN
   n=1 О»n     вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 = O(1). Thus, h(N, d) = O(1), and |T1 (z)| = O(d/N ).

In Proposition C.8, we show that if N, d вҶ’ вҲһ, the effect of learning from perturbations |T2 (z)|
exceeds that from mislabeled samples |T1 (z)| except for specific inputs. Consequently, we can
justify learning from perturbations on natural samples as follows:

Theorem 4.2 (Consistent decision of learning from geometry-inspired вҲҡ perturbations on natu-
ral samples).вҲҡ Suppose that Ineq. (2) holds. Assume вҲҘxn вҲҘ = Оҳ( d) for any n вҲҲ [N ] and
вҲҘzвҲҘ = Оҳ( d). Suppose that ynadv is randomly sampled from {Вұ1} for each n. Assume
 PN                                      PN
| n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(g(N, d)) if n=1 О»n |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(g(N,    P d)), where g is a positive
function of N and d. If there is no n such that |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(d) or n:|вҹЁxn ,zвҹ©|Мё=Оҳ(d) |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| =
                                             bdy
O(d) does not hold, with N, d вҶ’ вҲһ, then sgn(fadv (z)) = sgn(f bdy (z)) holds with probability at
least 99.99%.

                                              bdy
Proof. If |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = 0 for every n, then fadv   (z) = |T1 (z)| = |T2 (z)| = f bdy (z) = 0. As-
sume that there existsPn such that |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| > 0. By Proposition C.8, if there is no n such that
|вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(d) or n:|вҹЁxn ,zвҹ©|Мё=Оҳ(d) |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = O(d), with N, d вҶ’ вҲһ, then |T2 (z)| > |T1 (z)|
                                               bdy
with sufficiently high probability; thus, sgn(fadv (z)) = sgn(f bdy (z)).

D    P ROOFS OF T HEOREMS IN S ECTION 4.3
In this section, we prove Theorems 4.3 and 4.4 and Corollary 4.5. The proof flows of Theorems 4.3
and 4.4 follow Appendix C. In addition, we derive Corollary 4.5 as a natural consequence of Theo-
rem 4.2.
First, we summarize the properties of uniform random variables, which are required to consider the
orthogonality condition of perturbations on uniform noises.

Lemma D.1 (Properties of uniform random vectors). Let {Xn }N                      d
                                                                   n=1 вҠӮ [вҲ’1, 1] be N вҲҲ N inde-
pendent random variables sampled from the uniform distribution U ([вҲ’1, 1] ). Let z вҲҲ Rd be a
                                                                               d

constant vector. Then, for a positive constant t > 1/N , the following inequalities hold:
                          "                        вҲҡ         #               N
                                        2   d        d ln tN              2
                    (a) P max вҲҘXn вҲҘ вҲ’           вүӨ              вүҘ 1вҲ’             ,         (A90)
                             n              3          2                tN
                                                                           N
                          h                     вҲҡ          i           2
                    (b) P max |вҹЁXn , Xk вҹ©| вүӨ 2d ln tN вүҘ 1 вҲ’                  ,            (A91)
                             n                                        tN
                                                                            N
                          h                   вҲҡ             i           2
                    (c) P max |вҹЁXn , zвҹ©| вүӨ 2 ln tN вҲҘzвҲҘ вүҘ 1 вҲ’                  .           (A92)
                             n                                         tN

Proof. Let a > 0 be a positive constant.
                                       2
(a) By HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality with E[Xn,i ] = 1/3,

                                                           2a2

                                     2     d
                            P вҲҘXn вҲҘ вҲ’        вүҘ a вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’       .                           (A93)
                                           3                d
Thus,
                                                        N
                             2  d              2  d
                  P max вҲҘXn вҲҘ вҲ’   вүӨ a = P вҲҘXn вҲҘ вҲ’   вүӨa                                       (A94)
                     n          3                 3

                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                  N
                                                                    2     d
                                                      = 1 вҲ’ P вҲҘXn вҲҘ вҲ’       вүҘa                                 (A95)
                                                                          3
                                                                        2
                                                                            N
                                                                    2a
                                                      вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 2 exp вҲ’           .                                (A96)
                                                                      d
          p
For a =       d ln(tN )/2 with t > 1/N ,
                                                                N
                                             вҲҡ

                                        2 d                  2
                          P max вҲҘXn вҲҘ вҲ’     вүӨ d ln tN вүҘ 1 вҲ’       .                                            (A97)
                              n           3                 tN

(b) Similarly to (i),
                                                              2
                                                                a
                                  P[|вҹЁXn , Xk вҹ©| вүҘ a] вүӨ2 exp вҲ’      ,                                          (A98)
                                                                2d
                                                    i               2   N
                             h                                        a
                            P max |вҹЁXn , Xk вҹ©| вүӨ a вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 2 exp вҲ’          ,                                    (A99)
                                n                                     2d
                                                                 N
                     h                  вҲҡ           i         2
                    P max |вҹЁXn , Xk вҹ©| вүӨ 2d ln tN вүҘ 1 вҲ’            .                                          (A100)
                       n                                     tN

(c) Similarly to (i),
                                                                                          !
                                                                                 a2
                                            P[|вҹЁXn , zвҹ©| вүҘ a] вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’               2   ,                   (A101)
                                                                              2вҲҘzвҲҘ
                                                                                !!N
                           h                  i                             a2
                          P max |вҹЁXn , zвҹ©| вүӨ a вүҘ          1 вҲ’ 2 exp вҲ’
                                                                  2      ,                                    (A102)
                              n                              2вҲҘzвҲҘ
                                                                       N
                             h                вҲҡ           i         2
                            P max |вҹЁXn , zвҹ©| вүӨ 2 ln tN вҲҘzвҲҘ вүҘ 1 вҲ’         .                                    (A103)
                               n                                  tN



Theorem 4.3 (Decision boundary when learning from geometry-inspired perturbations on uniform
noises). Assume Оі 3 Rmin
                      4
                          /(3N Rmax  2
                                        ) вүҘ pmax . Let f be a one-hidden-layer neural network trained
on geometry-inspired perturbations on natural data (cf. Eq. (1) and Definition 3.2(b)) with Set-
ting 3.1. For any n Мё= k, if
            вҲҡ                           вҲҡ
       d      Cd             2      d     Cd                    вҲҡ                        вҲҡ
          вҲ’       вүӨ вҲҘXn вҲҘ вүӨ +                , |вҹЁXn , Xk вҹ©| вүӨ 2Cd, |вҹЁXn , О·/Пөвҹ©| вүӨ 2C, (4)
       3      2                     3     2
                                          вҲҡ          вҲҡ
                               Оі 3 (2d вҲ’ 3 Cd вҲ’ 12 2CПө + 6Пө2 )2          вҲҡ         вҲҡ
                                             вҲҡ          вҲҡ             вүҘ 2Cd + 2 2CПө + Пө2 (5)
                           18N adv (2d + 3 Cd + 12 2CПө + 6Пө2 )
with C := ln 1000N adv , then, with t вҶ’ вҲһ, the decision boundary of f is given by:
                        PN adv adv adv
         bdy               n=1 О»n yn вҹЁXn , zвҹ©                      f bdy (z)
        fadv (z) :=            PN adv adv            +       Пө PN                                         .      (6)
                                  n=1 О»n
                                                               вҲҘ n=1 О»n yn xn вҲҘ
                        |            {z         }            |        {z        }
                         Effect of learning from uniform noises   Effect of learning from perturbations


                  PN
Proof. Let q :=         n=1 О»n yn xn . The norm and inner product are

               2       2                 q
          xadv
           n     =вҲҘXn вҲҘ + 2Пөynadv Xn ,        + Пө2 ,                                                          (A104)
                                       вҲҘqвҲҘ

     adv  adv                 adv          q         adv         q
   вҹЁxn , xk вҹ© =вҹЁXn , Xk вҹ© + Пөyn     Xk ,       + Пөyk       Xn ,       + Пө2 ynadv ykadv .                      (A105)
                                         вҲҘqвҲҘ                    вҲҘqвҲҘ

                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus, under Ineq. (4),
                    вҲҡ                                                             вҲҡ
        adv 2  d       Cd    вҲҡ                                 adv 2  d             Cd    вҲҡ
      Rmin вүҘ вҲ’            вҲ’ 2 2CПө + Пө2 ,                      Rmax   вүӨ +               + 2 2CПө + Пө2 ,    (A106)
               3
               вҲҡ       2 вҲҡ                                                 3        2
         adv
       pmax вүӨ 2Cd + 2 2CПө + Пө2 .                                                                         (A107)
                                          adv 4          adv 2
Using these bounds, we can rearrange Оі 3 Rmin   /3N adv Rmax   as follows:
                                     4                      вҲҡ       вҲҡ
                        Оі 3 Rmin
                             adv
                                                 Оі 3 (2d вҲ’ 3 Cd вҲ’ 12 2CПө + 6Пө2 )2
                                         2 вүҘ
                                                              вҲҡ       вҲҡ            .                     (A108)
                      3N adv Rmax
                              adv              18N adv (2d + 3 Cd + 12 2CПө + 6Пө2 )
                                               4                  2
Thus, if Ineq. (5) holds, then Оі 3 Rmin
                                    adv
                                        /3N adv Rmax
                                                 adv
                                                     вүҘ padv
                                                        max holds, and we can use Corollary 3.4.
The decision boundary can be derived similarly to Theorem C.2.

Lemma D.2 is used in the proof of Theorem 4.4.
                                                                             вҲҡ       вҲҡ
Lemma D.2 (Upper bound of sum of squared inner products). If вҲҘxn вҲҘ = Оҳ( d), вҲҘzвҲҘ = Оҳ( d),
                                                            PN
and |вҹЁxn , xk вҹ©| = O(d/N ) for any n, k вҲҲ [N ], n Мё= k, then n=1 вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 = O(d2 ).

Proof. With ПҲn := sgn(вҹЁxn , zвҹ©), by the CauchyвҖ“Schwarz inequality,
                      N
                      X                      N
                                             X
                            |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| =           вҹЁПҲn xn , zвҹ©                                           (A109)
                      n=1                    n=1
                                               N
                                               X
                                         вүӨ           ПҲn xn вҲҘzвҲҘ                                           (A110)
                                               n=1
                                           v
                                           uN         N X
                                                   2
                                           uX         X
                                         = t  вҲҘxn вҲҘ +     ПҲn ПҲk вҹЁxn , xk вҹ©вҲҘzвҲҘ                            (A111)
                                               n=1               n=1 kМё=n
                                            вҲҡ
                                         =O( N d).                                                       (A112)
By the CauchyвҖ“Schwarz inequality,
        N
        X                   N
                            X
              вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 =         вҹЁвҹЁxn , zвҹ©xn , zвҹ©                                                       (A113)
        n=1                 n=1
                            *N                       +
                             X
                       =            вҹЁxn , zвҹ©xn , z                                                       (A114)
                             n=1
                        v
                        uN                   N X
                                          2
                        uX                   X
                       вүӨt  вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 вҲҘxn вҲҘ +     вҹЁxn , zвҹ©вҹЁxk , zвҹ©вҹЁxn , xk вҹ©вҲҘzвҲҘ.                          (A115)
                             n=1                           n=1 kМё=n

Now,
          N X
          X                                              N X
                                                         X N
                    вҹЁxn , zвҹ©вҹЁxk , zвҹ©вҹЁxn , xk вҹ© вүӨ                      |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©||вҹЁxk , zвҹ©||вҹЁxn , xk вҹ©|   (A116)
          n=1 kМё=n                                       n=1 k=1
                                                                   N
                                                                   X                   !2
                                                         d
                                                      =O                      |вҹЁxn , zвҹ©|                 (A117)
                                                         N              n=1
                                                      =O(d3 ).                                           (A118)
Thus,
                                               v
                              N
                              X
                                               u
                                               u       N
                                                       X
                                            2
                                    вҹЁxn , zвҹ© = tОҳ(d2 )   вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 + O(d4 ).                             (A119)
                             n=1                                 n=1


                                                           26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



      PN           2     О¶ 2                      d
Let    n=1 вҹЁxn , zвҹ© = O(N d ) for a constant О¶ вҲҲ R . Using this,

                                 N
                                 X
                                      вҹЁxn , zвҹ©2 = O(max(N О¶/2 d2 , d2 )).                           (A120)
                                 n=1
                                 |      {z        }
                                     O(N О¶ d2 )

If О¶ > 0, the left term grows faster than the right term, which contradicts the equation. Thus,
О¶ вүӨ 0.


Theorem 4.4 (Consistent decision of learning from geometry-inspired perturbations on uniform
noises). Assume Оі 3 Rmin4         2
                          /(3N Rmax  ) вүҘ pmax . Suppose that Ineqs. (4) and (5) hold. Assume
            вҲҡ                                      2
вҲҘzвҲҘ = Оҳ( d), |f (z)| = в„Ұ(1), and d > N adv . Then, the following equations hold with
                     bdy

probability at least 99.99%:
     PN adv adv adv                     вҲҡ !
                                                      |f bdy (z)|

        n=1   О» n  y n  вҹЁX n , zвҹ©         d                                    d
            PN adv adv            =O         ,   Пө PN                =в„ҰМғ вҲҡ             .  (7)
                                       N adv      вҲҘ n=1 О»n yn xn вҲҘ           N adv N
                n=1 О»n

In addition, if d and N adv are sufficiently large and N adv вүҘ N holds, then for any z вҲҲ Rd ,
     bdy
sgn(fadv  (z)) = sgn(f bdy (z)) holds with probability at least 99.99%.


Proof. By the definition in Theorem 3.3 and Corollary 3.4, О»n = Оҳ(1/d) and О»adv          n   = Оҳ(1/d).
                                                   PN adv adv adv
Left term. Consider the limiting behavior of | n=1 О»n yn вҹЁXn , zвҹ©|. First, we provide an
                                                                                    adv
                                                                                                    N adv
incorrect idea for clarity. By HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality with respect to {ynadv }N  n=1 and {Xn }n=1 , for
t > 0,
            пЈ® adv                          пЈ№                                             !
              NX
                      adv adv                                          t2
          P пЈ°       О»n yn вҹЁXn , zвҹ© вүҘ t вүӨ2 exp вҲ’ PN adv Pd
                                           пЈ»                                                          (A121)
                                                          2 n=1                adv 2 z 2
               n=1                                                       i=1 О»n       i
                                                                                    !
                                                                     t2
                                              =2 exp вҲ’ PN adv               2     2
                                                                                                      (A122)
                                                          2 n=1 О»adv   n      вҲҘzвҲҘ
                                                             dt2

                                              =O exp вҲ’ adv              .                             (A123)
                                                            N
                                                  PN adv                                   p
From this inequality, one might consider that | n=1 О»adv         adv
                                                            n yn вҹЁXn , zвҹ©| = O( N
                                                                                               adv /d) holds
with sufficiently high probability. This is incorrect because the above rearrangement does not take
                                                        adv
into account the orthogonality assumption on {Xn }N    n=1 , i.e., |вҹЁXn , Xk вҹ©| = O(d/N ) for n Мё= k.
                                                                                                  adv
We then provide a correct estimation. By HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality with respect to {ynadv }N       n=1 ,
            пЈ® adv                          пЈ№                                             !
              N
              X
                     adv adv                                           t2
          P пЈ°      О»n yn вҹЁXn , zвҹ© вүҘ t вүӨ2 exp вҲ’ PN adv
                                           пЈ»
                                                                           2
                                                                                           .          (A124)
              n=1                                        2 n=1 О»adv   n      вҹЁXn , zвҹ©2
                                         PN adv adv 2
By Lemma D.2 with the assumptions,          n=1 О»n     вҹЁXn , zвҹ©2 = O(1/d). Thus, we obtain
 PN adv adv adv                     вҲҡ
| n=1 О»n yn вҹЁXn , zвҹ©| = O(1/ d) with sufficiently high probability. Because the growth
         PN adv
rate of | n=1 О»adv
                n | is Оҳ(N
                           adv
                               /d), the claim is established.
                                                      2
Right term. Under Ineq. (5) and d > N adv , Пө = OМғ(d/N adv ). Since we can set Пө freely under Пө =
OМғ(d/N adv ), we consider Пө = ОҳМғ(d/N adv ). By Lemma C.3 and the assumption |f bdy (z)| = в„Ұ(1),
the claim is established.
Consistent decision. This is trivial by the growth rate of two terms.


                                                          27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Corollary 4.5 (Complete classification for natural training samples when learning from geome-
try-inspired perturbations on uniform noises). Assume Оі 3 Rmin 4         2
                                                                  /(3N Rmax  ) вүҘ pmax . Suppose that
                                     adv                                       2    вҲҡ
Ineqs. (4) and (5) hold. If d and N       are sufficiently large and d > N adv вүҘ N holds, then
a one-hidden-layer neural network trained on geometry-inspired perturbations on uniform noises
with Setting 3.1 can completely classify the natural dataset {(xn , yn )}N
                                                                         n=1 with probability at least
99.99%.


Proof. We can rearrange f bdy (xn ) as follows:
                                     N
                                                                          2
                                     X                                        X
                     bdy
                 f         (xn ) =         О»k yk вҹЁxk , xn вҹ© = О»n yn вҲҘxn вҲҘ вҲ’          О»l yl вҹЁxl , xn вҹ©.   (A125)
                                     k=1                                      lМё=n

By Ineq. (A65), |f bdy (xn )| = Оҳ(1). By Theorem 4.4, the claim is established.

E     OTHER P ERTURBATIONS

In the main text, we consider learning from geometry-inspired L2 perturbations, which simplify
notation. In this section, we consider learning from geometry-inspired L0 and LвҲһ and gradient-
based L2 perturbations.

E.1   G EOMETRY-I NSPIRED L0 P ERTURBATIONS

Let dОҙ вҲҲ NвүӨd be the number of modified pixels. An adversarial example is restricted to вҲҘxadv   n  вҲ’
xn вҲҘ0 вүӨ dОҙ . Following one pixel attack (Su et al., 2019) and SparseFool (Modas et al., 2019), we do
not constrain the distance between original and perturbed pixels. We define a geometry-inspired L0
perturbation as follows:
                               bdy
                                                            PN
                    adv вҲҮxn f      (xn ) вҠҷ Mn          adv    k=1 О»k yk xk вҠҷ Mk
          О·n := Пөyn            bdy
                                                 = Пөyn      PN                    ,          (A126)
                       вҲҘвҲҮxn f (xn ) вҠҷ Mn вҲҘ                 вҲҘ k=1 О»k yk xk вҠҷ Mk вҲҘ

where вҠҷ denotes the Hadamard product and Mn вҲҲ {0, 1}d denotes a mask vector. Let Sn be the set
of the top-dОҙ elements where |вҲҮxn,i f bdy (xn )| is the largest. The i-th element of Mn is set to one if
i is contained in Sn and zero otherwise. Since вҲҮxn f bdy (xn ) does not depend on n, Mn does not
depend on n. Thus, we denote M := M1 = В· В· В· = MN . Rearranging the above equation,
                                             PN
                                        adv      k=1 О»k yk xk вҠҷ M
                               О·n = Пөyn       PN                        .                       (A127)
                                            вҲҘ k=1 О»k yk xk вҠҷ M вҲҘ
Similar to Eq. (1), this perturbation is represented as the weighted sum of benign training samples,
and thus contains class features. This result indicates that even sparse perturbations, which seem to
lack natural data structures, enable networks to generalize.
Consider the decision boundary when learning from L0 perturbations. To employ Corollary 3.4, we
first construct an orthogonality condition for L0 perturbations. As a preliminary, refer to the proof
of Lemma C.1. The norm is
                                                  PN
                                                    k=1 О»k yk вҹЁxk вҠҷ M , xn вҹ©
                     вҲҘxadv
                        n  вҲҘ2
                              =вҲҘx n вҲҘ 2
                                        + 2Пөyn
                                              adv
                                                     PN                      + Пө2             (A128)
                                                   вҲҘ k=1 О»k yk xk вҠҷ M вҲҘ
                                            r !
                                                dОҙ
                              =Оҳ(d) Вұ Оҳ             Пө + Пө2 .                                  (A129)
                                                N

Note that
    N                       2       N                        N X
    X                               X                        X
          О»n yn xn вҠҷ M          =         О»2n вҲҘxn вҠҷ M вҲҘ2 +              О»n О»k yn yk вҹЁxn вҠҷ M , xk вҠҷ M вҹ© (A130)
    n=1                             n=1                      n=1 kМё=n


                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                N dОҙ
                             =Оҳ       .                                                            (A131)
                                 d2
In addition,
  N
  X                                                       X                               dОҙ
        О»k yk вҹЁxk вҠҷ M , xn вҹ© =О»n yn вҹЁxn вҠҷ M , xn вҹ© +             О»k yk вҹЁxk вҠҷ M , xn вҹ© = Оҳ    . (A132)
                                                                                          d
  k=1                                                     kМё=n

The inner product is
      вҹЁxadv  adv
        n , xk вҹ©
                          PN                                      PN
                              l=1 О»l yl вҹЁxl вҠҷ M , xk вҹ©             l=1 О»l yl вҹЁxl вҠҷ M , xn вҹ©
   =вҹЁxn , xk вҹ© + Пөynadv        PN                      + Пөykadv     PN                      + Пө2   (A133)
                             вҲҘ l=1 О»l yl xl вҠҷ M вҲҘ                 вҲҘ l=1 О»l yl xl вҠҷ M вҲҘ
                        r      !
      d                     dОҙ
   =O              ВұОҳ           Пө + Пө2 .                                                           (A134)
      N                     N
The orthogonality condition can be rearranged as follows:
                         p                                    r !
            (Оҳ(d) вҲ’ Оҳ( dОҙ /N )Пө + Пө2 )2

                                                      d          dОҙ
                           p                  вҲ’O        вҲ’Оҳ            Пө вҲ’ Пө2 вүҘ 0.      (A135)
          Оҳ(N )(Оҳ(d) + Оҳ( dОҙ /N )Пө + Пө )   2          N          N
                            p
Thus, Пө is constrained to O( d/N ). Moreover, similarly to Theorem 4.2, the following decision
boundary can be derived using Corollary 3.4:
                           PN                           PN
                 bdy              О»adv y adv вҹЁxn , zвҹ©     n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxn вҠҷ M , zвҹ©
                fadv (z) = n=1PnN n                   +Пө P  N
                                                                                  .    (A136)
                                          adv
                                    n=1 О»n              вҲҘ n=1 О»n yn xn вҠҷ M вҲҘ
Finally, under the condition
                      вҲҡ      of Theorem 4.2, we consider the limiting behavior of this boundary
           PN
for z :=     n=1  Оҳ(1/   N )x n . Since the left term of this boundary equals that of Eq.
                                                                                       p (3), the
left term grows with O(d/N ). Similarly to Lemma C.3, the right term grows with Оҳ( ddОҙ /N ).
If d/dОҙ = Оҳ(1), the right term grows faster than the left; namely, the effect of learning from
perturbations dominates the classifier decision. Thus, learning from L0 perturbations succeeds for
samples that are weakly correlated with many training samples.

E.2     G EOMETRY-I NSPIRED LвҲһ P ERTURBATIONS

Similar to fast gradient sign method (Goodfellow et al., 2015) and projected gradient descent (Madry
et al., 2018), we define an LвҲһ adversarial perturbation as follows:
                                                                     N
                                                                                !
                                                                    X
                   О·n := Пөynadv sgn(вҲҮxn f bdy (xn )) = Пөynadv sgn       О»k yk xk .            (A137)
                                                                         k=1
                   PN                          вҲҡ
Assume вҹЁsgn( k=1 О»k yk xk ), xn вҹ© = Оҳ( d) for any n. Similarly to the above discussion, the
orders of the norm and inner product are
                         вҲҡ                                                вҲҡ

     adv 2                                2      adv adv       d
    xn      =Оҳ(d) Вұ Оҳ( d)Пө + Оҳ(d)Пө , вҹЁxn , xk вҹ© =O                  Вұ Оҳ( d)Пө + Оҳ(d)Пө2 . (A138)
                                                              N
                                                                      вҲҡ
Assuming d/N = Оҳ(1), the orthogonality condition requires Пө = O(1/ d). The decision boundary
is
                             PN                          *       N
                                                                            ! +
                                      adv adv
                 bdy            n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©
                                                                X
               fadv (z) :=          PN                + Пө sgn       О»k yk xk , z .      (A139)
                                             adv
                                      n=1 О»n                    k=1
                                                                вҲҡ PN
Consider the limiting behavior of this boundary for z := Оҳ(d/ N ) k=1 О»k ykвҲҡxk . Similarly to
                                                        O(d/N )(= O(1)) and Оҳ( d), respectively.
the discussion above, the left and right terms grow withвҲҡ
                PN                PN
Note that вҹЁsgn( k=1 О»k yk xk ), k=1 О»k yk xk вҹ© = Оҳ( N ). Thus, learning from LвҲһ perturbations
succeeds for samples that are weakly correlated with many training samples.


                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.3     G RADIENT- BASED L2 P ERTURBATIONS

In the main text, we consider geometry-inspired perturbations that target the decision boundary f bdy
instead of the network f itself. In this section, we consider L2 gradient-based perturbations that
target the network f itself. Similar concepts are employed in fast gradient sign method (Goodfellow
et al., 2015) and projected gradient descent (Madry et al., 2018).
Attack on Network Directly. First, we consider an attack on the network f . Since gradient flow on
f converges in direction to W std (cf. Theorem B.1), with t вҶ’ вҲһ, we can represent the network as
f (z; cW std ) with c > 0. Note that вҹЁv, xn вҹ© > 0 and вҹЁu, xn вҹ© < 0 if yn = 1, and вҹЁu, xn вҹ© > 0 and
вҹЁv, xn вҹ© < 0 if yn = вҲ’1 (Frei et al., 2023). By Theorem B.1, if yn = 1,
                             m/2             m/2
                         X 1                 X Оі
        f (xn ; cW std ) =   вҲҡ вҹЁcvk , xn вҹ© вҲ’      вҲҡ вҹЁcuk , xn вҹ©                                (A140)
                               m                     m
                         k=1                 k=1
                         вҲҡ                вҲҡ
                           m             Оі m
                       =     вҹЁcv, xn вҹ© вҲ’      вҹЁcu, xn вҹ©                                        (A141)
                          2               2
                         c(1 + Оі 2 ) X                       cОі X
                       =                  О»k yk вҹЁxk , xn вҹ© вҲ’               О»k yk вҹЁxk , xn вҹ©.   (A142)
                             2                                2
                                   k:yk =+1                     k:yk =вҲ’1

Thus,
                                (1 + Оі 2 ) k:yk =+1 О»k yk xk вҲ’ Оі k:yk =вҲ’1 О»k yk xk
                                          P                     P
       вҲҮxn f (xn ; cW std )
                             =                                                       .         (A143)
      вҲҘвҲҮxn f (xn ; cW std )вҲҘ   вҲҘ(1 + Оі 2 ) k:yk =+1 О»k yk xk вҲ’ Оі k:yk =вҲ’1 О»k yk xk вҲҘ
                                          P                     P

We denote this by s+ . Similarly, for negatively labeled samples, we define sвҲ’ . An adversarial
example targeting the network can be represented as follows:
                                             adv
                              adv            Пөyn s+ (yn = 1)
                            xn := xn +                            .                    (A144)
                                             Пөynadv sвҲ’ (yn = вҲ’1)

                                      p we evaluate the order of вҹЁs+ , xn вҹ©. Similarly to Lemma C.3,
To consider the orthogonality condition,
the denominator of s+ grows with Оҳ( N/d). In addition, the inner product between the numerator
and xn grows with
                p Оҳ(1) (cf. Lemma C.1). Thus, similar to Lemma C.1, the orthogonality condition
requires Пө = O( d/N ). By Corollary 3.4, the decision boundary is
         bdy
        fadv  (z)
        PN                                         adv                         adv
                                       P                          P
                  adv adv
           n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©            n:yn =+1 О»n вҹЁs+ , zвҹ© +      n:yn =вҲ’1 О»n вҹЁsвҲ’ , zвҹ©
      =        PN                  +Пө                       N
                                                                                          .    (A145)
                       adv                                         adv
                                                          P
                  n=1 О»n                                    n=1 О»n
                                                           PN            вҲҡ
Consider the limiting behavior of this boundary for z = n=1 Оҳ(1/ N )xn . Because the left term
                                                                     adv
of this boundaryвҲҡequals Eq. (3), it grows with O(d/N ).  вҲҡ Since О»        = Оҳ(1/d) (cf. Corollary 3.4)
and вҹЁs+ , zвҹ© = N d, the right term grows with O(d/ N ). Thus, learning from L2 perturbations
that target the network itself also succeeds for samples that are weakly correlated with many training
samples.
Attack on Network with Loss Function. Then, we consider an attack on the network f with the
exponential loss. The gradients of the exponential loss for xn can be calculated as follows:
    вҲҮxn exp вҲ’yn f (xn ; cW std ) = вҲ’ yn exp вҲ’yn f (xn ; cW std ) вҲҮxn f (xn ; cW std )

                                                                                             (A146)
                                    = вҲ’ yn exp(вҲ’c)вҲҮxn f (xn ; cW std ).                        (A147)
This indicates that the normalized gradients with the exponential loss are consistent with those of
the network without a loss function. Thus, the case of the direct attack on the network can be applied
to the case of the exponential loss. The same discussion applies to the logistic loss.

F     S UB -G AUSSIAN N OISE S CENARIO
In this section, we consider learning from perturbations on sub-Gaussian noises. A sub-Gaussian
random variable is defined as follows:


                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition F.1 (Sub-Gaussian). A random variable X is called sub-Gaussian if there exists some
                                                                  2 2
Пғ 2 > 0 such that for every s вҲҲ R, X satisfies E[es(XвҲ’E[X]) ] вүӨ eПғ s /2 .

We write a sub-Gaussian random variable as X вҲј subG(Пғ 2 ). Sub-Gaussian random variables
include Gaussian and any bounded random variables such as Rademacher (or symmetric Bernoulli)
and uniform random variables. In addition, we define a sub-exponential random variable as follows:
Definition F.2 (Sub-exponential). A random variable X is called sub-exponential if there exist some
                                                                                2 2
Пғ 2 > 0 and b > 0 such that for every |s| вүӨ 1/b, X satisfies E[es(XвҲ’E[X]) ] вүӨ eПғ s /2 .

We write a sub-exponential random variable as X вҲј subE(Пғ 2 , b). Sub-Gaussian and -exponential
have the following properties:

Lemma F.3 (Properties of sub-Gaussian and -exponential).
     (a) If X follows subG(Пғ 2 ), then P[|X вҲ’ E[X]| > t] вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’t2 /2Пғ 2 holds for any t > 0.


     (b) If X follows subE(Пғ 2 , b), then P[|X вҲ’ E[X]| > t] вүӨ 2 exp вҲ’ min{t2 /Пғ 2 , t/b}/2 holds

          for any t > 0.
     (c) If X1 and X2 are independent and follow subG(Пғ12 ) and subG(Пғ22 ), respectively, then
          Оұ1 X1 + Оұ2 X2 follows subG(Оұ12 Пғ12 + Оұ22 Пғ22 ) for any Оұ1 , Оұ2 вҲҲ R.
     (d) If X1 and X2 are independent and follow subE(Пғ12 , b1 ) and subE(Пғ22 , b2 ), respectively,
          then Оұ1 X1 +Оұ2 X2 follows subE(Оұ12 Пғ12 +Оұ22 Пғ22 , max{|Оұ1 |b1 , |Оұ2 |b2 }) for any Оұ1 , Оұ2 вҲҲ R.
     (e) If X follows subG(Пғ 2 ), then X 2 follows subE(256Пғ 4 , 16Пғ 2 ).
      (f) Suppose that (i) X1 and X2 are independent. (ii) X1 and X2 follow subG(Пғ12 )
          and subG(Пғ22вҲҡ  ), respectively. (iii) E[X1 ] = E[X2 ] = 0. Then, X1 X2 follows
          subE(8Пғ12 Пғ22 , 2Пғ1 Пғ2 ).


Proof. For (a)вҖ“(e), refer to Duchi (2023); Rigollet & HuМҲtter (2023). We consider (f). For any s вҲҲ R,

                            EX1 ,X2 [esX1 X2 ] =EX2 [EX1 [esX1 x2 | X2 = x2 ]]                   (A148)
                                                     Пғ12 X22 s2 /2
                                             вүӨEX2 [e        ]                                    (A149)
                                                  "вҲһ                 #
                                                    X (Пғ 2 X 2 s2 )n
                                                        1 2
                                             =EX2                      .                         (A150)
                                                    n=0
                                                          n!2n

By E[X22n ] вүӨ 2(2Пғ22 )n n! for any n вҲҲ N (Rigollet & HuМҲtter, 2023),
                                                        вҲһ
                                                        X
                                   E[esX1 X2 ] вүӨ1 + 2       (Пғ12 Пғ22 s2 )n .                     (A151)
                                                        n=1
                вҲҡ
For any |s| вүӨ 1/ 2Пғ1 Пғ2 ,
                                                                     2   2 2
                          E[esX1 X2 ] вүӨ 1 + 4Пғ12 Пғ22 s2 вүӨ e8Пғ1 Пғ2 s /2 .                         (A152)
                                   вҲҡ
Thus, X1 X2 follows subE(8Пғ12 Пғ22 , 2Пғ1 Пғ2 ).

Similarly to Lemma D.1, we consider the properties of random vectors with sub-Gaussian entries.

Lemma F.4 (Properties of sub-Gaussian random vectors). Let {Xn }N              d
                                                                     n=1 вҠӮ R be N вҲҲ N indepen-
dent random variables sampled from the sub-Gaussian distribution subG(1). Assume E[Xn,i ] = 0
for any n вҲҲ [N ] and i вҲҲ [d]. Let z вҲҲ Rd be a constant vector. Then, the following statements hold:
     (a) If d вүҘ 2 ln 1000N ,
                                                                                       N
                    h
                              2
                                       вҲҡ           i                             1
                   P max вҲҘXn вҲҘ вҲ’ d вүӨ 16 2d ln 1000N вүҘ 1 вҲ’                                  .     (A153)
                        n                                                      500N


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     (b) If d вүҘ ln(1000N )/4,
                                                                                       N
                            h                    вҲҡ           i                   1
                           P max |вҹЁXn , Xk вҹ©| вүӨ 2 2d ln 1000N вүҘ 1 вҲ’                        .   (A154)
                              n                                                500N
     (c)
                                                                                       N
                            h                вҲҡ              i                    1
                           P max |вҹЁXn , zвҹ©| вүӨ 2 ln 1000N вҲҘzвҲҘ вүҘ 1 вҲ’                         .   (A155)
                              n                                                500N


Proof. As a preliminary, refer to Lemma F.3 and the proof of Lemma D.1.
(a) вҲҘXn вҲҘ2 follows subE(256d, 16) with mean d. For t > 0,
                                         t2     t
                                             вүӨ    вҮ” t вүӨ 16d.                                   (A156)
                                        256d   16
If d вүҘ 2 ln 1000N ,
                             h
                                   2
                                            вҲҡ           i                1
                            P вҲҘXn вҲҘ вҲ’ d вүҘ 16 2d ln 1000N вүӨ                  .                  (A157)
                                                                       500N
Thus,
                                                                                   N
                   h
                             2
                                      вҲҡ           i                         1
                  P max вҲҘXn вҲҘ вҲ’ d вүӨ 16 2d ln 1000N вүҘ 1 вҲ’                               .       (A158)
                       n                                                  500N
                                  вҲҡ
(b) вҹЁXn , Xk вҹ© follows subE(8d,       2) with zero mean. For t > 0,
                                       t2    t       вҲҡ
                                          вүӨ вҲҡ вҮ” t вүӨ 4 2d.                                      (A159)
                                       8d     2
If d вүҘ ln(1000N )/4,
                              h                вҲҡ           i            1
                             P |вҹЁXn , Xk вҹ©| вүҘ 2 2d ln 1000N вүӨ              .                   (A160)
                                                                      500N
                                                        вҲҡ
(c) вҹЁXn , zвҹ© follows subG(вҲҘzвҲҘ2 ) with zero mean. For t = 2 ln 1000N вҲҘzвҲҘ,
                           h             вҲҡ               i     1
                         P |вҹЁXn , zвҹ©| вүҘ 2 ln 1000N вҲҘzвҲҘ вүӨ          .                            (A161)
                                                             500N



By Lemma F.4, for вҲҘzвҲҘ = 1, the following inequalities hold with probability at least 99.8%:
                                                     вҲҡ
              вҲҘXn вҲҘ2 = ОҳМғ(d),       вҹЁXn , Xk вҹ© = OМғ( d),        вҹЁXn , zвҹ© = OМғ(1).           (A162)
These orders are consistent with those for uniformp   noises (cf. Lemma D.1). Thus, similarly to
Theorems 4.3 and 4.4, if Пө is constrained to Пө = OМғ( d/N adv ), the decision boundary Eq. (6) and
consistent decisions can be obtained for learning from perturbations on sub-Gaussian noises.

G    T HEOREM 4.1 WITHOUT A SSUMPTION OF L AST L AYER OF N ETWORK

In this section, we derive Theorem 4.1 without the assumption that the positive and negative values
of a are equal. Let m+ and mвҲ’ be the numbers of positive and negative neurons in the hidden layer,
respectively. In this setting, Frei et al. (2023) provides the decision boundary as follows:
                                           X                              X
          f bdy (z) = (m+ + ОіmвҲ’ )               О»n xn вҲ’ (Оіm+ + mвҲ’ )             О»n xn .      (A163)
                                      n:yn =+1                         n:yn =вҲ’1



                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


With An := (m+ + ОіmвҲ’ ) if yn = +1 and An := (Оіm+ + mвҲ’ ) otherwise,
                                                      N
                                                      X
                                        f bdy (z) =         An О»n yn xn .                        (A164)
                                                      n=1

Similar to Eq. (1), a perturbation is defined as follows:
                                                 PN
                                            adv     k=1 Ak О»k yk xk
                                  О·n := Пөyn      PN                 .                            (A165)
                                                    k=1 Ak О»k yk xk

Since An = Оҳ(1), the growth rate of О·n with respect
                                                 p to d and N is the same as the original definition
of О·n . Thus, similarly to Theorem C.2, if Пө = O( d/N ), the decision boundary is
                         PN      adv adv adv
                                                        PN
            bdy             n=1 An О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©         n=1 An О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©
           fadv (z) :=         PN                   +Пө P     N
                                                                                ,           (A166)
                                      adv   adv
                                 n=1 An О»n               вҲҘ n=1 An О»n yn xn вҲҘ
where Aadv
       n   := (m+ + ОіmвҲ’ ) if ynadv = +1 and Aadv
                                             n   := (Оіm+ + mвҲ’ ) otherwise.

H    F LIPPED L ABEL L EARNING
In this section, we explain the success of learning from perturbations under the flipped label scenario,
i.e., ynadv = вҲ’yn for every n вҲҲ [N ], with assumptions about a data structure and learning bias. First,
we assume that xn consists of two features: robust and non-robust features, which is based on
the hypothesis from Ilyas et al. (2019). Second, we suppose that standard trained classifiers focus
only on non-robust features, which is empirically supported by Etmann et al. (2019); Tsipras et al.
(2019); Zhang & Zhu (2019); Chalasani et al. (2020). In other words, we assume that the decision
boundary of the classifier consists of the learning effect only from non-robust features. Formally,
these assumptions are summarized as follows:

Assumption H.1. (a) For every n вҲҲ [N ], a natural sample xn can be represented as xn := xrob  n +
xnon
 n   . (b) For n  =
                  Мё k, вҹЁxrob
                         n   , x rob
                                 k   вҹ© = O(d/N ), вҹЁx rob
                                                     n   , xnon
                                                            k   вҹ© = O(d/N ), and вҹЁx non
                                                                                    n   , x non
                                                                                            k вҹ© =
O(d/N ). (c) Under the setting of Theorem 3.3, the decision boundary is given by f bdy (z) :=
PN             non
  n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©.

                                                                PN
Consider perturbations to the decision boundary f bdy (z) := n=1 О»n yn вҹЁxnon    n , zвҹ©. Similarly to
Eq. (1), an adversarial example and perturbation are defined as follows:
                                                                 PN            non
                  adv                                      adv      k=1 О»k yk xk
                xn :=xn + О·n ,                    О·n :=Пөyn       PN                .        (A167)
                                                               вҲҘ k=1 О»k yk xnonk вҲҘ

Under these settings,
                            r       !                                         r       !
         2                      d                                                 d
    xadv
     n     = Оҳ(d) Вұ Оҳ               Пө+Пө ,  2
                                                      вҹЁxadv  adv
                                                        n , xk вҹ© вүӨ pmax + Оҳ           Пө + Пө2 .   (A168)
                                N                                                 N
                                     p
Similarly to Theorem C.2, if Пө = O( d/N ), the decision boundary is
                               PN
                    bdy                О»adv y adv вҹЁxn , zвҹ©         f bdy (z)
                   fadv (z) := n=1PnN n                    + Пө PN                          (A169)
                                                adv           вҲҘ n=1 О»n yn xnon
                                        n=1 О»n                               n вҲҘ
                                                         N
                                                                            !
                                    d                   X
                             =Оҳ            f bdy (z) вҲ’      О»adv adv
                                                             n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ© .               (A170)
                                    N                   n=1
           PN         вҲҡ       non     bdy
                                                       вҲҡ          PN
For z =       n=1 Оҳ(1/ N )xn , |f         (z)| = Оҳ( N ) and | n=1 О»adv        adv
                                                                           n yn вҹЁxn , zвҹ©| = Оҳ(1).
                                  bdy
Thus, if N, d вҶ’ вҲһ, then sgn(fadv (z)) = sgn(f bdy (z)) holds. Finally, under Assumption H.1,
we can explain why even a flipped learning scenario (corresponding deterministic label scenarios in
Table 1) yields moderately high accuracy on natural test datasets.


                                                       33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I     E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS AND A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

In this section, we present detailed experimental settings and additional empirical results. First, we
introduce the settings that are consistent across experiments on artificial and real-world datasets.
We used an NVIDIA A100 GPU. A scheduler reduced a learning rate to 10% of its original value
if a training loss did not decrease over 10 consecutive epochs. Uniform noises were sampled from
U ([вҲ’1, 1]d ).
As adversarial attacks, we employed projected gradient descent (Madry et al., 2018). The step sizes
of projected gradient descent are 0.3 for L0 attacks and Пө/5 for L2 and LвҲһ attacks, respectively.
The number of steps is 100 for L2 and LвҲһ attacks.
In L0 attacks, the number of modifiable pixels was limited, but the distance between altered and
original pixels was not restricted. Sparse attacks employ the following procedures in each step:
(i) select the pixel with the highest gradient magnitude from the masked region, (ii) remove the mask
for the selected pixel, and (iii) update the perturbations for unmasked pixels. Thus, the number of
steps corresponds to the maximum number of modified pixels. Note that the modified pixels shown
in Figs. A16 to A18 may not always match the number of steps because we selected the adversarial
example with the highest loss over all steps for the final output.
Although we primarily considered geometry-inspired perturbations (cf. Eq. (1)) in the theoretical
discussion, we employ gradient-based perturbations (cf. Eq. (A144)) in the experiments. This is
due to the practical difficulty of obtaining the decision boundary of a one-hidden-layer neural net-
work (cf. Eq. (A14)) and the value of О»n (cf. Theorem B.1), making geometry-inspired perturbations
infeasible in practice.

I.1   A RTIFICIAL DATASET

The procedure for generating artificial data based on uniform noises can be found in Section 5.1.
Similarly, a dataset based on the Gaussian noises N (0, Id ) was created. Examples of standard, noise,
and adversarial samples are shown in Fig. A3. The experimental settings followed the theoretical
settings, Section 3.1. We used one-hidden-layer neural networks and stochastic gradient descent
with a learning rate of 0.01, momentum of 0.9, and exponential loss. Considering t вҶ’ вҲһ, we set
the epochs to 100,000. The vectors v and u used to illustrate the decision boundary are defined
in Theorem 3.3. In practice, these values are incalculable due to the uncomputable nature of О»n .
Therefore, we approximated v as the average of the first half of the weights in W and u as the
average of the latter half.
The experimental results for artificial datasets based on uniform and Gaussian noises with L0 , L2 ,
and LвҲһ adversarial perturbations are provided in Figs. A4 to A15. We can confirm a strong align-
ment between the decision boundaries when learning from standard samples and perturbations (cf.
Theorem 4.4). High classification accuracy for standard training data (cf. Corollary 4.5) was also
observed across a variety of noise and perturbation forms.

I.2   MNIST/FASHION -MNIST/CIFAR-10

Examples of standard and adversarial samples for each dataset are shown in Figs. A16 to A18. A
six-layer convolutional neural network was used for MNIST and Fashion-MNIST. WideResNet-28-
10 with a dropout ratio of 0.3 was used for CIFAR-10. The batch size was set to 128. While no
data augmentation was applied to MNIST and Fashion-MNIST, random cropping and horizontal
flipping were applied to CIFAR-10. We used stochastic gradient descent with Nesterov momentum
of 0.9, weight decay of 5 Г— 10вҲ’4 , and cross-entropy loss. The initial learning rates can be found
in Table A3. The perturbation constraint Пө or number of modifiable pixels dОҙ was set according
to Table A4. We set the epochs to 100 for MNIST and 200 for Fashion-MNIST and CIFAR-10.
However, in the experiments for Fig. A19, we set the epochs to 300, considering a large number of
training samples.
For MNIST and Fashion-MNIST, Fig. A19 shows the accuracy of learning from perturbations with
various adversarial sample sizes. In several cases, we observed a general increase in the accuracy
as the number of samples increased. However, in some cases, while the accuracy did not decrease,


                                                 34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Table A3: Initial learning rates in each learning scenario.
                 On natural samples                                            On noise data
                 L0 (R)   L0 (D)    L2 (R)     L2 (D)        LвҲһ (R)   LвҲһ (D)      L0    L2    LвҲһ
    MNIST          0.1      0.1         0.01    0.01          0.01      0.01      0.1   0.1   0.1
    FMNIST         0.1      0.1         0.01    0.01          0.01      0.01      0.1   0.1   0.1
    CIFAR-10       0.1      0.1          0.1     0.1          0.01       0.1      0.1   0.1   0.1


Table A4: Perturbation constraint Пө or number of modifiable pixels dОҙ for MNIST, Fashion-MNIST,
and CIFAR-10.
                     MNIST               Fashion-MNIST CIFAR-10
                     L0    L2     LвҲһ      L0   L2      LвҲһ      L0     L2    LвҲһ
                     10    2.0    0.3     35   2.0     0.3     150    0.5   0.1


there was no significant improvement in the accuracy. These inconsistencies could potentially be
resolved through extensive experiments and tuning of learning rates and architectures.


                                                35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Standard


           1      вҲ’1          1          1         1         вҲ’1         вҲ’1          1          1
Noise


           вҲ’1     вҲ’1          1         вҲ’1         вҲ’1        вҲ’1          1          1          1
Adv. L0


           вҲ’1     вҲ’1          1         вҲ’1         вҲ’1        вҲ’1          1          1          1
Adv. L2


           вҲ’1     вҲ’1          1         вҲ’1         вҲ’1        вҲ’1          1          1          1
Adv. LвҲһ


           вҲ’1     вҲ’1          1         вҲ’1         вҲ’1        вҲ’1          1          1          1

Figure A3: Artificial data based on uniform noises. Standard images were drawn from the uniform
distribution U ([вҲ’1, 1]d ), and their corresponding labels from U ({Вұ1}). We treated them as natural
images. Noise images are similarly drawn from U ([вҲ’1, 1]d ). Adversarial examples were generated
to superimpose adversarial perturbations on the noise images to fool a classifier trained on the stan-
dard (but seemingly noisy) images. The labels below the adversarial examples indicate target labels
that were randomly sampled from {Вұ1}. Those below the noise images were used for comparative
experiments in training classifiers on these noises.


                                                 36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Input dimension d                   (Adversarial) noise sample N adv
              100       500      1,000    10,000          1        10         100     10,000
Standard


              100%     100%     100%      100%          100%         100%       100%       100%
Adversarial


              90%      65%       73%       93%           62%          78%       91%        93%
Noise


              49%      47%       50%       50%           49%          48%       50%        50%
                      Natural sample N                           Modified pixel ratio dОҙ /d
              1,000    2,000     5,000    10,000        0.0001      0.0004      0.001       0.05
Standard


              100%     100%     100%      100%          100%         100%       100%       100%
Adversarial


              93%      82%       68%       62%           51%          58%       64%        93%
Noise


              50%      49%       50%       49%           50%          50%       50%        50%

Figure A4: Decision boundaries of classifiers trained on artificial datasets based on uniform noises
and L0 adversarial perturbations. Each variable was varied based on d = 10, 000, N adv = 10, 000,
N = 1000, and dОҙ /d = 0.05. The description is the same as Fig. 1.


                                                   37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Input dimension d                   (Adversarial) noise sample N adv
              100       500      1,000    10,000          1        10         100     10,000
Standard


              100%     100%     100%      100%          100%       100%       100%       100%
Adversarial


              94%      59%       61%       76%           60%       71%        75%        76%
Noise


              49%      48%       46%       49%           51%       51%        50%        49%
                      Natural sample N                         Modified pixel ratio dОҙ /d
              1,000    2,000     5,000    10,000        0.0001    0.0004      0.001       0.05
Standard


              100%     100%     100%      100%          100%       100%       100%       100%
Adversarial


              76%      67%       60%       56%           50%       56%        61%        76%
Noise


              49%      51%       49%       50%           49%       49%        49%        49%

Figure A5: Decision boundaries of classifiers trained on artificial datasets based on Gauss noises
and L0 adversarial perturbations. The description is the same as Fig. A4.


                                                   38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Input dimension d                  (Adversarial) noise sample N adv
              100       500      1,000    10,000         1        10         100     10,000
Standard


              100%     100%     100%      100%          100%       100%        100%        100%
Adversarial


              63%      69%       80%       99%          52%        54%         65%         99%
Noise


              49%      47%       50%       50%          49%        48%         50%         50%
                      Natural sample N                       Perturbation constraint
              1,000    2,000     5,000    10,000        0.01      0.05       0.1       0.78
Standard


              100%     100%     100%      100%          100%       100%        100%        100%
Adversarial


              99%      98%       90%       80%          51%        59%         67%         99%
Noise


              50%      49%       50%       49%          50%        50%         50%         50%

Figure A6: Decision boundaries of classifiers trained on artificial datasets based on uniform noises
and L2 adversarial perturbations. Each variable was varied based on d = 10, 000, N adv = 10, 000,
N = 1000, and Пө = 0.78. The description is the same as Fig. 1.


                                                   39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Input dimension d                  (Adversarial) noise sample N adv
              100       500      1,000    10,000         1        10         100     10,000
Standard


              100%     100%     100%      100%          100%     100%        100%        100%
Adversarial


              59%      62%       70%       97%          50%       53%         59%        97%
Noise


              49%      48%       46%       49%          51%       51%         50%        49%
                      Natural sample N                       Perturbation constraint
              1,000    2,000     5,000    10,000        0.01      0.05       0.1       0.78
Standard


              100%     100%     100%      100%          100%     100%        100%        100%
Adversarial


              97%      91%       79%       71%          50%       55%         59%        97%
Noise


              49%      51%       49%       50%          49%       49%         49%        49%

Figure A7: Decision boundaries of classifiers trained on artificial datasets based on Gauss noises
and L2 adversarial perturbations. The description is the same as Fig. A6.


                                                   40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Input dimension d                   (Adversarial) noise sample N adv
              100       500      1,000    10,000          1        10         100     10,000
Standard


              100%     100%     100%      100%          100%       100%        100%        100%
Adversarial


              70%      73%       80%       99%          52%        54%         64%         99%
Noise


              49%      47%       50%       50%          49%        48%         50%         50%
                      Natural sample N                        Perturbation constraint
              1,000    2,000     5,000    10,000        0.001     0.005      0.01       0.03
Standard


              100%     100%     100%      100%          100%       100%        100%        100%
Adversarial


              99%      98%       87%       78%          53%        71%         86%         99%
Noise


              50%      49%       50%       49%          50%        50%         50%         50%

Figure A8: Decision boundaries of classifiers trained on artificial datasets based on uniform noises
and LвҲһ adversarial perturbations. Each variable was varied based on d = 10, 000, N adv = 10, 000,
N = 1000, and Пө = 0.03. The description is the same as Fig. 1.


                                                   41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Input dimension d                   (Adversarial) noise sample N adv
              100       500      1,000    10,000          1        10         100     10,000
Standard


              100%     100%     100%      100%          100%      100%       100%        100%
Adversarial


              62%      63%       71%       95%          50%       53%         57%        95%
Noise


              49%      48%       46%       49%          51%       51%         50%        49%
                      Natural sample N                        Perturbation constraint
              1,000    2,000     5,000    10,000        0.001     0.005      0.01       0.03
Standard


              100%     100%     100%      100%          100%      100%       100%        100%
Adversarial


              95%      90%       78%       69%          52%       60%         70%        95%
Noise


              49%      51%       49%       50%          49%       49%         49%        49%

Figure A9: Decision boundaries of classifiers trained on artificial datasets based on Gauss noises
and LвҲһ adversarial perturbations. The description is the same as Fig. A8.


                                                   42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           1.00                                                                1.00
Accuracy


                                                                    Accuracy
           0.75                                                                0.75                                   Adversarial
                                                                                                                      Noise

           0.50                                                                0.50

                  0     2,000     4,000    6,000   8,000 10,000                        0      2,000   4,000   6,000    8,000 10,000
                              Input dimension d                                            (Adversarial) noise sample N adv
           1.00                                                                1.00
Accuracy


                                                                    Accuracy
           0.75                                                                0.75


           0.50                                                                0.50

                      2,000     4,000     6,000    8,000   10,000                     0.00    0.01    0.02    0.03     0.04    0.05
                              Natural sample N                                                Modified pixel ratio dОҙ /d

Figure A10: Accuracy of classifiers trained on artificial datasets based on uniform noises and L0
adversarial perturbations. The description is the same as Figs. 2 and A4.


           1.00                                                                1.00
                                                                                                                      Adversarial
Accuracy


                                                                    Accuracy


                                                                                                                      Noise
           0.75                                                                0.75


           0.50                                                                0.50

                  0     2,000     4,000    6,000   8,000 10,000                        0      2,000   4,000   6,000    8,000 10,000
                              Input dimension d                                            (Adversarial) noise sample N adv
           1.00                                                                1.00
Accuracy


                                                                    Accuracy


           0.75                                                                0.75


           0.50                                                                0.50

                      2,000     4,000     6,000    8,000   10,000                     0.00    0.01    0.02    0.03     0.04    0.05
                              Natural sample N                                                Modified pixel ratio dОҙ /d

Figure A11: Accuracy of classifiers trained on artificial datasets based on Gauss noises and L0
adversarial perturbations. The description is the same as Figs. 2 and A5.


                                                                43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           1.00                                                                1.00
Accuracy


                                                                    Accuracy
           0.75                                                                0.75                                    Adversarial
                                                                                                                       Noise

           0.50                                                                0.50

                  0     2,000     4,000    6,000   8,000 10,000                        0       2,000   4,000   6,000    8,000 10,000
                              Input dimension d                                             (Adversarial) noise sample N adv
           1.00                                                                1.00
Accuracy


                                                                    Accuracy
           0.75                                                                0.75


           0.50                                                                0.50

                      2,000     4,000     6,000    8,000   10,000                     0.0        0.2       0.4          0.6      0.8
                              Natural sample N                                                 Perturbation constraint

Figure A12: Accuracy of classifiers trained on artificial datasets based on uniform noises and L2
adversarial perturbations. The description is the same as Figs. 2 and A6.


           1.00                                                                1.00
Accuracy


                                                                    Accuracy


           0.75                                                                0.75                                    Adversarial
                                                                                                                       Noise

           0.50                                                                0.50

                  0     2,000     4,000    6,000   8,000 10,000                        0       2,000   4,000   6,000    8,000 10,000
                              Input dimension d                                             (Adversarial) noise sample N adv
           1.00                                                                1.00
Accuracy


                                                                    Accuracy


           0.75                                                                0.75


           0.50                                                                0.50

                      2,000     4,000     6,000    8,000   10,000                     0.0        0.2       0.4          0.6      0.8
                              Natural sample N                                                 Perturbation constraint

Figure A13: Accuracy of classifiers trained on artificial datasets based on Gauss noises and L2
adversarial perturbations. The description is the same as Figs. 2 and A7.


                                                                44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           1.00                                                                1.00
Accuracy


                                                                    Accuracy
           0.75                                                                0.75                                     Adversarial
                                                                                                                        Noise

           0.50                                                                0.50

                  0     2,000     4,000    6,000   8,000 10,000                         0       2,000   4,000   6,000    8,000 10,000
                              Input dimension d                                              (Adversarial) noise sample N adv
           1.00                                                                1.00
Accuracy


                                                                    Accuracy
           0.75                                                                0.75


           0.50                                                                0.50

                      2,000     4,000     6,000    8,000   10,000                     0.00          0.01          0.02           0.03
                              Natural sample N                                                  Perturbation constraint

Figure A14: Accuracy of classifiers trained on artificial datasets based on uniform noises and LвҲһ
adversarial perturbations. The description is the same as Figs. 2 and A8.


           1.00                                                                1.00
Accuracy


                                                                    Accuracy


           0.75                                                                0.75                                     Adversarial
                                                                                                                        Noise

           0.50                                                                0.50

                  0     2,000     4,000    6,000   8,000 10,000                         0       2,000   4,000   6,000    8,000 10,000
                              Input dimension d                                              (Adversarial) noise sample N adv
           1.00                                                                1.00
Accuracy


                                                                    Accuracy


           0.75                                                                0.75


           0.50                                                                0.50

                      2,000     4,000     6,000    8,000   10,000                     0.00          0.01          0.02           0.03
                              Natural sample N                                                  Perturbation constraint

Figure A15: Accuracy of classifiers trained on artificial datasets based on Gauss noises and LвҲһ
adversarial perturbations. The description is the same as Figs. 2 and A9.


                                                                45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Natural


          5         0          4         1             9       2          1          3          1
L0 (R)


          7         7          0         5             8       8          7          5          8
L0 (D)


          6         1          5         2             0       3          2          4          2
L2 (R)


          7         7          0         5             8       8          7          5          8
L2 (D)


          6         1          5         2             0       3          2          4          2
LвҲһ (R)


          7         7          0         5             8       8          7          5          8
LвҲһ (D)


          6         1          5         2             0       3          2          4          2
L0


          7         9          7         5             1       4          7          2          9
L2


          7         9          7         5             1       4          7          2          9
LвҲһ


          7         9          7         5             1       4          7          2          9


Figure A16: Natural images, perturbations on natural images, and perturbations on uniform noises
for MNIST. Below the natural images and adversarial examples are their respective original and
target labels in adversarial attacks. The вҖңRвҖқ indicates that a target label was randomly chosen from
the nine labels that differ from an original label. The вҖңDвҖқ indicates that a target label was determin-
istically chosen as the next sequential label after an original label.


                                                  46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Natural


           Boot      Top     Top      Dress     Top      Pullover Sneaker Pullover Sandal
L0 (R)


           Shirt    Sneaker Trouser   Sandal    Boot       Bag     Shirt    Sandal      Bag
L0 (D)


           Top      Trouser Trouser   Coat     Trouser    Dress    Bag       Dress     Shirt
L2 (R)


           Shirt    Sneaker Trouser   Sandal    Boot       Bag     Shirt    Sandal      Bag
L2 (D)


           Top      Trouser Trouser   Coat     Trouser    Dress    Bag       Dress     Shirt
LвҲһ (R)


           Shirt    Sneaker Trouser   Sandal    Boot       Bag     Shirt    Sandal      Bag
LвҲһ (D)


           Top      Trouser Trouser   Coat     Trouser    Dress    Bag       Dress     Shirt
L0


          Sneaker    Boot   Sneaker   Sandal   Trouser    Coat    Sneaker Pullover     Boot
L2


          Sneaker    Boot   Sneaker   Sandal   Trouser    Coat    Sneaker Pullover     Boot
LвҲһ


          Sneaker    Boot   Sneaker   Sandal   Trouser    Coat    Sneaker Pullover     Boot


Figure A17: Natural images, perturbations on natural images, and perturbations on uniform noises
for Fashion-MNIST. The description is the same as Fig. A16.


                                                47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Natural


          Frog    Truck   Truck      Deer      Car       Car       Bird     Horse      Ship
L0 (R)


          Horse   Frog    Plane      Dog       Truck     Ship     Horse      Deer      Horse
L0 (D)


          Horse   Plane   Plane      Dog       Bird      Bird       Cat      Ship      Truck
L2 (R)


          Horse   Frog    Plane      Dog       Truck     Ship     Horse      Deer      Horse
L2 (D)


          Horse   Plane   Plane      Dog       Bird      Bird       Cat      Ship      Truck
LвҲһ (R)


          Horse   Frog    Plane      Dog       Truck     Ship     Horse      Deer      Horse
LвҲһ (D)


          Horse   Plane   Plane      Dog       Bird      Bird       Cat      Ship      Truck
L0


          Bird    Frog     Ship     Truck      Truck    Plane      Ship      Dog       Deer
L2


          Bird    Frog     Ship     Truck      Truck    Plane      Ship      Dog       Deer
LвҲһ


          Bird    Frog     Ship     Truck      Truck    Plane      Ship      Dog       Deer


Figure A18: Natural images, perturbations on natural images, and perturbations on uniform noises
for CIFAR-10. The description is the same as Fig. A16.


                                               48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Max. validation accuracy


                                                                                                              L0
                           0.5                                          0.5
                                                                                                              L2
                                                                                                              LвҲһ
                           0.4                                          0.4


                           0.3                                          0.3


                           0.2                                          0.2
                                 60K 240K   480K   720K   960K   1.2M         60K 240K   480K   720K   960K   1.2M
                                              MNIST                                        FMNIST
                                                          The number of samples

Figure A19: Accuracy of classifiers trained on MNIST and Fashion-MNIST in uniform noise sce-
nario. The vertical axis represents the maximum validation accuracy across all epochs. The hori-
zontal axis represents the number of adversarial samples N adv .


                                                                   49
