FAIR O FF -P OLICY L EARNING FROM O BSERVATIONAL
DATA
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                A BSTRACT

          Algorithmic decision-making in practice must be fair for legal, ethical, and soci-
          etal reasons. To achieve this, prior research has contributed various approaches
          that ensure fairness in machine learning predictions, while comparatively little ef-
          fort has focused on fairness in decision-making, specifically off-policy learning.
          In this paper, we propose a novel framework for fair off-policy learning: we learn
          decision rules from observational data under different notions of fairness, where
          we explicitly assume that observational data were collected under a different –
          potentially discriminatory – behavioral policy. For this, we first formalize differ-
          ent fairness notions for off-policy learning. We then propose a neural network-
          based framework to learn optimal policies under different fairness notions. We
          further provide theoretical guarantees in the form of generalization bounds for
          the finite-sample version of our framework. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
          our framework through extensive numerical experiments using both simulated and
          real-world data. Altogether, our work enables algorithmic decision-making in a
          wide array of practical applications where fairness must be ensured.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Algorithmic decision-making in practice must avoid discrimination and thus be fair to meet legal,
ethical, and societal demands (Nkonde, 2019; De-Arteaga et al., 2022; Corbett-Davies et al., 2023).
For example, in the U.S., the Fair Housing Act and Equal Credit Opportunity Act stipulate that
decisions must not be subject to systematic discrimination by gender, race, or other attributes deemed
as sensitive.
However, research from different areas has provided repeated evidence that algorithmic decision-
making is often not fair. A prominent example is Amazon’s tool for automatically screening job
applicants that was used between 2014 and 2017 (Dastin, 2018). It was later discovered that the un-
derlying algorithm generated decisions that were subject to systematic discrimination against women
and thus resulted in a ceteris paribus lower probability of women being hired.
Ensuring fairness in off-policy learning is subject to inherent challenges. The reason is that off-
policy learning is based on observational data that observational data may ingrain existing bias from
historical decision-making.1 Hence, one challenge is that the resulting policy must be fair despite the
observational data being collected under a different – potentially discriminatory – behavioral policy.
Furthermore, one may erroneously think that a naı̈ve approach to achieving fairness in algorithmic
decision-making is to simply omit the sensitive attribute from the observational data. For instance,
to avoid bias against women, one would prevent off-policy learning from having access to a variable
that stores the gender of an individual. However, in observational data, other variables may act
as proxies for gender, and, hence, the learned policy may still lead to discrimination due to the
underlying data-generating process (Kilbertus et al., 2017). Hence, a custom approach for handling
sensitive attributes in off-policy learning is needed.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for fair off-policy learning from observational data.
Specifically, we learn fair decision rules from observational data where the observational may be
   1
     The term “bias” can have different meanings. Here, we use bias can refer to algorithmic bias, where
algorithms discriminate against individuals from certain sensitive groups. This is in contrast to the statistical
bias of estimators, e.g., due to confounded data.


                                                       1
collected under a different – potentially discriminatory – behavioral policy. To the best of our
knowledge, ours is the first neural approach to fair off-policy learning. In our off-policy learn-
ing framework, fairness may enter at two different stages, namely with respect to both the action
and the policy value.
    1. Fairness with respect to the action ensures that individuals with different sensitive attributes
       but otherwise equal characteristics receive the same decision. In other words, the choice of
       action is independent of the sensitive attribute. For example, in credit lending, this means that
       a woman and a man, each with the same academic subject, have the same chance that their
       student loan is approved. We later refer to this notion as “action fairness”.
    2. Fairness with respect to the policy value allows us to express fairness in the way that we
       consider the utility (i.e., the policy value) for each sensitive group. Hence, individuals with
       different sensitive attributes achieve, on average, a similar utility. For example, this may allow
       governments to account for the fact that some sub-populations have been historically under-
       represented. Hence, as women have a lower propensity than men to pursue academic careers
       in subjects related to technology, governments may want to strategically incentivize women
       through student loans so that the long-term benefit for society is maximized. We refer to this
       notion as “value fairness”. Later, we introduce two variants of value fairness that build upon
       envy-free fairness and max-min fairness.
Our contributions2 are three-fold. (1) We first introduce and formalize different fairness notions
tailored to our setting, namely fair off-policy learning from observational data. We also provide a
theoretical understanding of how these fairness notions interact in our setting.(2) We then propose a
neural framework, called FairPol, to learn optimal policies under these fairness notions. Specifically,
we leverage fair representation learning in combination with custom training objectives so that the
resulting policies satisfy our fairness notions. (3) We provide theoretical learning guarantees in the
form of generalizations bounds for FairPol. We also evaluate the effectiveness of our framework
through extensive numerical experiments using both simulated and real-world data.

2        R ELATED WORK
We provide an overview on related work on off-policy learning from observational data, both in the
standard machine learning and algorithmic fairness literature. For further background on algorithmic
fairness and fairness in utility-based decision models (e.g., reinforcement learning), we refer to
Appendix A.
Off-policy learning: Off-policy learning typically aims to determine optimal policies from obser-
vational data by maximizing the so-called policy value (e.g., Kallus, 2018; Athey & Wager, 2021).
The policy value is a causal quantity, which can be identified from observational data under cer-
tain assumptions (see Section 3). There are three standard methods for estimating the policy value:
(1) The direct method (DM) (Qian & Murphy, 2011; Bennett & Kallus, 2020); (2) The inverse
propensity score weighted (IPW) method (Kallus, 2018); and (3) The doubly robust (DR) (Athey
& Wager, 2021; Chernozhukov et al., 2022). Several works propose extensions of the three stan-
dard methods for specific settings, such as unobserved confounding (Kallus & Zhou, 2018a; Bennett
& Kallus, 2019) or distribution shifts (Hatt et al., 2022; Kallus et al., 2022), or overlap violations
(Kallus, 2021). Different from our work, none of the above works deals with algorithmic fairness in
off-policy learning.
Fair representation learning: A popular approach to achieve fairness in machine learning models
is to remove the algorithmic bias incorporated in the training data by producing a new, fair repre-
sentation of the data (e.g., Zemel et al., 2013; Locatello et al., 2019). For this, one typically uses
neural networks that learn such a fair representation, and, then, the fair representation is used as
input to the actual prediction model. For instance, statistical parity can be achieved by producing
a new representation of the data that is non-predictive of the sensitive attributes using probabilistic
models (Creager et al., 2019) or adversarial learning methods (Madras et al., 2018). In our work, we
adapt fair representation to satisfy parts of our fairness constraints. However, our main contribution
is not a new method for fair representation learning, but rather we adapt fairness notions and provide
an understanding of how these fairness notions interact in the context of off-policy learning.
     2
         Code is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/FairPol-402C.


                                                    2
Algorithmic fairness for off-policy learning from observational data: Closest to our framework
is the work by Viviano & Bradic (2023), which studies fair off-policy learning for Pareto-optimal
policies. There are two major differences to our work: (1) Viviano & Bradic (2023) propose to
maximize fairness over the set of Pareto-optimal policies. Here, Pareto optimality is defined so that
the policy value of one sensitive group cannot be improved without reducing the policy value for
the opposite group. In contrast, we propose to incorporate our fairness notions by adjusting the
off-policy learning objective (value fairness), and then maximize this objective over the class of so-
called action fair policies. (2). The approach from Viviano & Bradic (2023) is restricted to learning
linear policies, while our framework enables learning arbitrarily non-linear policies. This is possible
because we can incorporate the action fairness constraint by leveraging fair representation learning
to obtain a representation independent of the sensitive attribute, which can be used in a second step
to train an optimal policy.

3    P ROBLEM SETTING
We build upon the standard setting for policy learning from observational data (e.g., Kallus, 2018;
Athey & Wager, 2021). We consider observational data (Xi , Si , Ai , Yi )ni=1 sampled i.i.d. from a
data-generating process (X, S, A, Y ) ∼ P, which consists of user-specific covariates X ∈ X ⊆ Rp ,
sensitive attributes S ∈ S, an action A ∈ {0, 1}, and an outcome Y ∈ R.3 For example,
in credit lending, one could model the credit score of an applicant by X, the gender or age as
a sensitive attribute S, a decision A whether to approve or reject the loan, and a profit Y for
the lending institution. The causal graph from our setting is shown in Fig. 1. Note that mod-
eling the action A as a binary variable is consistent with previous literature (e.g., Kallus, 2018;
Kallus & Zhou, 2018a; Athey & Wager, 2021; Hatt et al., 2022) and is common for decision-
making in a wide range of practical applications such as, e.g., automated hiring, credit lending,
and ad targeting (e.g., Smith et al., 2023; Yoganarasimhan et al., 2022; Kozodoi et al., 2022).

We make use of the Neyman-Rubin potential outcomes framework (Rubin, 1978)
and denote Y (a) as the potential outcome, which would have been observed if the
action had been set to A = a. Formally, a policy is a measurable function π : X ×
S → [0, 1], which maps an individual with covariates (X, S) onto a probability of
receiving an action. The policy value of π is then defined as
            V (π) = E[Y π ] = E[π(X, S) Y (1) + (1 − π(X, S)) Y (0)].                   (1)   Figure      1:
                                                                                              Causal graph.
Note that we cannot directly estimate the policy value because, for each observa-             We      allow
tion, only one of the potential outcomes is observed in the observational data. This          for arbitrary
is known as the fundamental problem of causal inference (Pearl, 2009). However,               dependence
we can impose the following standard assumptions in order to identify the policy              between     X
value V (π) from observational data (Rubin, 1974).                                            and S.
Assumption 1 (Standard causal inference assumptions). We assume: (i) consis-
tency: Y (A) = Y ; (ii) positivity: 0 < P(A = 1 | X = x, S = s) < 1 for all x ∈ X ; and (iii) strong
ignorability: Y (0), Y (1) ⊥
                           ⊥ A | X.

Under Assumption 1, the policy value is identified by V (π) = EW [ψ m (π, W )], with observational
data W = (X, S, A, Y ) and where ψ m (π, W ) is one of the following three policy scores:
    ψ DM (π, W ) = π(X, S) µ1 (X, S) + (1 − π(X, S)) µ0 (X, S),                                            (2)
                     A π(X, S) + (1 − A) (1 − π(X, S))
    ψ IPW (π, W ) =                                       Y,          and                                  (3)
                    A πb (X, S) + (1 − A) (1 − πb (X, S))
                                    A π(X, S) + (1 − A) (1 − π(X, S))
     ψ DR (π, W ) = ψ DM (π, W ) +                                       (Y − µA (X, S)) ,                 (4)
                                   A πb (X, S) + (1 − A) (1 − πb (X, S))
which refer to the direct method (DM), the inverse propensity score weighted (IPW) method, and
the doubly robust (DR) method, and where µj (X, S) = E[Y | X, S, A = j], j ∈ {0, 1}, are the
   3
     In the literature on causal machine learning, actions are oftentimes also called treatments (e.g., Curth &
van der Schaar, 2021). Throughout our manuscript, we prefer the term “action” as it directly relates to the
decision-making literature.


                                                      3
response surfaces and where πb (X, S) = P(A = 1 | X, S) is the propensity score (i.e., behavioral
policy). Both µj (X, S) and µj (X, S) are also called nuisance parameters. Both are ground-truth
components for the data-generating process which can be estimated from the observational data.
Task: In standard off-policy learning, the objective is to find a policy from observational data that
maximizes the policy value via
                                       π uf ∈ arg max V (π),                                      (5)
                                                  π∈Π
where Π is some predefined class of policies. For example, Π may contain all policies parameterized
by some neural network. Any policy that satisfies Eq. (5) is an optimal unrestricted policy, as it does
not give any special considerations to the sensitive covariates S when maximizing the policy value.
In special cases, the optimal unrestricted policy may coincide with a policy that satisfies the desired
fairness notion but, in practice, it will generally not. In many situations, the optimal unrestricted
policy will lead to discrimination because of which fairness must be explicitly enforced.

4   FAIRNESS NOTIONS FOR OFF - POLICY LEARNING
We now introduce different fairness notions that are tailored to off-policy learning. Specifically,
fairness may enter off-policy learning at two different stages, namely with respect to (1) the action
and (2) the policy value. We refer to them as (1) action fairness and (2) value fairness, respectively.
The former, action fairness, prohibits discrimination with respect to the selected action, while the
latter, value fairness, prohibits discrimination with respect to the expected utility (i.e., the policy
value).
■ Action fairness: The objective in action fairness is that the prediction of a policy should not
depend on an individual’s sensitive attributes. For example, in credit lending, credit approval should
not be dependent on the gender of the applicants. We formalize this in the following definition.
Definition 1 (Action fairness). A policy π af ∈ Π fulfills action fairness if it is not a function of S
and π af (X) ⊥⊥ S, that is, the recommended action should be independent of the sensitive attribute.
A policy π af that fulfills action fairness is optimal if it satisfies π af ∈ arg maxπ∈Πaf V (π), where
Πaf = {π ∈ Π | π fulfills action fairness}.
Action fairness is the equivalent of demographic parity for decision-making (Hardt et al., 2016). It
ensures that individuals who only differ with respect to their sensitive attributes (and covariates cor-
related to them) receive the same decision. As such, action fairness is relevant in many applications
such as hiring or credit lending where legal frameworks mandate that decisions may not discriminate
against certain sensitive attributes (Barocas & Selbst, 2016; Kleinberg et al., 2019).
■ Value fairness: The rationale behind value fairness is that different sub-populations defined by
the sensitive attribute may benefit differently from a policy. Hence, we now express fairness with
respect to the policy value and thus ensure that individuals with different sensitive attributes achieve,
on average, a similar utility. To formalize value fairness, let us denote the conditional policy value
Vs (π) = E[ψ m (π, W ) | S = s], where we condition on the sensitive attribute S = s. In the
following, we introduce two variants of value fairness with different aims: (1) envy-free fairness
and (2) max-min fairness. The former, envy-free fairness, ensures that the conditional policy values
Vs (π), s ∈ {0, 1}, do not differ more than some predefined level α between the sub-populations. The
latter, max-min fairness, ensures that the worst-case conditional policy value across sub-populations
is being maximized.
Definition 2 (Envy-free fairness). A policy π ∈ Π fulfills envy-free fairness with level α ≥ 0 if
|Vs (π) − Vs′ (π)| ≤ α for all s, s′ ∈ S. We denote the set of envy-free policies by Π(α) = {π ∈
Π | π is envy free with level α}. An envy-free policy π α is optimal if π α ∈ arg maxπ∈Π(α) V (π).
Definition 3 (Max-min fairness). A policy π mm ∈ Π fulfills max-min fairness if it minimizes the
worst-case policy value for the sensitive attributes, that is, π mm ∈ arg maxπ∈Π inf s∈S Vs (π).
The above definitions of value fairness are inspired by previous literature on resource allocation
(e.g., Arnsperger, 1994; Bertsimas et al., 2011), and we here adopt them here to off-policy learning,
that is, learning from observational data. Envy-free fairness allows decision-makers to control for
disparities in the utility between the sensitive groups by fixing α. Max-min fairness seeks the best
possible worst-case policy value.


                                                   4
■ Combining action fairness and value fairness: Both action fairness and value fairness can be
combined in off-policy learning so that the obtained policies fulfill both notions simultaneously. To
this end, one simply replaces the policy class Π with Πaf . This thus restricts the policy class to all
policies that fulfill action fairness, and, as a result, one obtains policies that fulfill both notions.
Combining action fairness and value fairness has also theoretical implications, which we discuss in
the following. In fact, it turns out that the notion of max-min fairness only yields a useful fairness
notion when it is used in combination with action fairness. We show this in the following Lemma 1.
Lemma 1. Let Π the set of all measurable policies π : X × S → [0, 1]. Then, there exists a
policy that fulfills max-min fairness, i.e., π ∗ ∈ arg maxπ∈Π inf s∈S Vs (π) which is also an optimal
unrestricted policy (i.e., a solution to Eq. (5)).

We now turn to the relationship between envy-free fairness and max-min fairness when combined
with action fairness. As it turns out, under action fairness and some further conditions, max-min
fairness can be seen as a special case of envy-free fairness with α = 0. This is stated in Lemma 2.
We provide an additional discussion of the assumptions from Lemma 2 in Appendix D. Furthermore,
we provide a toy example to discuss our fairness notions in Appenidx C.

Lemma 2. Let ITE(x, s∗ ) = µ1 (x, s∗ ) − µ0 (x, s∗ ) denote the individual treatment effect for an
individual with covariates (x, s∗ ). We further assume that S = {0, 1} is binary, and let (π mm , s∗ )
be a solution to maxπ∈Π inf s∈S Vs (π), and let π mm (x) fulfill action fairness. Furthermore, we
assume that there exists a set of covariates V ⊆ X with P(X ∈ V | S = s) > 0 such that: either
ITE(x, s∗ ) > 0 and π mm (x) < 1; or ITE(x, s∗ ) < 0 and π mm (x) > 0 for all x ∈ V , s ∈ S. Then,
π mm fulfills envy-free fairness with α = 0. Further, all optimal policies that both satisfy action
fairness and envy-free fairness with α = 0 also fulfill max-min fairness.

5     N EURAL FRAMEWORK FOR OFF - POLICY LEARNING
We propose our neural framework, called FairPol, which learns optimal action and/ or value fair
policies in two steps (see Fig. 2). In Step 1, we ensure action fairness by restricting the underlying
policy class Π to a subset of policies Πaf ⊆ Π (Sec. 5.1). In Step 2, we ensure value fairness by
changing the underlying learning objective (Sec. 5.2). We provide theoretical results in Sec. 5.3.

5.1   S TEP 1: FAIR REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR ACTION FAIRNESS

To obtain Πaf , we build upon the idea of fair representation learning (e.g., Zemel et al., 2013; Madras
et al., 2018) but adapt it to our task of fair off-policy learning. We first learn a fair representation
Φ : X → Rk of the data so that Φ(X) ⊥⊥ S, but where Φ(X) is still predictive of the outcome Y .
This ensures that any policy based on Φ(X) satisfies action fairness but is still effective in achieving
a large policy value. In our implementation, we parameterize Φ by neural networks that are trained
with two adversarial objectives. As a result, Φ essentially yields a policy class that is restricted to
all policies with action fairness, that is, ΠΦ
                                             af = {πθ ◦ Φ | θ ∈ Θ}.

We use three feed-forward neural networks to learn the                                   Legend
representation Φ: (1) a base representation network ΦθΦ                               FF
                                                                                         Feed-foward

that takes the non-sensitive attributes X as input and out-                              neural network
                                                                                         Adversarial
puts the representation; (2) an outcome prediction net-                FF FF             predictor

work GYθY that predicts the outcome Y based on the rep-                                  Representation


resentation Φ; and (3) a sensitive attribute network GSθS        FF          FF          Input node

that predicts the sensitive attribute S based on the repre-     Step 1        Step 2     Output node

sentation. Here θΦ , θY , and θS denote the neural network
parameters. The base representation network ΦθΦ serves Figure 2: Overview of FairPol which
as basis to construct the fair representation, while GYθY provides an instantiation of our frame-
and GSθS allow us to ensure predictiveness of Y and non- work with neural networks.
predictiveness of S.
We proceed as follows to find the optimal parameters θ̂Φ , θ̂Y , and θ̂S . We optimize an ob-
jective consisting of three parts: (1) The outcome loss LY ensures that to our representation
Φ and the outcome prediction network are predictive of the outcome Y . For this, we mini-


                                                   5
                          Pn                               2
mize LY (θΦ , θY ) = n1 i=1 GYθY (ΦθΦ (Xi )) − Yi . (2) The sensitivity loss LS learns the
parameters of the sensitive attribute network, i.e., GSθS , so that it is predictive of S. We thus
                              Pn
minimize LS (θΦ , θS ) = n1 i=1 CE GSθS (ΦθΦ (Xi )) , Si , where CE denotes the categorical

cross-entropy loss. (3) The confusion loss Lconf , guided by the sensitive attribute network,
aims to render the representation
                                     Φ non-predictive
                                                          of S. We thus minimize Lconf (θΦ , θS ) =
1
  Pn P|S|         1         S              j             j
n    i=1   j=1 − |S| log   GθS [Φ θΦ (Xi )]   , where [·]  is the j-th element of a vector.

Both the sensitivity loss and the confusion loss are adversarial to each other. This is crucial for the
following reasons: the sensitive attribute network GSθS is trained to correctly classify the sensitive
attribute by minimizing LS (θΦ , θS ) with respect to θS , while the base representation network ΦθΦ
tries to “confuse” the sensitive attribute network by minimizing Lconf (θΦ , θS ) with respect to θΦ ,
i.e., forcing the sensitive attribute network to predict a uniform distribution of the sensitive attribute.
This ensures that the learned representation becomes non-predictive of the sensitive attribute S.
Taken together, the overall objective is
   θ̂Φ , θ̂Y = arg minθΦ ,θY LY (θΦ , θY ) + γLconf (θΦ , θ̂S );              θ̂S = arg minθS γLS (θ̂Φ , θS );      (6)
where γ is a parameter that weights the different parts in the loss function. The objective in Eq. (6)
is also known as counterfactual domain confusion loss (Melnychuk et al., 2022). We later train the
two adversarial objectives from Eq. (6) via an iterative gradient-based solver. For further details on
our learning algorithm, we refer to Appendix E.

5.2    S TEP 2: L EARNING OBJECTIVES FOR VALUE FAIRNESS

We now address how we incorporate fairness in off-policy learning, i.e., specify the learning objec-
tives in our framework and how these vary according to the different notions of value fairness. To
do so, we first propose model-agnostic objectives and then describe how we incorporate these into
Step 2 of FairPol.
Model-agnostic objectives: In expectation, the policy value is defined as V (π) = EW [ψ m (π, W )],
where m ∈ {DM, IPW, DR}. Further, the conditional policy value is defined as Vs (π) =
E[ψ m (π, W ) | S = s] = E[ψ m (π, W ) 1P(S=s)
                                         (S=s)
                                               ], where 1(·) denotes the indicator function. Hence,
we can estimate these quantities by replacing the expectations with finite sample averages. Then,
                                                  Pn
the empirical policy value becomes V̂ m (π) = n1 i=1 ψ m (π, W i ), , and the empirical   conditional
                                                                                    j=1 1(Sj =s)
                        m        1
                                   Pn 1(Si =s) m                                 Pn
policy value becomes V̂s (π) = n i=1 p̂n (s) ψ (π, W i ) with p̂n (s) =                 n        . The
optimal unconstrained policy can be obtained via π̂ ∈ arg maxπ∈Π V̂ m (π).
We now state the learning objectives for (1) envy-free fairness and (2) max-min fairness: (1) For
envy-free fairness, we reformulate the optimization problem over the class of envy-free policies
into an optimization problem over an unconstrained policy class. We further replace the pop-
ulation quantities V (π) and Vs (π) with their corresponding estimates V̂ m (π) and V̂sm (π). We
thus yield π̂ λ ∈ arg maxπ∈Π V̂λm (π) with V̂λm (π) = V̂ m (π) − λ maxs,s′∈S |V̂sm (π) − V̂sm
                                                                                            ′ (π)|,

where λ > 0 is a hyperparameter controlling envy-free fairness and where larger values cor-
respond to more fair policies. (2) For max-min fairness, we proceed analogously and obtain
π̂ mm ∈ arg maxπ∈Π mins∈S V̂sm (π).
Incorporating value fairness in FairPol: The second step of FairPol is to optimize the empirical
policy value. Here, we optimize against the previously introduced learning objectives. Depending
on whether action fairness is enforced, we optimize the learning objectives over all policies in Π or
the subset ΠΦ
            af of policies with action fairness. Hence, once the representation Φ̂ = Φθ̂Φ is trained,
we optimize our objectives for value fairness over the policy class ΠΦ̂
                                                                     af = {πθ ◦ Φ̂ | θ ∈ Θ}. Here,
we parametrize πθ by a neural network with parameters θ ∈ Θ that takes the representation Φ̂(X) as
input and outputs a policy recommendation πθ (Φ̂(X)) ∈ [0, 1]. Formally, we thus optimize the pol-
icy via maxθ∈Θ V̂ m (πθ ),     maxθ∈Θ V̂λm (πθ ),       or     maxθ∈Θ mins∈S V̂sm (πθ ), depending
on whether there is no value fairness, envy-free fairness, or max-min fairness, respectively.4
    4
      Note that the policies that fulfill no value fairness are either the optimal unrestricted policies or the policies
that fulfill action fairness.


                                                           6
Implementation details: In our FairPol implementation, we use feed-forward neural networks
with dropout and exponential linear unit activation functions for the base representation network,
the outcome prediction network, and the sensitive attribute network. We use Adam (Kingma & Ba,
2015) for the optimization in both Steps 1 and 2. We further follow best practices for hyperparameter
tuning. We first split the data into a training and validation set, and we then perform hyperparameter
tuning using a grid search. All evaluations are based on the test set so that we capture the out-of-
sample performance on unseen data. Additional details for our framework are in Appendix F.

5.3   G ENERALIZATION BOUNDS

We derive generalization bounds for the finite-sample version of our framework under the following
standard boundedness assumption.
Assumption 2 (Boundedness). We assume there exist constants C, η, ν > 0 such that (i) the out-
comes are bounded with |Y | ≤ C almost surely, (ii) the propensity score is bounded away from 0 and
1, i.e., P(η ≤ πb (X, S) ≤ 1 − η) = 1, and (iii) S has full support on S, i.e., p(s) = P(S = s) ≥ ν
for all s ∈ S and some ν > 0.
The following result quantifies the deviation of the proposed finite-sample policy estimators from
their respective population quantities. Note that the derivations also hold for action fairness where
one would simply need to replace Π by Πaf .

Theorem 1 (Generalization bounds). Let p(s) = P(S = s) ≥ ν for all s ∈ S and some ν >
0. Let p, p1 , p2 > 0 and let Km denote a constant that depends on the estimation method m ∈
{DM, IPW, DR} as follows: KDM = 1, KIPW = 2η               1
                                                             , and KDR = η+1
                                                                          η . Assume that, for
                      p                                   1
ℓ(n, p2 ) = 1 − ν + log (|S|/p2 ) /2, it holds that n ℓ(n, p2 ) < ν. Then, the following three
                                                         √

statements hold: (i) With probability at least 1 − p it holds that
                                                                   q
                                                                     8 log( p
                                                                            2
                                                                              )
                                  V (π) ≥ V̂ m (π) − 2CKm Rn (Π) +       n                                                                            (7)

for all π ∈ Π. (ii) With probability at least 1 − p1 − p2 , we have
                                                               r                                                                    !
                                                                               4|S|

                                                                   8 log
                     Vλ (π) ≥ V̂λm (π) − 2CKm 2+ν
                                               ν    Rn (Π) +               n
                                                                                p1             2√
                                                                                          + (2+ν) n
                                                                                                                    ℓ(n,p2 )
                                                                                                                 ν− √1n ℓ(n,p2 )
                                                                                                                                                      (8)

for all π ∈ Π. (iii) With probability at least 1 − p1 − p2 it holds that
                                                                                  r                                                               !
                                                                                                      2|S|

                                                                                          8 log                                   ℓ(n,p2 )
           mins∈S Vs (π) ≥ mins∈S V̂sm (π) − 2CK                                                                 + √1n
                                                                                                       p1
                                               ν
                                                 m
                                                          Rn (Π) +                                n                            ν− √1n ℓ(n,p2 )
                                                                                                                                                      (9)

for all π ∈ Π.
Theorem 1 shows that, with sufficient sample size, the oracle policy objectives V̂ m (π), V̂λm (π), and
mins∈S Vs (π) are with high probability lower bounded than their empirical counterpart if the policy
class Π has as vanishing Rademacher√ complexity Rn (Π). Theorem 1 has two main qualitative
implications: (i) We can achieve a 1/ n-convergence rate for all fairness objectives whenever we
                                     √
optimize over a model class Π with n-vanishing Rademacher complexity Rn (Π) = O n−1/2 ,

such as neural networks. (ii) Compared to the bound for the unrestricted policy (Eq. (7)), the bounds
corresponding to our fairness objectives depend on ν and hence on the population balance within
the marginal distribution of the sensitive attribute S. This implies that the bounds become loose
whenever a sensitive group is underrepresented in the data.

6     E XPERIMENTS
Experimental setup using simulated data: We generate a simulated dataset with n = 3000 ob-
servations inspired by a credit-lending problem (see AppendixG for details). Throughout our exper-
iments, we estimate the policies using the data from a training set (80%) and evaluate the policies
using the data from a test set (20%) to compare the out-of-sample performance. We perform all
evaluations using the following performance metrics: (1) We report the policy value V̂ m (π). This
thus corresponds to the objective function in off-policy learning that is maximized under the fairness
constraints (thus: larger values are better). (2) We additionally report the policy value by different


                                                           7
sub-populations given by the conditional policy value V̂sm (π) for s = 0 and s = 1. We provide the
results for our framework across all three different policy scores, namely m ∈ {DM, IPW, DR}
from Eq. (2), Eq. (3), and Eq. (4), respectively. Of note, we cannot compare our framework against
other methods since suitable baselines that can deal with fair off-policy learning over general poli-
cies are missing.                                Table 1: Results for simulated data.
Results for action fair-
ness: We now examine             Approach                                                       Policy value             Action fairness
                                                                                 Overall           S=0          S=1
whether our framework is
                                 BASELINES
effective in learning poli-        Optimal unrestricted policy                 1.24 ± 0.03 0.74 ± 0.03 1.46 ± 0.06        2.42 ± 0.20
cies that fulfill action fair-     Oracle action fairness                      1.03 ± 0.02 0.01 ± 0.07 1.46 ± 0.06        0.00 ± 0.00
                                 O UR FAIR P OL ( ONLY ACTION FAIRNESS )
ness.     (1) We first re-         FairPol with m = DM                         1.02 ± 0.02 0.01 ± 0.06 1.45 ± 0.06        0.21 ± 0.05
port an optimal unrestricted       FairPol with m = IPW                        1.01 ± 0.03 0.02 ± 0.05 1.43 ± 0.07        0.24 ± 0.06
                                   FairPol with m = DR                         1.01 ± 0.03 0.02 ± 0.05 1.43 ± 0.07        0.23 ± 0.05
policy that has access to        O UR FAIR P OL WITH ENVY- FREE FAIRNESS
the ground-truth outcome           FairPol with m  =  DM                       0.87  ±  0.17    0.61 ±  0.07 0.99 ± 0.24  0.38 ± 0.22
                                   FairPol with m = IPW                        0.87 ± 0.05 0.32 ± 0.17 1.11 ± 0.14        0.79 ± 0.30
functions from the data-           FairPol with m = DR                         0.86 ± 0.06 0.34 ± 0.17 1.09 ± 0.15        0.75 ± 0.32
                                 O UR FAIR P OL WITH MAX - MIN FAIRNESS
generating process and acts        FairPol with m = DM                         0.73 ± 0.03 0.73 ± 0.03 0.73 ± 0.03        0.00 ± 0.00
as the maximum achievable          FairPol with m = IPW
                                   FairPol with m = DR
                                                                               0.73 ± 0.03 0.73 ± 0.03 0.73 ± 0.03
                                                                               0.73 ± 0.03 0.73 ± 0.03 0.73 ± 0.03
                                                                                                                          0.00 ± 0.01
                                                                                                                          0.00 ± 0.01
policy value for compari-        Reported: mean ± standard deviation (×10) on test set over 5 runs.
son. (2) We further estimate an oracle policy that fulfills action fairness with access to the ground-
truth outcome functions. It should be regarded as an upper bound for the policy value that can be
achieved under action fairness. (3) We compare our FairPol for action fairness, setting γ = 0.5. We
report three different variants of our FairPol by varying the underlying policies scores m, namely
DM, IPW, and DR.
The results are in Table 1. Besides policy values, we also report the performance in terms of action
fairness, which we calculate via E[π(Xu , Xs=1 , S = 1) − π(Xu , Xs=0 , S = 0)]. We make the
following observations. First, the optimal unrestricted policy has the largest policy value but fails
to achieve action fairness, as expected. Second, the policy value for the oracle policy with action
fairness is lower, and, by definition, the action fairness achieves a score of zero. Third, we find
that our FairPol is effective in achieving action fairness. Fourth, we find that our FairPol attains a
policy value that is close to the upper bound given by the oracle policy with action fairness, which
corroborates the effectiveness of our framework. Finally, we find that our FairPol achieves a similar
performance regardless of the underlying policy score (i.e., DM, IPW, and DR) and thus appears
robust with respect to the choice of policy score.

                                        2YHUDOO                                               2YHUDOO                             Results for value fairness: We fur-
                                        S                                                     S                                        ther assess whether our framework is
                                    S                                                     S
 3ROLF\ YDOXH


                                                         3ROLF\ YDOXH


                                                                                                                                                effective in learning policies that ful-
                                                                                                                                           fill value fairness. Here, we report
                                                                                                                                       results from our framework with ac-
                                                                                                                                           tion fairness for three different fair-

                                                                                                                                           ness notions: (1) no value fairness,

                   (QY\ IUHHQHVV SDUDPHWHU                           5HJXODUL]DWLRQ SDUDPHWHU  (2) envy-free fairness (λ = 0.5), and
Figure 3: Sensitivity analysis for the envy-free parameter λ (3) max-min fairness. We set γ = 0.5
(left) and the regularization parameter γ (right).                                                                                              and provide a sensitivity analysis for
                                                                                                                                                the parameter later. The results are in
Table 1. We arrive at the following conclusions. First, the optimal unrestricted policy has the largest
overall policy value, as expected. Second, our FairPol for envy-free fairness achieves a smaller
overall policy due to the fairness constraints. Third, our FairPol for max-min fairness is effective
in achieving the desired fairness notion. It achieves a larger worst-case policy value compared to
the optimal unrestricted policy and a lower difference between groups. In summary, the experimen-
tal results confirm the effectiveness of our empirical framework in enforcing the proposed fairness
notions.
We also examine the sensitivity to the envy-freeness parameter λ. We compare the policy value from
our FairPol for different values of λ ∈ [0, 2] and choose m = DR. The results are shown in Fig. 3
(left). As expected, the policy value decreases and the difference between the policy values for the
two sub-groups S ∈ {0, 1} becomes smaller for larger λ. Furthermore, the results remain robust for
different choices of γ (Fig. 3, right).



                                                                                                 8
                                                            Table 2: Results for real-world data.
   Experimental setup using
   real-world data: We now          Approach                                             Policy value             Action fairness
                                                                        Overall           S = male     S = female
   demonstrate the applicabil-
                                    Optimal unrestricted policy     0.137 ± 0.005 0.101 ± 0.008 0.165 ± 0.003 0.129 ± 0.007
   ity of our framework to          FairPol (only action fairness)  0.130 ± 0.004 0.093 ± 0.006 0.160 ± 0.003 0.015 ± 0.001
   real-world, medical data.        FairPol with envy-free fairness 0.130 ± 0.004 0.093 ± 0.006 0.160 ± 0.003 0.067 ± 0.007
                                    FairPol with max-min fairness   0.131 ± 0.008 0.100 ± 0.011 0.157 ± 0.008 0.057 ± 0.010
   We use medical data from         Reported: mean ± standard deviation on test set over 5 random runs
   the Oregon health insur-
   ance experiment (Finkelstein et al., 2012). The Oregon health insurance experiment took place
   in 2008. As part of it, around 30,000 low-income, uninsured adults in Oregon were offered free
   health insurance through Medicaid. We use our framework to learn fair policies that assign Medi-
   caid to minimize the total costs for medical care of an individual, while avoiding discrimination with
   respect to gender. Besides gender, we include five additional variables as possible confounders. De-
   tails are Appendix H. FairPol is based on γ = 0.5 (for action fairness) and the double robust method
   m = DR. For envy-free fairness, we set λ = 0.3. Here, we do not know the ground-truth outcomes
   for real-world data, and, hence, we estimate the nuisance parameters using a TARNet (Shalit et al.,
   2017). We then estimate the (conditional) policy values on the test data using the estimators from
   Sec. 5.2. To quantify action fairness, we report Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient between
   the sensitive attribute (gender) and the policy predictions on the test data. For details, we refer to
   Appendix H.
   Results for action and value fairness: The results are shown in Table 2. Again, the optimal
   unrestricted policy has the largest empirical policy value but does not satisfy action fairness. FairPol
   with only action fairness is effective at enforcing the desired fairness notion, but this comes at the
   cost of a slightly worse policy value. However, this is to be expected as enforcing action fairness
   can worsen value fairness (we refer to our toy example in Appendix C for a detailed discussion on
   the tradeoff). Furthermore, FairPol with max-min fairness is effective in improving value fairness
   compared to FairPol with only action fairness. In summary, the results on real-world data confirm
   the effectiveness of our framework.
                                                                                                                                          Insights: We now examine the out-
                                                                                                                                          puts of the respective policies. We
                                                        $FWLRQ SURDELOLW\
$FWLRQ SURDELOLW\


                                                                                                                                             the averaged outputs over (i) age and
                                                                                                                                       (ii) the number of previous emer-
                                3ROLF\                                                             3ROLF\                        gency department visits of an individ-
                       2SWLPDO XQUHVWULFWHG                              2SWLPDO XQUHVWULFWHG
                          0D[ PLQ IDLUQHVV                                         0D[ PLQ IDLUQHVV          ual (Fig. 4). Both policies tend to rec-
                                                                                                                                             ommend Medicaid for the majority of

                         $JH                                              1XPEHU RI HPHUJHQF\ YLVLWV            individuals. Furthermore, both policy
                                                                                                                                             outputs are lower for individuals with
   Figure 4: Comparison of the estimated policies averaged a smaller number of emergency de-
   over 20 random runs. Visualized are the policy predictions partment visits. This is reasonable as
   (i.e., the outputs of the respective policies).                                                                                           such individuals may be less at risk of
   accumulating medical debt compared to individuals with an extensive medical history. FairPol with
   max-min fairness outputs slightly lower predictions for older individuals and for individuals with
   no or few emergency visits. Hence, there seem to exist some male individuals with few emergency
   visits or higher age for which free health insurance has only little positive effect.
   Discussion: In this paper, we proposed a novel framework for fair off-policy learning from observa-
   tional data. For this, we introduced fairness notions tailored to off-policy learning, then developed a
   flexible instantiation of our framework using machine learning (FairPol), and finally provided the-
   oretical guarantees in the form of generalization bounds. Our framework is widely applicable to
   algorithmic decision-making in practice where fairness must be ensured. In Appendix J, we discuss
   the pros/cons of the different fairness criteria, discuss suitable use cases, and provide recommenda-
   tions for practice.
   Our work contributes to the literature in the following ways: (i) We integrate fairness notions such as
   envy-free fairness or max-min fairness (which have been used in traditional, utility-based decision
   models) into off-policy learning. (ii) We provide a theoretical understanding of how these fairness
   notions interact in the context of off-policy learning. (iii) We propose a practical framework to learn
   fair optimal policies and provide theoretical guarantees in the form of generalization bounds. For
   future work, it may be interesting to consider different fairness notions and/or off-policy learning
   settings, e.g., when treatments are assigned over time.


                                                                                                      9
R EFERENCES
Christian Arnsperger. Envy-freeness and distributive justice. Journal of Economic Surveys, 8(2):
  155–186, 1994.
Susan Athey and Stefan Wager. Policy learning with observational data. Econometrica, 89(1):
  133–161, 2021.
Solon Barocas and Andrew D. Selbst. Big data’s disparate impact. California Law Review, 104:
  671–732, 2016.
Andrew Bennett and Nathan Kallus. Policy evaluation with latent confounders via optimal balance.
  In NeurIPS, 2019.
Andrew Bennett and Nathan Kallus. Efficient policy learning from surrogate-loss classification
  reductions. In ICML, 2020.
Dimitris Bertsimas, Vivek F. Farias, and Nikolaos Trichakis. The price of fairness. Operations
  Research, 59(1):17–31, 2011.
Dimitris Bertsimas, Vivek F. Farias, and Nikolaos Trichakis. Fairness, efficiency, and flexibility in
  organ allocation for kidney transplantation. Operations Research, 61(1):73–87, 2013.
Ioana Bica, Ahmed M. Alaa, James Jordon, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Estimating counterfactual
  treatment outcomes over time through adversarially balanced representations. In ICLR, 2020.
Ioana Bica, Daniel Jarrett, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Invariant causal imitation learning for
  generalizable policies. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Victor Chernozhukov, Juan Carlos Escanciano, Hidehiko Ichimura, Whitney K. Newey, and
  James M. Robins. Locally robust semiparametric estimation. Econometrica, 90(4):1501–1535,
  2022.
Alexandra Chouldechova and Aaron Roth. A snapshot of the frontiers of fairness in machine learn-
  ing. Communications of the ACM, 63(5):82–89, 2020.
Maxime C. Cohen, Adam N. Elmachtoub, and Xiao Lei. Price discrimination with fairness con-
 straints. Management Science, 68(12):8536–8552, 2022. ISSN 0025-1909.
Sam Corbett-Davies, Johann D. Gaebler, Hamed Nilforoshan, Ravi Shroff, and Sharad Goel. The
  measure and mismeasure of fairness: A critical review of fair machine learning. arXiv preprint,
  2023.
Elliot Creager, David Madras, Joern-Henrik Jacobsen, Marissa A. Weiss, Kevin Swersky, Tohiann
  Pitassi, and Richard Zemel. Flexibly fair representation learning by disentanglement. In ICML,
  2019.
Alicia Curth and Mihaela van der Schaar. Nonparametric estimation of heterogeneous treatment
  effects: From theory to learning algorithms. In AISTATS, 2021.
Jeffrey Dastin. Amazon scraps secret AI recruiting tool that showed bias against women, 2018.
Maria De-Arteaga, Stefan Feuerriegel, and Maytal Saar-Tsechansky. Algorithmic fairness in busi-
 ness analytics: Directions for research and practice. Production and Operations Management, 31
 (10):3749–3770, 2022.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Tohiann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness
  through awareness. In ITCS, 2012.
Ethan X. Fang, Zhaoran Wang, and Lan Wang. Fairness-oriented learning for optimal individualized
  treatment rules. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 2022.
Amy Finkelstein, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P. New-
 house, Heidi Allen, and Katherine Baicker. The oregon health insurance experiment: Evidence
 from the first year. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3):1057–1106, 2012.


                                                 10
Yaroslav Ganin and Victor Lempitsky. Unsupervised domain adaptation by backpropagation. In
  ICML, 2015.
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nathan Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. In
 NeurIPS, 2016.
Tobias Hatt, Daniel Tschernutter, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Generalizing off-policy learning under
  sample selection bias. In UAI, 2022.
Shahin Jabbari, Matthew Joseph, Michael Kearns, Jamie Morgenstern, and Aaron Roth. Fairness in
  reinforcement learning. In ICML, 2017.
Jiechuan Jiang and Zongqing Lu. Learning fairness in multi-agent systems. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Nathan Kallus. Balanced policy evaluation and learning. In NeurIPS, 2018.
Nathan Kallus. More efficient policy learning via optimal retargeting. Journal of the American
  Statistical Association, 116(534):646–658, 2021.
Nathan Kallus and Angela Zhou. Confounding-robust policy improvement. In NeurIPS, 2018a.
Nathan Kallus and Angela Zhou. Residual unfairness in fair machine learning from prejudiced data.
  In ICML, 2018b.
Nathan Kallus and Angela Zhou. Fairness, welfare, and equity in personalized pricing. In FAccT,
  2021.
Nathan Kallus, Xiaojie Mao, and Angela Zhou. Assessing algorithmic fairness with unobserved
  protected class using data combination. Management Science, 68(3):1591–2376, 2021. ISSN
  0025-1909.
Nathan Kallus, Xiaojie Mao, Kaiwen Wang, and Zhengyuan Zhou. Doubly robust distributionally
  roust off-policy evaluation and learning. In ICML, 2022.
Niki Kilbertus, Mateo Rojas-Carulla, Gianbattista Parascandolo, Moritz Hardt, Dominik Janzig, and
  Bernhard Schölkopf. Avoiding discrimination through causal reasoning. In NeurIPS, 2017.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
Jon Kleinberg, Jens Ludwig, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Cass R. Sunstein. Discrimination in the age
  of algorithms. Journal of Legal Analysis, 10:113–174, 2019.
Nikita Kozodoi, Johannes Jacob, and Stefan Lessmann. Fairness in credit scoring: Assessment, im-
  plementation and profit implications. European Journal of Operational Research, 297(3):1083–
  1094, 2022. ISSN 03772217.
Matt J. Kusner, Joshua R. Loftus, Chris Russell, and Ricardo Silva. Counterfactual fairness. In
 NeurIPS, 2017.
Francesco Locatello, Gabriele Abbati, Tom Rainforth, Stefan Bauer, Bernhard Schölkopf, and
  Olivier Bachem. On the fairness of disentangled representations. In NeurIPS, 2019.
David Madras, Elliot Creager, Tohiann Pitassi, and Richard Zemel. Learning adversarially fair and
  transferable representations. In ICML, 2018.
Valentyn Melnychuk, Dennis Frauen, and Stefan Feuerriegel. Causal transformer for estimating
  counterfactual outcomes. In ICML, 2022.
Shira Mitchell, Eric Potash, Solon Barocas, Alexander D’Amour, and Kristian Lum. Algorithmic
  fairness: Choices, assumptions, and definitions. Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application,
  8(1):141–163, 2021.
Razieh Nabi and Ilya Shpitser. Fair inference on outcomes. In AAAI, 2018.
Razieh Nabi, Daniel Malinsky, and Ilya Shpitser. Learning optimal fair policies. In ICML, 2019.


                                                11
Hamed Nilforoshan, Johann Gaebler, Ravi Shroff, and Sharad Goel. Causal conceptions of fairness
  and their consequences. In ICML, 2022.
Mutale Nkonde. Is ai bias a corporate social responsibility issue? Harvard Business Review, 2019.
Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge University Press, New York City, 2009. ISBN 9780521895606.
Min Qian and Susan A. Murphy. Performance guarantees for individualized treatment rules. Annals
 of Statistics, 39(2):1180–1210, 2011. ISSN 0090-5364.
David Rea, Craig Froehle, Suzanne Masterson, Brian Stettler, Gregory Fermann, and Arthur Panci-
  oli. Unequal but fair: Incorporating distributive justice in operational allocation models. Produc-
  tion and Operations Management, 30(7):2304–2320, 2021.
Donald B. Rubin. Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized studies.
  Journal of Educational Psychology, 66(5):688–701, 1974. ISSN 0022-0663.
Donald B. Rubin. Bayesian inference for causal effects: The role of randomization. Annals of
  Statistics, 6(1):34–58, 1978. ISSN 0090-5364.
Uri Shalit, Fredrik D. Johansson, and David Sontag. Estimating individual treatment effect: Gener-
  alization bounds and algorithms. In ICML, 2017.
Umer Siddique, Paul Weng, and Matthieu Zimmer. Learning fair policies in multiobjective (deep)
 reinforcement learning with average and discounted rewards. In ICML, 2020.
Ashudeep Singh and Thorsten Joachims. Policy learning for fairness in ranking. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Adam N. Smith, Stephan Seiler, and Ishant Aggarwal. Optimal price targeting. Marketing Science,
  2023.
Davide Viviano and Jelena Bradic. Fair policy targeting. Journal of the American Statistical Asso-
  ciation, 2023.
Jeremy Yang, Dean Eckles, Paramveer Dhillon, and Sinan Aral. Targeting for long-term outcomes.
   Management Science, 2023. ISSN 0025-1909.
Hema Yoganarasimhan, Ebrahim Barzegary, and Abhishek Pani. Design and evaluation of optimal
  free trials. Management Science, 2022. ISSN 0025-1909.
Eric Yang Yu, Zhizhen Qin, Min Kyung Lee, and Sicun Gao. Policy optimization with advantage
  regularization for long-term fairness in decision systems. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Richard Zemel, Yu Ledell Wu, Kevin Swersky, Tohiann Pitassi, and Cynthia Dwork. Learning fair
  representations. In ICML, 2013.
Matthieu Zimmer, Clarie Glanois, Umer Siddique, and Paul Weng. Learning fair policies in decen-
 tralized cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In ICML, 2021.


                                                 12
A     E XTENDED RELATED WORK

A.1    A LGORITHMIC FAIRNESS FOR MACHINE LEARNING PREDICTIONS

Extensive work has developed algorithmic fairness for machine learning predictions, which refers
to computational approaches that enforce certain constraints on predictions so that similarly situated
individuals also receive similar predictions. In the following, we provide a brief overview of the
different concepts and fairness notions. We refer to Chouldechova & Roth (2020) and Mitchell et al.
(2021) for a detailed overview. We emphasize that the following fairness notions are developed for
predictions and not for off-policy learning.
A major literature branch deals with fairness notions that prevent systematic differences in predic-
tions across different groups that are defined by some sensitive attributes (e.g., gender or race) (e.g.,
Dwork et al., 2012; Hardt et al., 2016; Madras et al., 2018; Corbett-Davies et al., 2023).This can
be achieved, for example, by enforcing independence between the sensitive attribute and the predic-
tions (i.e., statistical parity) or ensuring a similar classification performance for the different sensitive
groups (e.g., similar type-I/II error rates). Approaches for group-level fairness have been extended
to specific settings, such as for data with unobserved sensitive attributes (Kallus et al., 2021) and for
censored training data (Kallus & Zhou, 2018b). Beyond group-level fairness, there are also notions
at the individual level as well as notions that are based on a causal lens (called causal fairness); see
Chouldechova & Roth (2020). Note that, even though off-policy learning itself is a causal problem,
our setting later is different from the literature on causal fairness: the standard literature on causal
fairness uses causal theory (e.g., structural causal models) to define fairness notions (e.g., Kilbertus
et al., 2017; Kusner et al., 2017; Nabi & Shpitser, 2018), while we introduce fairness to a specific
causal decision problem (off-policy learning).



A.2    A LGORITHMIC FAIRNESS FOR UTILITY- BASED DECISION MODELS

A different literature stream has developed fairness notions that account for the utility of individuals
who are subject to decisions. Such fairness notions have been integrated into traditional decision
problems and thus outside of machine learning. Examples are, for instance, resource allocation
(Bertsimas et al., 2011; 2013; Rea et al., 2021) and pricing (Kallus & Zhou, 2021; Cohen et al.,
2022). Here, a common fairness notion is envy-free fairness, which is fulfilled if an individual
receives an allocation that has the same (or a higher) utility as the allocation of any other individ-
ual. Hence, decisions are envy-free if all players receive a share of resources that is equally good
from their perspective (Arnsperger, 1994). Another fairness notion is max-min fairness, which is
grounded in Rawlsian justice and which seeks to maximize the minimum utility that a player can
obtain (Bertsimas et al., 2011). However, to the best of our knowledge, the aforementioned notions
– envy-free fairness and max-min fairness – have only been used for traditional resource allocations
and have not yet been adapted to off-policy learning from observational data, which is one of our
contributions later.
Prior literature also considered algorithmic fairness in specialized settings. Examples are ranking
tasks such as from recommender systems (e.g., Singh & Joachims, 2019) or risk-averse approaches
to bound worst-case outcomes (e.g., Fang et al., 2022). Even others consider algorithmic fairness
in reinforcement learning. Here, fair policies can be obtained by customizing the reward function
(Jabbari et al., 2017; Jiang & Lu, 2019; Yu et al., 2022) or by optimizing social welfare functions
(Siddique et al., 2020; Zimmer et al., 2021). However, these works focus on Markov decision
processes (MDPs), whereas we focus on learning policies in non-sequential settings that are not
restricted to MDPs.

A.3    C AUSAL SCM- BASED FAIRNESS FOR OFF - POLICY LEARNING

This literature stream rests on the assumption that the structural causal graph of the decision problem
is known and then seeks to block specific causal pathways that are deemed unfair (Nabi et al., 2019;
Nilforoshan et al., 2022). However, approaches from this literature stream require exact knowledge
of the causal structure of the decision problem. That is, the underlying structural causal model of
the data-generating process must be a prior known. In contrast to that, we do not make such strong


                                                     13
assumption (i.e., exact knowledge of the underlying causal structure) as this is rarely the case in
practice.


                                                14
B     P ROOFS

B.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

Proof. For each sensitive attribute s ∈ S, we construct π ∗ (·, s) ∈ arg maxπ∈ΠX Vs (π), where
ΠX = {π : X → [0, 1] | π measurable}. By definition, it holds that Vs (π) ≤ Vs (π ∗ ) for any
policy π ∈ Π and, hence, inf s∈S Vs (π) ≤ inf s∈S Vs (π ∗ ), which means that π ∗ is a policy fulfilling
max-min fairness. At the same time, due to Vs (π) ≤ Vs (π ∗ ), it holds that
                                Z                           Z
                      V (π) =        Vs (π) P(S = s) ds ≤          Vs (π ∗ ) P(S = s) ds = V (π ∗ ).   (10)
                                 S                             S

Thus, the policy π ∗ is an optimal unrestricted policy.


B.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

Proof. We first show that V0 (π mm ) = V1 (π mm ), i.e., π mm is envy-free with α = 0. Let us assume
w.l.o.g. that V0 (π mm ) < V1 (π mm ). By our assumption, we can find an ϵ > 0 such the policy π ′
defined by
                                mm
                               π (x) + ϵ sign{ITE(x, 0)},           if x ∈ V,
                    π ′ (x) =                                                                    (11)
                               π mm (x),                            if x ∈ X \ V,

satisfies V1 (π ′ ) > V0 (π mm ). By construction of π ′ and our assumption, we yield
                  Z
    V0 (π ′ ) =        π ′ (x) ITE(x, 0) P(x | S = 0) + µ0 (x, 0) P(x | S = 0) dx                      (12)
                  X
                  Z
            >          π mm (x) ITE(x, 0) P(x | S = 0) + µ0 (x, 0) P(x | S = 0) dx = V0 (π mm ).       (13)
                  X

This implies

                                min{V0 (π ′ ), V1 (π ′ )} > min{V0 (π mm ), V1 (π mm )},               (14)

which is a contradiction to the assumption that π mm fulfills max-min fairness. Hence, π mm fulfills
envy-free fairness.
Now, let π 0 be an optimal policy that satisfies both action fairness and envy-free fairness. Let us
further assume that π 0 does not fulfill max-min fairness. We then yield

V (π 0 ) = P(S = 0) V0 (π 0 )+P(S = 1) V1 (π 0 ) < P(S = 0) V0 (π mm )+P(S = 1) V1 (π mm ) = V (π mm ),
                                                                                              (15)
which is a contradiction because π mm fulfills envy-free fairness and π 0 is optimal.


B.3    P ROOF OF GENERALIZATION BOUNDS

In this section, we provide proof of our generalization bounds, namely Theorem 1. In our proof, we
later leverage ideas from Theorem 1 in Kallus (2018); however, adapting these to our setting is not
straightforward, and several additional arguments must be made. To this end, we begin with three
auxiliary lemmas.

Lemma 3. Let T m (s, W ) = supπ∈Π | n1 i=1 1(S
                                         Pn       i =s)  m                          m
                                                 p(s) ψ (π, W i ) − Vs (π)|. Then, T (s, ·) sat-
                                               4C
isfies the bounded difference inequality with np(s) Km , where Km is a constant depending on
m ∈ {DM, IPW, DR}.


                                                          15
Proof. It holds that
       |T m (s, W ) − T m (s, W ′ )|                                                                  (16)
 (1)          1
                n
                X   1(Si = s) m                     1     1(Si′ = s) m
                                                               n
                                                               X
  ≤ sup                      ψ (π, W i ) − Vs (π) −                 ψ (π, W ′i ) − Vs (π)             (17)
       π∈Π    n i=1   p(s)                          n i=1   p(s)
                  n
 (2)     1
                     1(Si = s)ψm (π, W i ) − 1(Si′ = s)ψm (π, W ′i )
                 X
  ≤          sup                                                                                      (18)
       np(s) π∈Π i=1
         1
             sup |ψ m (π, W j )| + ψ m (π, W ′j ) ,

  =                                                                                                   (19)
       np(s) π∈Π
where (1) follows from a property of the supremum and (2) follows from the reverse triangle in-
equality. It remains to bound |ψ m (π, ·)| for m ∈ {DM, IPW, DR}. For m = DM, we get

                             ψ DM (π, W j ) ≤ |µ1 (X, S)| + |µ0 (X, S)| ≤ 2C.                         (20)
For m = IPW, we get
                                                           |Y |                  C
                     ψ IPW (π, W j ) ≤                                          ≤ .                   (21)
                                          |Aπb (X, S) + (1 − A)(1 − πb (X, S))|  η
Finally, for m = DR, we get

       DR                   DM                          |Y − µA (X, S)|                         η+1
   ψ        (π, W j ) ≤ ψ        (π, W j ) +                                       ≤ 2C                   .
                                             |Aπb (X, S) + (1 − A)(1 − πb (X, S))|               η
                                                                                                      (22)
Therefore, we arrive at
                                                                      4C
                                   |T m (s, W ) − T m (s, W ′ )| ≤         Km ,                       (23)
                                                                     np(s)
                      1
with KDM = 1, KIPW = 2η , and KDR = η+1
                                     η .



Lemma 4. With probability of at least 1 − p, it holds that
                                                          s         
                                                                   2
                                       2CK  m               8 log p
                      T m (s, W ) ≤               Rn (Π) +             .                              (24)
                                        p(s)                    n


Proof. Lemma 3 allows us to apply McDiarmid’s inequality, resulting in
                                                                np(s)2 ϵ2

                      m              m
                  P (T (s, W ) − E [T (s, W )] ≥ ϵ) ≤ exp −                 .                         (25)
                                                                 8C 2 Km
                                                                       2


Equivalently, with probability of at least 1 − p1 , it holds that
                                                                        s
                                                               2CKm         2 log p11
                            T m (s, W ) ≤ E [T m (s, W )] +                             .             (26)
                                                                p(s)           n
By a standard symmetrization argument, we yield
                                                                     
                        1  X           1 Xn
                                                1(Si = s) m               2CKm
 E [T m (s, W )] ≤ E  n          sup        ϵi          ψ ((π, W i )  ≤       E [Rn (Π)] .
                       2        n π∈Π  n i=1
                                                  p(s)                     p(s)
                              ϵ∈{−1,1}
                                                                                          (27)
Here, the Rademacher complexity Rn (Π) satisfies the bounded differences with n2 , and we thus
obtain
                                                              nϵ2

                      P (Rn (Π) − E [Rn (Π)] ≤ −ϵ) ≤ exp −           .                    (28)
                                                                2

                                                       16
This implies that, with probability of at least 1 − p2 , it holds that
                                                             s
                                                               2 log p12
                                 E [Rn (Π)] ≤ Rn (Π) +                   .                           (29)
                                                                   n
By setting p1 = p2 = p2 and applying the union bound, we yield
                                                                 s          
                                                                           2
                                           2CK   m                   8 log p
                           T m (s, W ) ≤           Rn (Π) +                                        (30)
                                            p(s)                         n
with probability of at least 1 − p.

In the next step, we use Lemma 4 to derive a bound on the absolute estimation error
 V̂sm (π) − Vs (π) that holds uniformly over all policies and sensitive attributes. This is stated in
Lemma 5.
                                     r
                                                   |S|
                                             log
Lemma 5. Let ℓ(n, p2 ) = 1 − ν +             2
                                               p2
                                                  . Let us further assume that ℓ(n,p )
                                                                                 √ 2 < ν. Then, with
                                                                                   n
probability of at least 1 − p1 − p2 , it holds that
                                                        s                                     !
                                                                  2|S|
                                  2CK    m                  8 log  p      1         ℓ(n, p2 )
  sup sup V̂sm (π) − Vs (π) ≤               Rn (Π) +                1
                                                                       +√                       .
  π∈Π s∈S                             ν                         n          n ν − √1n ℓ(n, p2 )
                                                                                                     (31)

Proof. We yield
    sup V̂sm (π) − Vs (π)                                                                            (32)
    π∈Π

        1 X 1(Si = s) m
              n
= sup                 ψ ((π, W i ) − Vs (π)                                                          (33)
    π∈Π n i=1 p̂n (s)

                                                       1 X 1(Si = s) m
                        n                                 n
      1      1
                          1(Si = s)ψm ((π, W i ) + sup
                       X
≤         −        sup                                              ψ ((π, W i ) − Vs (π)
   p̂n (s) p(s) π∈Π i=1                            π∈Π n i=1 p(s)
                                                                                    (34)
  2CKm |p̂n (s) − p(s)|
≤                       + T m (s, W ).                                              (35)
    p(s)     p̂n (s)
The absolute difference |p̂n (s) − p(s)| satisfies bounded differences with constant n1 because
                                                                      |1(Sj = s) − 1(Si′ = s)|  1
    ||p̂n (s) − p(s)| − |p̂′n (s) − p(s)|| ≤ |p̂n (s) − p̂′n (s)| ≤                            ≤ .   (36)
                                                                                 n              n
Hence, McDiamid’s inequality implies
                  P (|p̂n (s) − p(s)| − E [|p̂n (s) − p(s)|] ≥ ϵ) ≤ exp −2nϵ2 .

                                                                                                     (37)
Thus, with probability at least 1 − p2 it holds that
                                                            s
                                                                log p12
                 |p̂n (s) − p(s)| ≤ E [|p̂n (s) − p(s)|] +                                           (38)
                                                                  2n
                                                                         s
                                                                           log p12
                                         r h
                                   (1) 1                             i
                                                                   2
                                   ≤        E (np̂n (s) − np(s)) +                                   (39)
                                       n                                     2n
                                                              s
                                                                       1
                                       r
                                   (2)    p(s) (1 − p(s))        log p2
                                   =                       +             = ℓ(n, p2 , s)              (40)
                                                 n                 2n
                                                     s          
                                       1                 log p12
                                   ≤ √ 1 − ν +                  ,                                  (41)
                                         n                  2


                                                         17
where (1) follows by applying Jensen’s inequality and (2)p by noting that np̂n (s)                      ∼
Binomial(n, p(s)) with expectation np(s) and standard deviation np(s)(1 − p(s)).
The above also implies that, with probability of at least 1 − p2 , we obtain
                                     s                                  s         
                       1               log p12              1               log p12
     p̂n (s) ≥ p(s) − √      1−ν+                ≥ ν − √ 1 − ν +                    > 0,    (42)
                        n                  2                  n                2
                        q
                           log p1
whenever √1n 1 − ν +          2
                                2
                                    < ν. Putting everything together via the union bound, we obtain
with probability of at least 1 − p1 − p2 that
                                                                                       q             
                                                  s
                                                                                             log p1
                             2CKm                     8 log p21     1          1−ν+           2
                                                                                                  2

sup V̂sm (π) − Vs (π) ≤
                                                                                                      
                                  Rn (Π) +                        +√                     q           .
                                                                                                       
π∈Π                            ν                           n         n         1           log   1
                                                                                                  p2
                                                                            ν − √n 1 − ν +      2
                                                                                                      (43)
The result follows by applying the union bound over all s ∈ S.

In the following, we use Lemma 5 to prove the generalization bounds. Specifically, we provide the
proofs for the envy-free generalization bound from Eq. (8), the max-min generalization bound from
Eq. (9), and the unrestricted generalization bound from Eq. (7).
Proof of Eq. (8):

Proof. It follows that
            sup sup V̂ m (π) − λ V̂sm (π) − V̂sm
                                               ′ (π) − V (π) + λ Vs (π) − Vs′ (π)                     (44)
           π∈Π s,s′ ∈S

         ≤ sup V̂ m (π) − V (π) + λ sup sup                V̂sm (π) − V̂sm
                                                                         ′ (π) − Vs (π) − Vs′ (π)     (45)
            π∈Π                          π∈Π s,s′ ∈S

         ≤ sup V̂ m (π) − V (π) + 2λ sup sup V̂sm (π) − Vs (π) .                                      (46)
            π∈Π                           π∈Π s∈S

Hence, with probability of at least 1 − p1 − p2 , we yield
             sup sup V̂ m (π) − λ V̂sm (π) − V̂sm
                                                ′ (π) − V (π) + λ Vs (π) − Vs′ (π)                    (47)
             π∈Π s,s′ ∈S
                                         s                                                  !
                     2+ν                     8 log 4|S|
                                                     p1             2           ℓ(n, p2 )
          ≤ 2CKm          Rn (Π) +                          +          √                             (48)
                      ν                           n             (2 + ν) n    ν − √1n ℓ(n, p2 )
using Lemma 5. The theorem follows from
  V̂λm (π) ≤ Vλ (π) + sup sup V̂ m (π) − λ V̂sm (π) − V̂sm
                                                         ′ (π) − V (π) + λ |Vs (π) − Vs′ (π)| .
                         π∈Π s,s′ ∈S
                                                                                                      (49)


Proof of Eq. (9):

Proof. The triangle inequality implies that
                               V̂sm (π) ≤ Vs (π) + sup V̂sm (π) − Vs (π) .                            (50)
                                                      π∈Π

Hence, Lemma 5 yields with probability of at least 1 − p1 − p2 for all s ∈ S, π ∈ Π:
                                           s                                      !
                                                      2|S|
                        2CKm                  8 log   p1    1          ℓ(n, p2 )
    Vs (π) ≥ V̂sm (π) −         Rn (Π) +                   +√                        .               (51)
                          ν                         n         n ν − √1n ℓ(n, p2 )
The result follows by applying the minimum over s on both sides.


                                                      18
Proof of Eq. (7):

Proof. It follows that
                            V̂ m (π) ≤ V (π) + sup V̂ m (π) − V (π) .                      (52)
                                               π∈Π
With the same proof as in Lemma 5, we can show, with probability of at least 1 − p, that
                                                              s          
                                                                        2
                                                                  8 log p
                   sup V̂ m (π) − V (π) ≤ 2CKm Rn (Π) +                     .             (53)
                   π∈Π                                               n


                                                19
C      T OY EXAMPLE TO DIFFERENTIATE FAIRNESS NOTIONS

In the following, we provide a toy example based on which we discuss the differences between the
above fairness notions. For this, we consider algorithmic decision-making in credit lending where
applications for student loans are evaluated. We consider two covariates for students, namely their
gender and average grade (GPA) given by Gender ∈ {Female, Male} and GPA ∈ {Low, High}.
We consider Gender as the sensitive attribute S. The outcome Y is the expected change in salary,
that is, whether it increases (= 1), remains the same (= 0), or decreases (= −1) as a result of the
study program. For the purpose of our toy example, we make further assumptions regarding the
distribution of covariates and expected outcomes. To this end, Table 3 reports the probability of
observing an individual from each sub-population (column 3), the outcome when a student receives
the loan (µ1 ), and the outcome when a student does not receive the loan (µ0 ). Then, the overall effect
of the action (i.e., the student loan) is given by µ1 − µ0 . As can be seen, the action of receiving a
loan benefits males with a high GPA while it has a negative effect for all other sub-groups.
In Table 3, we report the policy value under different decision policies. (Details for calculating the
policy values in our toy example are in Appendix C). First, we report the optimal unrestricted policy
(π u ). This policy gives student loans only to males with high GPA but not to any other student.
The reason is that the sub-population of males with high GPA is the only one with a positive effect
(i.e., µ1 − µ0 = 1). Second, we report an optimal policy under action fairness (π af ). It chooses
the same action for both males and females with high (low) GPA. Hence, the action taken by π af
does not depend on gender and thus fulfills action fairness. Third, envy-free fairness (π α ) and max-
min fairness (π mm ) assign loans only to males with a high GPA. In particular, the max-min policy
coincides with the optimal unrestricted policy, as implied by Lemma 1.
We further consider policies for envy-free fairness and max-min fairness that are combined with
action fairness, so that always both action fairness and value fairness are satisfied (columns 10 and
11). Here, the policies assign actions to males and females with high GPA in order to fulfill action
fairness. In addition, both policies assign actions only to a fraction of the overall population. This is
seen by the fact that the policy outputs are α+1      1
                                              3 and 3 , respectively, and thus below 1. We further note
that some of the policies can coincide as stipulated in Lemma 2. For α = 0, the policy combining
action fairness and envy-free fairness is identical to the policy combing action fairness and max-min
fairness. For α = 2, the policy combining action fairness and envy-free fairness is identical to the
policy for action fairness (π af ).

          Table 3: Toy example comparing the different fairness notions for off-policy learning.

                    Data                                Expected outcome                                         Policies           Combined policies
                                                                                                                                   (with action fairness)
 Gender         GPA           Probability                  µ1                  µ0               πu          π af       πα   π mm     πα           π mm
 Female         Low                 0.1                    0                     1               0           0          0    0        0             0
 Male           Low                 0.4                    0                     1               0           0          0    0        0             0
                                                                                                                                    α+1             1
 Female         High                0.1                   −1                     1               0           1          0    0       3              3
                                                                                                                                    α+1             1
 Male           High                0.4                    1                     0               1           1          1    1       3              3
 Legend: π u : optimal unrestricted; π af : action fairness; π α : envy-free fairness; π mm : max-min fairness



Derivations: We denote the levels of gender with F (female) and M (male), and the levels of GPA
with L (low) and H (high). We first calculate the conditional policy value VF for females
VF (π) = π(F, L)µ1 (F, L) + (1 − π(F, L))µ0 (F, L) + π(F, H)µ1 (F, H) + (1 − π(F, H))µ0 (F, H)
                                                                                          (54)
          = (1 − π(F, L)) − π(F, H) + (1 − π(F, H))                                                                                                     (55)
          = 2 − π(F, L) − 2π(F, H)                                                                                                                      (56)
and VM for males
VM (π) = π(M, L)µ1 (M, L) + (1 − π(M, L))µ0 (M, L) + π(M, H)µ1 (M, H) + (1 − π(M, H))µ0 (M, H)
                                                                                     (57)
           = 1 − π(M, L) + π(M, H).                                                                                                                     (58)


                                                                                       20
The overall policy value is
               V (π) = 0.2VF (π) + 0.8VM (π)                                                   (59)
                     = 1.2 + 0.8π(M, H) − 0.8π(M, L) − 0.2π(F, L) − 0.4π(F, H).                (60)
Hence, the optimal unrestricted policy is π u (M, H) = 1, π u (M, L) = 0, π u (F, H) = 0, and
π u (F, L) = 0.
The difference of the conditional policy value is
          ∆(π) = |VF (π) − VM (π)| = |1 − π(F, L) − 2π(F, H) − π(M, H) + π(M, L)|.             (61)
It holds that ∆(π u ) = 0 which implies that the policy π α with α-envy-free fairness coincides with
πu .
For the optimal policy π af with action fairness, the policy value simplifies to
                V (π af ) = 1.2 + 0.8π af (H) − 0.8π af (L) − 0.2π af (L) − 0.4π af (H)        (62)
                                       af           af
                         = 1.2 + 0.4π (H) − π (L),                                             (63)
which means that π af (L) = 0 and π af (H) = 1. For the policy π af+α with both action fairness and
envy-free fairness, we obtain
                                 ∆(π af+α ) = |1 − 3π af+α (H)| ≤ α,                           (64)
which yields π af+α (L) = 0 and π af+α (H) = α+1
                                              3 . Finally, the policy π
                                                                        mm
                                                                           with max-min fairness
maximizes
  min{VF (π mm ), VM (π mm )} = min{2 − π mm (L) − 2π mm (H), 1 − π mm (L) + π mm (H)}, (65)
which implies π mm (L) = 0 and π mm (H) = 1/3.


                                                    21
D      D ISCUSSION OF THE ASSUMPTIONS IN L EMMA 2
In this section, we provide additional details regarding the assumptions in Lemma 2. In essence,
Lemma 2 holds if the max-min solution (π mm , s∗ ) outputs stochastic actions in an area V of the
covariate space where the policy value could be improved by choosing a deterministic action. In the
toy example from the previous section, this is the case, and, hence, the max-min and the envy-free
policy with α = 0 coincide. In the following, we study a second toy example where π mm does not
coincide with any envy-free policy π af+α .

D.1      T OY EXAMPLE

The same data from Table 3 is shown in Table 4 with different ITEs. Now, the action benefits all
groups, but males have larger expected outcomes than females. Furthermore, old males receive
a larger benefit from the action than all other groups. Hence, even though the action benefits all
groups, the difference in policy values for males and females will increase by performing actions
for old male patients. The max-min policy π mm simply recommends action to everyone, as it aims
to maximize the policy value VFemale (π mm ) for females (worst-case). In contrast, the π af+α restricts
action on older patients in order to decrease the disparity of conditional policy values VFemale (π af+α )
and VMale (π af+α ) (envy-free).

          Table 4: Toy example comparing the different fairness notions for off-policy learning.

                    Data                                Expected outcome                                         Policies           Combined policies
                                                                                                                                   (with action fairness)
 Gender         GPA           Probability                  µ1                  µ0               πu          π af       πα   π mm     πα           π mm
 Female         Low                 0.1                     0                  −1                1           1          1    1      1               1
                                                                                                                        α
 Male           Low                 0.4                     1                   0                1           1          3
                                                                                                                             1      1               1
 Female         High                0.1                     0                  −1                1           1          1    1     α−2              1
                                                                                                                        α
 Male           High                0.4                     2                   0                1           1          3
                                                                                                                             1     α−2              1
 Legend: π u : optimal unrestricted; π af : action fairness; π α : envy-free fairness; π mm : max-min fairness


D.2      D ERIVATION OF TOY EXAMPLE

We proceed as in the example from our main paper (see Appendix C for details) and calculate the
conditional policy values
                                                  VF (π) = −(1 − π(F, L)) − (1 − π(F, H))                                                               (66)
                                                         = π(F, L) + π(F, H) − 2                                                                        (67)
and
                                                            VM (π) = π(M, L) + 2π(M, H).                                                                (68)
The overall policy value is
                        V (π) = 0.2VF (π) + 0.8VM (π)                                                                                                   (69)
                              = 1.6π(M, H) + 0.8π(M, L) + 0.2π(F, L) + 0.2π(F, H) − 0.4                                                                 (70)

We immediately obtain the optimal unrestricted policy is π u ≡ π af ≡ π mm ≡ 1 because all policy
terms are positive. To obtain policies π af+α and π α with envy-free fairness, we write the constraints
as
                        ∆(π α ) = |2 + π α (M, L) + 2π α (M, H) − π α (F, L) − π α (F, H)| ≤ α                                                          (71)
and
                                                          ∆(π af+α ) = 2 + π af+α (H) ≤ α,                                                              (72)
where π af+α again denotes the policy that fulfills both action fairness and envy-free fairness.
Eq. (72) implies π af+α (H) = α − 2 (for α ≥ 2) and π af+α (L) = 1. Eq. (71) yields a lin-
ear constrained optimization problem with solution π α (F, L) = π α (F, H) = 1 and π α (M, L) =
π α (M, H) = α/3.


                                                                                       22
E      L EARNING ALGORITHM FOR FAIR P OL
Algorithm 1 provides the learning algorithm for FairPol. The algorithm consists of two consecutive
steps, namely the fair representation learning step and the policy learning step. For the policy learn-
ing step, the specification of the policy loss is needed, namely one of no value, envy-free fairness,
and max-min fairness: Lm             m       m                    m
                          π (·) ∈ {V̂ (·), V̂λ (·), and mins∈S V̂s (·)}.


Algorithm 1 Learning algorithm for FairPol
    Input: hyperparameters of representation networks (number of epochs nr , learning rate ηr , action fairness
    parameter γ), hyperparameters of policy network (number of epochs np , learning rate ηp , policy loss Lm        π (·))
                 (0)    (0)  (0)
    Initialize θY , θΦ , θS ∼ Kaiming-Uniform                             ▷ Step 1. Fitting the representation networks
    for k = 1 to nr do
        Forward pass of the base representation, outcome prediction, and sensitive attribute networks with
      (k−1)    (k−1)     (k−1)
    θY      , θΦ      , θS
          (k)       (k−1)                   (k−1)     (k−1)
        θY ← θY             − ηr ∇θY LY (θΦ        , θY     )
          (k)       (k−1)                   (k−1)     (k−1)              (k−1)    (k−1)
        θΦ ← θΦ             − ηr ∇θΦ LY (θΦ       , θY      ) + γLconf (θΦ     , θS     )
                                                                                              (k)   (k−1)
        Forward pass of the base representation and sensitive attribute networks with θΦ , θS
          (k)       (k−1)                    (k)    (k−1)
        θS ← θS             − ηr ∇θS γLS (θΦ , θS         )
    end for
              (n )
    θ̂Φ ← θΦ r
    Initialize θ(0) ∼ Kaiming-Uniform                                               ▷ Step 2. Fitting the policy network
    for k = 1 to np do
                                                        (k−1)
        Forward pass of the policy   network with θ
        θ(k) ← θ(k−1) − ηp ∇θ Lm

                                      π (πθ (k−1) ( Φ̂(X)))
    end for


                                                            23
F    H YPERPARAMETER TUNING
We followed best practices in causal machine learning (e.g., Bica et al., 2021; Curth & van der
Schaar, 2021) and performed extensive hyperparameter tuning for FairPol. We split the data into a
training set (80%) and a validation set (10%). We then performed 30 random grid search iterations
and chose the set of parameters that minimized the respective training loss on the validation set. In
particular, the tuning procedure was the same for all baselines, which ensures that the performance
differences reported in Section 6 are not due to larger flexibility but are due to the different methods
themselves.
We performed hyperparameter tuning for all neural networks in FairPol, i.e., the different repre-
sentation networks and the policy network. For the real-world data, we also used TARNet (Shalit
et al., 2017) in order to estimate the nuisance parameters. We first performed hyperparameter tuning
for TARNet and for the representation networks, before tuning the policy neural networks by using
the input from the tuned neural networks. The tuning ranges for the hyperparameter are shown in
Table 5 (simulated data) and Table 6 (real-world data).

                       Table 5: Hyperparameter tuning ranges (simulated data).

      N EURAL NETWORK            H YPERPARAMETER                      T UNING RANGE
      All neural networks        Dropout probability                  0, 0.1, 0.2
                                 Batch size                           32, 64, 128
                                 Epochs                               400
      Representation networks    Learning rate                        0.0001, 0.0005, 0.001, 0.005
                                 Hidden layer / representation size   2, 5, 10
                                 Weight decay                         0, 0.001
      Policy network             Learning rate                        0.00005, 0.0001, 0.0005, 0.001
                                 Hidden layer size                    5, 10, 15, 20
                                 Weight decay                         0


                       Table 6: Hyperparameter tuning ranges (real-world data).

      N EURAL NETWORK            H YPERPARAMETER                      T UNING RANGE
      All neural networks        Dropout probability                  0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3
                                 Batch size                           32, 64, 128
      TARNet                     Learning rate                        0.0001, 0.0005, 0.001, 0.005
                                 Hidden layer sizes                   5, 10, 20, 30
                                 Weight decay                         0
                                 Epochs                               200
      Representation networks    Learning rate                        0.0001, 0.0005, 0.001, 0.005
                                 Hidden layer / representation size   2, 5, 10
                                 Epochs                               400
                                 Weight decay                         0, 0.001
      Policy network             Learning rate                        0.00005, 0.0001, 0.0005, 0.001
                                 Hidden layer size                    5, 10, 15, 20
                                 Epochs                               300
                                 Weight decay                         0

The tables include both the hyperparameter ranges shared across all neural networks and the
network-specific hyperparameters. For reproducibility purposes, we report the selected hyperpa-
rameters as .yaml files.5


  5
    Codes are in the supplementary materials and at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/
FairPol-402C.


                                                   24
G    D ETAILS REGARDING SIMULATED DATA
Here, we provide details regarding our synthetic data generation. We consider a decision problem
from credit lending where loans are approved based on covariates of the customers, yet where al-
gorithmic decision-making must not discriminate by gender. To this end, we denote the sensitive
attribute by S ∈ {0, 1} and generate data as follows. We simulate two covariates Xu ∈ R and
Xs ∈ R via
     S ∼ Bernoulli(ps ),      Xu ∼ U[−1, 1],        and      Xs | S = s ∼ U[s − 1, s],       (73)
where U[−1, 1] is the uniform distribution over the interval [−1, 1]. Thus, Xu is independent of
S, while Xs is correlated with S. In practice, Xu can be, e.g., a credit score (which gives the
probability of repaying a loan yet which is independent of gender), while Xs can be, e.g., income
(which is often correlated with gender). We further generate actions (decisions on whether a loan
was approved or not) via
A | Xu = xu , Xs = xs , S = s ∼ Bernoulli(p) with p = σ(sin(2xu ) + sin(2Xs ) + sin(2s)),
                                                                                     (74)
where σ(·) denotes the sigmoid function. Finally, we generate outcomes
        Y = 1{A = 1} (1{Xu < 0.5} sin(4Xs − 2) + 1{Xu > 0.5}(0.6 S − 0.3)) + ϵ,              (75)
where ϵ ∼ N (0, 0.1). In our example, the outcomes could correspond to the profit for the lending
institution. We sample a dataset of n = 3000 sample from the data generating process and split the
data into a training set (80%) and a test set (20%).


                                               25
H    D ETAILS REGARDING REAL - WORLD DATA
In our experiment with real-world data, we use data from the Oregon health insurance experiment
(OHIE)6 (Finkelstein et al., 2012). The OHIE was conducted as a large-scale experiment among
public health to assess the effect of health insurance on several outcomes such as health or economic
status. In 2008, a lottery draw offered low-income, uninsured adults in Oregon participation in a
Medicaid program, providing health insurance. Chosen individuals were offered free health insur-
ance. After a period of 12 months, a survey was conducted to evaluate several outcomes of the
participants.
In our analysis, the decision to sign up for the Medicaid program is the action A, and the overall out-
of-pocket cost for medical care within the last 6 months is the outcome Y . The sensitive covariate
S we consider is gender. Furthermore, we include the following covariates X: age, the number of
people the individual signed up with, the week the individual signed up, the number of emergency
visits before the experiment, and language. We extract n = 24, 646 observations from the OHIE
data and plot the histograms of all variables in Fig. 5.
We split the data randomly into a train (0.7%), validation (0.1%), and test set (0.2%) and perform
hyperparameter tuning using the validation set. The evaluation metrics are then computed using the
test set. We estimate the nuisance parameters using a TARNet (Shalit et al., 2017), for which we
perform hyperparameter tuning according to Appendix F. Then, we used the estimators proposed in
Sec. 5.2 to estimate (conditional) policy values using the estimated nuisance parameters).
           )UHTXHQF\


                                                                                                 )UHTXHQF\


                                                                                                                                                               )UHTXHQF\


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                )UHTXHQF\


                                                                                                                                                                                         0DOH                    )HPDOH
                                                        2XWFRPH                                                          7UHDWPHQW                                                          *HQGHU                                                                     $JH
           )UHTXHQF\


                                                                                                 )UHTXHQF\


                                                                                                                                                               )UHTXHQF\


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                )UHTXHQF\


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2WKHU                 (QJOLVK
                                1XPEHU RI SHRSOH VLJQHG XS ZLWK                        :HHN RI VLJQ XS                                     1XPEHU RI HPHUJHQF\ YLVLWV                                            /DQJXDJH


                                                Figure 5: Histograms of marginal distributions (real-world data).


   6
     The dataset is available here: https://www.nber.org/programs-projects/projects-and-centers/oregon-health-
insurance-experiment


                                                                                                                                                               26
I   D ISCUSSION
Unfair decisions can have detrimental consequences for individuals because of which ethical and
legal frameworks require that algorithmic decision-making must ensure fairness (Barocas & Selbst,
2016; Kleinberg et al., 2019). Hence, potential applications benefiting from fairness for algorithmic
decision-making are vast and include healthcare, lending, and criminal justice, among many others
(De-Arteaga et al., 2022). For instance, in the U.S., the Equal Credit Opportunity Act mandates
that lending decisions are fair for individuals of different gender, race, and other sensitive groups,
while the Fair Housing Act enforces similar principles for housing rentals and purchases. As such
algorithmic decision-making must avoid discrimination of individuals and thus generate decisions
that are regarded as fair.
We addressed the problem of fairness in algorithmic decision-making by learning fair policies from
observational data. Our framework has three main benefits that make it appealing for use in practice:
(1) Our framework is directly applicable even in settings where observational data ingrain historical
discrimination. Despite such historical discrimination, our framework can still obtain a fair policy.
This is relevant for practice as there is a growing awareness that many data sources are biased and
that it is often challenging or infeasible to remove bias in historical data (Corbett-Davies et al., 2023).
(2) Our framework comes with a scalable machine learning instantiation based on a custom neural
network (FairPol). Hence, practitioners can effectively generate fair policies from high-dimensional
and non-linear observational data. (3) Our framework is flexible in the sense that it supports different
fairness notions. Practitioners can thus adapt our framework to the underlying fairness goals as well
as the legal and ethical contexts and thus choose a suitable fairness notion. Together, our framework
fulfills crucial fairness demands in many applications from practice (e.g., automated hiring, credit
lending, and ad targeting).
Our work contributes to the literature in several ways. First, our work connects to off-policy learning
(e.g., Kallus, 2018; Athey & Wager, 2021). While there is a growing body of literature that uses off-
policy learning for managerial decision-making such as pricing and ad targeting (e.g., Smith et al.,
2023; Yoganarasimhan et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2023), we add by offering a new framework with
fairness guarantees. In particular, our work fills an important gap in the literature in that we are able
to learn fair policies from discriminatory observational data. Second, there is extensive literature on
algorithmic fairness that focuses on machine learning predictions (e.g., Hardt et al., 2016; Kusner
et al., 2017; Nabi & Shpitser, 2018), whereas we contribute to algorithmic fairness for decision-
making from observational data, specifically, off-policy learning. Third, fairness notions such as
envy-free fairness or max-min fairness have been used in traditional, utility-based decision models
such as those from resource allocation and pricing (e.g., Bertsimas et al., 2011; Kallus & Zhou,
2021; Cohen et al., 2022). We build upon these fairness notions but integrate them into off-policy
learning.
Conclusion: In this paper, we proposed a novel framework for fair off-policy learning from obser-
vational data. For this, we introduced fairness notions tailored to off-policy learning, then developed
a flexible instantiation of our framework using machine learning (FairPol), and finally provided
theoretical guarantees in form of generalization bounds. Our framework is widely applicable to
algorithmic decision-making in practice where fairness must be ensured.


                                                    27
J      P RACTICAL RECOMMENDATIONS FOR USING OUR FAIRNESS CRITERIA
We discuss the applicability of our three proposed fairness criteria (action fairness, envy-free fair-
ness, and max-min fairness) and when practitioners should choose which. Table 7 lists the advan-
tages and disadvantages of the different fairness criteria as well as examples of real-world use cases
in which practitioners may consider enforcing these.

    Fairness   Definition                       Use cases                  Advantages/ disadvantages
    metric
    Action     A policy fulfills action fair-   Hiring, credit lending,       Focuses on the underlying mech-
    fairness   ness if the recommended          where decisions can-       anism for assigning treatments, not
               action is independent of the     not directly discrim-      outcomes/utility from treatments.
               sensitive attribute.             inate against/depend           Ensures equal treatment across
               ⇒ Definition 1                   on sensitive attributes.   sensitive attributes.
                                                                               Consistent with many regulatory
                                                                           frameworks (e.g., US Fair Lending
                                                                           Laws, US Fair Housing Act, anti-
                                                                           discrimination laws in the EU).
                                                                                Typically suitable when non-
                                                                           treatment does not lead to immediate
                                                                           loss or harm.
                                                                               Often suitable for selection tasks
                                                                           where items out of a large pool should
                                                                           be chosen.
                                                                              Does not consider discrepancies in
                                                                           policy values between the sensitive
                                                                           groups.
    Envy-      A policy fulfills envy-free      Resource allocation,          Focuses on outcomes/utility of an
    free       fairness if the conditional      scholarships, where        individual relative to others.
    fairness   policy values between sub-       disparities in utility        Allows control over utility dispari-
               populations do not differ        between groups are         ties.
               more than a predefined           controlled.                    Typically suitable for distributive
               level.                                                      tasks where a given pool of N items
               ⇒ Definition 2                                              should be allocated.
                                                                               Grounded in ethics (Rawlsian jus-
                                                                           tice).
                                                                               May require careful calibration of
                                                                           the fairness level.
                                                                               May lead to policies that are not
                                                                           Pareto optimal, i.e., the policy value of
                                                                           one sensitive group may be improved
                                                                           without reducing the policy value for
                                                                           the opposite group.
    Max-       A policy fulfills max-min        Situations where the          Focuses on the worst out-
    min        fairness if it maximizes the     worst-case outcome is      come/utility across a group.
    fairness   worst-case policy value for      to be optimized, e.g.,        When combined with action fair-
               the sensitive attributes.        emergency services         ness, can be a special case of envy-free
               ⇒ Definition 3                   allocation.                fairness.
                                                                              Focuses on improving the worst-off
                                                                           group.
                                                                               Oftentimes helpful for decision-
                                                                           makers that “do not want to harm”.
                                                                               Typically suitable for distributive
                                                                           tasks where a given pool of N items
                                                                           should be allocated.
                                                                              Could lead to suboptimal outcomes
                                                                           for non-worst-off groups.

           Table 7: Guidance for choosing our fairness metrics for policy learning in practice.


                                                         28
 K                    S YNTHETIC EXPERIMENTS WITH ADDITIONAL REPRESENTATION
                      LEARNING BASELINES

Here, we compare our approach for fair representation learning (=adversarial domain confusion
loss) against potential benchmarks. In principle, our approach for fair representation learning
(=adversarial domain confusion loss) can be replaced by any other approach that aims at enforc-
ing independence from the sensitive attribute. In the following, we consider two common baselines
from the literature: (i) adversarial learning using gradient reversal (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2015); and
(ii) regularization using a Wasserstein distance Shalit et al. (2017). Both are as follows:
(i) Adversarial learning using gradient reversal: Here, we consider an adversarial approach that
reduces the dependence between the representation and sensitive attribute via gradient reversal. That
is, we defined the loss
                                                 Lγ (θΦ , θS , θY ) = LY (θΦ , θY ) − γLS (θΦ , θS )                                              (76)
and solve the adversarial problem
                              θ̂Φ , θ̂Y = arg min Lγ (θΦ , θ̂S , θY );                     θ̂S = arg max Lγ (θ̂Φ , θS , θ̂Y );                    (77)
                                           θΦ ,θY                                                    θS

where γ is a parameter that weights the different parts in the loss function. For further details, we
refer to Ganin & Lempitsky (2015) or Bica et al. (2020).
(ii) Regularization using Wasserstein distance: Here, we consider a regularization approach sim-
ilar to Shalit et al. (2017) that solves
                               θ̂Φ , θ̂Y = arg min LY (θΦ , θY ) + γWp ({ΦθΦ (Xi )}S=1 , {ΦθΦ (Xi )}S=0 ),                                        (78)
                                            θΦ ,θY

where mathcalWp denotes the p-Wasserstein distance between the empirical distributions
{ΦθΦ (Xi )}S=1 and {ΦθΦ (Xi )}S=0 , and γ is a parameter that weights the strength of the regu-
larization.
Implementation: For both baselines, we use Step 1 of FairPol as the base architecture (see Sec. 5.1
for details) and use the same neural network-specific hyperparameters (see Appendix F). We choose
p = 2 for the Wasserstein distance.
Experiments: We then train FairPol without value fairness and only action fairness, where the
action fairness is enforced via (1) adversarial domain confusion, (2) adversarial gradient reversal,
and (3) regularization using Wasserstein distance, respectively. We repeat the training of FairPol
for different values of γ, and plot the corresponding action fairness and achieved policy value in
Fig. 6. The adversarial domain confusion loss performs consistently best over different levels of
action fairness. This is also consistent with prior literature (Melnychuk et al., 2022).

               0.14

               0.12

               0.10                                                                                  FairPol (adversarial domain confusion)
                                                                                                     FairPol (adversarial gradient reversal)
Policy value


               0.08                                                                                  FairPol (regularization using Wasserstein distance)
                                                                                                     Optimal unrestricted policy
               0.06                                                                                  Oracle action fairness

               0.04

               0.02

               0.00
                       0.00       0.05    0.10        0.15       0.20   0.25        0.30
                                                 Action Fairness


Figure 6: Comparing different representation learning methods in Step 1 for FairPol to enforce
action fairness.



                                                                               29
L    S YNTHETIC EXPERIMENTS WITH ESTIMATED NUISANCE PARAMETERS
In this section, we repeat the experiments from Table 1in Sec. 6 but where we estimate nuisance
parameters µj (X, S) = E[Y | X, S, A = j], j ∈ {0, 1} and πb (X, S) = P(A = 1 | X, S) from
the observational data. To do so, we use a TARNet (Shalit et al., 2017) for estimation and refer to
Appendix H for details. The results are shown in Table 8. In particular, our results from Table 1
are robust with respect to estimation errors in nuisance parameters. In sum, this demonstrates the
effectiveness of our framework when nuisance parameters are estimated from data.

             Table 8: Results for simulated data with estimated nuisance parameters.

 Approach                                                  Policy value                 Action fairness
                                               Overall       S=0            S=1
 O UR FAIR P OL ( ONLY ACTION FAIRNESS )
   FairPol with m = DM                       0.88 ± 0.16   0.34 ± 0.34    1.11 ± 0.36    0.17 ± 0.06
   FairPol with m = IPW                      1.02 ± 0.01   0.00 ± 0.05    1.45 ± 0.07    0.20 ± 0.04
   FairPol with m = DR                       1.02 ± 0.01   0.00 ± 0.05    1.45 ± 0.07    0.18 ± 0.04
 O UR FAIR P OL WITH ENVY- FREE FAIRNESS
   FairPol with m = DM                       0.85 ± 0.15   0.61 ± 0.12    0.95 ± 0.24    0.51 ± 0.44
   FairPol with m = IPW                      0.80 ± 0.05   0.49 ± 0.14    0.94 ± 0.11    0.14 ± 0.07
   FairPol with m = DR                       0.83 ± 0.05   0.43 ± 0.12    1.00 ± 0.11    0.22 ± 0.07
 O UR FAIR P OL WITH MAX - MIN FAIRNESS
   FairPol with m = DM                         0.72 ± 0.04 0.72 ± 0.04    0.73 ± 0.04    0.13 ± 0.06
   FairPol with m = IPW                        0.73 ± 0.03 0.73 ± 0.03    0.73 ± 0.03    0.14 ± 0.08
   FairPol with m = DR                         0.73 ± 0.03 0.73 ± 0.03    0.73 ± 0.03    0.11 ± 0.04
 Reported: mean ± standard deviation (×10) on test set over 5 runs.


                                                30
M    S YNTHETIC EXPERIMENTS WITH VARYING SAMPLE SIZES
Here we repeat the experiment from Table 1 with three different samples sizes n                   ∈
{1000, 3000, 5000}. The results are shown in Table 9.

            Table 9: Results for simulated data with varying sample sizes (m = DR).

 Approach                                                 Policy value                 Action fairness
                                               Overall       S=0           S=1
 BASELINES
  Optimal unrestricted policy               1.24 ± 0.03   0.74 ± 0.03    1.46 ± 0.06    2.42 ± 0.20
  Oracle action fairness                    1.03 ± 0.02   0.01 ± 0.07    1.46 ± 0.06    0.00 ± 0.00
 O UR FAIR P OL ( ONLY ACTION FAIRNESS )
   n = 1000                                    0.93 ± 0.09 0.09 ± 0.16   1.28 ± 0.04    0.53 ± 0.69
   n = 3000                                    1.01 ± 0.03 0.02 ± 0.05   1.43 ± 0.07    0.23 ± 0.05
   n = 3000                                    1.01 ± 0.03 0.00 ± 0.05   1.45 ± 0.07    0.15 ± 0.05
 O UR FAIR P OL WITH ENVY- FREE FAIRNESS
   n = 1000                                    0.68 ± 0.15 0.37 ± 0.22   0.81 ± 0.19    0.42 ± 0.60
   n = 3000                                    0.86 ± 0.06 0.34 ± 0.17   1.09 ± 0.15    0.26 ± 0.10
   n = 5000                                    0.81 ± 0.03 0.44 ± 0.09   0.97 ± 0.05    0.18 ± 0.14
 O UR FAIR P OL WITH MAX - MIN FAIRNESS
   n = 1000                                    0.73 ± 0.03 0.73 ± 0.03   0.73 ± 0.03    0.13 ± 0.10
   n = 3000                                    0.73 ± 0.03 0.73 ± 0.03   0.73 ± 0.03    0.13 ± 0.03
   n = 5000                                    0.73 ± 0.03 0.73 ± 0.03   0.73 ± 0.03    0.18 ± 0.10
 Reported: mean ± standard deviation (×10) on test set over 5 runs.


                                               31
