Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H OW THE LEVEL SAMPLING PROCESS IMPACTS ZERO -
SHOT GENERALISATION IN DEEP REINFORCEMENT
LEARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review

                                             A BSTRACT

         A key limitation preventing the wider adoption of autonomous agents trained via
         deep reinforcement learning (RL) is their limited ability to generalise to new en-
         vironments, even when these share similar characteristics with environments en-
         countered during training. In this work, we investigate how a non-uniform sam-
         pling strategy of individual environment instances, or levels, affects the zero-shot
         generalisation (ZSG) ability of RL agents, considering two failure modes: overfit-
         ting and over-generalisation. As a first step, we measure the mutual information
         (MI) between the agent’s internal representation and the set of training levels,
         which we find to be well-correlated to instance overfitting. In contrast to uniform
         sampling, adaptive sampling strategies prioritising levels based on their value loss
         are more effective at maintaining lower MI, which provides a novel theoretical
         justification for this class of techniques. We then turn our attention to unsuper-
         vised environment design (UED) methods, which adaptively generate new train-
         ing levels and minimise MI more effectively than methods sampling from a fixed
         set. However, we find UED methods significantly shift the training distribution,
         resulting in over-generalisation and worse ZSG performance over the distribution
         of interest. To prevent both instance overfitting and over-generalisation, we intro-
         duce self-supervised environment design (SSED). SSED generates levels using a
         variational autoencoder, effectively reducing MI while minimising the shift with
         the distribution of interest, and leads to statistically significant improvements in
         ZSG over fixed-set level sampling strategies and UED methods.


1   INTRODUCTION
A central challenge facing modern reinforce-
ment learning (RL) is learning policies capable
of zero-shot transfer of learned behaviours to a
wide range of environment settings. Prior ap-
plications of RL algorithms (Agostinelli et al.,
                                                         (a)         (b)          (c)           (d)
2019; Lee et al., 2020; Rudin et al., 2021) indi-
cate that strong zero-shot generalisation (ZSG) Figure 1: The agent (blue) must navigate to the
can be achieved through an adaptive sampling goal (lime green) but cannot pass through walls
strategy over the set of environment instances (grey) and only observes tiles directly adjacent to
available during training, which we refer to as itself. An agent trained over levels (a)-(c) will
the set of training levels. However the relation- transfer zero-shot to level (d) if it has learnt a be-
ship between ZSG and the level sampling pro- havior adapted to the task semantics of following
cess remains poorly understood. In this work, pale green tiles to reach the goal location.
we draw novel connections between this process and the minimisation of an upper bound on the
generalisation error derived by Bertran et al. (2020), which depends on the mutual information (MI)
between the agent’s internal representation and the identity of individual training levels.
An agent learning level-specific policies implies high MI between its internal representation and the
level identities, and, in general, will not transfer zero-shot to new levels. To build an understanding
of the relationship between MI and ZSG, consider the minimal gridworld navigation example in
Figure 1. A “shortcut” exists in level (a), and a model with high MI is able to first predict the level
identity from its initial observation to learn an ensemble of level-specific policy optimal over the
training set. When deployed on (d) the model will predict it is in (a) since under the agent’s restricted


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


field of view (a) and (d) share the same initial observation. As a result the agent will attempt to
follow the (a)-specific policy, which will not transfer. We discover that the reduced generalisation
error achieved by adaptive level sampling strategies over uniform sampling can be attributed to their
effectiveness in reducing the MI between the agent’s internal representation and the level identity. In
particular, we find that strategies de-prioritising levels with low value loss, as proposed in prioritised
level replay (PLR, Jiang et al., 2021b), implicitly minimise mutual information as they avoid training
on levels in which the value function is accurately estimated through level identification.
While some adaptive sampling strategies reduce the generalisation gap, their effectiveness is ul-
timately limited by the number of training levels. We propose Self-Supervised Environment De-
sign (SSED) which augments the set of training levels to further reduce generalisation error. We
find training on an augmented set can negatively impact performance when the augmented set is
not drawn from the same distribution as the training set. We show it induces a form of over-
generalisation, in which the agent learns to solve levels incompatible with the targeted task, and
performs poorly at test time. There is therefore a trade-off between augmenting the training set to
prevent instance-overfitting, i.e. to avoid learning level-specific policies, and ensuring that this aug-
mented set comes from the same distribution to avoid distributional shift and over-generalisation.
In our experiments, we show that SSED strikes this trade-off more effectively than other adaptive
sampling and environment design methods. SSED achieves significant improvements in the agent’s
ZSG capabilities, reaching 1.25 times the returns of the next best baseline on held-out levels, and
improving performance by two to three times on more difficult instantiations of the target task.


2    RELATED WORK

Buffer-free sampling strategies. Domain randomisation (DR, Tobin et al., 2017; Jakobi, 1997), is
one of the earliest proposed methods for improving the generalisation ability of RL agents by aug-
menting the set of available training levels, and does so by sampling uniformly between manually
specified ranges of environment parameters. Subsequent contributions introduce an implicit prioriti-
sation over the generated set by inducing a minimax return (robust adversarial RL Pinto et al., 2017)
or a minimax regret (unsupervised environment design (UED), Dennis et al., 2020) game between
the agent and a level generator, which are trained concurrently. These adversarial formulations pri-
oritise levels in which the agent is currently performing poorly to encourage robust generalisation
over the sampled set, with UED achieving better Nash equilibrium theoretical guarantees. CLUTR
(Azad et al., 2023) removes the need for domain-specific RL environments and improves sample ef-
ficiency by having the level generator operate within a low dimensional latent space of a generative
model pre-trained on randomly sampled level parameters. However the performance and sample
efficiency of these methods is poor when compared to a well calibrated DR implementation or to the
buffer-based sampling strategies discussed next.
Buffer-based sampling strategies. Prioritised sampling is often applied to off-policy algorithms,
where individual transitions in the replay buffer are prioritised (Schaul et al., 2015) or resampled
with different goals in multi-goal RL (Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2020). Prioritised
Level Replay (PLR, Jiang et al., 2021b) instead affects the sampling process of future experiences,
and is thus applicable to both on- and off-policy algorithms. PLR maintains a buffer of training
levels and empirically demonstrates that prioritising levels using a scoring function proportional
to high value prediction loss results in better sample efficiency and improved ZSG performance.
Robust PLR (RPLR, Jiang et al., 2021a) extends PLR to the UED setting, using DR as its level
generation mechanism, whereas ACCEL (Parker-Holder et al., 2022) gradually evolves new levels
by performing random edits on high scoring levels in the buffer. SAMPLR (Jiang et al., 2022) pro-
poses to eliminate the covariate shift induced by the prioritisation strategy by modifying individual
transitions using a second simulator that runs in parallel. However SAMPLR is only applicable to
settings in which the level parameter distribution is provided, whereas SSED can approximate this
distribution from a dataset of examples.
Mutual-information minimisation in RL. In prior work, mutual information has been minimised
in order to mitigate instance-overfitting, either by learning an ensemble of policies (Bertran et al.,
2020; Ghosh et al., 2021), performing data augmentation on observations (Raileanu et al., 2021;
Kostrikov et al., 2021), an auxiliary objective (Dunion et al., 2023) or introducing information bot-
tlenecks through selective noise injection on the agent model (Igl et al., 2019; Cobbe et al., 2019).


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In contrast, our work is the first to draw connections between mutual-information minimisation and
adaptive level sampling and generation strategies.

3   PRELIMINARIES
Reinforcement learning. We model an individual level as a Partially Observable Markov Decision
Process (POMDP) ⟨A, O, S, T , Ω, R, p0 , γ⟩ where A is the action space, O is the observation space,
S is the set of states, T : S × A → ∆(S) and Ω : S → ∆(O) are the transition and observation
functions (we use ∆(·) to indicate these functions map to distributions), R : S → R is the reward
function, p0 (s) is the initial state distribution and γ is the discount factor. We consider the episodic
RL setting, in which the agent attempts to learn a policy π maximising the expected discounted
                        PT
return V π (st ) = Eπ [ t̄=t γ t−t̄ rt ] over an episode terminating at timestep T , where st and rt are
the state and reward at step t. We use V π to refer to V π (s0 ), the expected episodic returns taken
from the first timestep of the episode. In this work, we focus on on-policy actor-critic algorithms
(Mnih et al., 2016; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2017) representing the agent policy πθ
and value estimate V̂θ with neural networks (in this paper we use θ to refer to model weights). The
policy and value networks usually share an intermediate state representation bθ (ot ) (or for recurrent
architectures bθ (Hto ), Hto = {o0 , · · · , ot } being the history of observations oi ).
Contextual MDPs. Following Kirk et al. (2023), we model the set of environment instances we aim
to generalise over as a Contextual-MDP (CMDP) M = ⟨A, O, S, T , Ω, R, p0 (s|x), γ, XC , p(x)⟩.
The CMDP may be viewed as a POMDP, except that the reward, transition and observation functions
now also depend on the context set XC with associated distribution p(x), that is T : S × XC × A →
∆(S), Ω : S × XC → ∆(O), R : S × XC → R. Each element x ∈ XC is not observable
by the agent and instantiates a level ix of the CMDP with initial state distribution p0 (s|x). The
optimal policy of the CMDP maximises VCπ = Ex∼p(x) [Viπx ], with Viπx referring to the expected
return in level ix instantiated by x (we use L to refer to a set of levels i and X to refer to a set
of level parameters x). We assume access to a parametrisable simulator with parameter space X,
with XC ⊂ X. While prior work expects XC to correspond to all solvable levels in X, we consider
the more general setting in which there may be more than one CMDP within X, whereas we aim
to solve a specific target CMDP. We refer to levels with parameters x ∈ XC as in-context and to
levels with parameters x ∈ X \ XC as out-of-context. As we show in our experiments, training on
out-of-context levels can induce distributional shift and cause the agent to learn a different policy
than the optimal CMDP policy.
Generalisation bounds. We start training with access to a limited set of level parameters Xtrain ⊂
XC sampled from p(x), and evaluate generalisation using a set of held-out level parameters Xtest ,
also sampled from p(x). Using the unbiased value estimator lemma from Bertran et al. (2020),
Lemma 3.1 Given a policy π and a set L = {ix |x ∼ p(x)}n of n levels from a CMDP with context
distribution p(x), we have ∀Hto (t < ∞) compatible with L (that is the observation sequence
Hto occurs in L), EL|Hto [Viπx (Hto )] = VCπ (Hto ), with Viπx (Hto ) being the expected returns under π
given observation history Hto in a given level ix , and VCπ (Hto ) being the expected returns across all
possible occurrences of Hto in the CMDP.
we can estimate the generalisation gap using a formulation reminiscent of supervised learning,
                                         1      X            1      X
                      GenGap(π) :=                  Viπx −              Viπx .                 (1)
                                      |Xtrain |            |Xtest |
                                                x∈Xtrain              x∈Xtest
Using this formulation, Bertran et al. (2020) extend generalisation results in the supervised setting
(Xu & Raginsky, 2017) to derive an upper bound for the GenGap.
Theorem 3.2 For any CMDP such that |VCπ (Hto )| ≤ D/2, ∀Hto , π, then for any set of training
levels L, and policy π                   s
                                                     2D2
                                 GenGap(π) ≤              × MI(L, π).                                (2)
                                                      |L|
                   P
With MI(L, π) = i∈L MI(i, π) being the mutual information between π and the identity of each
level i ∈ L. In this work, we show that minimising the bound in Theorem 3.2 is an effective
surrogate objective for reducing the GenGap.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Adaptive level sampling. We study the connection between MI(L, π) and adaptive sampling strate-
gies over L. PLR introduce a scoring function score(τi , π) compute level scores from a rollout
trajectory τi . Scores are used to define an adaptive sampling distribution over a level buffer Λ, with
                                     PΛ = (1 − ρ) · PS + ρ · PR ,                                      (3)
where PS is a distribution parametrised by the level scores and ρ is a coefficient mixing PS with a
staleness distribution PR that promotes levels replayed less recently. Jiang et al. (2021b) experiment
with different scoring functions, and empirically find that the scoring function based on the ℓ1 -value
loss SiV = score(τi , π) = (1/|τi |) H o ∈τi |V̂ (Hto ) − Viπ (Hto )| incurs a significant reduction in the
                                    P
                                        t
GenGap at test time.
In the remaining sections, we draw novel connections between the ℓ1 -value loss prioritisation strat-
egy and the minimisation of MI(L, π). We then introduce SSED, a level generation and sampling
framework training the agent over an augmented set of levels. SSED jointly minimises MI(L, π)
while increasing |L| and as such is more effective at minimising the bound from Theorem 3.2.

4     MUTUAL - INFORMATION MINIMISATION UNDER A FIXED SET OF LEVELS
We begin by considering the setting in which L remains fixed. We make the following arguments:
1) as the contribution of each level to MI(L, π) is generally not uniform across L nor constant over
the course of training, an adaptive level sampling strategy yielding training data with low MI(L, π)
can reduce the GenGap over uniform sampling; 2) the value prediction objective promotes learn-
ing internal representations informative of the current level identity and causes overfitting; 3) de-
prioritising levels with small value loss implicitly reshapes the training data distribution to yield
smaller MI(L, π), reducing GenGap. We substantiate our arguments with a comparison of different
sampling strategies in the Procgen benchmark (Cobbe et al., 2020).
4.1   MAINTAINING LOW MUTUAL INFORMATION CONTENT VIA ADAPTIVE SAMPLING
The following lemma enables us to derive an upper bound for MI(L, π) that can be approximated
using the activations of the state representation shared between the actor and critic networks.

Lemma 4.1 (proof in appendix) Given a set of training levels L and an agent model π = f ◦ b,
where b(Hto ) = ht is an intermediate state representation and f is the policy head, we can bound
MI(L, π ◦ b) by MI(L, b), which in turn satisfies
                                                     XZ
                 MI(L, π) ≤ MI(L, b) = H(p(i)) +            dhp(h, i) log p(i|h)               (4)
                                                         i∈L
                                                          1      X
                                          ≈ H(p(i)) +                       log p(i|b(Hto ))           (5)
                                                         |B|
                                                               (i,Hto )∈B

where H(p) is the entropy of p and B is a batch of trajectories collected from levels i ∈ L.

This result applies to any state representation function b, including the non-recurrent case where
b(Hto ) = b(ot ), ∀(o, Hto ) ∈ (O, O⊗t ). To remain consistent with the CMDP we must set p(i) to
p(x), making the entropy H(p(i)) a constant. However the second term in Equation (5) depends on
the representation b learned under the training data. We hypothesise that minimising MI(L, b) in the
training data is an effective data regularisation technique against instance-overfitting. We can isolate
level-specific contributions to MI(L, b) as
                            X                         X X
                                   log p(i|b(Hto )) =           log p(i|b(Hto )),                    (6)
                        (i,Hto )∈B                    i∈L Hto ∈Bi

where Bi indicates the batch trajectories collected from level i. As sampled trajectories depend on
the behavioral policy, and as the information being retained depends on b, each level’s contribution
to MI(L, b) is in general not constant over the course of training nor uniform across L. There should
therefore exist adaptive distributions minimising MI(L, b) more effectively than uniform sampling.
4.2   ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF VALUE LOSS PRIORITISATION STRATEGIES
From a representation learning perspective, the value prediction objective may be viewed as a self-
supervised auxiliary objective shaping the intermediate state representation b. This additional signal


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Mean Normalised Train Score        Mean Normalised Test Score             Mean Normalised GenGap
 S = S V , S2 = S MI
             S = SV
            S = S MI
  S = S V , P S2 = U
             PS = U
                           0.90         1.05                1.05       1.20        1.35   0.15        0.30      0.45


Figure 2: Mean aggregated train and test scores and GenGap of different sampling strategies. Scores
are normalised for each game using the mean score achieved by the uniform sampling strategy (we
use the test set scores to normalise GenGap).


is often necessary for learning, and motivates sharing b across the policy and value networks. How-
ever, in a CMDP the value prediction loss
                                       1     X
                            LV (θ) =               (V̂θ (Hto ) − Viπ (Hto ))2                    (7)
                                      |B|     o      (i,Ht )∈B

uses level-specific functions Viπ as targets, which may be expressed as Viπ = VCπ +viπ , where viπ is a
component specific to i. While Lemma 3.1 guarantees convergence to an unbiased estimator for VCπ
when minimising Equation (7), reaching zero training loss is only achievable by learning the level
specific components viπ . Perfect value prediction requires learning an intermediate representation
from which the current level i is identifiable, which implies high MI(i, b). Conversely, we can
characterise PLR’s ℓ1 -value loss sampling as a data regularisation technique minimising MI(L, b)
when generating the training data. By de-prioritising levels with low LVi , PLR prevents the agent
from generating training data for which its internal representation has started overfitting to.
4.3     COMPARING MUTUAL INFORMATION MINIMISATION SAMPLING STRATEGIES
We aim to establish how PLR under value loss scoring S V compares to a scoring function based on
                                                 PT
Equation (6). We define this function as SiMI = t=0 log pθ (i|b(Hto )), where pθ is a linear classifier.
We also introduce a secondary scoring strategy S2 with associated distribution PS2 , letting us mix
different sampling strategies and study their interaction. PΛ then becomes
                               PΛ = (1 − ρ) · ((1 − η) · PS + η · PS2 ) + ρ · PR ,                                        (8)
with η being a mixing parameter. We compare different sampling strategies in Procgen, a benchmark
of 16 games designed to measure generalisation in RL. We train the PPO (Schulman et al., 2017)
baseline employed in (Cobbe et al., 2020), which uses a non-recurrent intermediate representation
bθ (ot ) in the “easy” setting (|L| = 200, 25M timesteps). We report a complete description of the
experimental setup in Appendix D.1.
Figure 2, compares value loss scoring (S = S V ), uniform sampling (PS = U), U(·) being the
uniform distribution, direct MI minimisation (S = S MI ) as well as mixed strategies (S = S V , S2 =
S MI ) and (S = S V , PS2 = U). While (S = S MI ) reduces GenGap the most, the degradation it
induces in the training performance outweigh its regularisation benefits. This result is consistent
with Theorem 3.2 and Lemma 4.1, as MI(L, b) bounds the GenGap and not the test returns.1 On the
other-hand, (S = S V ) slightly improves training efficiency while reducing the GenGap. As denoted
by its smaller GenGap when compared to (PS = U), the improvements achieved by (S = S V ) are
markedly stronger over the test set than for the train set, and indicate that the main driver behind the
stronger generalisation performance is not a higher sample efficiency but a stronger regularisation.
We tested different mixed strategies (S = S V , S2 = S MI ) using different η, and the best performing
configuration (reported in Figure 2) only achieves a marginal improvement over (S = S V ) (on the
other hand, mixing S V and uniform sampling (S = S V , PS2 = U) noticeably reduces the test set
performance). This implies that (S = S V ) strikes a good balance between training efficiency and
regularisation within the space of mutual information minimisation adaptive sampling strategies. In
Appendix B.1 we analyse the correlation between MI(L, b), the ℓ1 -value loss and the GenGap across
all procgen games and methods tested. We find MI(L, b) to be positively correlated to the GenGap
(p < 1e−34) and inversely correlated with the ℓ1 -value loss (p < 1e−16).
    1
      Exclusively focusing on data regularisation can be problematic: in the most extreme case, destroying all
information contained within the training data would guarantee MI(L, π) = GenGap = 0 but it would also
make the performance on the train and test sets equally bad.


                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     SELF - SUPERVISED ENVIRONMENT DESIGN
We have established that certain adaptive sampling strategies effectively minimise MI(L, b), which
in turn reduces GenGap. However our experiments in Section 4 and appendices B.1 and B.2 indicate
GenGap may still be significant when training the agent over a fixed level set, even with an adaptive
sampling strategy. We now introduce SSED, a framework designed to more aggressively minimise
the generalisation bound in Theorem 3.2 by jointly minimising MI(L, b) and increasing |L|. SSED
does so by generating an augmented set of training levels L̃ ⊃ L, while still employing an adaptive
sampling strategy over the augmented set.
SSED shares UED’s requirement of having access to a parametrisable simulator allowing the spec-
ification of levels through environment parameters x. In addition, we assume that we start with
a limited set of level parameters Xtrain sampled from p(x). SSED consists of two components: a
generative phase, in an augmented set X̃ is generated using a batch X ∼ U(Xtrain ) and added to the
buffer Λ, and a replay phase, in which we use the adaptive distribution PΛ to sample levels from Λ.
We alternate between the generative and replay phases, and only perform gradient updates on the
agent during the replay phase. Algorithm 1 describes the full SSED pipeline, and we provide further
details on each phase below.

Algorithm 1 Self-Supervised Environment Design
Input: Pre-trained VAE encoder and decoder networks ψθE , ϕθD , level parameters Xtrain , number
    of pairs M , number of interpolations per pair K
 1: Initialise agent policy π and level buffer Λ, adding level parameters in Xtrain to Λ
 2: Update Xtrain with variational parameters (µz , σz )n ← ψθE (xn ) for xn in Xtrain
 3: while not converged do
 4:      Sample batch X using PΛ                                                          ▷ Replay phase
 5:      for x in X do
 6:           Collect rollouts τ from ix and compute scores S, S2
 7:           Update π according to τ
 8:           Update scores S, S2 of x in Λ
 9:      Randomly sample 2M (x, µ, σ) from Xtrain and arrange them into M pairs.
10:      for ((x, µz , σz )i , (x, µz , σz )j ) in pairs do                          ▷ Generative phase
11:           Compute K interpolations {(µz , σz )}K between ((x, µz , σz )i , (x, µz , σz )j )
12:           for (µz , σz )k in {(µz , σz )}K do
13:                Sample embedding z ∼ N (µz , σz )
14:                x̃ ← ϕθD (z)
15:                Collect π’s trajectory τ from x and compute scores S, S2
16:                Add ⟨x, S, S2 ⟩ to Λ at arg min{Λ\Xtrain } S2 if S2 > min{Λ\Xtrain } S2


5.1   THE GENERATIVE PHASE
While SSED is not restricted to a particular approach to obtain X̃, we chose the VAE (Kingma &
Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014) due its ability to model the underlying training data distribution
p(x) as stochastic realisations of a latent distribution p(z) via a generative model p(x | z). The
model is pre-trained on Xtrain by maximising the variational ELBO
                        (                                                                   )
       LELBO =      E           E          [log p(x | z; ϕθD )] − βDKL (q(z | x; ψθE ) || p(z)) ,   (9)
                 x∼p(x)    z∼q(z|x;ψθE )

where q(z | x; ψθE ) is a variational approximation of an intractable model posterior distribution
p(z | x) and DKL (· || ·) denotes the Kullback–Leibler divergence, which is balanced using the
coefficient β, as proposed by Higgins et al. (2017). The generative p(x | z; ϕθD ) and variational
q(z | x; ψθE ) models are parametrised via encoder and decoder networks ψθE and ϕθD .
We use p(x; ϕθD ) to generate augmentedRlevel parameters x̃. As maximising Equation (9) fits the
VAE such that the marginal p(x; ϕθD ) = p(x | z; ϕθD )p(z) dz approximates the data distribution
p(x), and sampling from it limits distributional shift. This makes out-of-context levels less frequent,
and we show in Section 6 that this aspect is key in enabling SSED-trained agents to outperform
UED-agents. To improve the quality of the generated x̃, we interpolate in the latent space between


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the latent representations of pair of samples (xi , xj ) ∼ Xtrain to obtain z, instead of sampling from
p(z), as proposed by White (2016). We evaluate the agent (without updating its weights) on the
levels obtained from a batch of levels parameters X̃, adding to the buffer Λ any level scoring higher
than the lowest scoring generated level in Λ. We provide additional details on the architecture,
hyperparameters and pre-training process in Appendix D.3.

5.2   THE REPLAY PHASE

All levels in Xtrain originate from p(x) and are in-context, whereas generated levels, being obtained
from an approximation of p(x), do not benefit from as strong of a guarantee. As training on out-
of-context levels can significantly harm the agents’ performance on the CMDP, we control the ratio
between Xtrain and augmented levels using Equation (8) to define PΛ . PS and PR only sample from
Xtrain levels, whereas PS2 supports the entire buffer. We set both S1 and S2 to score levels according
to the ℓ1 -value loss. We initialise the buffer Λ to contain Xtrain levels and gradually add generative
phase levels over the course of training. A level gets added if Λ is not full or if it scores higher than
the lowest scoring level in the buffer. We only consider levels solved at least once during generative
phase rollouts to ensure unsolvable levels do not get added in. We find out-of-context levels to be
particularly harmful in the early stages of training, and reduce their frequency early on by linearly
increasing the mixing parameter η from 0 to 1 over the course of training.

6     EXPERIMENTS

As it only permits level instantiation via providing a random seed, Procgen’s level generation pro-
cess is both uncontrollable and unobservable. Considering the seed space to be the level parameter
space X makes the level generation problem trivial as it is only possible to define a single CMDP
with XC = X and p(x) = U(X). Instead, we wish to demonstrate SSED’s capability in settings
where XC spans a (non-trivial) manifold in X, i.e. only specific parameter semantics will yield lev-
els of the CMDP of interest. As such we pick Minigrid, a partially observable gridworld navigation
domain (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018). Minigrid levels can be instantiated via a parameter vector
describing the locations, starting states and appearance of the objects in the grid. Despite its sim-
plicity, Minigrid qualifies as a parametrisable simulator capable of instantiating multiple CMDPs.
We define the context space of our target CMDP as spanning the layouts where the location of
green “moss” tiles and orange “lava” tiles are respectively positively and negatively correlated to
their distance to the goal location. We employ procedural generation to obtain a set Xtrain of 512
level parameters, referring the reader to Figure 10 for a visualisation of levels from Xtrain , and to
Appendix C for extended details on the CMDP specification and level set generation process.
As the agent only observes its immediate surroundings and does not know the goal location a priori,
the optimal CMDP policy is one that exploits the semantics shared by all levels in the CMDP,
exploring first areas with high perceived moss density and avoiding areas with high lava density.
Our CMDP coexists alongside a multitude of other potential CMDPs in the level space and some
correspond to incompatible optimal policies (for example levels in which the correlation of moss
and lava tiles with the goal is reversed). As such, it is important to maintain consistency with the
CMDP semantics when generating new levels.
We compare SSED to multiple baselines, sorted in two sets. The first set of baselines is restricted to
sample from Xtrain , and consists of uniform sampling (U) and PLR with the ℓ1 -value loss strategy.
The second set incorporates a generative mechanism and as such are more similar to SSED. We con-
sider domain randomisation (DR) (Tobin et al., 2017) which generates levels by sampling uniformly
between pre-determined ranges of parameters, RPLR (Jiang et al., 2021a), which combines PLR
with DR used as its generator, and the current UED state-of-the-art, ACCEL Parker-Holder et al.
(2022), an extension of RPLR replacing DR by a generator making local edits to currently high scor-
ing levels in the buffer. All experiments share the same PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) agent, which
uses the LSTM-based architecture and hyperparameters reported in Parker-Holder et al. (2022),
training over 27k updates.

6.1   GENERALISATION PERFORMANCE

As shown in Figure 3, SSED achieves statistically significant improvements in its IQM (inter-
quantile mean), mean score, optimality gap and mean solved rate over other methods on held-out
levels from the CMDP. SSED’s ZSG performance on held-out levels from Xtrain demonstrates it al-


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                         Solved Rate
                                 IQM                      Mean Score                Optimality Gap
                                                                                                                SSED
             SSED
              PLR                                                                                                PLR
                U                                                                                                  U
               DR                                                                                                DR
             RPLR                                                                                               RPLR
            ACCEL
                                                                                                               ACCEL
                 0.00     0.25    0.50    0.75     0.2      0.4         0.6   0.4          0.6        0.8          0.0         0.5

                                                                                                                         Solved Rate
                                 IQM                      Mean Score                Optimality Gap
                                                                                                                SSED
             SSED
              PLR                                                                                                PLR
                U                                                                                                  U
               DR                                                                                                DR
             RPLR                                                                                               RPLR
            ACCEL
                                                                                                               ACCEL
                    0.0    0.2      0.4      0.6   0.15     0.30       0.45         0.60      0.75      0.90       0.0        0.4



Figure 3: Center: aggregate test performance on 200 held-out levels from Xtrain (top) and in-context
edge cases (bottom). Right: zero-shot solved rate on the same levels, the bars indicate standard
error for 3 training seeds (some example levels are provided for reference, refer to Appendix C for
additional details on our evaluation sets).
leviates instance-overfitting while remaining consistent with the target CMDP. This is thanks to its
generative model effectively approximating p(x), and to its mixed sampling strategy ensuring many
training levels originate from Xtrain , which are guaranteed to be in-context. We next investigate
whether SSED’s level generation improves robustness to edge cases which are in-context but would
have a near zero likelihood of being in Xtrain in a realistic setting. We model edge cases as levels
matching the CMDP semantics but generated via different procedural generation parameters. We
find SSED to be particularly dominant is this setting, achieving a solved rate and IQM respectively
two- and four-times U, the next best method, and a mean score 1.6 times PLR, the next best method
for that metric. SSED is therefore capable of introducing additional diversity in the level set in a
manner that remains semantically consistent with the CMDP. In Figure 4, we measure transfer to
levels of increased complexity using a set of layouts 9 times larger in area than Xtrain levels and
which would be impossible to instantiate during training. We find that SSED performs over twice
as well as the next best method in this setting.
To better understand the importance of using a VAE as a generative model we introduce SSED-
EL, a version of SSED replacing the VAE with ACCEL’s level editing strategy. SSED-EL may
be viewed as an SSED variant of ACCEL augmenting Xtrain using a non-parametric generative
method, or equivalently as an ablation of SSED that does not approximate p(x) and is therefore less
grounded to the target CMDP. In Figure 4, we compare the two methods across level sets, and find
that SSED improves more significantly over its ablation for level sets that are most similar to the
original training set. This highlights the significance of being able to approximate p(x) through the
VAE to avoid distributional shift, which we discuss next.

6.2      DISTRIBUTIONAL SHIFT AND THE OVER - GENERALISATION GAP
Despite poor test scores, the UED baselines achieve small GenGap (as shown in Figure 8), as they
perform poorly on both the test set and on Xtrain . Yet the fact they tend to perform well on the subset
of X spanning their own training distribution means that they have over-generalised to an out-of-
context set. As such, we cannot qualify their poor performance on XC as a lack of capability but
instead as a form of misgeneralisation not quantifiable by the GenGap, and which are reminiscent
of goal misgeneralisation failure modes reported in Di Langosco et al. (2022); Shah et al. (2022).
Instead, we propose the over-generalisation gap as a complementary metric, which we define as
                                       X                          1      X
                      OverGap(π) :=        PΛ (ix̃ ) · Viπx̃ −                Viπx .                (10)
                                                               |Xtrain |
                                                   x̃∈Λ                                    x∈Xtrain

Note that OverGap compares the agent’s performance with Xtrain and as such is designed to mea-
sure over-generalisation induced by distributional shift.2 Based on further analysis conducted in
Appendix B.3, high OverGap coincides with the inclusion of out-of-context levels coupled with a
significant shift in the level parameter distribution with respect to p(x), and we find that SSED is
the only level generation method tested able to maintain both low distributional shift and OverGap.
   2
       using Xtest would make OverGap ≡ GenGap if PΛ = U(Xtrain ), whereas it should be 0.


                                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   Solved Rate
                                         SSED
                                          PLR                                             P(SSED > SSED-EL)


                                                                    Level set
                                                                                  Xtest
                                            U
                                                                                Edge C
                                           DR
                                                                                 Large
                                         RPLR
                                                                                          0.54   0.60   0.66
                                        ACCEL
                                            0.00         0.15


Figure 4: Left: zero-shot solved rate on a set of 100 levels with larger layouts. SSED’s success
rate is over twice PLR’s, the next best performing method. Right: probability (p < 0.05) of SSED
achieving higher zero-shot returns than its ablation SSED-EL, evaluated in each level set.
7       CONCLUSION

In this work, we investigated the impact of the level sampling process on the ZSG capabilities of RL
agents. We found adaptive sampling strategies are best understood as data regularisation techniques
minimising the mutual information between the agent’s internal representation and the identity of
training levels. In doing so, these methods minimise an upper bound on the generalisation gap,
and our experiments showed it to act as an effective proxy for reducing this gap in practice. This
theoretical framing allowed us to understand the mechanisms behind the improved generalisation
achieved by value loss prioritised level sampling, which had only been justified empirically in prior
work. We then investigated the setting in which the set of training levels is not fixed and where
the generalisation bound can be minimised by training over an augmented set. We proposed SSED,
a level generation and sampling framework restricting level generation to an approximation of the
underlying distribution of a starting set of level parameters. We showed that this restriction lets
SSED mitigates the distributional shift induced by UED methods. By jointly minimising the gen-
eralisation and over-generalisation gaps, we demonstrated that SSED achieves strong generalisation
performance on in-distribution test levels, while also being robust to in-context edge-cases.
In future work, we plan to investigate how SSED scales to more complex environments. In a prac-
tical setting, the level parameter space is often high dimensional, and levels are described by highly
structured data corresponding to specific regions of the parameter space. Depending on the simu-
lator used, level parameters may consist of sets of values, configuration files or any other modality
specific to the simulator. For example, they could be 3D scans of indoor environments (Li et al.,
2021) or a vector map describing a city’s road infrastructure (Wilson et al., 2021), which are often
costly to collect or prescribe manually, and thus are limited in supply. Augmenting the number of
training environments is therefore likely to play a role in scaling up RL in a cost effective manner.
Our experiments show that unsupervised environment generation is problematic even in gridworlds,
whereas the SSED framework is designed to scale with the amount of data being provided.
Lastly, we are interested in further exploring the synergies between SSED and mutual information
minimisation frameworks. SSED performs data augmentation uptream of level sampling, whereas
Jiang et al. (2021b) report significant improvements in combining PLR with data augmentation on
the agent’s observations (Raileanu et al., 2021) and thus acting downstream of level sampling. There
may be further synergies in combining mutual information minimisation techniques at different
points of the level-to-agent information chain, which is an investigation we leave for future work.

8       REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT

We believe parametrisable simulators are better suited to benchmark ZSG than procedural environ-
ments, as they provide a fine degree of control over the environment and are more consistent with
a realistic application setting, as argued by Kirk et al. (2023). For example, our study of over-
generalisation would not have been possible in Procgen, due to each game supporting a singular and
non-parametrisable level distribution. Having access to the level parameters used in experiments also
facilitates the reproducibility of ZSG research, and we make the train and evaluation sets of level
parameters used in this work, as well as the code for running experiments, publicly available.3 To
encourage this practice in future work, we open-source our code3 for specifying arbitrary CMDPs
    3
        Available upon de-anonymisation of this publication


                                                                9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in Minigrid and generate their associated level sets, describing the generation process in detail in
Appendix C. We also provide a dataset of 1.5M procedurally generated minigrid base layouts to
facilitate level set generation.3
Proofs and derivations are included in Appendix A and additional implementation details, including
the hyperparameters used and searched over are included in Appendix D.

R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron Courville, and Marc G Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 2021.
Forest Agostinelli, Stephen McAleer, Alexander Shmakov, and Pierre Baldi. Solving the rubik’s
  cube with deep reinforcement learning and search. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(8):356–363,
  8 2019. ISSN 2522-5839. doi: 10.1038/s42256-019-0070-z. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1038/s42256-019-0070-z.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience re-
 play. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Abdus Salam Azad, Izzeddin Gur, Jasper Emhoff, Nathaniel Alexis, Aleksandra Faust, Pieter
  Abbeel, and Ion Stoica. Clutr: Curriculum learning via unsupervised task representation learning.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1361–1395. PMLR, 2023.
Marc G. Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning envi-
 ronment: An evaluation platform for general agents (extended abstract). In IJCAI, 2015.
Martin Bertran, Natalia Martinez, Mariano Phielipp, and Guillermo Sapiro. Instance based general-
 ization in reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2011.01089, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/
 abs/2011.01089.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Lucas Willems, and Suman Pal. Minimalistic gridworld environment
 for openai gym. https://github.com/maximecb/gym-minigrid, 2018.
Karl Cobbe, Oleg Klimov, Chris Hesse, Taehoon Kim, and John Schulman. Quantifying gener-
  alization in reinforcement learning. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1282–1289. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v97/cobbe19a.html.
Karl Cobbe, Chris Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural generation to
  benchmark reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2048–
  2056. PMLR, 2020.
Michael Dennis, Natasha Jaques, Eugene Vinitsky, Alexandre Bayen, Stuart Russell, Andrew Critch,
 and Sergey Levine. Emergent complexity and zero-shot transfer via unsupervised environment
 design. NIPS, 2020.
Lauro Langosco Di Langosco, Jack Koch, Lee D Sharkey, Jacob Pfau, and David Krueger. Goal mis-
  generalization in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 12004–12019. PMLR, 2022.
Mhairi Dunion, Trevor McInroe, Kevin Sebastian Luck, Josiah P. Hanna, and Stefano V. Albrecht.
 Conditional mutual information for disentangled representations in reinforcement learning, 2023.
Dibya Ghosh, Jad Rahme, Aviral Kumar, Amy Zhang, Ryan P. Adams, and Sergey Levine. Why
  generalization in RL is difficult: Epistemic pomdps and implicit partial observability. CoRR,
  abs/2107.06277, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.06277.
M. Gumin. Wave function collapse algorithm. https://github.com/mxgmn/, 2016.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Irina Higgins, Loı̈c Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher P. Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew M.
   Botvinick, Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts
   with a constrained variational framework. In ICLR, 2017.
Maximilian Igl, Kamil Ciosek, Yingzhen Li, Sebastian Tschiatschek, Cheng Zhang, Sam Devlin,
 and Katja Hofmann. Generalization in reinforcement learning with selective noise injection and
 information bottleneck. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019. URL https://api.
 semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:202778414.
Nick Jakobi. Evolutionary robotics and the radical envelope-of-noise hypothesis. Adaptive Behavior,
  6:325 – 368, 1997.
Minqi Jiang, Michael Dennis, Jack Parker-Holder, Jakob Foerster, Edward Grefenstette,
 and Tim Rocktäschel.     Replay-guided adversarial environment design.    In M. Ran-
 zato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 1884–1897. Curran Asso-
 ciates, Inc., 2021a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/file/
 0e915db6326b6fb6a3c56546980a8c93-Paper.pdf.
Minqi Jiang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel.          Prioritized level replay.   ArXiv,
 abs/2010.03934, 2021b.
Minqi Jiang, Michael Dennis, Jack Parker-Holder, Andrei Lupu, Heinrich Küttler, Edward Grefen-
 stette, Tim Rocktäschel, and Jakob Foerster. Grounding aleatoric uncertainty in unsupervised
 environment design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05219, 2022.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. ICLR, 2014.
Robert Kirk, Amy Zhang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. A survey of zero-shot gener-
  alisation in deep reinforcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 76:201–264,
  2023.
Ilya Kostrikov, Denis Yarats, and Rob Fergus. Image augmentation is all you need: Regularizing
   deep reinforcement learning from pixels. ArXiv, abs/2004.13649, 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convo-
  lutional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 25, 2012.
J. Lee, J. Hwango, et al. Learning quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain. Science
   Robotics, 2020.
Z. Li, T. Yu, S. Sang, S. Wang, M. Song, Y. Liu, Y. Yeh, R. Zhu, N. Gundavarapu, J. Shi, S. Bi,
  H. Yu, Z. Xu, K. Sunkavalli, M. Hasan, R. Ramamoorthi, and M. Chandraker. Openrooms:
  An open framework for photorealistic indoor scene datasets. In 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 7186–7195, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, jun
  2021. IEEE Computer Society. doi: 10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00711. URL https://doi.
  ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00711.
Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Manfred Otto Heess, Tom Erez,
  Yuval Tassa, David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learn-
  ing. CoRR, abs/1509.02971, 2016.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In ICML, 2016.
Jack Parker-Holder, Minqi Jiang, Michael Dennis, Mikayel Samvelyan, Jakob N. Foerster, Edward
  Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktaschel. Evolving curricula with regret-based environment design.
  ArXiv, abs/2203.01302, 2022.
Lerrel Pinto, James Davidson, Rahul Sukthankar, and Abhinav Kumar Gupta. Robust adversarial
  reinforcement learning. In ICML, 2017.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Roberta Raileanu, Maxwell Goldstein, Denis Yarats, Ilya Kostrikov, and Rob Fergus. Automatic
  data augmentation for generalization in reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:5402–5415, 2021.
Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Daan Wierstra. Stochastic backpropagation and
  approximate inference in deep generative models. In Eric P. Xing and Tony Jebara (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 32 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1278–1286, Bejing, China, 22–24 Jun 2014. PMLR. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v32/rezende14.html.
Nikita Rudin, David Hoeller, Philipp Reist, and Marco Hutter. Learning to walk in minutes using
  massively parallel deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.11978, 2021.
Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience re-
  play. CoRR, abs/1511.05952, 2015. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:13022595.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv, 2017.
Rohin Shah, Vikrant Varma, Ramana Kumar, Mary Phuong, Victoria Krakovna, Jonathan Uesato,
  and Zac Kenton. Goal misgeneralization: Why correct specifications aren’t enough for correct
  goals. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01790, 2022.
Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Do-
  main randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In
  2017 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS), pp. 23–30.
  IEEE, 2017.
Tom White. Sampling generative networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.04468, 2016.
Benjamin Wilson, William Qi, Tanmay Agarwal, John Lambert, Jagjeet Singh, Siddhesh Khan-
  delwal, Bowen Pan, Ratnesh Kumar, Andrew Hartnett, Jhony Kaesemodel Pontes, Deva
  Ramanan, Peter Carr, and James Hays. Argoverse 2: Next generation datasets for self-driving
  perception and forecasting. In J. Vanschoren and S. Yeung (eds.), Proceedings of the Neural
  Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks, volume 1, 2021. URL
  https://datasets-benchmarks-proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/
  file/4734ba6f3de83d861c3176a6273cac6d-Paper-round2.pdf.
Aolin Xu and Maxim Raginsky. Information-theoretic analysis of generalization capability of learn-
  ing algorithms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=ryGs6iA5Km.
Yunzhi Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Lerrel Pinto. Automatic curriculum learning through value dis-
  agreement. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:7648–7659, 2020.


                                               12
