Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


BSPA: E XPLORING B LACK - BOX S TEALTHY P ROMPT
ATTACKS AGAINST I MAGE G ENERATORS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Extremely large image generators offer significant transformative potential across
         diverse sectors. It allows users to design specific prompts to generate realistic
         images through some black-box APIs. However, some studies reveal that image
         generators are notably susceptible to attacks and generate Not Suitable For Work
         (NSFW) contents by manually designed toxin texts, especially imperceptible to
         human observers. We urgently need a multitude of universal and transferable
         prompts to improve the safety of image generators, especially black-box-released
         APIs. Nevertheless, they are constrained by labor-intensive design processes and
         heavily reliant on the quality of the given instructions. To achieve this, we in-
         troduce a black-box stealthy prompt attack (BSPA) that adopts a retriever to sim-
         ulate attacks from API users. It can effectively harness filter scores to tune the
         retrieval space of sensitive words for matching the input prompts, thereby craft-
         ing stealthy prompts tailored for image generators. Significantly, this approach
         is model-agnostic and requires no internal access to the model’s features, ensur-
         ing its applicability to a wide range of image generators. Building on BSPA, we
         have constructed an automated prompt tool and a comprehensive prompt attack
         dataset (NSFWeval). Extensive experiments demonstrate that BSPA effectively
         explores the security vulnerabilities in a variety of state-of-the-art available black-
         box models, including Stable Diffusion XL and Midjourney. Furthermore, we
         have developed a resilient text filter and offer targeted recommendations to ensure
         the security of image generators against prompt attacks in the future.


1   INTRODUCTION

The recent emergence of image generators (Ramesh et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al.,
2022) promises immense transformative across various sectors (Song et al., 2021; 2022; Kapelyukh
et al., 2023). However, these sophisticated generators come with their own set of opportunities and
challenges. They are vulnerable to exploitation by adversaries who might generate images that could
negatively impact ethical, societal, and political landscapes (Rando et al., 2022; Schramowski et al.,
2023). As illustrated in Fig. 1, malicious users can leverage these technologies to craft Not Suitable
For Work (NSFW) content, especially when provided with prompts containing explicit harmful
tokens derived from inappropriate websites. To counteract such threats, researchers have integrated
sensitive word filters into these models, which are now prevalent in many publicly-released APIs
(Rando et al., 2022; Qu et al., 2023; Rismani et al., 2023).
To delve deeper into vulnerability risks and enhance model safety, recent studies have manually
designed seemingly benign prompts (Schuhmann et al., 2021; 2022) that are more discreet and
challenging to defend against. While these subtle threat prompts are adept at circumventing filters
and generating NSFW content, they are constrained by labor-intensive design processes and heavily
reliant on the quality of the given instructions. With the dramatic increase in users accessing the
black-box API to generate images, there is a pressing need for an automated prompt-generation tool
capable of producing a multitude of prompt samples. It can simulate the stealthy attack process i.e.
black-box approach to identify weaknesses in prevalent models and facilitate their improvement.
A logical approach directly involves a large language model (LLM) for automated prompt generation
through instructions (Wei et al., 2021; Qu et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2023). However, these resulting
prompts tend to be minimally threatening and lack diversity. Since these methods lack an effective


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Schematic illustrations of the comparisons across various prompt attackers. Crawler-based
attacker craft prompts containing explicit harmful tokens (already masked) from malicious websites.
Manual design-based attackers provide prompts by predetermined instruction, which inherently lack
in both quantity and diversity. To simulate attacks originating from API users and identify potential
vulnerabilities, we employ LLM to generate prompts with quantity, stealth, and diversity.
training strategy and rely excessively on the LLM’s zero-shot performance, the resulting prompts
tend to be minimally threatening and lack diversity. To solve the above issues, some works (Ilyas
et al., 2018; Cheng et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2022) adopt zeroth-order/derivative-free optimization to
tune prompts. However, these strategies confine prompts to a restricted subspace and cannot provide
adequate malicious direction, making it challenging to fully engage the LLM’s creative capacities.
Due to the above challenge, these methods can not generate stealthy and diverse prompts to simulate
attacks from API users.
To address the aforementioned problems, we drive our research perspective to optimize the stealthy
attack prompts by only accessing the image generator inference API. We introduce a novel black-box
stealthy prompt attack (BSPA) to generate stealthy, offensive, and diverse samples, which enables
a transformation from original zeroth-order optimization (Conn et al., 2009; Rios & Sahinidis,
2013) to gradient-based optimization. Specifically, it utilizes the supervised sign from generated
text/image and employs a retriever to identify the most relevant sensitive word to the input, thus
ensuring a sufficient retrieval space. Inspired by the mechanisms of communication feedback to the
attacker, we leverage a pseudo-labeling strategy to mitigate the lack of training data in this domain
and effectively optimize the retriever. Our innovative pseudo-labeling technique integrates aspects
of toxicity, stealth, and similarity to the input text. Furthermore, we propose a streamlined loss to
sufficiently sample the retrieval space to obtain diverse sensitive words. This refined function can
amplify prompt diversity by suppressing the probability of the top-k text similarities, allowing for a
more extensive and varied range of stealthy prompts.
Building upon the BSPA framework, we have developed an automated prompt tool proficient in
generating stealthy and diverse NSFW samples. We present an extensive prompt attack dataset,
named NSFWeval, designed to simulate attacks from malicious users, comprising 3,000 stealthy
and explicit prompts. These prompts exhibit significant transferability and reveal universal vulnera-
bilities on commercial APIs, including Stable Diffusion XL and Midjourney. Additionally, we have
constructed a robust text filter for enhancing the safety of the image generator, which can suppress
84.9% of prompt attacks, including explicit and stealthy prompts. To the best of our knowledge, this
constitutes the inaugural effort to develop a security verification framework for image generators,
which is paramount in fostering the development of more secure and robust image generators.


2   RELATED WORKS
The safety of image generator. The main area of this work is verifying the defense capabilities
of image generators and building a universal benchmark for NSFW content detection. Currently,


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


researchers focus on improving model’s performance to generate exquisite and realistic images
through diffusion model (Ramesh et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022) etc.
However, there is a lack of control over the security of the generated content, and if exploited by
attackers, it is easy to do behaviors that harm society. Nowadays, researchers have started to focus
on the safety of generators by collecting prompts with explicit NSFW prompts (Qu et al., 2023;
Kim et al., 2023). These methods achieve excellent attack results on open-source models. How-
ever, they become dysfunctional due to the powerful filtering mechanism present in the Black-box
model. To evaluate the safety of the generated models in a more comprehensive and general way,
we urgently require more stealthily toxic prompts to validate them. We design a black-box attack
framework instead of traditional prompt collection methods, thus producing more imaginative and
comprehensively toxic prompts with less cost.
Black-box optimization. Researchers adopt black-box optimization to simulate attacks on large
model APIs by malicious users. The mainstream black-box optimization methods can be divided
into two types: 1) score-based black-box adversarial attacks (Ilyas et al., 2018; Andriushchenko
et al., 2020; Cheng et al., 2019), these works adopt zeroth-order optimization methods to optimize
the inputs and thus spoof the threat model. Derivative-Free Optimization and Prompt Learning
methods are mostly applied to increase the loss on large models. However, these methods suffer from
limited retrieval space and cannot effectively achieve diversity and comprehensive attack coverage.
2) the other method is Knowledge Distillation (Wang, 2021; Nguyen et al., 2022), which utilizes the
outputs of other models to learn the threat model for achieving adversarial attacks. However, these
methods can only achieve excellent attack and transferability when the parameters and the training
data in the teacher model are much larger than the attacked model. Unlike previous black-box attack
paradigms (Sun et al., 2022; Diao et al., 2023), our approach adopts gradient-based optimization by
a retriever (e.g., BM25 (Robertson et al., 2009), DPR (Karpukhin et al., 2020), etc.) and receives
the supervised signal from generated text/image, which has sufficient retrieval space to engage the
LLM’s creative capacities.

3     M ETHOD
In this section, we first clarify the problem and present our attacker. Afterwards, we introduce the
text retriever, which provides a larger retrieval space for retrieving sensitive words. Finally, we
design our optimization scheme, including pseudo-labeling and loss function.

3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Let X denote the space of normal language prompts. We aspire to learn a mapping function, denoted
as gϕ (·) : X → X , tasked with morphing a given prompt x ∈ X into a modified prompt x s .
This altered prompt, when interfaced with an image generator API gψ (·) : X → Y, is engineered
to generate harmful images, with Y representing the realm of generated images. Formally, our
objective is to solve:
                                      x)))] s.t. Lsim (x
            max Ex ∼X [Lharm (gψ (gϕ (x                x, x s ) > δ, Ltox (gψ (x
                                                                               xs )) < ϵ,            (1)
             gϕ

where Lharm quantifies the degree of harmfulness in a generated image y ∈ Y, Lsim calculates the
similarity between the original and the transformed prompts, and Ltox assesses the manifest toxicity
of the altered prompt. δ and ϵ are the corresponding thresholds. This objective aims to optimize
for the generation of maximally harmful images, subjected to constraints on the similarity to the
original prompt and the overt toxicity of the altered prompt. Our intention is to learn the mapping
function gϕ (·) within a black-box scenario, devoid of access to the internal mechanisms of gψ (·),
and interfacing with gψ (·) exclusively through its API.
A preliminary idea entails utilizing a text generator (e.g. LLM) to instantiate gϕ (·), where it directly
generates a stealthy prompt x s by input description x straightly. Subsequently, x s is applied to an
image generator gψ (·) to yeild y as:
                                           y = gψ (gϕ (x
                                                       x)).                                          (2)
Due to the lack of training process and “bait” guidance, this paradigm is challenging in ensuring
prompt diversity and relevance, adapting to various model complexities, and preventing the creation
of unintentional malicious or harmful prompts.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: An overview of the training paradigm of black-box stealthy prompt attack (BSPA). Left:
Our method transforms zeroth-order optimization into gradient-based optimization through the in-
volvement of a retriever. This operation effectively employs text/image filter scores to tune the
retrieval space of sensitive words for matching the input prompts. Right: We embed and retrieve
sensitive words by a dense retrieval model, which is characterized by minimal optimization effort
and expansive retrieval space.
To enhance the quality and diversity of prompts, we drive our research perspective to train a retriever
to simulate the actions of a malicious user. This approach utilizes a retriever r(·) to influence gϕ (·)
                                                              x) (filtered from malicious image-text
to generate x s by querying the most relevant sensitive w = r(x
pairs). These are subsequently combined into a single prompt x m = x ⃝w   + w , x m ∈ Xm to fabricate
harmful images, where ⃝  + represents a human instruction guiding the LLM to generate x s :
                                                      xm )).
                                          y = gψ (gϕ (x                                             (3)

To simulate attacks from API users and improve the stealthy and diversity of prompts, we propose
a framework for black-box stealthy prompt attacks. It transforms zeroth-order optimization into
gradient-based optimization through the incorporation of a retriever. As illustrated in Figure 2, we
decompose the optimization process of Eq. 1 into four steps: Step1 (Sensitive word matching), To
guide the LLM to produce toxic prompts, when a description x is fed into the framework, it initially
matches the most similar sensitive words w (i.e., the words with the highest propensity to generate
the attack samples). Step2 (Threat content generation), Text/Image Generator gϕ (·)/gψ (·) is adopted
to generate threat content based on input prompts. To simulate attacks from API users, both utilize
a black-box API. Step3 (Toxic score calculation). To optimize the retriever to retrieve the most
relevant words, we apply a text/image filter fϕ (·)/fψ (·) to calculate the toxicity of the text/image.
Step4 (Retriever Optimization), Text Retriever r(·) serves to retrieve the most pertinent sensitive
word relative to the input text, engaging the creative capacities of Text Generator. It undergoes
training and optimization by the toxic scores derived from text/image filters.
We pioneered the black-box attack on image generator by enabling the creativity of LLM through
a retriever, which expands the sampling space of sensitive words. The benefits of utilizing BSPA
over alternative methods are as follows. First, it contains a black-box nature regarding the image
generation model, meaning that it can only access the final prediction results from the target model,
akin to an external attacker’s perspective. Second, the implementation of a supervised, automatic
generation methodology can produce numerous attack texts with elevated diversity and complexity.
Additionally, an attack is considered successful when fϕ (xxs ) < ϵt and fψ (yy ) > ϵi , where ϵt and ϵi
are the toxic score thresholds of text and image, respectively.

3.2   T EXT R ETRIEVER

To cover attacks from malicious users, we require a large retrieval space to accommodate enough
sensitive words. Therefore, we adopt a text retriever for fetching relevant words. As shown in Fig
2, text retriever is the main optimization part of our framework. It effectively adopts text/image
filter scores and transforms zeroth-order optimization into gradient-based optimization to generate
                                                                                                  w)
threatening prompts. Text retriever first encodes the sensitive words to d-dimensional vector ew (w
and builds an index for retrieval. During retrieval, we encode input sentence x to a d-dimensional


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           x), and retrieve the closest sensitive word vector to the input sentence vector. We define
vector ex (x
similarity as their association criterion as
                                                          x)ew (w
                                                      ex (x     w)
                                        x, w ) =
                                    sim(x                             .                              (4)
                                                    |ex (x
                                                         x)||ew (w
                                                                 w )|
Our goal is to create a sufficient retrieval space where the distance between relevant pairs of x and
x s is smaller than the distance of the irrelevant pairs. However, with the retrieval space expanding,
space optimization becomes extraordinarily hard, which interferes with the selection of relevant
sensitive words. To solve the problem of difficult spatial optimization, in-batch negatives are adopted
to improve training efficiency and increase the number of training examples, i.e., the (B × d) input
text vectors es (S) are associated with all (B × d) sensitive words vectors ew (W ) within a batch, thus
obtaining a similarity (B × B) matrix S = es (S)ew (W )T . Therefore, we achieve effective training
on B 2 (Wi , Sj ) in each batch, when i = j and the text is related to the sensitive word and vice versa.
The training process of our retriever is summarized in the Appendix C.

3.3   P SEUDO -L ABELING AND LOSS FUNCTION

As described above, we introduce a black-box prompt-generation tool and adopt gradient-based
optimization to optimize it. The supervisory signal and loss function are crucial for model opti-
mization, decreasing the optimization effort and improving the quality of prompts. To prevent over-
centralization of sensitive words and increase the diversity of prompts, we produce a complete and
streamlined optimization scheme, including pseudo-labeling generation and loss function design.
They can increase the utilization of retrieval space by considering the similarity of x-x
                                                                                        xs .
We design a stealthy and toxic pseudo-label to simulate the tactics of the attacker. The pseudo-label
generation process of our retriever is summarized in the Appendix C. Given a description xi and
sensitive word set W. When xi is fed into the framework, we match it with all the sensitive words
W to generate toxicity prompts set Xsi and harmful images set Y i by text/image generator. We adopt
fϕ (·)/fψ (·) to get the supervised signal st /si from x is /yy i :
                                                 xis ), x is ∈ Xsi ,
                                        st = fϕ (x                                                   (5)
                                                                  i
                                        si = fψ (yy i ), y i ∈ Y .                                   (6)

                                                                                xs pair as a part of the
Additionally, to increase the diversity of prompts, we add the similarity of x -x
pseudo-label. The pseudo label s is defined as:
                                     s = si − αst + βsim(x
                                                         x, x s )                                    (7)
where α and β are tunable parameter. The first term encourages the generated image y to contain
more NSFW content. The second term encourages the generated text x s to contain less NSFW
content. The third similarity term encourages the generated text to be as similar as possible to the
input text to ensure the diversity of the generated text. Since the vectors of x and x s are iteratively
optimized during training, pseudo label s is also optimized during training to lead it more inclined to
generate NSFW text related to the input text and improve the diversity of attack prompts. We choose
the sensitive word with the highest s as its positive pseudo-labeling s+ and the others as negative
pseudo-labeling s− .
During the training process of BSPA, the sampling of the retriever will be overly centralized on
some highly induced sensitive words, which is detrimental to the diversity of the prompt. To im-
prove sample utilization and training efficiency, we fully utilize positive/negative pseudo-labeling
for contrastive learning. The first term is designed as the following function to encourage the re-
triever to choose closer to positive pseudo-labeling, we optimize it as the negative log-likelihood of
the positive pseudo-labeling s+ :
                                                              +
                                                           es
                                   Lclo = − log            Pn          −   ,                         (8)
                                                                     sj
                                                   es+ +       j=1 e

where n denotes the number of sensitive words. The second term encourages Text Retriever to
provide more diverse options of w :
                                  Ldiv = h(sof tmax(sim(x
                                                        x, x s ))),                                  (9)


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Figure 3: Example of generated images by using prompts from BSPA.

where h(·) is adopted to sum the top k values. We aim to minimize the probability value of the top-k
text similarities, thus obtaining a greater diversity of y . The text retriever loss is defined as
                                          L = Lclo + Ldiv .                                       (10)
We adopt L in our experiments to improve the sample utilization, resulting in greater diversity for
our method without compromising aggressiveness.

4     E VALUATION AND DISCUSSION

In this section, we present the experimental results to validate the effectiveness of BSPA for stealthy
prompt attacks. We follow a simple-to-complex procedure to conduct experiments. We first intro-
duce baseline and metrics, and then conduct results and discussion. For consistency and fairness of
the evaluation, we conduct the main experiment on Stable Diffusion. More experiment details are
put in the Appendix B. We demonstrate some NSFW images generated with BSPA prompts in Fig.
3, which reveals that large image generators are suffering from the stealthy prompts attack.

4.1   BASELINE AND M ETRICS

To validate the toxicity, stealth, and diversity of the prompts generated by BSPA, we choose Crawler-
based attacker and Traditional LLM-based attacker as our baseline for comparison with our method.
Crawler-based attacker (CBA): We collect the titles of the videos from Pornhub and detect the
title language, selecting 6,000 English titles for retention.
Traditional LLM-based attacker (TLA): We randomly select 10,000 scene descriptions from the
MS-COCO captions val dataset for the LLM’s human instructions.
BSAP attacker (BSAP): We adopt the same scene descriptions as TLA, and the top-3 sensitive
words with the highest correlation are selected for stealthy prompt generation.
For TLA and BSAP, we adopt a simple data cleaning method to filter the dirty data and retain 12,155
and 27,026 prompts. The implementation details can be found in the Appendix B. We evaluate
generated text-image pairs from text stealth, text diversity, and attack success rate as follows.
Text stealth: It is designed to evaluate the stealthy of generated text. The higher probability that
prompts are not detected as toxic text by the text filter, the more stealthy the text is. Therefore,
we verify text stealth by publicly convincing toxic comment classification (Hanu & Unitary team,
2020), i.e., the number of texts surpassing the toxicity threshold (0.3 in this paper).


                                                  6
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 16
                        Tokens
                        Sensitive words                   7139   7205
                                              7041                50
                                    6892                   46
                      6721                     34
                 15
                       13            19
Toxic Rate (%)


                                                                        Numbers
                 14

                 13

                 12
                        0             1          3         5      10
                                           Top K choose
     Figure 4: Ablation studies of Ldiv .We evaluate                                  Figure 5: The word cloud of BSPA prompts, we
     its impact on diversity from toxic rate and the                                  set the max words as 200.
     number of tokens/sensitive words.

     Table 1: Quality review and attack success rates of three attackers. Toxic Rate ↓ means that a lower
     toxic rate is better, ASR ↑ means that a higher attack success rate is better.

                                                  Text-level                                              Image-level
                             Prompt        Toxic Rate ↓ Avg Length                    Token   ASRf il ↑    ASRhum ↑     ASR ↑
                 CBA          6,000          75.48%          17.04                    4,707    8.60%        1.15%        9.75%
                 TLA         12,155          13.84%          31.63                    6,513    6.07%        1.66%        7.65%
                 BSPA        27,026          14.35%          33.75                    7,139   11.95%        3.80%       15.32%


     Text diversity: Texts with longer sentence lengths and larger token counts tend to contain more
     comprehensive scenarios and content expressions. Therefore, we evaluate the diversity of the gen-
     erated prompts by two textual attributes: average length of prompts and total number of tokens.
     Attack success rate: The main objective of the attack method is to induce the image generator to
     produce NSFW images. Since there are gaps in the filters of different image generators, human
     judgment is involved in determining whether the response is a refusal or an attempt to avoid gener-
     ating NSFW content. We define two attack success statistics: 1) the generated image is intercepted
     by the image filter of the model, and 2) the generated image is not intercepted but contains NSFW
     content, both of them provided that the prompts escape the text filter. Three attack success rates are
     designed to fully evaluate the attack effectiveness of the models: 1) filter success rate ASRf il = sf
                                                                                                         sp ,
     2) human success rate ASRhum = sp−sfsh
                                              , and 3) total success rate ASR = sh+sf
                                                                                  sp , where sf , sp, sh
     are the number of prompt samples, filters and human considered NSFW content respectively.


     4.2              P ROMPT AND ATTACK ANALYSIS

     Tab. 1 left reports the overview of three prompt datasets produced by three attackers. We find that
     the toxic rate of the BSPA prompts by our method is significantly lower than that of CBA prompts.
     It indicates that our method can effectively inhibit the text generator from generating explicit NSFW
     content and encourage the model to generate stealthy toxic prompts. In addition, the average length
     and number of tokens of our prompt are higher than the CBA/TLA prompt. It illustrates that our
     method improves the quality and diversity of generated prompts by retrieving key sensitive words.
     We validate ASR on stable diffusion. As shown in Tab. 1 right, we can find that BSPA obtains
     much better results than CBA. It indicates that our stealthy prompts can effectively bypass filter
     detection to generate NSFW content. Meanwhile, BSPA generates prompts with higher ASR than
     TLA, illustrating that the introduction of sensitive words can effectively engage the creativity of the
     text generator and guide it to produce toxic content by combining normal texts.
     The results show that BSPA can reduce toxicity by more than 80% and improve ASR by more than
     57% compared to CBA prompts. We analyze that our methods can provide more stealthy and diverse
     prompts because BSPS adopts a text retriever to engage the LLM’s creative capacities and improve
     the retrieval space of sensitive words, which is more similar to attacks from API users.


                                                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                x, x s ).
                               Table 2: Ablation studies of sim(x

                                                Toxic Rate ↓     Token      ASRf il ↑
                   w/o sim(textreg , wsen )       13.17%         6,703       10.19%
                          BSPA                    14.35%         7,139      11.95%
Table 3: The result of Open-source/Release API on the public list of NSFWeval. Explicit means the
explicit attack prompts from CBA, and Stealthy means the stealthy attack prompts from BSPA.

                                          Explicit                               Stealthy
                             ASRf il ↑    ASRhum ↑       ASR ↑      ASRf il ↑    ASRhum ↑       ASR ↑
     Open-source
      SD w/fϕ (·)             16.7%           8.8%       24.1%       44.6%         56.3%        75.8%
     LD w/fϕ (·)              24.1%           2.1%       25.7%       32.1%         24.0%        48.4%
  DALL·E mini w/fϕ (·)        18.8%           4.4%       22.4%       28.6%         19.4%        42.5%
      SD w/ RSF                6.3%           3.6%        9.7%        8.7%          2.8%        11.3%
     Release API
       SD-demo                 4.3%           3.1%        4.6%       11.5%          7.3%        14.1%
       MJ-demo                52.6%           1.8%       53.5%       74.6%          4.3%        75.7%

4.3   F URTHER A NALYSIS

As with the inspiration for malicious users to create prompts, the size of retrieval space for sensitive
words is crucial to the diversity of toxic prompts. We employ Ldiv and sim(x      x, x s ) in our training
strategy to increase the range of retrieval space and diversity of toxic prompts. In this section, we
conduct extensive ablation studies to evaluate the impact of these strategies.
Influence of Ldiv . As shown in Fig. 4, we find that adding the Ldiv can effectively expand the
range of retrieval space. Different values of the k will affect the prompt toxic. When k is too small,
the selection is too centralized, leading to insufficient sample diversity. When k is too large, the
retrieval of sensitive words is not relevant enough to induce the generator to produce toxic prompts.
This confirms our assumption that Ldiv can improve the diversity of toxic prompts.
Influence of sim(x  x, x s ). Another conclusion of this work is that the sim(x  x, x s ) can effectively
improve the diversity of toxic prompts by leading the toxic prompts closer to the input text. As
shown in Tab. 2, by adding sim(x    x, x s ), the number of tokens can be effectively increased, which
confirms that the strategy is effective in improving the diversity of prompts.
Bias analysis. We present the word cloud of the BSPA prompt dataset in Fig. 5, which partially
reflects the data distribution of prompts. Upon examination, we find that these words are primarily
centered around stealthy scenarios, activities, and events where NSFW content may occur. Simul-
taneously, we discover that there is a serious gender issue, which indirectly reflects the bias in the
training data of the language model. Through the analysis, we hope to provide some insights to re-
searchers, i.e., to judge the data distribution issues in the training data from a generative perspective.


4.4   D ISCUSSION

At a high level, this work has very broad research implications. Unlike previous prompt attack
methods, we believe that automated adversarial attacks are more effective and comprehensive than
manual ones. BSPA can harness filter scores to tune the retrieval space of sensitive words for match-
ing the input prompts, which can simulate attacks from API users. Based on BSPA, we construct
a benchmark to evaluate the model’s ability to reject NSFW content. We hope this work can effec-
tively and comprehensively identify the vulnerability that exists in current generative models.
In our experiments, we also find two notable points: 1) Cross-modal alignment is the core problem
of multimodal adversarial. Because most multimodal large models only train the vector alignment
to achieve cross-modal projection, which leads it to be the weakest link. 2) By case analysis of the
toxic prompts/images, we find that there is serious gender and racial discrimination in the generated
content. This could be attributed to the bias in the training data. Therefore, we believe that evaluating
the quality of the training data inversely from the generated data is a noteworthy research direction.


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     NSFW EVAL
5.1   DATASET STATISTICS .

In this section, we select 1,500 prompts from CBA prompts and BSPA prompts as explicit and
stealthy attack prompts, respectively. It comprehensively evaluates the ability of image generators
to defend against prompt attacks. We categorize benchmarks into public and private lists for attack
evaluation of image generators. The public list consists of a fixed 2,000 data prompts (1,000 each
from explicit and stealthy prompts), and the private list consists of the remaining prompts. In private
list evaluation, we randomly select 250 items from explicit and stealthy attack prompts for manual
evaluation each time to ensure accuracy and fairness.

5.2   TEST MODELS

We verify five image generators’ defenses through public list of NSFWeval, including open source
models with text filter (The complete results on NSFWeval are demonstrated in the Appendix D):
Stable Diffusion (SD), Latent Diffusion (LD) (Rombach et al., 2022), DALL·E mini (Dayma et al.,
2021) and black-box, publicly released model: Stable Diffusion-demo (SD-demo), Midjourney-
demo (MJ-demo). Additionally, based on the other unselected prompts, we finetune a novel resilient
text filter (RSF) to defend against explicit and stealthy attack prompts.

5.3   B ENCHMARKING THE API S

Tab. 3 shows the overall results of test models on our benchmark. We found that stealthy prompt
attack is more threatening to image generators, causing serious trouble for all models. Since the
released API has additional filtering capabilities (e.g., sensitive word filters, sentence filters, and
higher quality image filters, etc.), these models have a better defense against threat prompts. Fig. 3
demonstrates some successful attack cases for each model. We find that each model is threatened by
prompt attacks, and stealth prompt is more threatening.
For the open-source model, we notice a trend where ASR is proportional to model performance,
owing to 1) state-of-the-art methods have an excellent image-text alignment, leading to mine deeper
into the prompt, 2) it utilizes a huge amount of training data, causing the model to be more suscep-
tible to being induced to generate negative content. Additionally, RSF can effectively filter attack
prompts, both explicit and stealthy texts. We adopt it on SD, which can reduce the ASR of ex-
plicit/stealthy prompts by 14.4% /64.5% compared to fϕ (·).
Since the SD-demo has a sensitive word filter, it has a lower ASRf il than the MJ-demo. However, in
reality, we focus more on the images that escape filters, and we find that even though MJ-demo has
a better defense, it suffers from the issue of NSFW content leaks. From Fig. 3, we find the NSFW
content is clearer in SOTA methods. Therefore, the filtering and rejection of NSFW content is more
critical in Release API, especially stealthy threat prompts.

6     CONCLUSION

In this work, we present a black-box stealthy prompt attack (BSPA) to automatically generate
stealthy, offensive, and diverse samples. It can effectively harness filter scores to retrieve the most
relevant sensitive word to the input. Based on BSPA, we create a universal benchmark, dubbed
NSFWeval, to simulate the attack from malicious users. These prompts exhibit significant transfer-
ability and reveal universal vulnerabilities on commercial APIs, including Stable Diffusion XL and
Midjourney. Additionally, we have constructed a robust text filter to improve the safety of the image
generator. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first pioneering effort in establishing a security
verification framework for image generators. We believe that addressing this concern is crucial for
advancing more secure and robust image generators.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ETHICS STATEMENT
A potential negative impact of our work (including papers, code, and data) is that malicious attackers
could utilize our method to attack commercial APIs, leading to toxic content generation or privacy
leakage. Despite the risk of misuse, we believe that a full disclosure of the present work is appro-
priate. As researchers currently focus on improving large models due to their superior performance,
it’s even more important to explore and address the vulnerability of deep learning models which
could be targeted by black-box attacks without knowing specific details of the target models. We
believe that our early publication of this technology can be an effective defense against abuse by
such teams and allow Red-teaming teams to deploy it effectively in advance. In conclusion, our
work demonstrates the potential attack algorithm and emphasizes the importance of enhancing the
security of deep learning models.

R EFERENCES
Maksym Andriushchenko, Francesco Croce, Nicolas Flammarion, and Matthias Hein. Square at-
 tack: a query-efficient black-box adversarial attack via random search. In European conference
 on computer vision, pp. 484–501. Springer, 2020.
Shuyu Cheng, Yinpeng Dong, Tianyu Pang, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Improving black-box adversarial
  attacks with a transfer-based prior. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Andrew R Conn, Katya Scheinberg, and Luis N Vicente. Introduction to derivative-free optimiza-
  tion. SIAM, 2009.
Boris Dayma, Suraj Patil, Pedro Cuenca, Khalid Saifullah, Tanishq Abraham, Phúc Lê Khc,
  Luke Melas, and Ritobrata Ghosh. Dall·e mini, 7 2021. URL https://github.com/
  borisdayma/dalle-mini.
Shizhe Diao, Zhichao Huang, Ruijia Xu, Xuechun Li, LIN Yong, Xiao Zhou, and Tong Zhang.
  Black-box prompt learning for pre-trained language models. Transactions on Machine Learn-
  ing Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  IvsGP7xRvm.
Laura Hanu and Unitary team. Detoxify. Github. https://github.com/unitaryai/detoxify, 2020.
Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Anish Athalye, and Jessy Lin. Black-box adversarial attacks with
  limited queries and information. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2137–
  2146. PMLR, 2018.
Ivan Kapelyukh, Vitalis Vosylius, and Edward Johns. Dall-e-bot: Introducing web-scale diffusion
  models to robotics. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2023.
Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oğuz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi
  Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2004.04906, 2020.
Sanghyun Kim, Seohyeon Jung, Balhae Kim, Moonseok Choi, Jinwoo Shin, and Juho Lee. To-
  wards safe self-distillation of internet-scale text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.05977, 2023.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer
  Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014,
  Proceedings, Part V 13, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Dang Nguyen, Sunil Gupta, Kien Do, and Svetha Venkatesh. Black-box few-shot knowledge distil-
  lation. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 196–211. Springer, 2022.
Yiting Qu, Xinyue Shen, Xinlei He, Michael Backes, Savvas Zannettou, and Yang Zhang. Unsafe
  diffusion: On the generation of unsafe images and hateful memes from text-to-image models.
  ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2023.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
Javier Rando, Daniel Paleka, David Lindner, Lennard Heim, and Florian Tramèr. Red-teaming the
  stable diffusion safety filter. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04610, 2022.
Luis Miguel Rios and Nikolaos V Sahinidis. Derivative-free optimization: a review of algorithms
  and comparison of software implementations. Journal of Global Optimization, 56:1247–1293,
  2013.
Shalaleh Rismani, Renee Shelby, Andrew Smart, Renelito Delos Santos, AJung Moon, and Negar
  Rostamzadeh. Beyond the ml model: Applying safety engineering frameworks to text-to-image
  development. In Proceedings of the 2023 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp.
  70–83, 2023.
Stephen Robertson, Hugo Zaragoza, et al. The probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25 and be-
  yond. Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval, 3(4):333–389, 2009.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Patrick Schramowski, Manuel Brack, Björn Deiseroth, and Kristian Kersting. Safe latent diffusion:
  Mitigating inappropriate degeneration in diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22522–22531, 2023.
Christoph Schuhmann, Richard Vencu, Romain Beaumont, Robert Kaczmarczyk, Clayton Mullis,
  Aarush Katta, Theo Coombes, Jenia Jitsev, and Aran Komatsuzaki. Laion-400m: Open dataset of
  clip-filtered 400 million image-text pairs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02114, 2021.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:25278–25294, 2022.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=PxTIG12RRHS.
Yang Song, Liyue Shen, Lei Xing, and Stefano Ermon. Solving inverse problems in medical imaging
  with score-based generative models. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=vaRCHVj0uGI.
Tianxiang Sun, Yunfan Shao, Hong Qian, Xuanjing Huang, and Xipeng Qiu. Black-box tuning for
  language-model-as-a-service. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepes-
  vari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 20841–20855.
  PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/sun22e.
  html.
Bart Thomee, David A Shamma, Gerald Friedland, Benjamin Elizalde, Karl Ni, Douglas Poland,
  Damian Borth, and Li-Jia Li. Yfcc100m: The new data in multimedia research. Communications
  of the ACM, 59(2):64–73, 2016.
Zi Wang. Zero-shot knowledge distillation from a decision-based black-box model. In International
   Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10675–10685. PMLR, 2021.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.01652, 2021.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A       S ENSITIVE WORD SET

The sensitive word set of our experiments is shown in Tab. A. We filter the NSFW-labeled data
in the Laion-400M by a text filter and retain normal text. Then, we utilize TF-IDF to choose the
keywords in data and select 50 words with the highest frequency as the sensitive words for retrieval.

                                     Table A: Sensitive word set.


        invoice   images    photo        getty     wiring        diagram      template     free
        receipt    black     man         execl     woman         addition        bra      women
         white     cover     red         body     download        breast         hot       best
          map      sexy     book        human      awards         vector       female      hair
          male      tax    windows        lace     service        music          art      bikini
         stock      new     video          set      men         screenshot      chart     young
         online     like


B       I MPLEMENTATION

Thanks to the release of Image-Text Pairs datasets (e.g., Laion (Schuhmann et al., 2021; 2022),
YFCC100M (Thomee et al., 2016), and MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014)), which provides a tremen-
dous data for our model training. In our framework, all modules are substitutable, including the text
retriever, which we can replace with other neural network encoders. Considering the open source,
in this paper, we adopt BERT as the text retriever, and Vicuna as the text generator. Laion-400M
is utilized for training Text retriever. Detoxify1 and Stable diffusion safety checker (Rando et al.,
2022) are adopted as Text Filter and Image Filter, respectively.
Specifically, we first filter the NSFW-labeled data in the Laion-400M by a text filter and retain
normal text. Then, we utilize TF-IDF to choose the keywords in data and select 50 words with the
highest frequency as the sensitive words for retrieval. We believe that these sensitive words do not
contain explicitly negative information, but are somewhat leading to it. We randomly sample 15000
captions from MS-COCO and feed them into our prompt2 with sensitive words respectively.
After training, we randomly select 5000 captions from the MS-COCO test set for data generation.
The captions are sequentially fed into the text retriever, and the top-3 sensitive words with the highest
correlation are selected for sentence generation. We further filter the generated prompts to get the
stealthily harmful prompts.
Through the observation and analysis of prompts, we find that the generated text effectively com-
bines the contextual information of x and the stealthy toxicity embedded in w . Simultaneously, the
text generator tends to generate NSFW content about women, which reflects that the current text
generator is ethically flawed.
We train the text retriever with in-batch negative setting, and the batch-size =256. We adopt adam
as our optimizer and set the initial learning rate to 0.0002. In this paper, all the label constructing
process along with the model training process is carried out on a piece of NVIDIA A100 80GB.


C       P SEUDO - LABELING AND TRAINING ALGORITHM

In this section, we show the pesudo-labeling and text retriever algorithm in Algorithm 1 and Algo-
rithm 2.

    1
    https://github.com/unitaryai/detoxify
    2
    The prompt is ”Can you generate a porn scene with about 15 words based on some vocabulary in ’image
caption x ’ and ’sensitive words w ’? And ’porn’ cannot appear in the generated text.”


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1: Pesudo-labeling Process
Input: Input text x , sensitive word set W;
for w in W do
    Generate toxic image-text pair;
    Feed w and x into Text Generator → x s ; Feed x s into Image Generator → y ;
    Generate Pseudo-Labeling;
    Feed x s into Text Filter → st ;
    Feed y into Image Filter → si ;
    During train process, compute similarity between x and x s → sim(xx, x s );
    s = si − αst + βsim(x     x, x s );
end


Algorithm 2: Training Process
Initialize model parameters from pre-trained BERT;
Set the max number of training epoch Em and the batch-size B;
Input: Input text textreg , sensitive word set Wsen ;
In-batch learning
for epoch t in 1, 2, · · · , Em do
     Compute similarity (B × B) matrix S = es (S)ew (W )T
     Compute loss and gradient;
                              +
                           es
      Lclo = − log                 s
                                     −
                     s+   + n        j
                           P
                     e       j=1 e
      Ldiv = h(sof tmax(sim(x
                            x, x s )))
      L = Lclo + Ldiv
      Update model;
end



D      T HE COMPLETE RESULTS ON PUBLIC LIST OF NSFW EVAL .
In this section, we show the complete results on public list of NSFWeval in Tab. 5.


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Table 5: The complete results on public list of NSFWeval.

                                    Explicit                            Stealth
                        ASRf il ↑   ASRhum ↑       ASR ↑    ASRf il ↑   ASRhum ↑   ASR ↑
     Open-source
          SD             66.7%        32.7%        77.6%     51.3%        71.4%    86.1%
          LD             89.2%        28.7%        92.3%     38.7%        33.8%    59.4%
     DALL·E mini         79.2%        26.0%        84.6%     32.8%        28.3%    64.7%
       SD w/fϕ           16.7%         8.8%        24.1%     44.6%        56.3%    75.8%
       LD w/fϕ           24.1%         2.1%        25.7%     32.1%        24.0%    48.4%
   DALL·E mini w/fϕ      18.8%         4.4%        22.4%     28.6%        19.4%    42.5%
      SD w/ RSF           6.3%         3.6%         9.7%      8.7%         2.8%    11.3%
      Release api
       SD-demo            4.3%         3.1%         4.6%     11.5%         7.3%    14.1%
       MJ-demo           52.6%         1.8%        53.5%     74.6%         4.3%    75.7%


                                              15
