Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NTERPRETABLE D IFFUSION VIA
I NFORMATION D ECOMPOSITION
 Xianghao Kong1 * , Ollie Liu2 * , Han Li1 , Dani Yogatama2 , Greg Ver Steeg1
 1
   University of California Riverside, 2 University of Southern California
 {xkong016,hli358,gregoryv}@ucr.edu, {zliu2898, yogatama}@usc.edu


                                            A BSTRACT

         Denoising diffusion models enable conditional generation and density modeling
         of complex relationships like images and text. However, the nature of the learned
         relationships is opaque making it difficult to understand precisely what relation-
         ships between words and parts of an image are captured, or to predict the effect
         of an intervention. We illuminate the fine-grained relationships learned by diffu-
         sion models by noticing a precise relationship between diffusion and information
         decomposition. Exact expressions for mutual information and conditional mutual
         information can be written in terms of the denoising model. Furthermore, point-
         wise estimates can be easily estimated as well, allowing us to ask questions about
         the relationships between specific images and captions. Decomposing informa-
         tion even further to understand which variables in a high-dimensional space carry
         information is a long-standing problem. For diffusion models, we show that a
         natural non-negative decomposition of mutual information emerges, allowing us
         to quantify informative relationships between words and pixels in an image. We
         exploit these new relations to measure the compositional understanding of diffu-
         sion models, to do unsupervised localization of objects in images, and to measure
         effects when selectively editing images through prompt interventions.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Denoising diffusion models are the state-of-the-art for modeling relationships between complex data
like images and text. While diffusion models exhibit impressive generative abilities, we have little
insight into precisely what relationships are learned (or neglected). Often, models have limited value
without the ability to dissect their contents. For instance, in biology specifying which variables have
an effect on health outcomes is critical. As AI advances, more principled ways to probe learned
relationships are needed to reveal and correct gaps between human and AI perspectives.


Figure 1: We start (left) with a real image from the COCO dataset. We do a “prompt intervention”
(§3.3) to generate a new image. Next we show conditional mutual information, illustrated using
our pixel-wise decomposition, and attention maps for the modified word. Top row shows an image
where prompt intervention has an effect, while in the bottom row it has little effect. Conditional
mutual information reflects the effect of intervention while attention does not.
                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Quantifying the relationships learned in a complex space like text and images is difficult. Informa-
tion theory offers a black-box method to gauge how much information flows from inputs to outputs.
This work proceeds from the novel observation that diffusion models naturally admit a simple and
versatile information decomposition that allows us to pinpoint information flows in fine detail which
allows us to understand and exploit these models in new ways.
For denoising diffusion models, recent work has explored how attention can highlight how models
depends on different words during generation (Tang et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023;
Tian et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023; He et al., 2023). Our
information-theoretic approach diverges from attention-based methods in three significant ways.
First, attention requires not just white-box access but also dictates a particular network design. Our
approach abstracts away from architecture details, and may be useful in the increasingly com-
mon scenario where we interact with large generative models only through black-box API ac-
cess (Ramesh et al., 2022). Second, while attention is engineered toward specific tasks such as
segmentation Tang et al. (2022) and image-text matching He et al. (2023), our information estima-
tors can adapt to diverse applications. As an illustrative example, in §3.1 we automate the evaluation
of compositional understanding for Stable Diffusion Rombach et al. (2022). Third, information flow
as a dependence measure better captures the effects of interventions. Attention within a neural net-
work does not necessarily imply that the final output depends on the attended input. Our Conditional
Mutual Information (CMI) estimator correctly reflects that a word with small CMI will not affect
the output (Fig. 1). We summarize our main contributions below.
       • We show that denoising diffusion models directly provide a natural and tractable way to
         decompose information in a fine-grained way, distinguishing relevant information at a per-
         sample (image) and per-variable (pixel) level. The utility of information decomposition is
         validated on a variety of tasks below.
       • We provide a better quantification of compositional understanding capabilities of diffusion
         models. We find that on the ARO benchmark Yuksekgonul et al. (2022), diffusion models
         are significantly underestimated due to sub-optimal alignment scores.
       • We examine how attention and information in diffusion models localize specific text in
         images. While neither exactly align with the goal of object segmentation, information
         measures more effectively localize abstract words like adjectives, adverbs, and verbs.
       • How does a prompt intervention modify a generated image? It is often possible to surgi-
         cally modify real images using prompt intervention techniques, but sometimes these in-
         terventions are completely ignored. We show that CMI is more effective at capturing the
         effects of intervention, due to the ability to take contextual information into account.

2     M ETHODS : D IFFUSION IS I NFORMATION D ECOMPOSITION
2.1   I NFORMATION - THEORETIC P ERSPECTIVE ON D IFFUSION M ODELS

A diffusion model can be seen as a noisy channel that takes samples      p from the data
                                                                                      p distribution,
x ∼ p(X = x), and progressively adds Gaussian noise, xα ≡                  σ(α)x + σ(−α)ϵ, with
ϵ ∼ N (0, I) (a variance preserving Gaussian channel with log SNR, α, using the standard sigmoid
function). By learning to reverse or denoise this noisy channel, we can generate samples from the
original distribution (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015), a result with remarkable applications (Ramesh
et al., 2022). The Gaussian noise channel has been studied in information theory since its incep-
tion (Shannon, 1948). A decade before diffusion models appeared in machine learning, Guo et al.
(2005) demonstrated that the information in this Gaussian noise channel, I(X; Xα ), is exactly re-
lated to the mean square error for optimal signal reconstruction. This result was influential because
it demonstrated for the first time that information-theoretic quantities could be related to estimation
of optimal denoisers. In this paper, we are interested in extending this result to other mutual infor-
mation estimators, and to pointwise estimates of mutual information. Our focus is not on learning
the reverse or denoising process for generating samples, but instead to measure relationships using
information theory.
For our results, we require the optimal denoiser, or Minimum Mean Square Error (MMSE) denoiser
for predicting ϵ at each noise level, α.
                          ϵ̂α (x) ≡ arg min Ep(x),p(ϵ) ∥ϵ − ϵ̄(xα )∥2

                                         ϵ̄(·)
                                                                                           (1)


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that we predict the noise, ϵ, but could equivalently predict x. This optimal denoiser is exactly
what diffusion models are trained to estimate. Instead of using denoisers for generation, we will see
how to use them for measuring information-theoretic relationships.
For the denoiser in Eq. 1, the following expression holds exactly.
                                      Z
                    − log p(x) = /2 Ep(ϵ) ∥ϵ − ϵ̂α (xα )∥2 dα + const

                                   1                                                               (2)

The value of the constant, const, will be irrelevant as we proceed to build Mutual Information
(MI) estimators and a decomposition from this expression. This expression shows that solving a
denoising regression problem (which is easy for neural networks) is equivalent to density modeling.
No differential equations need to be referenced or solved to make this exact connection, unlike the
approaches appearing in Song et al. (2020) and McAllester (2023). The derivation of this result
in Kong et al. (2022) closely mirrors Guo et al. (2005)’s original result, and is shown in App. A
for completeness. This expression is extremely powerful and versatile for deriving fine-grained
information estimators, as we now show.

2.2   M UTUAL I NFORMATION AND P OINTWISE E STIMATORS

Note that Eq. 2 also holds with arbitrary conditioning. Let x, y ∼ p(X = x, Y = y) and ϵ̂α (xα |y)
be the optimal denoiser for p(x|y) as in Eq. 1. Then we can write the conditional density as follows.
                                      Z
                 − log p(x|y) = 1/2 Ep(ϵ) ∥ϵ − ϵ̂α (xα |y)∥2 dα + const

                                                                                                  (3)

This directly leads to an estimate of the following useful Log Likelihood Ratio (LLR).
                                      Z
        log p(x|y) − log p(x) = /2 Ep(ϵ) ∥ϵ − ϵ̂α (xα )∥2 − ∥ϵ − ϵ̂α (xα |y)∥2 dα

                                  1                                                                (4)

The LLR is the integrated reduction in MMSE from conditioning on auxiliary variable, y. The mu-
tual information, I(X; Y ) can be defined via this LLR, I(X; Y ) ≡ Ep(x,y) [log p(x|y) − log p(x)] .
We write MI using information theory notation, where capital X, Y are used to refer to function-
als of random variables with the distributions p(x, y) Cover & Thomas (2006). MI is an average
measure of dependence, but we are often interested in the strength of a relationship for a single
point, or pointwise information. Pointwise information for a specific x, y is sometimes written with
lowercase as i(x; y) and is defined so that the average recovers MI (Finn & Lizier, 2018). Fano
(1961) referred to what we call “mutual information” as “average mutual information”, and con-
sidered what we call pointwise mutual information to be the more fundamental quantity. Pointwise
information has been especially influential in NLP Levy & Goldberg (2014).
            I(X; Y ) = Ep(x,y) [i(x; y)]     Defining property of pointwise information
Pointwise information is not unique and both quantities below satisfy this property.
                               Z
                i (x; y) ≡ /2 Ep(ϵ) ∥ϵ − ϵ̂α (xα )∥2 − ∥ϵ − ϵ̂α (xα |y)∥2 dα
                 s

                            1

                               Z                                                                   (5)
                io (x; y) ≡ 1/2 Ep(ϵ) ∥ϵ̂α (xα ) − ϵ̂α (xα |y)∥2 dα



The first standard definition comes from using log p(x|y) − log p(x) written via Eq. 4. The second
more compact definition is derived using the orthogonality principle in §B. is has higher variance
due to the presence of extra ϵ terms, while io has lower variance and is always non-negative. We will
explore both estimators, but find the lower variance version that exploits the orthogonality principle
is generally more useful (see §C.2). Note that while (average) MI is always non-negative, pointwise
MI can be negative as is (x; y) = log p(x|y) − log p(x) < 0 occurs when the observation of y
makes x appear less likely. We can say negative pointwise information signals a “misinformative”
observation (Finn & Lizier, 2018).
All these expressions can be given conditional variants, where we condition on a random vari-
able, C, defining the context. CMI and its pointwise expression can be related as I(X; Y |C) =
Ep(x,y,c) [i(x; y|c)]. The pointwise versions of Eq. 5 can be obtained by conditioning all the denois-
ers on C, e.g., ϵ̂α (xα |y) → ϵ̂α (xα |y, c).


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.3   P IXEL - WISE I NFORMATION D ECOMPOSITION

The pointwise information, i(x; y), does not tell us which variables, xj ’s, are informative about
which variables, yk . If x is an image and y represents a text prompt, then this would tell us which
parts of the image a particular word is informative about. One reason that information decomposition
is highly nontrivial is that scenarios can arise where information in variables is synergistic, for
example (Williams & Beer, 2010). Our decomposition instead proceeds from the observation that
the correspondence between information and MMSE leads to a natural decomposition
                                                                            Pn         of information
into a sum of terms for each variable. If x ∈ Rn , we can write i(x; y) = j=1 ij (x; y) with:
                                     Z
                  isj (x; y) ≡ 1/2       Ep(ϵ) (ϵ − ϵ̂α (xα ))2j − (ϵ − ϵ̂α (xα |y))2j dα


                                     Z                                                             (6)
                  ioj (x; y) ≡ 1/2       Ep(ϵ) (ϵ̂α (xα ) − ϵ̂α (xα |y))2j dα


In other words, both variations of pointwise information can be written in terms of squared errors,
and we can decompose the squared error into the error for each variable. For pixel-wise information
for images with multiple channels, we sum over the contribution from each channel.
We can easily extend this for conditional information. Let x represent a particular image, y =
{y∗ , c} = {“object”, “a person holding an ”}. Then we can estimate ij (x; y∗ |c), which represents
the information that word y∗ has about variable xj , conditioned on the context, c. To get estimates
using Eq. 6, we just add conditioning on c on both sides. Denoising images conditioned on arbitrary
text is a standard task for diffusion models. An example of the estimator is shown in Fig. 1, where
the highlighted region represents the pixel-wise value of ioj (x; y∗ |c) for pixel j.


2.4   N UMERICAL I NFORMATION E STIMATES

All information estimators we have introduced require evaluating a one-dimensional integral over an
infinite range of SNRs. To estimate in practice we use importance sampling to evaluate the integral as
in (Kingma et al., 2021; Kong et al., 2022). We use a truncated logistic for the importance sampling
distribution for α. Empirically, we find that contributions to the integral for both very small and
very large values of α are close to zero, so that truncating the distribution has little effect. Unlike
MINE Belghazi et al. (2018) or variational estimators (Poole et al., 2019) the estimators presented
here do not depend on optimizing a direct upper or lower bound on MI. Instead, the estimator
depends on finding the MMSE of both the conditional and unconditional denoising problems, and
then combining them to estimate MI using Eq. 4. However, these two MMSE terms appear with
opposite signs. In general, any neural network trained to minimize MSE may not achieve the global
minimum for either or both terms, so we cannot guarantee that the estimate is either an upper or
lower bound. In practice, neural networks excel at regression problems, so we expect to achieve
reasonable estimates. In all our results we use pretrained diffusion models which have been trained
to minimize mean square under Gaussian noise, as required by Eq. 1 (different papers differ in
how much weight each α term receives in the objective, but in principle the MMSE for each α is
independent, so the weighting shouldn’t strongly affect an expressive enough neural network).


3     R ESULTS

Section 2 establishes a precise connection between optimal denoisers and information. For ex-
periments we consider diffusion models as approximating optimal denoisers which can be used to
estimate information. All our experiments are performed with pre-trained latent space diffusion
models Rombach et al. (2022), Stable Diffusion v2.1 from Hugging Face unless otherwise noted.
Latent diffusion models use a pre-trained autoencoder to embed images in a lower resolution space
before doing typical diffusion model training. We always consider x as the image in this lower
dimensional space, but in displayed images we show the images after decoding, and we use bilinear
interpolation when visualizing heat maps at the higher resolution. See §D for experiment details and
links to open source code.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   R ELATION T ESTING WITH P OINTWISE I NFORMATION

First, we consider information decomposition at the “pointwise” or per-image level. We make use
of our estimator to compute summary statistics of an image-text pair and quantify qualitative differ-
ences across samples. As a novel application scenario, we apply our pointwise estimator to analyze
compositional understanding of Stable Diffusion on the ARO benchmark Yuksekgonul et al. (2022).
Referring readers to Yuksekgonul et al. (2022) for more detailed descriptions, the ARO benchmark is
a suite of discriminative tasks wherein a VLM is commissioned to align an image x with its ground-
truth caption y from a set of perturbations P = {ỹj }M
                                                      j=1 induced by randomizing constituent orders
from y. The compositional understanding capability of a VLM is thus measured by the accuracy:
                                  Ex,y [1 y = arg max    s(x, y ′ ) ],

                                               y ′ ∈{y}
                                                      S
                                                           P
where s : X × Y → R is an alignment score. For contrastive VLMs, s is chosen to be the cosine
similarity between encoded image-text representations. We choose s(x, y) ≡ io (x; y) as our score
function for diffusion models. In contrast, He et al. (2023) compute s as an aggregate of latent atten-
tion maps, while Krojer et al. (2023) adopt the negative MMSE. In Table 1, we report performances
of OpenCLIP Ilharco et al. (2021) and Stable Diffusion 2.1 Rombach et al. (2022) on the ARO
benchmark, while controllilng model checkpoints with the same text encoder for fair comparison.
Table 1: Accuracy (%) of Stable Diffusion and its OpenCLIP backbone on the ARO Benchmark. ⋆:
conducts additional fine-tuning with compositional-aware hard negatives.

                          Method                        VG-A    VG-R    COCO    Flickr30k
            OpenCLIP Ilharco et al. (2021)               64.6    51.4    32.8      40.5
            DiffITM Krojer et al. (2023)                 62.9    50.0    23.5      33.2
            HardNeg-DiffITM⋆ Krojer et al. (2023)        67.6    52.3    34.4      48.6
            Info. (Ours)                                 72.0    69.1    40.1      49.3

We observe that Stable Diffusion markedly improves in compositional understanding over Open-
CLIP. Since the text encoder is frozen, we can attribute this improvement solely to the de-
noising objective and the visual component. More importantly, our information estimator sig-
nificantly outperforms MMSE Krojer et al. (2023), decidedly proving that previous works un-
derestimate compositional understanding capabilities of diffusion models. Our observation pro-
vides favorable evidence for adapting diffusion models for discriminative image-text matching
(He et al., 2023). However, these improvements are smaller compared to contrastive pre-training
approaches that make use of composition-aware negative samples (Yuksekgonul et al., 2022).

In Table 2 we report a subset of fine-grained per-            Table 2: Selected results on VG-R.
formances across relation types, highlighting those
with over 30% performance improvement in green                             Info. (↑) OpenCLIP (↑)
and those with over 30% performance decrease in
                                                         Accuracy (%)          69.1           51.4
magenta. Interestingly, our highlighted categories
correlate well with performance changes incurred         beneath               50.0           90.0
by composition-aware negative training, despite us-      covered in            14.3           50.0
ing different CLIP backbones (c.f. Table 2 of Yuk-       feeding               50.0          100.0
                                                         grazing on            60.0           30.0
sekgonul et al. (2022)). Most improvements are at-
                                                         sitting on            78.9           49.7
tributed to verbs that associate subjects with con-      wearing               84.1           44.9
ceptually distinctive objects (e.g. “A boy sitting on
a chair”). Our observation suggests that improve-
ments in compositional understanding may stem predominantly from these “low-hanging fruits”,
and partially corroborate the hypothesis in Rassin et al. (2023), which posits that incorrect asso-
ciations between entities and their visual attributes are attributed to the text encoder’s inability to
encode linguistic structure. We refer readers to §D.1 for complete fine-grained results, implementa-
tion details, and error analysis.

3.2   P IXEL - WISE I NFORMATION AND W ORD L OCALIZATION

Next, we explore “pixel-wise information” that words in a caption contain about specific pixels in
an image. According to §2.2 and §2.3, it naturally leads us to consider two potential approaches


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for validating this nuanced relationship. The first one entails concentrating solely on the mutual
information between the object word and individual pixels. The second approach involves inves-
tigating this mutual information when given the remaining context in the caption, i.e., conditional
mutual information. As the success of our experiment relies heavily on the alignment between im-
ages and text, we carefully filtered two datasets, COCO-IT and COCO-WL from the MSCOCO (Lin
et al., 2015) validation dataset. For specific details about dataset construction, please refer to §E.
Meanwhile, we also provide an image-level information analysis on these two datasets in §C.1, and
visualize the diffusion process and its relation to information for 10 cases in §C.2.

3.2.1   V ISUALIZE MUTUAL INFORMATION AND CONDITIONAL MUTUAL INFORMATION

Given an image-text pair (x, y) where y = {y∗ , c}, we compute pixel-level mutual information as
ioj (x; y∗ ), and the conditional one as ioj (x; y∗ |c) for pixel j, from Eq. 6. Eight cases are displayed in
Fig. 2, and we put more examples in §C.3 and §C.4.


Figure 2: Examples of localizing different types of words in images. The left half presents noun
words, while the right half displays abstract words.


In Fig. 2, the visualizations of pixel-level MI and CMI are presented using a common color scale.
Upon comparison, it becomes evident that CMI has a greater capacity to accentuate objects while
simultaneously diminshing the background. This is attributed to the fact that MI solely computes the
relationship between noun word y∗ and pixels, whereas CMI factors out context-related information
from the complete prompt-to-pixel information. However, there are occasional instances of the op-
posite effect, as observed in the example where ‘y∗ = airplane’ (left bottom in Fig. 2). In this case, it
appears that CMI fails to highlight pixels related to ‘airplane’, while MI succeeds. This discrepancy
arises from the presence of the word ‘turboprop’ in the context. Therefore the context, c, accurately
describes the content in the image and ‘airplane’ adds no additional information. Compared to at-
tention, CMI and MI qualitatively appear to focus more on fine details of objects, like the eyes, ears,
and tusks of an elephant, or the face of horses. For object words, we can use a segmentation task to
make more quantitative statements in §3.2.2.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We also explore whether pixel-level CMI or MI can provide intriguing insights for other types of
entities. Fig. 2 (right) presents four different types of entities besides nouns, including verbs, adjec-
tives, adverbs, numbers and prepositions. These words are quite abstract, and even through manual
annotation, it can be challenging to precisely determine the corresponding pixels for them. The
visualization results indicate that MI gives intuitively plausible results for these abstract items, es-
pecially adjectives and adverbs, that highlight relevant finer details of objects more effectively than
attention. Interestingly, MI’s ability to locate abstract words within images aligns with the findings
presented in §3.1 regarding relation testing (Table 10).

3.2.2    L OCALIZING WORD INFORMATION IN IMAGES
The visualizations provided above offer an intuitive demonstration of how pixel-wise CMI relates
parts of an image to parts of a caption. Therefore, our curiosity naturally extends to whether this
approach can be applied to word localization within images. Currently, the prevalent evaluation in-
volves employing attention layers within Stable Diffusion models for object segmentation Tang et al.
(2022); Tian et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2023). These methodologies heavily rely on attention layers
and meticulously crafted heuristic heatmap generation. It’s worth highlighting that during image
generation, the utilization of multi-scale cross-attention layers allows for the rapid computation of
the Diffuse Attention Attribution Map (DAAM) Tang et al. (2022). This not only facilitates segmen-
tation but also introduces various intriguing opportunities for word localization analyses. We opted
for DAAM as our baseline choice due to its versatile applicability, and the detailed experimental
design is documented in the §D.2. We use mean Intersection over Union (mIoU) as the evaluation

            Table 3: Unsupervised Object Segmentation mIoU (%) Results on COCO-IT

                              Method                50 steps   100 steps   200 steps
                     Whole Image Mask                14.94       14.94       14.94
                     Attention Tang et al. (2022)    34.52       34.90       35.35
                     Conditional Mutual Info.        32.31       33.24       33.63
                     Attention+Information           42.46       42.71       42.84


metric for assessing the performance of pixel-level object segmentation. Table 3 illustrates that, in
contrast to attention-based methods, pixel-wise CMI proves less effective for object segmentation,
with an error analysis appearing in Table 9. The attention mechanism in DAAM combines high
and low resolution image features across the multi-scale attention layers, akin to Feature Pyramid
Networks (FPN) Lin et al. (2017), facilitating superior feature fusion. CMI tends to focus more on
the specific details that are unique to the target object rather than capturing the overall context of
it. Although pixel-level CMI did not perform exceptionally well in object segmentation, the results
from ‘Attention+Information’ clearly demonstrate that the information-theoretic diffusion process
Kong et al. (2022) does enhance the capacity of attention layers to capture features.

Discussion: attention versus information versus segmentation Looking at the heatmaps, it is
clear that some parts of an object can be more informative than others, like faces or edges. Con-
versely, contextual parts of an image that are not part of an object can still be informative about the
object. For instance, we may identify an airplane by its vapor trail (Fig. 2). Hence, we see that
neither attention nor information perfectly aligns with the goal of segmentation. One difference be-
tween attention and mutual information is that when a pixel pays “attention” to a word in the prompt,
it does not imply that modifications to the word would modify the prompt. This is best highlighted
with conditional mutual information, where we see that an informative word (“jet”) may contribute
little information in a larger context (“turboprop jet”). To highlight this difference, we propose an
experiment where we test whether intervening on words changes a generated image. Our hypothesis
is that if a word has low CMI, then its omission should not change the result. For attention, on the
other hand, this is not necessarily true.

3.3     S ELECTIVE I MAGE E DITING VIA P ROMPT I NTERVENTION

Diffusion models have gained widespread adoption by providing non-technical users with a natural
language interface to create diverse, realistic images. Our focus so far has been on how well diffusion


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


models understand structure in real images. We can connect real and generated images by studying
how well we can modify a real image, which is a popular use case for diffusion models discussed
in §4. We can validate our ability to measure informative relationships by seeing how well the
measures align with effects under prompt intervention.
For this experiment, we adopt the perspective that diffusion models are equivalent to continuous,
invertible normalizing flows (Song et al., 2020). In this case, the denoising model is interpreted as a
score function, and an ODE depending on this score function smoothly maps the data distribution to
a Gaussian, or vice versa. The solver we use for this ODE is the 2nd order deterministic solver with
100 steps from Karras et al. (2022). We start with a real image and prompt, then use the (conditional)
score model to map the image to a Gaussian latent space. In principle, this mapping is invertible,
so if we reverse the dynamics we will recover the original image. We see in §C.5 that the original
image is almost always recovered with high fidelity.
Next, we consider adding an intervention. While doing the reverse dynamics, we modify the (condi-
tional) score by changing the denoiser prompt in some way. We focus in experiments on the effects
of omitting a word, or swapping a word for a categorically similar word (“bear” → “elephant”, for
example). Typically, we find that much of the detail in the original image is preserved, with only
the parts that relate to the modified word altered. Interestingly, we also find that in some cases
interventions to a word are seemingly ignored (see Fig. 1, 3).
We want to explore whether attention or information measures predict the effect of interventions.
When intervening by omitting a word, we consider the conditional (pointwise) mutual information
i(x; y|c) from Eq. 5, and for word swaps we use a difference of CMIs with y, y ′ representing the
swapped word, as in Fig. 1. For attention, we aggregate the attention corresponding to a certain
word during generation using the code from Tang et al. (2022). We find that a word can be ignored
even if the attention heatmap highlights an object related to the word. In other words, attention to
a word does not imply that it affects the generated outcome. One reason for this is that a word may
provide little information beyond that in the context. For instance, in Fig. 3, a woman in a hospital
is assumed to be on a bed, so omitting this word has no effect. CMI, on the other hand, correlates
well with the effect of intervention, and “bed” in this example has low CMI.
To quantify our observation that conditional mutual information better correlates with the effect of
intervention than attention models, we measure the Pearson correlation between a score (CMI or
attention heatmap) and the effect of the intervention using L2 distance between images before and
after intervention. To get an image-level correlation, we correlated the aggregate scores per image
across examples on COCO100-IT. We also consider the pixel-level correlations between L2 change
per pixel and metrics, CMI and attention heatmaps. We average these correlations over all images
and report the results in Table 4. CMI is a much better predictor of changes at the image-level,
which reflects the fact that it directly quantifies what additional information a word contributes after
taking context into account. At the per-pixel level, CMI and attention typically correlated very well
when changes were localized, but both performed poorly in cases where a small prompt change led
to a global change in the image. Results visualizing this effect are shown along with additional
experiments with word swap interventions in §C.5. Small dependence, as measured by information,
correctly implied small effects from intervention. Large dependence, however, can lead to complex,
global changes due to the nonlinearity of the generative process.



                                                              Table 4: Pearson Correlation with Im-
                                                              age Change
                                                                                  i(x; y|c)     Attention
                                                                Image-level    0.34 (±.010)   0.24 (±.011)
                                                                 Pixel-level   0.27 (±.002)   0.21 (±.002)



Figure 3: COCO images edited by omitting words from the prompt. Conditional mutual information
better reflects the actual changes in the image after intervention. Table shows Pearson correlation
between metrics (CMI or attention) versus L2 changes in image after intervention, at the image-level
and pixel-level as discussed in §3.3.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4   R ELATED W ORK

Visual perception via diffusion models: Diffusion models’ success in image generation has piqued
interest in their text-image understanding abilities. A variety of pipeline designs are emerging in the
realm of visual perception and caption comprehension, offering fresh perspectives and complexities.
Notably, ODISE introduced a pipeline that combines diffusion models with discriminative models,
achieving excellent results in open-vocabulary segmentation (Xu et al., 2023). Similarly, OVDiff
uses diffusion models to sample support images for specific textual categories and subsequently ex-
tracts foreground and background features (Karazija et al., 2023). It then employs cosine similarity,
often known as the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) filter, to segment objects effectively. MaskDiff (Le
et al., 2023) and DifFSS (Tan et al., 2023) introduce a new breed of conditional diffusion models tai-
lored for few-shot segmentation. DDP, on the other hand, takes the concept of conditional diffusion
models and applies it to dense visual prediction tasks (Ji et al., 2023). VDP incorporates diffusion
for a range of downstream visual perception tasks such as semantic segmentation and depth estima-
tion (Zhao et al., 2023). Several methods have begun to explore the utilization of attention layers
in diffusion models for understanding text-image relationships in object segmentation (Tang et al.,
2022; Tian et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023).
Image editing via diffusion: Editing real images is an area of growing interest both academically
and commercially with approaches using natural text, similar images, and latent space modifications
to achieve desired effects (Nichol et al., 2021; Mao et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Balaji et al., 2022;
Kawar et al., 2023; Mokady et al., 2023). Su et al. (2022)’s approach most closely resembles the
procedure used in our intervention experiments. Unlike previous work, we focus not on edit quality
but on using edits to validate the learned dependencies as measured by our information estimators.
Interpretable ML: Traditional methods for attribution based on gradient sensitivity rather than at-
tention (Sundararajan et al., 2017; Lundberg & Lee, 2017) are seldom used in computer vision due
to the well-known phenomenon that (adversarial) perturbations based on gradients are uncorrelated
with human perception (Szegedy et al., 2014). Information-theoretic approaches for interpretabil-
ity based on information decomposition (Williams & Beer, 2010) are mostly unexplored because no
canonical approach exists (Kolchinsky, 2022) and existing approaches are completely intractable for
high-dimensional use cases (Reing et al., 2021), though there are some recent attempts to decom-
pose redundant information with neural networks (Kleinman et al., 2021; Liang et al., 2023). Our
decomposition decomposes an information contribution from each variable, but does not explicitly
separate unique and redundant components. “Interpretability” in machine learning is a fuzzy con-
cept which should be treated with caution (Lipton, 2018). We adopted an operational interpretation
from information theory, which considers y → x as a noisy channel and asks how many bits of
information are communicated, using diffusion models to characterize the channel.


5   C ONCLUSION

The eye-catching image generation capabilities of diffusion models have overshadowed the equally
important and underutilized fact that they also represent the state-of-the-art in density model-
ing (Kingma et al., 2021). Using the tight link between diffusion and information, we were able
to introduce a novel and tractable information decomposition. This significantly expands the useful-
ness of neural information estimators (Belghazi et al., 2018; Poole et al., 2019; Brekelmans et al.,
2023) by giving an interpretable measure of fine-grained relationships at the level of individual sam-
ples and variables. While we focused on vision tasks for ease of presentation and validation, infor-
mation decomposition can be particularly valuable in biomedical applications like gene expression
where we want to identify informative relationships for further study (Pepke & Ver Steeg, 2017).
Another promising application relates to contemporaneous works on mechanistic interpretability
(Wang et al., 2022; Hanna et al., 2023, inter alia) which seeks to identify “circuits”—a subgraph
of a neural network responsible for certain behaviors—by ablating individual network components
to observe performance differences. For language models, differences are typically measured as
the change in total probability of interested vocabularies; whereas metric design remains an open
question for diffusion models. Our analyses indicate that the CMI estimators are apt for captur-
ing compositional understanding and localizing image edits. For future work, we are interested in
exploring their potential as metric candidates for identifying relevant circuits in diffusion models.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   E THICS S TATEMENT
Recent developments in internet-scale image-text datasets have raised substantial concerns over their
lack of privacy, stereotypical representation of people, and political bias (Birhane et al., 2021; Peng
et al., 2021; Schuhmann et al., 2021, inter alia). Dataset contamination entails considerable safety
ramifications. First, models trained on these datasets are susceptible to memorizing similar pitfalls.
Second, complex text-to-image generation models pose significant challenges to interpretability and
system monitoring (Hendrycks et al., 2023), especially given the increasing popularity in black-
box access to these models (Ramesh et al., 2022). These risks are exacerbated by these models’
capability to synthesize photorealistic images, forming an “echo chamber” that reinforces existing
biases in dataset collection pipelines. We, as researchers, shoulder the responsibility to analyze,
monitor, and prevent the risks of such systems at scale.
We believe the application of our work has meaningful ethical implications. Our work aims to char-
acterize the fine-grained relationship between image and text. Although we primarily conduct our
study on entities that do not explicitly entail societal implications, our approach can be conceiv-
ably adapted to attribute prompt spans responsible for generating images that amplify demographic
stereotypes (Bianchi et al., 2023), among many other potential risks. Aside from detecting known
risks and biases, we should aim to design approaches that automatically identify system anomalies.
In our image generation experiments, we observe changes in mutual information to be inconsistent
during prompt intervention. It is tempting to hypothesize that these differences may be reflective of
dataset idiosyncrasies. We hope that our estimator can contribute to a growing body of work that
safeguards AI systems in high-stake application scenarios (Barrett et al., 2023), as diffusion mod-
els could extrapolate beyond existing text-to-image generation to sensitive domains such as protein
design (Watson et al., 2023), molecular structure discovery (Igashov et al., 2022), and interactive
decision making (Chi et al., 2023).
Finally, it is imperative to address the ethical concerns associated with the use of low-wage labor
for dataset annotation and evaluation (Perrigo, 2023). Notably, existing benchmarks for assessing
semantic understanding of image generation resort to manual evaluation (Conwell & Ullman, 2022;
Liu et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022). In §3.1 we adapt our estimator for compositional understand-
ing, and aim to develop an automated metric for evaluation on a broader spectrum of tasks.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
GV thanks participants of the DEMICS workshop hosted at MPI Dresden for valuable feedback on
this project.

R EFERENCES
Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Karsten Kreis, Miika
  Aittala, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, et al. ediffi: Text-to-image diffusion models
  with an ensemble of expert denoisers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01324, 2022.
Arindam Banerjee, Srujana Merugu, Inderjit S Dhillon, and Joydeep Ghosh. Clustering with breg-
  man divergences. Journal of machine learning research, 6(10), 2005.
Clark Barrett, Brad Boyd, Ellie Burzstein, Nicholas Carlini, Brad Chen, Jihye Choi, Amrita Roy
  Chowdhury, Mihai Christodorescu, Anupam Datta, Soheil Feizi, et al. Identifying and mitigating
  the security risks of generative ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.14840, 2023.
Mohamed Ishmael Belghazi, Aristide Baratin, Sai Rajeshwar, Sherjil Ozair, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron
 Courville, and Devon Hjelm. Mutual information neural estimation. In Proceedings of the 35th
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 531–540, 2018.
Federico Bianchi, Pratyusha Kalluri, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Myra Cheng, Debora Nozza,
  Tatsunori Hashimoto, Dan Jurafsky, James Zou, and Aylin Caliskan. Easily accessible text-to-
  image generation amplifies demographic stereotypes at large scale. In Proceedings of the 2023
  ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 1493–1504, 2023.
Abeba Birhane, Vinay Uday Prabhu, and Emmanuel Kahembwe. Multimodal datasets: misogyny,
  pornography, and malignant stereotypes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.01963, 2021.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rob Brekelmans, Sicong Huang, Marzyeh Ghassemi, Greg Ver Steeg, Roger Grosse, and Alireza
  Makhzani. Improving mutual information estimation with annealed and energy-based bounds.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06992, 2023.
Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shu-
  ran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.04137, 2023.
Colin Conwell and Tomer Ullman. Testing relational understanding in text-guided image generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.00005, 2022.
Thomas M Cover and Joy A Thomas. Elements of information theory. Wiley-Interscience, 2006.
Robert M Fano. Transmission of Information: A Statistical Theory of Communications. MIT Press,
  1961.
Conor Finn and Joseph T Lizier. Pointwise partial information decompositionusing the specificity
  and ambiguity lattices. Entropy, 20(4):297, 2018.
Dongning Guo, Shlomo Shamai, and Sergio Verdú. Mutual information and minimum mean-square
  error in gaussian channels. IEEE transactions on information theory, 51(4):1261–1282, 2005.
Michael Hanna, Ollie Liu, and Alexandre Variengien. How does gpt-2 compute greater-than?: Inter-
 preting mathematical abilities in a pre-trained language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00586,
 2023.
Xuehai He, Weixi Feng, Tsu-Jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Arjun Akula, Pradyumna Narayana, Sugato
  Basu, William Yang Wang, and Xin Eric Wang. Discriminative diffusion models as few-shot
  vision and language learners, 2023.
Dan Hendrycks, Mantas Mazeika, and Thomas Woodside. An overview of catastrophic ai risks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12001, 2023.
Ilia Igashov, Hannes Stärk, Clément Vignac, Victor Garcia Satorras, Pascal Frossard, Max Welling,
   Michael Bronstein, and Bruno Correia. Equivariant 3d-conditional diffusion models for molecular
   linker design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.05274, 2022.
Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Ross Wightman, Cade Gordon, Nicholas Carlini, Rohan Taori,
  Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Hongseok Namkoong, John Miller, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali
  Farhadi, and Ludwig Schmidt. Openclip, July 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
  zenodo.5143773.
Yuanfeng Ji, Zhe Chen, Enze Xie, Lanqing Hong, Xihui Liu, Zhaoqiang Liu, Tong Lu, Zhenguo Li,
  and Ping Luo. Ddp: Diffusion model for dense visual prediction, 2023.
Laurynas Karazija, Iro Laina, Andrea Vedaldi, and Christian Rupprecht. Diffusion models for zero-
  shot open-vocabulary segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09316, 2023.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-
  based generative models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:26565–26577,
  2022.
Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and
  Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6007–6017, 2023.
Steven M Kay. Fundamentals of statistical signal processing: estimation theory. Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
  1993.
Diederik P Kingma, Tim Salimans, Ben Poole, and Jonathan Ho. Variational diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.00630, 2021.
Michael Kleinman, Alessandro Achille, Stefano Soatto, and Jonathan C Kao. Redundant informa-
 tion neural estimation. Entropy, 23(7):922, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Artemy Kolchinsky. A novel approach to the partial information decomposition. Entropy, 24(3):
  403, 2022.
Xianghao Kong, Rob Brekelmans, and Greg Ver Steeg. Information-theoretic diffusion. In The
  Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Benno Krojer, Elinor Poole-Dayan, Vikram Voleti, Christopher Pal, and Siva Reddy. Are diffusion
  models vision-and-language reasoners? In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023.
Minh-Quan Le, Tam V. Nguyen, Trung-Nghia Le, Thanh-Toan Do, Minh N. Do, and Minh-Triet
 Tran. Maskdiff: Modeling mask distribution with diffusion probabilistic model for few-shot
 instance segmentation, 2023.
Omer Levy and Yoav Goldberg. Neural word embedding as implicit matrix factorization. In Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2177–2185, 2014.
Paul Pu Liang, Zihao Deng, Martin Ma, James Zou, Louis-Philippe Morency, and Ruslan Salakhut-
  dinov. Factorized contrastive learning: Going beyond multi-view redundancy. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.05268, 2023.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, Lubomir Bourdev, Ross Girshick, James Hays, Pietro
  Perona, Deva Ramanan, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Piotr Dollár. Microsoft coco: Common objects
  in context, 2015.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Piotr Dollár, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, Bharath Hariharan, and Serge Belongie.
  Feature pyramid networks for object detection, 2017.
Zachary C Lipton. The mythos of model interpretability: In machine learning, the concept of inter-
  pretability is both important and slippery. Queue, 16(3):31–57, 2018.
Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional visual
  generation with composable diffusion models. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  423–439. Springer, 2022.
Nan Liu, Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Antonio Torralba. Unsuper-
  vised compositional concepts discovery with text-to-image generative models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.05357, 2023.
Scott Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions, 2017.
Chaofan Ma, Yuhuan Yang, Chen Ju, Fei Zhang, Jinxiang Liu, Yu Wang, Ya Zhang, and Yanfeng
  Wang. Diffusionseg: Adapting diffusion towards unsupervised object discovery, 2023.
Jiafeng Mao, Xueting Wang, and Kiyoharu Aizawa. Guided image synthesis via initial image editing
   in diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03382, 2023.
David McAllester. On the mathematics of diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11108, 2023.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Null-text inversion for
  editing real images using guided diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6038–6047, 2023.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
Kenny Peng, Arunesh Mathur, and Arvind Narayanan. Mitigating dataset harms requires steward-
  ship: Lessons from 1000 papers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.02922, 2021.
Shirley Pepke and Greg Ver Steeg. Comprehensive discovery of subsample gene expression com-
  ponents by information explanation: therapeutic implications in cancer. BMC medical genomics,
  10(1):12, 2017. URL https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-017-0245-6.
Billy Perrigo. Openai used kenyan workers on less than $2 per hour: Exclusive, Jan 2023.

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ben Poole, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Van Den Oord, Alex Alemi, and George Tucker. On variational
  bounds of mutual information. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Royi Rassin, Eran Hirsch, Daniel Glickman, Shauli Ravfogel, Yoav Goldberg, and Gal Chechik.
  Linguistic binding in diffusion models: Enhancing attribute correspondence through attention
  map alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08877, 2023.
Kyle Reing, Greg Ver Steeg, and Aram Galstyan. Influence decompositions for neural network attri-
  bution. In The 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS),
  2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.
Christoph Schuhmann, Richard Vencu, Romain Beaumont, Robert Kaczmarczyk, Clayton Mullis,
  Aarush Katta, Theo Coombes, Jenia Jitsev, and Aran Komatsuzaki. Laion-400m: Open dataset of
  clip-filtered 400 million image-text pairs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02114, 2021.
C.E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell System Technical Journal, 27:
  379–423, 1948.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric A Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsuper-
  vised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.03585, 2015.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models, 2022.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
Xuan Su, Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Dual diffusion implicit bridges for
  image-to-image translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08382, 2022.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks, 2017.
C. Szegedy, W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, J. Bruna, D. Erhan, I. Goodfellow, and R. Fergus. Intriguing
  properties of neural networks. In ICLR, 2014.
Weimin Tan, Siyuan Chen, and Bo Yan. Diffss: Diffusion model for few-shot semantic segmenta-
 tion, 2023.
Raphael Tang, Linqing Liu, Akshat Pandey, Zhiying Jiang, Gefei Yang, Karun Kumar, Pontus Stene-
  torp, Jimmy Lin, and Ferhan Ture. What the daam: Interpreting stable diffusion using cross
  attention, 2022.
Junjiao Tian, Lavisha Aggarwal, Andrea Colaco, Zsolt Kira, and Mar Gonzalez-Franco. Diffuse,
  attend, and segment: Unsupervised zero-shot segmentation using stable diffusion, 2023.
Jinglong Wang, Xiawei Li, Jing Zhang, Qingyuan Xu, Qin Zhou, Qian Yu, Lu Sheng, and Dong Xu.
   Diffusion model is secretly a training-free open vocabulary semantic segmenter, 2023.

                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Inter-
  pretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in gpt-2 small. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.00593, 2022.
Joseph L Watson, David Juergens, Nathaniel R Bennett, Brian L Trippe, Jason Yim, Helen E Eise-
  nach, Woody Ahern, Andrew J Borst, Robert J Ragotte, Lukas F Milles, et al. De novo design of
  protein structure and function with rfdiffusion. Nature, pp. 1–3, 2023.
P.L. Williams and R.D. Beer.           Nonnegative decomposition of multivariate information.
  arXiv:1004.2515, 2010.
Jiarui Xu, Sifei Liu, Arash Vahdat, Wonmin Byeon, Xiaolong Wang, and Shalini De Mello. Open-
   vocabulary panoptic segmentation with text-to-image diffusion models, 2023.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Pratyusha Kalluri, Dan Jurafsky, and James Zou. When and
 why vision-language models behave like bag-of-words models, and what to do about it? arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2210.01936, 2022.
Manlin Zhang, Jie Wu, Yuxi Ren, Ming Li, Jie Qin, Xuefeng Xiao, Wei Liu, Rui Wang, Min Zheng,
 and Andy J. Ma. Diffusionengine: Diffusion model is scalable data engine for object detection,
 2023.
Wenliang Zhao, Yongming Rao, Zuyan Liu, Benlin Liu, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Unleashing text-
 to-image diffusion models for visual perception, 2023.


                                                 14
