Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A RE B ERT FAMILY G OOD I NSTRUCTION F OLLOWERS ?
A S TUDY ON T HEIR P OTENTIAL A ND L IMITATIONS
 Yisheng Xiao 1 , Juntao Li 1∗, Zechen Sun 1 , Zechang Li 2 , Qingrong Xia 2 , Xinyu Duan 2 ,
 Zhefeng Wang 2 , Min Zhang 1
 1                                2
   Soochow University, China        Huawei Cloud, China
 {ysxiaoo,zcsuns}@stu.suda.edu.cn, {ljt,minzhang}@suda.edu.cn
 {lizechang1,xiaqingrong,duanxinyu,wangzhefeng}@huawei.com



                                             A BSTRACT
           Language modeling at scale has proven very effective and brought unprecedented
           success to natural language models. Many typical representatives, especially
           decoder-only models, e.g., BLOOM and LLaMA, and encoder-decoder models,
           e.g., Flan-T5 and AlexaTM, have exhibited incredible instruction-following capa-
           bilities while keeping strong task completion ability. These large language mod-
           els can achieve superior performance in various tasks and even yield emergent
           capabilities, e.g., reasoning and universal generalization. Though the above two
           paradigms are mainstream and well explored, the potential of the BERT family,
           which are encoder-only based models and have ever been one of the most repre-
           sentative pre-trained models, also deserves attention, at least should be discussed.
           In this work, we adopt XML-R to explore the effectiveness of the BERT family
           for instruction following and zero-shot learning. We first design a simple yet ef-
           fective strategy to utilize the encoder-only models for generation tasks and then
           conduct multi-task instruction tuning. Experimental results demonstrate that our
           fine-tuned model, Instruct-XMLR, outperforms Bloomz on all evaluation tasks
           and achieves comparable performance with mT0 on most tasks. Instruct-XMLR
           also possesses strong task and language generalization abilities, indicating that
           Instruct-XMLR can also serve as a good instruction follower and zero-shot learner.
           Besides, Instruct-XMLR can accelerate decoding due to its non-autoregressive
           generation manner, achieving around 3 times speedup compared with current au-
           toregressive large language models. Although we also witnessed several limita-
           tions through our experiments, such as the performance decline in long-generation
           tasks and the shortcoming of length prediction, Instruct-XMLR can still become
           a good member of the family of current large language models.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
Making large language models (LLMs) as good instruction followers further unleashes their power
for different usages. Through instruction tuning with annotated examples and human preference
feedback (if possible), the output of these LLMs can align with human expectations well on various
tasks, e.g., understanding, generation, commonsense reasoning, under different settings, including
zero-shot, few-shot, and chain-of-thought (Ouyang et al., 2022; Longpre et al., 2023). Many re-
cent works have pointed out the key factors and insights into the success of instruction following
techniques on the popular decoder-only (e.g., GPT (Brown et al., 2020), LLaMA (Touvron et al.,
2023)) and encoder-decoder frameworks (e.g., T5 (Raffel et al., 2020a)), including but not limited
to annotation quality (Zhou et al., 2023), data formats, and scaling (Chung et al., 2022). It can be
predicted that more powerful alignment methods will occur for more model variants.
To enlarge the application range of alignment techniques, we alternatively explore the potential and
limitations of the BERT family as instruction followers. To our knowledge, this is the first work
that attempts to provide suggestions for building instruction-following models on the BERT family.
    ∗
        Juntao Li is the corresponding author.
    1
        https://github.com/LitterBrother-Xiao/Instruct_XMLR/tree/main


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Our study is motivated by existing observations that: 1) the BERT family can also be zero-shot
learners (Zhao et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023). Further equipping them with instruction understand-
ing capabilities will expand their usage scenarios; 2) their masking language model objective can
support open-ended long text generation and meanwhile achieve much faster decoding speed than
the popular autoregressive fashion (Liang et al., 2023b); 3) complicated real-world applications usu-
ally involves the collaboration of generative LLMs and expert models (Liang et al., 2023c; Shen
et al., 2023), while the BERT family have moved countless tasks forward before the rising of large
generative models and still hold the records for various downstream tasks.


Contributions Throughout this paper, we mainly (1) provide a basic method that can hint at the
potential and limitations of the BERT family as instruction followers; (2) present the key factors in
making the BERT family competitive with the popular encoder-decoder and decoder-only models
that have similar model scale and pretraining data; (3) disclose the risks and limitations (4) along
with the possible reasons and solutions to give suggestions for further performance improvement.


Important Observations Although this work is at the preliminary stage, we still have some im-
portant observations for reference and future research. First, the BERT family has the possibility to
be good instruction followers that can generalize well across tasks and languages compared to the
other popular LLMs with similar model sizes and data. Besides, our presented method is scalable, in
which one can use more computation resources and data to improve performance significantly. Some
of the problems are possibly owing to the limited capabilities of the backbone models since there
are no previous BERT family models that are as powerful as the decoder-only and encoder-decoder
counterparts yet. The inherent shortages of non-autoregressive decoding also result in unconvinced
and unreliability to feed different tasks and scenarios.
In the rest of this paper, we first provide the background of text generation via the BERT family
and instruction tuning in Section 2. We then present the details for post-training the BERT family
as a language generator in Section 3 and detailed experimental settings for instruction fine-tuning in
Section 4. Section 5 and 6 analyze their potential and the possible reasons behind the limitations.



2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   T EXT G ENERATION VIA BERT FAMILY

BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) revolutionized the field of Natural Language Processing by leveraging the
Transformer architecture and large-scale pre-training. BERT is a typical encoder-only architecture
consisting of a multi-layer bidirectional Transformer encoder (Vaswani et al., 2017) with stacked
identical blocks. Building upon the foundation laid by BERT, researchers have further explored and
expanded the capabilities of the original BERT architecture, leading to the development of the BERT
family, such as RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2020), DeBERTa (He et al.,
2020), and XLM-R (Conneau et al., 2020), among others. The bidirectional modeling characteristic
and parallelizable masked language model (MLM) objective enables it to learn contextual word
representations, facilitating the capture of comprehensive semantic information. Thus, the BERT
family is renowned for its ability in natural language understanding (NLU) tasks. However, there is
a scarcity of research that delves into their potential for text-generation tasks. Previous works (Dong
et al., 2019; Wang & Cho, 2019) have theoretically indicated that the BERT family can generate
coherent and high-quality textual content. However, the primary usage of the BERT family has been
focused on extracting contextual features rather than generating text by itself (Zhu et al., 2019; Guo
et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020). Recent works (Chan & Fan, 2019; Jiang et al., 2021; Su et al., 2021;
Liang et al., 2023b;a) explore the application of the BERT family in non-autoregressive generation
using MLMs and receive positive feedback regarding performance. Their settings still follow the
traditional pre-training and task-specific fine-tuning paradigm. In our work, we further explore
the potential of becoming multitask instruction followers, which has been well explored in recent
autoregressive language models but is a blank area for BERT family.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.2   I NSTRUCTION T UNING

Instruction tuning refers to the process of fine-tuning LLMs on an instruction dataset consisting of
(instruction, output) pairs in a supervised fashion, which narrows the gap between the next-word
prediction objective of LLMs and the users’ objective of having LLMs adhere to human instruc-
tions (Zhang et al., 2023). The concept of merging diverse NLP tasks as generative tasks was
pioneered by the T5 model (Raffel et al., 2020b). This method effectively simplifies the application
of LLMs and paves the way for further advancements in instruction tuning models. Subsequent
instruction tuning models like FLAN (Wei et al., 2021; Chung et al., 2022)(Wei et al., 2021; Chung
et al., 2022) and T0 (Sanh et al., 2021) have further improved performance across diverse tasks by
incorporating more task-specific instructions during the pre-training phase. Currently, instruction
tuning represents an important research direction in NLP. The open-source community offers a va-
riety of instruction datasets, such as xP3 (Muennighoff et al., 2022), Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023), and
Dolly (Conover et al., 2023), as well as instruction fine-tuned LLMs, such as BLOOMZ (Muen-
nighoff et al., 2022), FLAN-T5 (Chung et al., 2022), and Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023). However,
the backbone of present instruction fine-tuned LLMs is mainly encoder-decoder and decoder-only
based. The instruction-following capabilities of the BERT family, which are encoder-only based
models, are severely under-explored. In this work, we introduced Instruct-XMLR to explore the
potential and limitations of the BERT family for instruction following.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
3.1   U TILIZING B ERT FAMILY FOR L ANGUAGE G ENERATION

Dramatically different from the prevalent left-to-right autoregressive unidirectional language mod-
els, the conditional independent factorization due to the bi-directional nature of BERT family cap-
tures more complex dependencies between tokens during training and also results in difficulty in
generating reliable texts from scratch. In this section, we review the potential solution to utilize
BERT family for language generation. As shown in previous work (Wang & Cho, 2019; He et al.,
2022), BERT can be viewed as a Markov random field language model and then sample texts.
Specifically, the sequence Y = (Y1 , Y2 , ..., YT ) can be viewed as random variables of an undirected
fully-connected graph S, and this full graph can be defined as a clique in the Markov Random Field.
Then the potential of this graph clique can be decomposes into a sum of T log-potential terms :
                                      T
                                                         ( T             )
                                     Y                     X
                            ψ(S) =       ψi (S) = exp          log ψi (S) ,                        (1)
                                     i=1                  i=1

where S denotes the fully-connected graph created from the original sequence Y , T denotes the
number of random variables, i.e., the length of sequence Y . This can also be simplified by Con-
ditional Distribution and Pseudo Log-Likelihood which maximizes the probability of each variable
rather than joint probability of the entire graph:
                                                  T
                                             1X
                                    ψ(S) =         log P(yi |S\i ).                                (2)
                                             T i=1
Then for BERT family, S\i can represent that yi is replaced by the masked token [MASK] in the
entire sequence Y , yi can represent each masked token. Then, the original training objective can
be approximated as a masked language model (MLM), where each potential ψ(S) is based on the
model probability P(yi |S\i , θ). Given the sequence Y , we can achieve:
                                   T                       R
                                1X                      1 X
                      ψ(Y ) =         log P(yi |Y\i ) ≈       log P(yi |Y\i , θ),                  (3)
                                T i=1                   R i=1
where R is the number of masked tokens sampled from Y , and the upper bound is the length of Y .
Then we can expand this non-conditional language model to conditional scenarios, i.e., sequence to
sequence generation. Given a training pair (X, Y ), the model maximizes the following likelihood:
                                              R
                                           1 X
                                 ψ(Y ) =         log P(yi |Y\i , X, θ).                            (4)
                                           R i=1


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


During inference, we begin with a fully Y with all tokens masked and generate them in each step of
|Y | (Wang & Cho, 2019). Notice that the conditional MLM and Mask-Predict are suitable for BERT
family, which keeps the training and inference objective consistent with pre-training.

3.2   O NE - STEP T RAINING WITH DYNAMIC M IXED ATTENTION

We can draw inspiration from the previous practices for language generation; the encoder-decoder-
based models feed the source sequence X into the encoder to extract the representations and use the
decoder to learn the internal relationships of the target sequence Y . Then, a cross-attention module
is inserted into each decoder layer to aggregate the source representation and the target sequence.
The key factor to language generation is how to learn the conditional probabilities P(Y |X) well,
and this is the same for BERT family. However, unlike previous encoder-decoder-based models, the
BERT family only contains a single multi-layer bidirectional Transformer encoder. To best match
the traditional learning formats, we first build an additional model to perform like the decoder, then
introduce mixed attention module (He et al., 2018; Liang et al., 2023b) to substitute for the original
cross-attention and self-attention modules in the decoder. Specifically, given a training pair (X, Y ),
the pre-training MLM containing L layers where each comprises one self-attention layer and one
                                                              l
feed-forward layer. We can get the source representation Hsrc    of each encoder layer l:
             l                     l−1      l−1                  l           l         l
           Ĥsrc = Self Attention(Hsrc ) + Hsrc ,               Hsrc = FFN(Ĥsrc ) + Ĥsrc .        (5)

For target sequence Y , we randomly select partial tokens to be replaced by the [MASK] token
and feed this corrupted sequence into the additional MLM. Then, this model tries to recover these
                                                                  l
masked tokens during training, and get the target representation Htgt of each decoder layer l:
        l                      L      l−1      l−1                    l           l         l
      Ĥtgt = Mixed Attention(Hsrc ⊕ Htgt ) + Htgt ,                 Htgt = FFN(Ĥtgt ) + Ĥtgt ,   (6)
where ⊕ denotes the concatenation operation. Mixed-attention brings no additional parameters but
just take the concatenated vector of source and target hidden states as key and value in the original
attention mechanism. As a result, this additional MLM can completely share parameters with the
MLM encoder. Thus, we can adopt only one pre-training BERT model to save model parameters
and accelerate the training process. However, the mix-attention mechanism first acquires the last
layer’s source representation. We must pass the model twice during training, leading to low training
efficiency. As a result, we introduce dynamic mixed-attention, which allows the model to get source
representation and learn to predict the masked tokens at the same pass as the model. This mechanism
adopts each source representation of the corresponding previous layer rather the last layer as:
        l                      l−1    l−1      l−1                    l           l         l
      Ĥtgt = Mixed Attention(Hsrc ⊕ Htgt ) + Htgt ,                 Htgt = FFN(Ĥtgt ) + Ĥtgt .   (7)

In practice, we can simply concatenate the source and the
masked target sequence, then feed them into the model for
training. Besides, as shown in Figure 1, we prevents the
query of each source token attending the target sequence in
the attention module, which keeps consistent with the infer-
ence process since there is no target sequence in advance.
Dynamic mixed-attention is more matching with the pre-
training tasks of BERT family, making the idea of shared
parameters more reliable.

3.3   T RAINING AND I NFERENCE P ROCESS
                                                              Figure 1: The overview attention
To better adapt to generation tasks, given a training pair masking, Green and Blue ones de-
(X, Y ), we uniformly mask 1 to L (target length) tokens fol- note which can be attended while the
lowing CMLM (Ghazvininejad et al., 2019) rather the origi- white can not be attended.
nal fixed masking in BERT family. Besides, we also randomly mask a small ratio of tokens in source
sequence to improve generality as mentioned in AMOM (Xiao et al., 2023). Then the training ob-
jective is to maximum the conditional MLM loss like the pre-training process:
                                           M
                                           X
                                 LMLM =          log P(yi |YM , XM , θ),                            (8)
                                           i=1


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where M is the number of masked tokens in masked target sequence YM . Notice the model do not
need to predict the masked tokens in the source sequence XM .
During inference, we adopt the same Mask-Predict algorithm in CMLM (Ghazvininejad et al.,
2019), which adopts multiple iterations to generate the final sequence. Specifically, given the to-
tal decoding iteration T in advance, we begin with the fully masked target sequence at the first
decoding iteration. In the following T − 1 iterations, a specific number of low-confidence tokens
will be masked and re-generated. The number of masked tokens in each iteration can be computed
as n = TT−t ∗ LY , where t denotes the current iteration number. The model selects the specific
masked tokens in the next iteration based on the prediction probability, where tokens with the lowest
probability will be masked, and their scores will be updated after the new prediction. Besides, unlike
traditional left-to-right auto-regressive models, we should obtain the target length before initializing
the fully masked target sequence. Naturally, we can directly give a length before inference. We also
introduce a length prediction module following previous non-autoregressive models where a special
token [LENGTH] is used to predict the target length.

4     E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

In this section, we introduce our experimental settings in fine-tuning and evaluation process.

4.1   F INE - TUNING D ETAILS

Backbone Model. Recent generative LLMs have been proven to be good instruction follow-
ers (Wei et al., 2021; Taori et al., 2023), especially for these with relatively large size (Chung et al.,
2022; OpenAI, 2023). To fully explore this capability of BERT family, we also select our back-
bone model with large size version. As a result, we choose XML-R (Conneau et al., 2020), which
is pre-trained on around one hundred languages with masked language modeling objective and has
two large versions, XML-RXL and XML-RXXL (Goyal et al., 2021), containing 3.5 and 10.7 billion
parameters respectively. Due to the cost of computing resources, We choose XML-RXL in our main
experiments.

Instruction Data. For fine-tuning instruction data, to make full use of the multilingual knowledge
during the pre-training process of XML-R, we select a multilingual instruction dataset xP3 (Muen-
nighoff et al., 2022). xP3 adds 30 new multilingual datasets with English prompts and serves as
the multilingual version of P3 (Sanh et al., 2021). Overall, xP3 contains 46 languages and a similar
language distribution of ROOTS (Laurençon et al., 2022). In the original xP3 paper (Muennighoff
et al., 2022), the authors use around 80 million samples for training, which is much more than the
actual needs and increases the training expenses. As a result, we sample partial instruction samples
(around 1/80) from the original training corpus in our experiment. Our sampled data only differs
from the original data in sample size and remains strictly consistent in all other aspects, such as the
composition ratio of each language, the number of tasks, prompt formats, etc.

Implementation Details. Our experiments use the pre-trained XML-RXL , which contains 36 lay-
ers, 2560 hidden sizes, and 10240 feed-forward filter sizes. We implement all the experiments based
on the Fairseq (Ott et al., 2019) library on 8 NVIDIA A100-PCIE-40GB GPU cards. We adopt
the Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) as an optimization algorithm during training. The learning rate
will warm up to 2e-5 in the first 500 updates and then decrease gradually with the polynomial
decay schedule. We select the final model based on the validation performance.

4.2   E VALUATION P ROCESS

Baseline Models. To make a relatively fair comparison between our fine-tuned model and other
LLMs, we choose mT0-3.7B and BLOOMZ-3B since they have comparable model parameters and
are also fine-tuned on the instruction dataset xP3. We give more comparison in Table 1. These
models are with different and covers the current popular architectures. Need to notice a big differ-
ence exists in the number of training tokens, which always plays an important role on performance.
Instruct-XMLRXL is trained on a bit more tokens than BLOOMZ-3B and half of mT0-3.7B during
pre-training. While in fine-tuning Instruct-XMLRXL is training on much fewer tokens.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        Instruction Tuning stage                         Pre-training Stage
               Model
                            Backbone     Architecture      Parameter   Tok.   Datasets       Size     Tok.    Len.
            BLOOMZ-3B       Bloom-3b     Decoder-only          3B      15B    ROOTS          1.6T     366B    2048
              mT0-3.7B       mT5-xl     Encoder-decoder       3.7B     15B      mC4          6.4T      1T     1024
          Instruct-XMLRXL   XML-RXL      Encoder-only         3.5B     0.6B    CC100         167B     0.5T     512

Table 1: Comparison between our model Instruct-XMLRXL and other baseline models. Tok. denotes
the training tokens (billion). Len. denotes the sequence length limitation.

Tasks and Datasets. Following the previous work (Muennighoff et al., 2022), we evaluate the
model’s ability of task generalization in three held-out tasks that are not contained in the fine-
tuned instruction data: conference resolution, sentence completion, and natural language inference
(NLI). Specifically, we use XWinograd (Tikhonov & Ryabinin, 2021), XCOPA (Ponti et al., 2020),
XNLI (Conneau et al., 2018) dataset for each task, respectively. Besides, we also evaluate in machine
translation as a language generation task, which can also serve as a held-in task since xP3 contains
various translation samples in multiple languages sampled from Flores-200 datasets (Costa-jussà
et al., 2022). We use WMT’14 translation datasets2 which contains five language splits between
English and others. We adopt the test set for evaluation, each containing around 3,000 sentence
pairs. Fortunately, all these datasets contain the language splits that do not exist in xP3, so we can
also study and evaluate the model’s ability for language generalization.

Evaluation Settings. During evaluation, we select five prompts from PromptSource (Bach et al.,
2022) and then use them for all language splits of each dataset mentioned above. Finally, we report
the average performance of these prompts. Since our model need to get target length in advance,
we adopt length prediction module for WMT’14 datasets and fixed length for others. Besides, we
should adopt some constraints on the design of prompts depending on the specific task formats due
to the length prediction, more information can be found in Section 5.1.

5       O N THE P OTENTIAL OF BERT FAMILY FOR I NSTRUCTION F OLLOWING
In this section, we first present the potential of length prediction in successfully applying BERT
family for instruction following. We then present the overall performance on three held-out tasks
under the zero-shot setting to evaluate the model’s ability task generalization. Finally, we further
study the scaling effects, which serves as an important aspect in assessing the potential for further
improvement of model capabilities and performance.

5.1       L ENGTH P REDICTION

For several non-autoregressive models, length prediction is an extra task to determine the target
sequence length during inference (Ghazvininejad et al., 2019; Qian et al., 2021). In comparison, the
autoregressive models, e.g., the two baseline models BLOOMZ and mT0, generate the texts one-
by-one in a left-to-right manner, and they can dynamically finish generation when meeting a special
token indicating the end of sentences (e.g., [EOS]). For Instruct-XMLRXL which adopts Mask-
Predict algorithm (Ghazvininejad et al., 2019) for generating the texts as mentioned in Section 3.3,
length prediction is an essential process and directly related to the quality of final generation results.
Next, we discuss the potential of length prediction through our experiments.
Adopting the length predicted by the model-self is a common practice in original task-specific
non-autoregressive models for various generation tasks, e.g., machine translation, summarization,
and story generation. In their experiments, length prediction only brings a tiny decline in per-
formance compared with directly using the target length. It is also explainable that since these
generation tasks are flexible, word adjustments can eliminate the effect of minor length differ-
ences during generation. Unlike several above-mentioned generation tasks with flexible target
lengths, some tasks with determined target lengths may heavily rely on the length prediction.
To verify this, we choose the XWinograd task and the prompt as {The        in the sentence
below refers to {option1}. True or False? {sentence} }, the label space
is {True, False}. Notice these two labels have different lengths after the sentencepiece
    2
        https://www.statmt.org/wmt14/translation-task.html


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tokenizer in Instruct-XMLRXL . As a result, once we set the length as one in advance during infer-
ence, the predictions are always {True}. If we set the length as two, the predictions are always
{False}, indicating that the predicted length directly determines the label. This is not a reasonable
situation and should be avoided in practical applications. As a result, we can add some constraints
when selecting the prompts for these tasks.
Specifically, we can adopt length prediction module to get target length for traditional language
generation tasks (e.g., machine translation since their target length can be flexible) and adopt a fixed
length for determined tasks (e.g., multiple choice tasks since they always have the target length as
one). However, for such tasks whose labels have determined but different lengths, such as the task
with label space {False, True}, we can transform the label space into {Yes, No} whose labels
have the same length, and then adopt the corresponding fixed length without leaking information
about target labels.

5.2   OVERALL P ERFORMANCE

Many works have shown that large lan-
guage models after multitask instruc-                 Models        XCOPA XNLI XWinograd
tion tuning can solve completely new
                                                  BLOOMZ-3B           0.519     0.482      0.523
tasks (Wei et al., 2021; Taori et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2022), we also examine                 mT0-3.7B          0.627     0.528      0.584
our fine-tuned model: if Instruct-XMLR          Instruct-XMLRXL       0.646     0.518      0.582
can successfully understand and com-
plete the tasks which are not included in            Table 2: Accuracy on three held-out tasks.
the fine-tuning process. Table 2 presents the results. To avoid the influence of language gener-
alization discussed in Section 6.1, we only choose the languages included in the fine-tuned data
here. We report the average accuracy of 5 prompts in all tasks. We can find that Instruct-XMLR
also demonstrates strong task generalization ability. After fine-tuning only 1/25 tokens of baseline
models, Instruct-XMLR can significantly outperform a decoder-only model with comparable size
BLOOMZ-3B in all tasks. Compared with the more competitive model mT0-3.7B, Instruct-XMLR
achieves better performance on XCOPA and comparable performance on XWinograd, but underper-
forms a little on XNLI. We attribute this failure to: (1) XNLI is a multilingual dataset for traditional
natural language inference (NLI) task, and mT0 with the encoder-decoder architecture is more ben-
eficial to this task as also mentioned in Muennighoff et al. (2022), and (2) mT0-3.7B is trained more
much longer in both pre-training (1 trillion v.s. 0.5 trillion tokens) and instruction tuning stage (15
billion v.s. 0.6 billion tokens), which can boost the performance of NLI tasks (Goyal et al., 2021;
Hoffmann et al., 2022).

5.3   S CALING E FFECTS

Scaling law plays a vital role in the recent success of LLMs (Hoffmann et al., 2022; Touvron et al.,
2023). Since XML-R has different versions containing various parameters, we study the perfor-
mance changes as the model size increases. Besides, we also focus on another layer of scaling,
the number of training tokens during the fine-tuning process. Firstly, we also conduct experiments
on relatively small models, XML-RBase and XML-RLarge with 270M and 550M parameters, respec-
tively. Table 3 presents the results. We can find an apparent growing trend as the model parameters
increase. After fine-tuned with the same data, Instruct-XMLRXL outperforms Instruct-XMLRBase
and Instruct-XMLRLarge on all tasks, indicating the important role of model size in task general-
ization. Then, we focus on the scaling effects of training tokens during instruction tuning process.
Figure 2 plots the performance changes in the training process. The performance of all tasks keeps
improving as the training continues, which is consistent with our intuition. Overall, Instruct-XMLR
also demonstrates the positive scaling effects, which presents potential improvements in the future.


6     P OSSIBLE L IMITATIONS , R EASONS AND S OLUTIONS

In Section 5, we have noticed the potential of the BERT family for instruction following. However,
more aspects remain to be explored for Instruct-XMLR before becoming a superior instruction fol-
lower. In this section, we investigate some limitations that may be caused by the specific factors of


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Models        XCOPA   XNLI    XWinograd
   Instruct-XMLRBase    0.583   0.386      0.521
   Instruct-XMLRLarge   0.602   0.432      0.545
    Instruct-XMLRXL     0.646   0.518      0.582

           Table 3: Effects on models scaling.                Figure 2: Effects on data scaling.

our model, e.g., the backbone model, including the original architecture and training corpus, the tra-
ditional non-autoregressive generation manner we adopted during inference, etc. Then, after finding
these limitations, we also give some possible solutions.

6.1     L ANGUAGE G ENERALIZATION

Since Instruct-XMLR and two baseline models are multilingual, they should support multiple lan-
guages. Naturally, we aim to explore their abilities of language generalization, i.e., whether the
model can perform well in languages not contained in fine-tuned datasets. Language generalization
is also a widespread concern of language models and is related strongly to language distribution in
the training data.
We select the language splits that are not
included in the fine-tuned data of each              Models        XCOPA XNLI XWinograd
task for evaluation. Table 4 presents
                                                  BLOOMZ-3B          0.427    0.391       0.499
the results. We can find that Instruct-
XMLR outperforms BLOOMZ-3B but                      mT0-3.7B         0.605    0.533       0.569
fails behind mT0-3.7B in all tasks, es-         Instruct-XMLRXL      0.599    0.466       0.539
pecially on XNLI dataset. Considering
the same language composition in fine-             Table 4: Results of language generalization.
tuning datasets, we explain this to the difference between their pre-training stages. Firstly, all these
languages are outside the pre-training data of BLOOMZ-3B, the declines for BLOOMZ-3B are easy
to understand. Regarding Instruct-XMLR and mT0-3.7B, these languages are all in the pre-training
data and show a similar composition distribution. As shown in Table 1, mT0-3.7B is trained with
twice as many tokens than Instruct-XMLR and learns more robust language knowledge. As a result,
Instruct-XMLR is inferior to mT0-3.7B in the ability of language generalization.

6.2     G ENERATION TASKS

As mentioned in numerous previous
works (Gu et al., 2018; Xiao et al.,                   Models          EN → X X → EN Speedup
2022), the non-autoregressive models               BLOOMZ-3B            4.15       8.30       1.1x
remove the target-side dependency dur-               mT0-3.7B           9.41      22.82       1.0x
ing training. They will result in a perfor-      Instruct-XMLRXL        5.72      13.51       3.1x
mance drop in generation quality com-          Instruct-XMLRXL -MT      8.83      18.31       3.0x
pared with the traditional autoregressive
models. As Instruct-XMLR also adopts               Table 5: Results of machine translation tasks.
the non-autoregressive manner to generate texts, this performance decline still exists. What’s more,
unlike the generative pre-training of baseline models, the pre-training paradigm of the BERT family
is not designed for language generation, leading to difficulty in learning well just in the instruction
tuning process. To evaluate the generation ability of Instruct-XMLR, we choose WMT’14 trans-
lation datasets, which are widely used in non-autoregressive works. Table 5 presents the results.
We use SacreBLEU 3 (Post, 2018) as our evaluation metric for all translation directions. We split
the dataset into two subsets whose source and target language is English (EN→X and X→EN). We
report the average performance of 5 prompts. Besides we also report the speedup by computing the
number of tokens per second when translating the texts. As mT0-3.7B is the lowest, the correspond-
ing speedup is 1.0x. Results show that although Instruct-XMLRXL can speed up the decoding by
around 3 times that baselines due to the non-autoregressive manner, the performance drops seriously
compared with mT0-3.7B.
   3
       https://github.com/mjpost/sacrebleu


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We further analyze the main internal reasons: non-autoregressive generation manner or the pre-
training paradigm. As mentioned in (Muennighoff et al., 2022), our fine-tuned dataset contains much
more short target texts for training. Thus, Instruct-XMLRXL still can not learn superior generation
abilities. As a result, we aim to enhance the learning on generation tasks during the instruction
tuning process. Specifically, we random sample a subset containing all translation pairs but keep the
language distribution the same as the original one. We get Instruct-XMLRXL -MT after fine-tuning
on this purer instruction dataset with only a quarter updates steps of Instruct-XMLRXL . We can
witness a significant performance improvement, indicating that the pre-training paradigm is more
decisive. Therefore, it is necessary to enhance the learning on generation tasks for the BERT family;
even a suitable generative post-training process is optimal before instruction tuning.

6.3   U NRELIABLE P REDICTED L ENGTH

As mentioned in section 5.1, we should transform the label space
by designing the prompts for several tasks. However, we also rec-       Settings Accuracy Gap
ognize that this can not be adapted to all tasks in practical appli-       A         0.87      0.02
cations. For example, it is unrealizable for a language modeling           B         0.42      33.2
task whose targets have different lengths of various samples. Be-          C         0.05      24.3
sides, length prediction also seems not suitable since the length
of each sample is determined. Therefore, we conduct quantitative        Table 6: Effects on length.
experiments to analyze the effects of length prediction in various
tasks with determined target length. Specifically, we select the following evaluation settings: (1)
multiple choice questions task with options {A, B, C, D}, denoted as setting A; (2) the specific
XWinograd task mentioned above with label space as {True, False} without transforming the
label space, denoted as setting B; (3) a language modeling task LAMBADA (Paperno et al., 2016),
where the target words to be generated are with various length, this is a more challenging setting,
denoted as setting C. Table 6 presents the results. We report the accuracy of length prediction (the
column Accuracy) and the performance gap compared with using fixed target length or the ground
length (the column Gap). We can find that: length prediction is unreliable when meeting challeng-
ing testing scenarios. For setting A, since the model may predict the incorrect length, e.g., one as
two, the result cab be {C:} or {C.}, which is equal to the label {C}. For settings B and C, length
prediction almost fails, leading to a seriously declining performance. Therefore, we look forward to
a more robust mechanism to determine the target length for non-aoturegressive models.

6.4   F EW- SHOT P ROMPTING L EARNING

Few-shot prompting, also known as in-context learning (ICL), is first mentioned in GPT-3 (Brown
et al., 2020) and allows the LLMs to learn specific abilities to solve different tasks with only a few
examples concatenated in the demonstration. Then, LLMs can perform well in various without up-
dating model parameters. ICL has become a mainstream method to boost the performance of various
LLMs. Unfortunately, Instruct-XMLR has not yet demonstrated this ability during our experiments.
We also concatenate several examples simply before the test example. However, this setting con-
fuses the model and results in disorganized predictions. We attribute this to the bi-directional nature
of BERT family since ICL has only been proven effective in autoregressive unidirectional language
model. Therefore, we need more efforts to explore this and leave it as a future work.

7     C ONCLUSION
This paper thoroughly explores the potential and limitations of BERT family as instruction followers.
We find that our fine-tuned Instruct-XMLR can also generalize well across tasks and languages
compared with current popular LLMs of model architecture with comparable model parameters.
Besides, we also witnessed several limitations through our experiments, such as the performance
decline of long-generation task and failure in few-shot prompting learning. We further analyze
the reasons and point out that some of the problems are possibly owing to the limited capabilities
of the backbone models since there are no previous BERT family models that are as powerful as
the decoder-only and encoder-decoder counterparts yet. Therefore, we hope that researchers can
pay more attention to BERT family, and make them become competitive members in the family of
current large language models.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments. This work was
supported by the National Science Foundation of China (NSFC No. 62206194), the Natural Science
Foundation of Jiangsu Province, China (Grant No. BK20220488), and the Young Elite Scientists
Sponsorship Program by CAST (Grant No. 2023QNRC001).

R EFERENCES
Stephen H Bach, Victor Sanh, Zheng-Xin Yong, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Nihal V Nayak,
  Abheesht Sharma, Taewoon Kim, M Saiful Bari, Thibault Fevry, et al. Promptsource: An in-
  tegrated development environment and repository for natural language prompts. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.01279, 2022.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Ying-Hong Chan and Yao-Chung Fan. A recurrent bert-based model for question generation. In
  Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Machine Reading for Question Answering, pp. 154–162,
  2019.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
  Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
Kevin Clark, Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V Le, and Christopher D Manning. Electra: Pre-training
  text encoders as discriminators rather than generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10555, 2020.
Alexis Conneau, Ruty Rinott, Guillaume Lample, Adina Williams, Samuel R. Bowman, Holger
  Schwenk, and Veselin Stoyanov. Xnli: Evaluating cross-lingual sentence representations. In
  Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018.
Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek,
  Francisco Guzmán, Édouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Unsuper-
  vised cross-lingual representation learning at scale. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 8440–8451, 2020.
Mike Conover, Matt Hayes, Ankit Mathur, Jianwei Xie, Jun Wan, Sam Shah, Ali Ghodsi, Patrick
 Wendell, Matei Zaharia, and Reynold Xin. Free dolly: Introducing the world’s first truly open
 instruction-tuned llm, 2023. URL https://www.databricks.com/blog/2023/04/
 12/dolly-first-open-commercially-viable-instruction-tuned-llm.
Marta R Costa-jussà, James Cross, Onur Çelebi, Maha Elbayad, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Heffernan,
 Elahe Kalbassi, Janice Lam, Daniel Licht, Jean Maillard, et al. No language left behind: Scaling
 human-centered machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.04672, 2022.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, 2019.
Li Dong, Nan Yang, Wenhui Wang, Furu Wei, Xiaodong Liu, Yu Wang, Jianfeng Gao, Ming Zhou,
  and Hsiao-Wuen Hon. Unified language model pre-training for natural language understanding
  and generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Marjan Ghazvininejad, Omer Levy, Yinhan Liu, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Mask-predict: Parallel
 decoding of conditional masked language models. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
 Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference
 on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 6112–6121, 2019.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Myle Ott, Giri Anantharaman, and Alexis Conneau. Larger-scale trans-
  formers for multilingual masked language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.00572, 2021.
Jiatao Gu, James Bradbury, Caiming Xiong, Victor OK Li, and Richard Socher. Non-autoregressive
   neural machine translation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Junliang Guo, Zhirui Zhang, Linli Xu, Hao-Ran Wei, Boxing Chen, and Enhong Chen. Incor-
  porating bert into parallel sequence decoding with adapters. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:10843–10854, 2020.
Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. Deberta: Decoding-enhanced bert
  with disentangled attention. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Tianyu He, Xu Tan, Yingce Xia, Di He, Tao Qin, Zhibo Chen, and Tie-Yan Liu. Layer-wise co-
  ordination between encoder and decoder for neural machine translation. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Zhengfu He, Tianxiang Sun, Kuanning Wang, Xuanjing Huang, and Xipeng Qiu. Diffusion-
  bert: Improving generative masked language models with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.15029, 2022.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Chao Jiang, Mounica Maddela, Wuwei Lan, Yang Zhong, and Wei Xu. Neural CRF model for
  sentence alignment in text simplification. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2020, Online, July 5-10, 2020, pp. 7943–7960.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020.
Ting Jiang, Shaohan Huang, Zihan Zhang, Deqing Wang, Fuzhen Zhuang, Furu Wei, Haizhen
  Huang, Liangjie Zhang, and Qi Zhang. Improving non-autoregressive generation with mixup
  training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.11115, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2014.
Hugo Laurençon, Lucile Saulnier, Thomas Wang, Christopher Akiki, Albert Villanova del Moral,
  Teven Le Scao, Leandro Von Werra, Chenghao Mou, Eduardo González Ponferrada, Huu Nguyen,
  et al. The bigscience roots corpus: A 1.6 tb composite multilingual dataset. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:31809–31826, 2022.
Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Jianfeng Gao, and Bill Dolan. A diversity-promoting
  objective function for neural conversation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.03055, 2015.
Xiaobo Liang, Juntao Li, Lijun Wu, Ziqiang Cao, and Min Zhang. Dynamic and efficient inference
  for text generation via bert family. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 2883–2897, 2023a.
Xiaobo Liang, Zecheng Tang, Juntao Li, and Min Zhang. Open-ended long text generation via
  masked language modeling. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 223–241, 2023b.
Yaobo Liang, Chenfei Wu, Ting Song, Wenshan Wu, Yan Xia, Yu Liu, Yang Ou, Shuai Lu, Lei Ji,
  Shaoguang Mao, et al. Taskmatrix. ai: Completing tasks by connecting foundation models with
  millions of apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16434, 2023c.
Bill Yuchen Lin, Wangchunshu Zhou, Ming Shen, Pei Zhou, Chandra Bhagavatula, Yejin Choi,
  and Xiang Ren. CommonGen: A constrained text generation challenge for generative common-
  sense reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020,
  November 2020.
Chin-Yew Lin and Eduard Hovy. Manual and automatic evaluation of summaries. In Proceedings
  of the ACL-02 Workshop on Automatic Summarization, pp. 45–51, 2002.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
Shayne Longpre, Le Hou, Tu Vu, Albert Webson, Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Denny Zhou, Quoc V
  Le, Barret Zoph, Jason Wei, et al. The flan collection: Designing data and methods for effective
  instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13688, 2023.
Niklas Muennighoff, Thomas Wang, Lintang Sutawika, Adam Roberts, Stella Biderman, Teven Le
  Scao, M Saiful Bari, Sheng Shen, Zheng-Xin Yong, Hailey Schoelkopf, et al. Crosslingual gen-
  eralization through multitask finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01786, 2022.
Shashi Narayan, Shay B Cohen, and Mirella Lapata. Don’t give me the details, just the summary!
  topic-aware convolutional neural networks for extreme summarization. In Proceedings of the
  2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 1797–
  1807, 2018.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. 2023.
Myle Ott, Sergey Edunov, Alexei Baevski, Angela Fan, Sam Gross, Nathan Ng, David Grangier,
 and Michael Auli. fairseq: A fast, extensible toolkit for sequence modeling. In Proceedings of
 NAACL-HLT 2019: Demonstrations, 2019.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Denis Paperno, Germán Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazaridou, Quan Ngoc Pham, Raffaella Bernardi,
  Sandro Pezzelle, Marco Baroni, Gemma Boleda, and Raquel Fernández. The lambada dataset:
  Word prediction requiring a broad discourse context. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06031, 2016.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
  evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, pp. 311–318, 2002.
Edoardo Maria Ponti, Goran Glavaš, Olga Majewska, Qianchu Liu, Ivan Vulić, and Anna Ko-
  rhonen. Xcopa: A multilingual dataset for causal commonsense reasoning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2005.00333, 2020.
Matt Post. A call for clarity in reporting BLEU scores. In Proceedings of the Third Conference on
 Machine Translation: Research Papers, October 2018.
Lihua Qian, Hao Zhou, Yu Bao, Mingxuan Wang, Lin Qiu, Weinan Zhang, Yong Yu, and Lei Li.
  Glancing transformer for non-autoregressive neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
  59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
  Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pp. 1993–2003, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-
  text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67, 2020a. URL http:
  //jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21:1–67, 2020b.
Alexander M Rush, Sumit Chopra, and Jason Weston. A neural attention model for abstractive
  sentence summarization. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 379–389, 2015.
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, An-
  toine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja, et al. Multitask prompted training
  enables zero-shot task generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08207, 2021.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang.
  Hugginggpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in huggingface. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.17580, 2023.
Emily Sheng and David Uthus. Investigating societal biases in a poetry composition system, 2020.
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Y Ng,
  and Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
  treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on empirical methods in natural language pro-
  cessing, pp. 1631–1642, 2013.
Yixuan Su, Deng Cai, Yan Wang, David Vandyke, Simon Baker, Piji Li, and Nigel Collier. Non-
  autoregressive text generation with pre-trained language models. In Proceedings of the 16th
  Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main
  Volume, pp. 234–243, 2021.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin,
  Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto.        Alpaca: A strong, replicable instruction-
  following model. Stanford Center for Research on Foundation Models. https://crfm. stanford.
  edu/2023/03/13/alpaca. html, 2023.
James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. FEVER: a large-
  scale dataset for fact extraction and VERification. In NAACL-HLT, 2018.
Alexey Tikhonov and Max Ryabinin. It’s all in the heads: Using attention heads as a baseline for
  cross-lingual transfer in commonsense reasoning, 2021.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Alex Wang and Kyunghyun Cho. Bert has a mouth, and it must speak: Bert as a markov random
  field language model. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Methods for Optimizing and Evaluating
  Neural Language Generation, pp. 30–36, 2019.
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei, An-
  jana Arunkumar, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Atharva Naik, David Stap, et al.
  Super-naturalinstructions: Generalization via declarative instructions on 1600+ nlp tasks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2204.07705, 2022.
Yue Wang, Lijun Wu, Juntao Li, Xiaobo Liang, and Min Zhang. Are the bert family zero-shot
  learners? a study on their potential and limitations. Artificial Intelligence, pp. 103953, 2023.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.01652, 2021.
Yisheng Xiao, Lijun Wu, Junliang Guo, Juntao Li, Min Zhang, Tao Qin, and Tie-yan Liu. A sur-
  vey on non-autoregressive generation for neural machine translation and beyond. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.09269, 2022.
Yisheng Xiao, Ruiyang Xu, Lijun Wu, Juntao Li, Tao Qin, Tie-Yan Liu, and Min Zhang. Amom:
  adaptive masking over masking for conditional masked language model. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 13789–13797, 2023.
Jiacheng Yang, Mingxuan Wang, Hao Zhou, Chengqi Zhao, Weinan Zhang, Yong Yu, and Lei Li.
   Towards making the most of bert in neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the AAAI
   conference on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp. 9378–9385, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Saizheng Zhang, Emily Dinan, Jack Urbanek, Arthur Szlam, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. Per-
  sonalizing dialogue agents: I have a dog, do you have pets too? In Proceedings of the 56th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistic, pp. 2204–2213, 2018.
Shengyu Zhang, Linfeng Dong, Xiaoya Li, Sen Zhang, Xiaofei Sun, Shuhe Wang, Jiwei Li, Runyi
  Hu, Tianwei Zhang, Fei Wu, et al. Instruction tuning for large language models: A survey. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.10792, 2023.
Xuandong Zhao, Siqi Ouyang, Zhiguo Yu, Ming Wu, and Lei Li. Pre-trained language models can
  be fully zero-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06950, 2022.
Chunting Zhou, Pengfei Liu, Puxin Xu, Srini Iyer, Jiao Sun, Yuning Mao, Xuezhe Ma, Avia Efrat,
  Ping Yu, Lili Yu, et al. Lima: Less is more for alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11206, 2023.
Jinhua Zhu, Yingce Xia, Lijun Wu, Di He, Tao Qin, Wengang Zhou, Houqiang Li, and Tieyan
   Liu. Incorporating bert into neural machine translation. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2019.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     P ROMPTS

We provide the prompts adopted in our main experiments here.

    Task       Index                                                        Prompt Template

                ⃝
                1                             Suppose {{premise}} Can we infer that ”{{hypothesis}}”? Yes, no, or maybe?
                ⃝
                2                           {{premise}} Are we justified in saying that ”{{hypothesis}}”? Yes, no, or maybe?
    XNLI        ⃝
                3                              Given that premise Does it follow that ”{{hypothesis}}” Yes, no, or maybe?
                ⃝
                4                      Given that {{premise}} Therefore, it must be true that ”{{hypothesis}}”? Yes, no, or maybe?
                ⃝
                5                     {{premise}} Based on the previous passage, is it true that ”{{hypothesis}}”? Yes, no, or maybe?

                ⃝
                1                            {{premise}} Select the most plausible effect/cause: {{Option 1}} {{Option 2}}
                ⃝
                2      {{premise}} As a consequence.../This happened because... Help me pick the more plausible option: {{Option 1}} {{Option 2}}
    XCOPA       ⃝
                3           {{premise}} I am hesitating between two options. Help me choose the best effect/cause: {{Option 1}} {{Option 2}}
                ⃝
                4                  {{premise}} We are looking for an effect/cause, what is the best option? {{Option 1}} {{Option 2}}
                ⃝
                5                                          {{Option 1}} {{Option 2}} {{premise}} because/so:

                ⃝
                1                             {{premise}} The in the sentence above refers to {{Option 1}} Yes or No?
                ⃝
                2                      {{premise}} What does the in the above sentence refer to? {{Option 1}} or {{Option 2}}?
  XWinogra      ⃝
                3                             {{premise}} The in the sentence above refers to {{Option 1}} Yes or No?
                ⃝
                4                      What does the stand for in the below sentence? {{premise}} {{Option 1}} or {{Option 2}}
                ⃝
                5                 {{premise}} Replace the in the above sentence with the correct option: {{Option 1}} or {{Option 2}}
                ⃝
                1                                    A text in {{src-lang}}: {{Source}} The same text in {{tgt-lang}}
                ⃝
                2                               Translate the following text from {{src-lang}} to {{tgt-lang}}: {{Source}}
  WMT’14
                ⃝
                3                                             {{Source}} Here is the same text in {{tgt-lang}}:
 Translation
                ⃝
                4                          {{Source}} The previous text is in {{src-lang}} Here is the same text in {{tgt-lang}}:
                ⃝
                5                            Text in {{src-lang}}: {{Source}} Translation of the previous text to {{tgt-lang}}:


Table 7: Different prompts adopted in our experiments. Texts within quotes denote the input se-
quences. {{src-lang}} and {{tgt-lang}} denote the source and target languages.


A.2     R ESULTS

As we only report the average performance in the main body of our paper, we present different
results based on the different prompts and different languages splits here.

                             Models            Prompts         EN         FR         PT         ZH         JP*       RU*
                                                 ⃝1           0.511      0.530      0.475      0.474      0.452      0.454
                                                 ⃝2           0.548      0.482      0.525      0.536      0.490      0.524
                         BLOOMZ-3B               ⃝3           0.557      0.530      0.502      0.567      0.485      0.498
                                                 ⃝4           0.501      0.494      0.483      0.524      0.503      0.540
                                                 ⃝5           0.592      0.494      0.529      0.609      0.510      0.533
                                                   ⃝
                                                   1          0.568      0.651      0.551      0.583      0.560      0.527
                                                   ⃝
                                                   2          0.575      0.566      0.574      0.575      0.569      0.571
                             mT0-3B                ⃝
                                                   3          0.619      0.566      0.597      0.585      0.603      0.590
                                                   ⃝
                                                   4          0.579      0.554      0.582      0.502      0.560      0.546
                                                   ⃝
                                                   5          0.615      0.590      0.608      0.629      0.597      0.568
                                                   ⃝
                                                   1          0.553      0.518      0.532      0.554      0.550      0.470
                                                   ⃝
                                                   2          0.563      0.619      0.570      0.607      0.539      0.505
                       Instruct-XMLRXL             ⃝
                                                   3          0.567      0.566      0.548      0.627      0.565      0.517
                                                   ⃝
                                                   4          0.568      0.602      0.567      0.647      0.592      0.502
                                                   ⃝
                                                   5          0.637      0.578      0.589      0.631      0.600      0.546


Table 8: Results of conference resolution task on XWinograd datasets. The language with * is not
contained in fine-tuned dataset.


                                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                     EN→X                                                        X→EN
          Models                Prompts
                                                 FR            HI        DE         CS        RU          FR            HI        DE           CS             RU
                                      ⃝
                                      1        10.12          2.61       0.70      0.19       0.28       8.15          5.46      4.91         2.15           3.77
                                      ⃝
                                      2        32.65          6.57       2.64      0.16       0.48       33.13         17.55     15.18        2.57           13.97
      BLOOMZ-3B                       ⃝
                                      3         7.99          1.93       0.53      0.23       0.29       8.17          5.44      4.59         2.24           3.55
                                      ⃝
                                      4         7.07          1.79       0.43      0.24       0.25       6.76          4.67      4.12         1.95           3.19
                                      ⃝
                                      5        20.98          3.47       1.56      0.14       0.54       24.32         12.56      8.92        1.59            8.57
                                      ⃝
                                      1         24.9          8.41       6.62      5.26       7.71       28.78         19.63     24.35        21.36          23.82
                                      ⃝
                                      2        27.33          9.58       7.01      4.26       9.13       31.52         20.14     27.28        28.05          27.85
          mT0-3B                      ⃝
                                      3        24.53          7.93       6.72      4.64       7.39       28.35         19.56     23.98        24.37          23.41
                                      ⃝
                                      4        22.12          8.32       7.01      5.03       7.76       28.34         19.81     24.00        24.37          23.42
                                      ⃝
                                      5        11.78          3.73       5.65      0.60       1.77       19.55         10.36     17.76        15.91          14.63
                                      ⃝
                                      1        14.97          7.03       5.23      2.57       0.75       19.59         13.16     15.83        14.94          7.62
                                      ⃝
                                      2        12.26          4.83       2.67      2.18       0.73       18.57         12.18     14.62        14.05          1.80
    Instruct-XMLRXL                   ⃝
                                      3        15.84          7.00       5.20      2.49       0.73       20.53         13.72     16.52        15.38          8.27
                                      ⃝
                                      4        14.99          7.16       5.42      2.69       0.77       17.79         12.29     13.81        13.34          5.89
                                      ⃝
                                      5        12.73          6.51       4.99      2.53       0.76       19.33         12.84     14.92        14.03          6.79
                                      ⃝
                                      1        16.53          7.75       8.02      5.77       4.25       21.88         13.35     17.83        16.92          16.32
                                      ⃝
                                      2        20.76          9.52       9.95      7.20       5.83       26.35         19.48     23.71        25.00          22.12
 Instruct-XMLRXL -MT                  ⃝
                                      3        16.23          7.94       8.35      5.74       4.14       19.78         11.26     16.23        17.31          15.32
                                      ⃝
                                      4        16.42          7.74       8.16      5.47       3.51       19.32         13.98     17.69        16.53          15.34
                                      ⃝
                                      5        16.60          7.82       7.59      5.44       4.06       22.13         15.33     18.64        17.36          18.65


                       Table 9: Results of machine translation task on WMT’14 datasets.


     Models        Prompts     AR       EN      ES       FR       HI        SW       UR      VI         ZH     BG*       DE*      EL*      RU*       TH*      TR*
                     ⃝1       0.482    0.540   0.506    0.514    0.468     0.418    0.437   0.462      0.477   0.394     0.408   0.404     0.437     0.377    0.353
                     ⃝2       0.483    0.522   0.503    0.505    0.462     0.419    0.429   0.466      0.490   0.411     0.410   0.408     0.439     0.429    0.363
  BLOOMZ-3B          ⃝3       0.488    0.518   0.505    0.516    0.463     0.417    0.428   0.485      0.478   0.379     0.402   0.367     0.418     0.361    0.348
                     ⃝4       0.490    0.504   0.498    0.510    0.455     0.419    0.434   0.457      0.473   0.380     0.398   0.381     0.412     0.379    0.356
                     ⃝5       0.518    0.570   0.535    0.536    0.495     0.433    0.458   0.516      0.508   0.380     0.422   0.365     0.421     0.369    0.356
                     ⃝
                     1        0.518    0.568   0.542    0.538    0.498     0.492    0.479   0.531      0.506   0.533     0.533   0.533     0.505     0.521    0.487
                     ⃝
                     2        0.509    0.552   0.548    0.542    0.502     0.496    0.467   0.532      0.506   0.542     0.548   0.538     0.531     0.510    0.506
     mT0-3B          ⃝
                     3        0.539    0.568   0.539    0.562    0.512     0.520    0.490   0.549      0.547   0.550     0.535   0.551     0.539     0.548    0.535
                     ⃝
                     4        0.514    0.578   0.539    0.554    0.489     0.518    0.458   0.524      0.529   0.528     0.534   0.539     0.508     0.516    0.513
                     ⃝
                     5        0.538    0.583   0.556    0.558    0.533     0.526    0.514   0.547      0.544   0.560     0.565   0.558     0.549     0.553    0.537
                     ⃝
                     1        0.515    0.566   0.547    0.541    0.504     0.494    0.488   0.530      0.513   0.457     0.504   0.443     0.453     0.407    0.500
                     ⃝
                     2        0.499    0.559   0.545    0.538    0.510     0.496    0.492   0.529      0.518   0.459     0.511   0.459     0.459     0.419    0.508
 Instruct-XMLRXL     ⃝
                     3        0.514    0.555   0.535    0.540    0.503     0.492    0.478   0.523      0.518   0.453     0.507   0.440     0.442     0.406    0.506
                     ⃝
                     4        0.506    0.554   0.539    0.529    0.504     0.487    0.480   0.521      0.515   0.455     0.508   0.456     0.461     0.417    0.497
                     ⃝
                     5        0.502    0.558   0.532    0.536    0.507     0.485    0.486   0.522      0.504   0.473     0.505   0.458     0.477     0.426    0.500



                   Table 10: Results of natural language inference task on XNLI datasets.


       Models                Prompts        ID          SE        TA         VI        ZH            ET*       HT*        IT*      QU*             TH*       TR*
                               ⃝1          0.74        0.51      0.57       0.76       0.76          0.43      0.53       0.50     0.47            0.46      0.48
                               ⃝2          0.62        0.44      0.53       0.68       0.67          0.46      0.44       0.49     0.43            0.46      0.50
    BLOOMZ-3B                  ⃝3          0.65        0.47      0.52       0.70       0.72          0.51      0.49       0.53     0.38            0.48      0.55
                               ⃝4          0.50        0.42      0.43       0.54       0.54          0.43      0.42       0.45     0.42            0.45      0.47
                               ⃝5          0.14        0.25      0.36       0.13       0.32          0.37      0.32       0.07     0.38            0.18      0.25
                               ⃝
                               1           0.76        0.61      0.66       0.69       0.74          0.69      0.68       0.70      0.49           0.69      0.71
                               ⃝
                               2           0.77        0.57      0.70       0.67       0.79          0.68      0.70       0.70      0.50           0.71      0.69
       mT0-3B                  ⃝
                               3           0.72        0.58      0.69       0.67       0.76          0.72      0.67       0.68      0.45           0.73      0.68
                               ⃝
                               4           0.75        0.59      0.66       0.68       0.74          0.70      0.65       0.67      0.48           0.69      0.70
                               ⃝
                               5           0.40        0.36      0.39       0.39       0.33          0.44      0.45       0.35      0.34           0.42      0.38
                               ⃝
                               1           0.82        0.58      0.71       0.75       0.74          0.68      0.57       0.73      0.58           0.72      0.68
                               ⃝
                               2           0.73        0.60      0.71       0.75       0.70          0.71      0.57       0.70      0.63           0.71      0.64
 Instruct-XMLRXL               ⃝
                               3           0.66        0.61      0.67       0.71       0.69          0.62      0.54       0.68      0.58           0.66      0.68
                               ⃝
                               4           0.77        0.62      0.67       0.76       0.68          0.70      0.54       0.65      0.63           0.65      0.64
                               ⃝
                               5           0.43        0.53      0.40       0.40       0.47          0.43      0.47       0.37      0.41           0.42      0.39


                      Table 11: Results of sentence completion task on XCOPA datasets.



                                                                            16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3   T HE P ERFORMANCE VARIANCE OF D IFFERENT P ROMPTS .

Since we adopt five different prompts for each task, analyzing how stable these models perform
across these different prompts is essential. As a result, we present the performance variance of dif-
ference prompts here. Table 12, Table 13 and Table 14 present the results. We report the performance
range, i.e., the performance boundary, to show the performance variance of difference prompts. We
can find that: (1) The performance difference across prompts of Instruct-XMLR is nearly compared
with two baseline models in all tasks and even smaller in XCOPA, XNLI, and machine translation
tasks, indicating that our method does not bring instability across prompts. (2) The performance
difference in XCOPA is relatively big, but this is the case for all models. Instruct-XMLR performs
better than other models.

                         Models           XCOPA          XNLI         XWinograd

                      BLOOMZ-3B         0.519 ±0.289   0.482 ±0.026   0.523 ±0.033
                        mT0-3.7B        0.627 ±0.253   0.528 ±0.016   0.584 ±0.030
                    Instruct-XMLRXL     0.646 ±0.200   0.518 ±0.004   0.582 ±0.043

                            Table 12: Accuracy on three held-out tasks.


                         Models           XCOPA          XNLI         XWinograd

                      BLOOMZ-3B         0.427 ±0.165   0.391 ±0.019   0.499 ±0.046
                        mT0-3.7B        0.605 ±0.208   0.533 ±0.021   0.569 ±0.028
                    Instruct-XMLRXL     0.599 ±0.184   0.466 ±0.007   0.539 ±0.034

                           Table 13: Results of language generalization.

                                   Models          EN → X       X → EN
                                BLOOMZ-3B          4.15 ±4.35 8.30 ±8.18
                                  mT0-3.7B         9.41 ±4.70 22.82 ±7.18
                              Instruct-XMLRXL      5.72 ±1.19 13.51±1.37
                            Instruct-XMLRXL -MT    8.83 ±1.82 18.31 ±5.02

                          Table 14: Results of machine translation tasks.


A.4   E VALUATION ON M ORE TASKS AND DATASETS .

Beyond the tasks shown in 4.2, we also evaluate more tasks and datasets. Table 15 and Table 16
present the corresponding results.

Tasks and Datasets. We evaluate our models in more tasks, including language generation and
understanding. For language generation, except the machine translation task we have included in
Table 5, we select various tasks with different characteristics, e.g., text summarization task which
has relatively long sequences, text simplification and paraphrase generation tasks whose inputs and
targets have the similar expression, controllable generation task which requires the model to gener-
ates texts meeting certain controllable constraints as humans wish reliably, and dialogue generation
task which has relatively flexible outputs. For text summarization task, we use XSUM (Narayan
et al., 2018) and Gigaword (Rush et al., 2015), which contain the online articles and single sentence
summary pairs from the British Broadcasting Corporation and summary from Gigaword corpus, re-
spectively. For text simplification task, we adopt WIKI-AUTO (Jiang et al., 2020) which contains
aligned sentences from English Wikipedia and Simple English Wikipedia. We adopt Quora Question
Pairs (QQP) for paraphrase generation task, where each question pair is semantically equivalent. For
controllable generation task, we adopt COMMONGEN (Lin et al., 2020) in which the model needs
to generate a coherent sentence using the given common concepts. For dialogue generation task, we


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        Text Summarization
                                              XSUM                              Gigaword
                                    Rouge-1           Rouge-L          Rouge-1             Rouge-L
         Bloomz-3B                35.12 ±11.32     27.97 ±9.35       31.45 ±10.60        28.94 ±10.04
         mT0-3.7B                 37.85 ±0.04      30.28 ±0.26       34.31 ±0.18         31.54 ±0.10
     Instruct-XMLRXL              35.62 ±0.22      27.90 ±0.23       30.64 ±0.11         28.52 ±0.21
  Instruct-XMLRXL w/GL            36.00 ±0.19      27.84 ±0.10       32.60 ±0.55         29.85 ±0.60
                                      Text Simplification               Paraphrase Generation
                                         WIKI-AUTO                                   QQP
                                     Bleu-2           Distinct-2           Bleu-2          Distinct-2
         Bloomz-3B                41.90 ±6.02         0.57 ±0.03     38.24 ±10.79          0.54 ±0.28
         mT0-3.7B                 55.92 ±1.83         0.64 ±0.01     51.93 ±10.39          0.63 ±0.08
     Instruct-XMLRXL              47.91 ±1.85         0.65 ±0.01     43.50 ±2.49           0.67 ±0.01
  Instruct-XMLRXL w/GL            56.93 ±2.00         0.76 ±0.00     60.02 ±0.72           0.69 ±0.01
                                   Controllable Generation                 Dialogue Generation
                                        COMMONGEN                              PersonaChat
                                     Bleu-2           Distinct-2           Bleu-2          Distinct-2
         Bloomz-3B                35.20 ±0.26         0.44 ±0.01      16.39 ±0.04          0.39 ±0.01
         mT0-3.7B                 31.86 ±0.14         0.36 ±0.04       9.17 ±0.02          0.39 ±0.01
     Instruct-XMLRXL              21.68 ±0.85         0.52 ±0.02       2.88 ±0.04          0.52 ±0.03
  Instruct-XMLRXL w/GL            35.44 ±1.03         0.48 ±0.01      17.30 ±0.01          0.53 ±0.01

                      Table 15: Results on various language generation tasks.

                                      Fact Verification             Sentiment Analysis
                                           FEVER                   SST-2               Poem
                                       Accuracy (%)          Accuracy (%)           Accuracy (%)
              Bloomz-3B                  81.23 ±4.67          95.40 ±0.30            18.67 ±2.33
              mT0-3.7B                   83.47 ±3.37          82.30 ±1.50            14.67 ±1.67
          Instruct-XMLRXL                88.10 ±1.20          92.20 ±0.60            25.33 ±0.67
       Instruct-XMLRXL w/GL              88.10 ±1.20          92.20 ±0.60            25.33 ±0.67

                    Table 16: Results on various language understanding tasks.

adopt PersonaChat (Zhang et al., 2018), which contains around 150k data triples formatted as (pro-
file, conversation, response). For language understanding tasks, we select FEVER (Thorne et al.,
2018) for the fact verification task, which aims to verify the correctness of textual claims against
textual sources. We also use SST-2 (Socher et al., 2013) and Poem (Sheng & Uthus, 2020) datasets
to evaluate the sentiment analysis task, which analyzes the sentiment information given the specific
sentence.

Evaluation Metrics. We utilize various evaluation metrics for these tasks. For text summarization
task, we adopt ROUGE F1 score (Lin & Hovy, 2002) following previous works. For other language
generation tasks, i.e., text simplification, paraphrase generation, controllable generation, and dia-
logue generation, we adopt BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and Distinct (Li et al., 2015) to measure
the n-gram level precision and the diversity of the generated texts. For language understanding tasks,
we report the corresponding accuracy.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Results. As shown in Table 15 and Table 16, except the performance of standard Instruct-XMLR,
we also report the performance of Instruct-XMLR w/GL which decodes that we use ground truth
length rather than the predicted length during inference. We aim to analyze the effects of length pre-
diction for different tasks. We can mainly find that: (1) Instruct-XMLR is more suitable for language
understanding tasks. It outperforms mT0 and BLOOMZ in most testing scenarios (except underper-
forming BLOOMZ on sst-2). (2) We can notice two groups for language generation tasks according
to the effects of length prediction. The length prediction is usable for text summarization, text
simplification, and paraphrase generation tasks. The performance in these tasks of Instruct-XMLR
outperforms BLOOMZ in most testing scenarios but underperforms mT0. This is the same case for
the machine translation task as shown in Table 4 in the main body. (3) For other language genera-
tion tasks, i.e., COMMONGEN and PersonaChat, although Instruct-XMLR can achieve promising
performance with ground truth length, adopting length prediction results in significant performance
declines. This is easy to understand, i.e., these tasks have no strong alignment relationship between
source length and target length. Hence, Instruct-XMLR fails to predict the reliable length based
on the source representation. More reliable alternative solutions should be explored to determine
the target length for these tasks in the future. (4) The Distinct score of Instruct-XMLR is superior
in all generation tasks, indicating that Instruct-XMLR can generate more diverse texts for all text
generation tasks. We attribute this to the non-autoregressive generation (Mask-Predict algorithm)
generation manner where the dependency of different tokens is released compared with adopting the
standard next token prediction algorithm in traditional autoregressive models.

A.5   M ORE E XPLORATION FOR F EW- SHOT P ROMPTING L EARNING

As mentioned in Section 6.4, Instruct-XMLR has not yet demonstrated the ability of few-shot
prompting during our experiments. Since this capacity is first noticed in GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020),
current researchers believe that few-shot prompting learning arises in the pre-training stage and
benefits from its generative pre-training paradigm. However, the different pre-training paradigm
of Instruct-XMLR (i.e., simply predicting the masked tokens without generative paradigm) fails
to equip the capacity of few-shot prompting learning. As a result, We have tried to make up for
this flaw by including some few-shot instruction data during training rather than the only zero-shot
instruction data we adopted in our main experiments. Unfortunately, this also doesn’t bring any
profit. Table 17 and Table 18 present the corresponding results. We can find that adopting few-shot
prompting learning even harms the overall performance.

                              Models           XCOPA      XNLI     XWinograd

                      Instruct-XMLRXL w/ zs      0.646     0.518      0.582
                                 w/ ICL 4        0.548     0.414      0.547

                       Instruct-XMLRXL w/ fs     0.642     0.489      0.565
                                  w/ ICL 4       0.571     0.442      0.553

Table 17: Accuracy on three held-out tasks. w/ zs denotes the model trained on zero-shot instruction
data, w/ fs denotes the model trained on mixed zero/few-shot instruction data, w/ ICL 4 denotes that
we adopt 4 examples in the demonstration for few-shot prompting learning.


                              Models           XCOPA      XNLI     XWinograd

                      Instruct-XMLRXL w/ zs      0.599     0.466      0.539
                                 w/ ICL 4        0.521     0.397      0.506

                       Instruct-XMLRXL w/ fs     0.591     0.451      0.528
                                  w/ ICL 4       0.536     0.419      0.514

Table 18: Results of language generalization. w/ zs denotes the model trained on zero-shot instruc-
tion data, w/ fs denotes the model trained on mixed zero/few-shot instruction data, w/ ICL 4 denotes
that we adopt 4 examples in the demonstration for few-shot prompting learning.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.6        R ESULTS OF XML-R WITHOUT I NSTRUCTION T UNING

To analyze the effects of instruction tuning for our model, we compare Instruct-XMLR and the
original pre-trained XML-R without instruction tuning. However, it is difficult or even impossible
to collect the evaluation results of XMLR-w/o instruction tuning owing to its poor performance on
these tasks. We provide a few representative examples for intuitive understanding in Table 19. We
can find that XML-R fails to complete the task without instruction tuning, i.e., it always generates
the special tokens [PAD] without actual meaning in XCOPA, XNLI, and XWinograd tasks and
generates texts unrelated to the specific prompt in machine translation.

   Task               Type                                                        Output
                     Source       Mata saya menjadi merah dan bengkak. Select the most plausible cause: - A: Saya tertangis. - B: Saya tertawa.
                     Target                                                          A
  XCOPA
               Instruct-XMLRXL                                                       A
                   XML-RXL                                                        [PAD]
                     Source                    Suppose “And he said, Mama, I’m home.” Can we infer that “He didn’t say a word.”?
                     Target                                                         No
   XNLI
               Instruct-XMLRXL                                                      No
                   XML-RXL                                                        [PAD]
                     Source      Joan made sure to thank Susan for all the help had given. The in the sentence above refers to Susan. Yes or No?
                     Target                                                            Yes
 XWinograd
               Instruct-XMLRXL                                                         Yes
                   XML-RXL                                                           [PAD]
                     Source                   A text in German: Kinder brauchen Stabilität und Sicherheit. The same text in English:
                     Target                                          Children need stability and certainty.
      MT
               Instruct-XMLRXL                                         Children need safety and security.
                   XML-RXL                                                Fragen und Antworten zum.
                     Source                      Translate the following text from German to English: Auch Fast Food ist erlaubt.
                     Target                                                 Fast food is also permitted.
      MT
               Instruct-XMLRXL                                                 Fast food is acceptable.
                   XML-RXL                                                       Translate this page:


Table 19: Examples of XML-R with/without instruction tuning. MT denotes machine translation.


                                                                   20
