Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R ISK -C ONTROLLING M ODEL S ELECTION VIA G UIDED
BAYESIAN O PTIMIZATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         Adjustable hyperparameters of machine learning models typically impact various
         key trade-offs such as accuracy, fairness, robustness, or inference cost. Our goal
         in this paper is to find a configuration that adheres to user-specified limits on
         certain risks while being useful with respect to other conflicting metrics. We solve
         this by combining Bayesian Optimization (BO) with rigorous risk-controlling
         procedures, where our core idea is to steer BO towards an efficient testing
         strategy. Our BO method identifies a set of Pareto optimal configurations residing
         in a designated region of interest. The resulting candidates are statistically
         verified and the best-performing configuration is selected with guaranteed risk
         levels. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on a range of tasks with
         multiple desiderata, including low error rates, equitable predictions, handling
         spurious correlations, managing rate and distortion in generative models, and
         reducing computational costs.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Deploying machine learning models in the real-world requires balancing different performance
aspects such as low error rate, equality in predictive decisions (Hardt et al., 2016; Pessach &
Shmueli, 2022), robustness to spurious correlations (Sagawa et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2023), and
model efficiency (Laskaridis et al., 2021; Menghani, 2023). In many cases, we can influence the
model’s behavior favorably via sets of hyperparameters that determine the model configuration.
However, selecting such a configuration that exactly meets user-defined requirements on test data is
typically non-trivial, especially when considering a large number of objectives and configurations
that are costly to assess (e.g., that require retraining large neural networks for new settings).
Bayesian Optimization (BO) is widely used for efficiently selecting configurations of functions
that require expensive evaluation, such as hyperparameters that govern the model architecture or
influence the training procedure (Shahriari et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2022; Bischl et al., 2023).
The basic concept is to substitute the costly function of interest with a cheap, and easily optimized,
probabilistic surrogate model. This surrogate is used to select promising candidate configurations,
while balancing exploration and exploitation. Beyond single-function optimization, BO has been
extended to multiple objectives, where a set of Pareto optimal configurations that represent the best
possible trade-offs is sought (Karl et al., 2022). It has also been extended to accommodate multiple
inequality constraints (Gardner et al., 2014). Nevertheless, none of these mechanisms provide
formal guarantees on model behavior at test time, and can suffer from unexpected fluctuations from
the desired final performance (Letham et al., 2019; Feurer et al., 2023).
Addressing configuration selection from a different prospective, Learn Then Test (LTT) (An-
gelopoulos et al., 2021) is a rigorous statistical testing framework for controlling multiple risk
functions with distribution-free, finite-sample validity in a model-agnostic fashion. Although
providing exact theoretical verification, it becomes practically challenging to apply this framework
over large configuration spaces due to increased computational costs and loss of statistical power,
resulting in the inability to identify useful configurations. These challenges were addressed in the
recently proposed Pareto Testing method (Laufer-Goldshtein et al., 2023), which combines the
complementary features of multi-objective optimization and statistical testing. The core idea is
that multi-objective optimization can dramatically reduce the space of configurations to consider,
recovering Pareto optimal hyper-parameter combinations that are promising candidates for testing.
While improving computational and statistical efficiency, the recovered subspace remains unnec-


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Demonstration of our proposed method for algorithmic fairness with gender as a sensitive
attribute (left). We would like to set the model configuration λ to minimize the difference in demo-
graphic parity, while bounding the overall prediction error by α. Our method (right): (i) defines a
region of interest in the objective space, (ii) identifies Pareto optimal solutions in this region, (iii) sta-
tistically validates the chosen solutions, and (iv) sets λ to the best-performing verified configuration.
essarily large, containing many irrelevant configurations that are either valid but inefficient or that
are highly unlikely to satisfy the constraints. Therefore, when considering expansive configuration
spaces, this strategy can again become costly and statistically loose.
In this work, we propose a new synergistic approach to combine optimization and testing to achieve
efficient model selection under multiple risk constraints. We introduce the notion of the region of
interest in the objective space that is aligned with the ultimate goal of testing efficiency under limited
compute budget. Our region boundaries are determined by taking into account the data sample sizes
and the user-specified limits and certainty levels. Consequently, we propose an adjusted BO proce-
dure, recovering the part of the Pareto front that intersects with the defined region of interest. The
resulting focused optimization procedure recovers a dense set of configurations, representing candi-
dates that are both effective and likely to pass the test. In the final step, we filter the chosen set by
means of statistical testing to identify highly-preforming configurations that exhibit verified control.
We show that the proposed framework is flexible and can be applied in diverse contexts for both
predictive and generative models, and for tuning various types of hyper-parameters that impact the
model prior or post training. Specifically, we show its applicability in the domains of algorithmic
fairness, robustness to spurious correlations, rate and distortion in Variational Autoencoders (VAEs),
and accuracy-cost trade-offs for pruning large-scale Transformer models. See Fig. 1 for an example
and a high-level illustration of the proposed method.
Contribution. Our main ideas and results can be summarized as follows:

1. We introduce the region of interest in the objective space that significantly limits the search space
   for candidate configurations in order to obtain efficient testing outcomes with less computations.
2. We define a new BO procedure to identify configurations that are Pareto optimal and lie in the
   defined region of interest, which are then validated via testing.
3. We present a broad range of objectives across varied tasks, where our approach can be valuable
   for valid control and effective optimization of diverse performance aspects, including classifica-
   tion fairness, predictive robustness, generation capabilities and model compression.
4. We demonstrate empirically that our proposed method selects highly efficient and verified
   configurations under practical budget constraints, relative to baselines.

2    R ELATED WORK
Conformal prediction and risk control. Conformal prediction is a popular model-agnostic
and distribution-free uncertainty estimation framework that returns prediction sets or intervals
containing the true value with high probability (Vovk, 2002; Vovk et al., 2015; 2017; Lei et al.,
2013; 2018; Gupta et al., 2020; Barber et al., 2021). Coverage validity, provided by standard
conformal prediction, has recently been extended to controlling general statistical losses, allowing
guarantees in expectation (Angelopoulos et al., 2022) or with user-defined probability (Bates et al.,
2021). Our contribution builds on the foundational work by Angelopoulos et al. (2021) addressing
the broader scenario of multiple risk control by selecting a proper low-dimensional hyper-parameter


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


configuration via multiple hypothesis testing (MHT). Additionally, we draw upon the recently intro-
duced Pareto Testing method (Laufer-Goldshtein et al., 2023) that further improves computational
and statistical efficiency by solving a multiple objective optimization (MOO) problem and focusing
the testing procedure over the approximated Pareto optimal set. In this paper, we point out that
recovering the entire Pareto front is redundant and costly and suggest instead to recover a focused
part of the front that is aligned with the purpose of efficient testing. This enables highly-expensive
hyper-parameter tuning that involves retraining of large models with a limited compute budget.
Bayesian Optimization (BO). BO is a commonly used sequential model-based optimization tech-
nique to efficiently find an optimal configuration for a given black-box objective function (Shahriari
et al., 2015; Frazier, 2018; Wang et al., 2022). It can be applied to constrained optimization prob-
lems (Gardner et al., 2014) or multi-objective scenarios involving several conflicting objectives (Karl
et al., 2022). However, when used in model hyper-paramaeter tuning, the objective functions can
only be approximated through validation data, resulting in no guarantees on test time performance.
To account for that we resort to statistical testing, and utilize the effectiveness of BO to efficiently
explore the configuration space and identify promising candidates for testing. Closely related to our
work are (Stanton et al., 2023; Salinas et al., 2023) proposing to integrate conformal prediction into
BO in order to improve the optimization process under model misspecification and in the presence of
observation noise. These works go in a different direction from our approach, guaranteeing coverage
over the approximation of the surrogate model, while ours provides validity on configuration selec-
tion. Another recent work (Zhang et al., 2023) utilizes online conformal prediction for maintaining a
safety violation rate (limiting the fraction of unsafe configurations found during BO), which differs
from our provided guarantees and works under the assumption of a Gaussian observation noise.
Multi Objective Optimization (MOO). Simultaneously optimizing multiple black-box objective
functions was traditionally performed with evolutionary algorithms, such as NSGA-II (Deb et al.,
2002), SMS-EMOA (Emmerich et al., 2005) and MOEA/D (Zhang & Li, 2007). Due to the need
for numerous evaluations, evolutionary methods can be costly. Alternatively, BO methods are more
sample efficient and can be combined with evolutionary algorithms. Various methods were proposed
exploiting different acquisition functions (Knowles, 2006; Belakaria et al., 2019; Paria et al., 2020)
and selection mechanisms, encouraging diversity in the objective space (Belakaria et al., 2020) or in
the design space (Konakovic Lukovic et al., 2020). The main idea behind our approach is to design a
Multi-Objective-BO (MOBO) procedure that recovers a small set of configurations that are expected
to be both valid and efficient, and then calibrate the chosen set via MHT (Angelopoulos et al., 2021).
Additional related work is given in Appendix A.

3    P ROBLEM FORMULATION
Consider an input X ∈ X and an associated label Y ∈ Y drawn from a joint distribution
pXY ∈ PXY . We learn a model fλ : X → Y, where λ ∈ Λ ⊆ Rn is an n-dimensional
hyper-parameter that determines the model configuration. The model weights are optimized over
a training set Dtrain by minimizing a given loss function, while the hyper-parmeter λ determines
different aspects of the training procedure or the model final setting. For example, λ can weigh the
different components of the training loss function, affect the data on which the model is trained, or
specify the final mode of operation in a post-processing procedure.
We wish to select a model configuration λ according to different, often conflicting performance
aspects, such as low error rate, fairness across different subpopulations and low computational costs.
In many practical scenarios, we would like to constrain several of these aspects with pre-specified
limits to guarantee a desirable performance in test time. Specifically, we consider a set of objective
functions of the form ℓ : PXY × Λ → R. We assume that there are c constrained objective functions
ℓ1 , ...., ℓc , where ℓi (λ) = EpXY [Li (fλ (X), Y, λ)] and Li : Y × Y × Λ → R is a loss function. In
addition, there is a free objective function ℓfree defining a single degree of freedom for minimization.
The constraints are specified by the user and have the following form:
                              P (ℓi (λ) ≤ αi ) ≥ 1 − δ, ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , c},                           (1)
where αi is the upper bound of the i-th objective function, and δ is the desired confidence level. The
selection is carried out based on two disjoint data subsets: (i) a validation set Dval = {Xi , Yi }ki=1 and
                                        k+m
(ii) a calibration set Dcal = {Xi , Yi }i=k+1 . We will use the validation data to identify a set of candi-
date configurations, and the calibration data to validate the identified set. Accordingly, the probabil-


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ity in (1) is defined over the randomness of the calibration data, namely if δ = 0.1, then the selected
configuration will satisfy the constraints at least 90% of the time across different calibration datasets.
We provide here a brief example of our setup in the context of algorithmic fairness and derive other
applications in §6. In many cases, we wish to increase the fairness of the model without significantly
sacrificing performance. For example, we would like to encourage similar true positive rates across
different subpopulations, while constraining the expected error. One approach to enhance fairness
involves introducing a fairness-promoting term in addition to the standard cross-entropy loss (Lo-
haus et al., 2020; Padh et al., 2021). In this case, λ represents the weights assigned to each term
to determine the overall training loss. Different weights would lead to various accuracy-fairness
trade-offs of the resulting model. Our goal is to select a configuration λ that optimizes fairness,
while guaranteeing with high probability that the overall error would not exceed a certain limit.

4    BACKGROUND
In the following, we provide an overview on optimization of multiple objectives and on statistical
testing for configuration selection, which are the key components of our method.
Multiple Objective Optimization.            Consider an optimization problem over a vector-valued
function ℓ(λ) = (ℓ1 (λ), . . . , ℓd (λ)) consisting of d objectives. In the case of conflicting objectives,
there is no single optimal solution that minimizes them all simultaneously. Instead, there is a set of
optimal configurations representing different trade-offs of the given objectives. This is the Pareto
optimal set, defined by:
                         Λp = {λ ∈ Λ : {λ′ ∈ Λ : λ′ ≺ λ, λ′ ̸= λ } = ∅},                                (2)
where λ ≺ λ denotes that λ′ dominates λ if for every i ∈ {1, . . . d}, ℓi (λ′ ) ≤ ℓi (λ), and for some
         ′

i ∈ {1, . . . d}, ℓi (λ′ ) < ℓi (λ). Accordingly, the Pareto optimal set consists of all points that are not
dominated by any point in Λ. Given an approximated Pareto front P̂, a common quality measure is
the hypervolume indicator (Zitzler & Thiele, 1998) defined with respect to a reference point r ∈ Rd :
                                                       Z
                                        HV (P̂; r) =       1H(P̂,r) dz                                   (3)
                                                         Rd

where H(P̂; r) = {z ∈ R : ∃ p ∈ P̂ : p ≺ z ≺ r} and 1H(P̂,r) is the Dirac delta function that
                             d

equals 1 if z ∈ H(P̂; r) and 0 otherwise. An illustration is provided in Fig. E.1. The reference point
defines the boundaries for the hypervolume computation. It is usually set to the nadir point that is
defined by the worst objective values, so that all Pareto optimal solutions have positive hypervolume
contributions (Ishibuchi et al., 2018). For example, in model compression with error and cost as
objectives, the reference point can be set to (1.0, 1.0), since the maximum error and the maximum
normalized cost equal 1.0. The hypervolume indicator measures both the individual contribution of
each solution to the overall volume, and the global diversity, reflecting how well the solutions are
distributed. It can be used to evaluate the contribution of a new point to the current approximation,
defined as the Hypervolume Improvement (HVI):
                        HV I(ℓ(λ), P̂; r) = HV (ℓ(λ) ∪ P̂; r) − HV (P̂; r).                             (4)
The hypervolume indicator serves both as a performance measure for comparing different algo-
rithms and as a score for maximization in various MOO methods (Emmerich et al., 2005; 2006;
Bader & Zitzler, 2011; Daulton et al., 2021).
BO. BO is a powerful tool for optimizing black-box objective functions that are expensive to evalu-
ate. It uses a surrogate model to approximate the expensive objective function, and iteratively selects
new points for evaluation based on an acquisition function that balances exploration and exploitation.
Formally, we start with an initial pool of random configurations C0 = {λ0 , . . . , λN0 } and their asso-
ciated objective values L0 = {ℓ(λ1 ), . . . , ℓ(λN0 )}. Commonly, a Gaussian Process (GP) (Williams
& Rasmussen, 2006) serves as a surrogate model, providing an estimate with uncertainty given by
the Gaussian posterior. We assume a zero-mean GP prior g(λ) ∼ N (0, k(λ, λ)), characterized by
a kernel function κ : Λ × Λ → R. The posterior distribution of the GP is given by p(g|λ, Cn , Ln ) =
                                                                                                     −1
N (µ(λ), Σ(λ, λ)), with µ(λ) = k(K + σ 2 I)−1 l and Σ(λ, λ) = k(λ, λ) − kT K + σ 2 I                    k,
where ki = κ(λ, λi ), Kij = κ(λi , λj ) and li = ℓ(λi ), i, j ∈ {1, . . . , |Cn |}. Here σ 2 is the obser-
vation noise variance, i.e. ℓ(λi ) ∼ N (g(λi ), σ 2 ). Next, we optimize an acquisition function that



                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is defined on top of the surrogate model, such as probability of improvement (PI) (Kushner, 1964),
expected improvement (EI) (Močkus, 1975), and lower confidence bound (LCB) (Auer, 2002). For
multi-objective optimization, a GP is fitted to each objective. Then, one approach is to perform
scalarization (Knowles, 2006), converting the problem back to single-objective optimization and ap-
plying one of the aforementioned acquisition functions. Another option is to use a modified acquisi-
tion function that is specified for the multi-objective case, such as expected hypervolume improve-
ment (EHVI) (Emmerich et al., 2006) and predictive entropy search for multi-objective optimization
(PESMO) (Hernández-Lobato et al., 2016). After a new configuration is selected, it is evaluated and
added to the pull. This process is repeated until the maximum number of iterations is reached.
Learn then Test (LTT) & Pareto Testing. Angelopoulos et al. (2021) have recently proposed
LTT, which is a statistical framework for configuration selection based on MHT. Given a set of con-
straints of the form (1), a null hypothesis is defined as Hλ : ∃ i where ℓi (λ) > αi i.e., that at least
one of the constraints is not satisfied. For a given configuration, we can compute the p-value under
the null-hypothesis based on the calibration data. If the p-value is lower than the significance level
δ, the null hypothesis is rejected and the configuration is declared to be valid. When testing multiple
model configurations simultaneously, this becomes an MHT problem. In this case, it is necessary
to apply a correction procedure to control the family-wise error rate (FWER), i.e. to ensure that
the probability of one or more wrong rejections is bounded by δ. This can become computationally
demanding and result in inefficient testing when the configuration space is large. In order to
mitigate these challenges, Pareto Testing was proposed (Laufer-Goldshtein et al., 2023), where the
testing is focused on the most promising configurations identified using MOO. Accordingly, only
Pareto optimal configurations are considered and are ranked by their approximated p-values from
low to high risk. Then, Fixed Sequence Testing (FST) (Holm, 1979) is applied over the ordered set,
sequentially testing the configurations with a fixed threshold δ until failing to reject for the first time.
Although Pareto Testing demonstrates enhanced testing efficiency, it recovers the entire Pareto front,
albeit focusing only on a small portion of it during testing. Consequently, the optimization budget
is not directly utilized in a way that enhances testing efficiency, putting an emphasis on irrelevant
configurations on one side and facing an excessive sparsity within the relevant area on the other.

5     M ETHOD
Our approach involves two main steps: (i) performing BO to generate a small set of potential config-
urations, and (ii) applying MHT over the candidate set to identify valid configurations. Considering
the shortcomings of Pareto Testing, we argue that the two disjoint stages of optimization followed
by testing are suboptimal, especially for resource-intensive MOO. As an alternative, we propose
adjusting the optimization procedure for better testing outcomes by focusing only on the most
relevant parts in the objective space. To accomplish this, we need to (i) specify a region of interest
guided by our testing goal, and (ii) establish a BO procedure capable of effectively identifying
configurations within the defined region. In the following we describe these steps in details.
5.1   D EFINING THE R EGION OF I NTEREST

We would like to define a region of interest in the objective space Rc+1 , where we wish to identify
candidate configurations that are likely to be valid and efficient while conducting MHT. We start
with the case of a single constraint (c = 1). Recall that in the testing stage we define the null
hypothesis Hλ : ℓ(λ) > α for a candidate configuration λ, and compute a p-value for a given
                                                    1
                                                      Pk+m
empirical loss over the calibration data ℓ̂(λ) = m      j=k+1 ℓ(Xj , Yj ; λ). A valid p-value pλ has
to be super-uniform under the null hypothesis, i.e. P (pλ ≤ u) ≤ u, for all u ∈ [0, 1]. As presented
in (Angelopoulos et al., 2021), a valid p-value can be computed based on concentration inequalities
that quantify how close is the sample loss to the expected population loss. When the loss is bounded
by 1, we can use Hoeffding’s inequality to obtain the following p-value (see Appendix E):
                                                                2
                                                   −2m(α−ℓ̂(λ))
                                         pHF
                                          λ := e
                                                                +   .                                   (5)
For a given significance level δ, the null hypothesis is rejected (the configuration is declared to be
risk-condoling), when pHF
                        λ < δ. By rearranging (5), we obtain that the maximum empirical loss


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ℓ̂(λ) that can pass the test with significance level δ is given by (see Appendix E):
                                                     r
                                          max           log (1/δ)
                                        α     =α−                 .                                 (6)
                                                            2m
For example, consider the error rate as a loss function, which we would like to bound by 5%
(α = 0.05), with significance level δ = 0.1. By (6), if the empirical loss of a calibration set of size
m = 5000 is up to 3.5%, then we have enough evidence to declare that this configuration is safe
and its error does not exceed 5%.
In the BO procedure, we are interested in identifying configurations that are likely to be both valid
and efficient. On the one hand, in order to be valid the loss must not exceed αmax . On the other hand,
from efficiency considerations, we would like to minimize the free objective as much as possible.
This means that the constrained loss should be close to αmax (from bellow), since the free objective
decreases as the constrained objective increases. An illustration demonstrating this idea is provided
in Fig. E.2, where the irrelevant regions are: (i) the green part on the left where the configurations
are not effectively minimizing ℓ2 , and (2) the brown part on the right where the configurations
are not satisfying the constraint. Ideally, we would like to find configurations with expected loss
equal to the limiting testing threshold αmax . However, during optimization we can only evaluate the
loss on a finite-size validation data with |Dval | = k. To account for that, we construct an interval
[ℓlow , ℓhigh ] around αmax based on the size of the validation data. In this region, we wish to include
empirical loss values that are likely to correspond to an expected value of αmax based on the evidence
provided by the validation data. Specifically, we consider ℓ̂1 values that are likely to be obtained
under ℓ1 = αmax with probability that is at least δ ′ . This can be formed by defining 1 − δ ′ confidence
bounds. For example, using again Hoeffding’s inequality, we obtain the following region of interest:
                                                                                    
                                              r                       r
                                     max         log (1/δ ′ ) max      log (1/δ ′ ) 
                                    α −
                       R(α, k, m) =                          ,α +                   .               (7)
                                                {z 2k } |              {z 2k }
                                                                                     
                                      |
                                               ℓlow                   ℓhigh
                                ′
Note that setting the value of δ is an empirical choice that is unrelated to the MHT procedure and to
δ. For small δ ′ the region expands, including more options with reduced density, while for larger δ ′
the region becomes smaller and denser. In any case, when k increases, the width of (7) decreases as
we have more confidence in the observed empirical losses of being reflective of the expected loss.
In practice we use the tighter Hoeffding-Bentkus inequality for both (6) and (7) (see Appendix E).
In the case of multiple constraints, the null hypothesis is defined as Hλ : ∃ i where ℓi (λ) > αi . A
valid p-value is given by pλ = maxi∈{1,...,c} pλ,i , where pλ,i is the p-value corresponding to the
i-th constraint. Consequently, we define the region of interest in the multi-constraint case as the
intersection of the individual regions:
                                         \c
                         R(α, k, m) =       R(αi , k, m); α = (α1 , . . . , αc )                   (8)
                                         i=1

5.2   L OCAL H YPERVOLUME I MPROVEMENT
Given our definition of the region of interest, we derive a BO
procedure that recovers Pareto optimal points in the intersec-
tion of R(α, k, m) and P. Our key idea is to use the HVI
in (4) as an acquisition function and to modify it to capture
only the region of interest. To this end, we properly define the
reference point r ∈ Rc+1 to enclose the desired region.
Recall that the reference point defines the upper limit in each
direction. Therefore, we set ri = ℓhigh
                                      i , i ∈ {1, . . . , c} using
                                                                     Figure 2: Proposed BO procedure
the upper bound in (7) for the constrained dimensions. We can        for two objectives. ℓ1 is controlled
use the maximum possible value of ℓfree for rc+1 . However,          at α while ℓ2 is minimized. The
this will unnecessarily increase the defined region, including       shaded area corresponds to our
configurations that are low-risk but do not minimize the free        defined region of interest.        A
objective (where the constrained objectives are overly small         reference point (in red) is defined
and the free objective is overly big). Instead, we set rc+1 to be    accordingly to enclose the region
                                                                     of interest.

                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the point on the free axis that correspond to the intersection of
the lower limits of the constrained dimensions. For this purpose,
                                                                     we use the posterior mean as our
objective estimator, i.e. ĝ = µ. We define the region Rlow = λ : ĝ1 (λ) < ℓlow                       low
                                                                                1 , . . . , ĝc (λ) < ℓc   ,
where the configurations are likely to be valid but inefficient. Finally, we tightly enclose this region
from below in the free dimension:
                                         rc+1 = min ĝfree (λ).                                         (9)
                                                   λ∈Rlow
As a result, we obtain the following reference point:

                                      high       high
                               r = ℓ1 , . . . , ℓc , min ĝfree (λ) .                                  (10)
                                                              λ∈Rlow

We select the next configuration by maximizing the HVI (4) with respect to this reference point:
                                   λn = arg max HV I(ĝ(λ), P̂; r)                                     (11)
                                              λ
to recover only the relevant section and not the entire Pareto front. We evaluate the objective func-
tions on the new selected configuration, and update our candidate set accordingly. This process of
BO iterations continues until reaching the maximum budget N . The resulting candidate set is de-
noted as C BO . Our proposed BO procedure is described in Algorithm D.1 and is illustrated in Fig. 2.
Note that in MOBO it is common to use an HVI-based acquisition function that also takes into
account the predictive uncertainty as in EHVI (Emmerich et al., 2005) and SMS-EGO (Ponweiser
et al., 2008). However, our preliminary runs showed that these approaches do not work well in the
examined scenarios with small budget (N ∈ [10, 50]), as they often generated points outside the re-
gion of interest. Similarly, for these scenarios the random scalarization approach, proposed in (Paria
et al., 2020), was less effective for generating well-distributed points inside the desired region.
5.3   T ESTING THE F INAL S ELECTION
We follow (Angelopoulos et al., 2021; Laufer-Goldshtein et al., 2023) for testing the selected set.
Prior to testing we filter and order the candidate set C BO . Specifically, we retain only Pareto optimal
configurations from C BO , and arrange the remaining configurations by increasing p-values (approx-
imated by Dval ). Next, we recompute the p-values based on Dcal and perform FST, where we start
testing from the first configuration and continue until the first time the p-value exceeds δ. As a result,
we obtain the validated set C valid , and choose a configuration minimizing the free objective:
                                          λ∗ = min ℓfree (λ).                                          (12)
                                                  λ∈C valid
Our method is summarized in Algorithm D.2. As a consequence of (Angelopoulos et al., 2021;
Laufer-Goldshtein et al., 2023) we achieve a valid risk-controlling configuration, as we now
formally state.
Theorem 5.1. Let Dval = {Xi , Yi }ki=1 and Dcal = {Xi , Yi }k+m
                                                            i=k+1 be two disjoint datasets. Suppose
the p-value pλ , derived from Dcal , is super-uniform under Hλ for all λ. Then the output λ∗ of
Algorithm D.2 satisfies Eq. (1).

In situations where we are unable to identify any statistically valid configuration (i.e., C valid = ∅),
we set λ = null. In practice, the user can choose limits α1 , . . . , αc that are likely to be feasible
based on the initial pool of configurations C0 that is generated at the beginning of the BO procedure.
Specifically, the user may select αi ∈ [minλ∈C0 ℓi (λ), maxλ∈C0 ℓi (λ)], i ∈ {1, . . . , c}, and can
further refine this choice during the BO iterations as more function evaluations are accumulated.

6     A PPLICATIONS
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method for different tasks with diverse objectives,
where the definition of λ and its effect prior or post training, vary per setting.
Classification Fairness. In many classification tasks, it is important to take into account the be-
havior of the predictor with respect to different subpopulations. Assuming a binary classification
task and a binary sensitive attribute a = {−1, 1}, we consider the Difference of Demographic Par-
ity (DDP) as a fairness score (Wu et al., 2019):
                      DDP(f ) = E 1f (x)>0 |a = −1 − E 1f (x)>0 |a = 1 .

                                                                                               (13)


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We define the following loss parameterized by λ:
                             R(f ; λ) = (1 − λ) · BCE(f ) + λ · DDP(f
                                                                d ),                                 (14)
where BCE is the binary cross-entropy loss, and DDP      d is the hyperbolic tangent relaxation
of (13) (Padh et al., 2021). Changing the value of λ leads to different models that trade-off accuracy
for fairness. In this setup, we have a 1-dimensional    hyperparamter λ and two objectives: (i) the
error of the model ℓerr (λ) = E 1fλ (X)̸=Y , and (ii) the DDP defined in (13) ℓddp (λ) = DDP(fλ ).


Classification Robustness. Predictors often rely on spurious correlations found in the data (such as
background features), which leads to significant performance variations among different subgroups.
Recently, Izmailov et al. (2022) demonstrated that models trained using expected risk minimization
surprisingly learn core features in addition to spurious ones. Accordingly, they proposed to enhance
model robustness by retraining the final layer on a balanced dataset. We adapt their approach to
obtain different configurations, offering a trade-off between robustness and average performance.
Given a dataset D (either the training set or a part of the validation set) we denote by Db a balanced
subset of D with equal number of samples per subgroup, and by Du a random (unbalanced) subset of
D. We define a parameterized dataset Dλ in the following way. Let B ∼ Bern(λ) denote a Bernoulli
random variable with parameter λ. We randomly draw K i.i.d samples {Bi }K            i=1 , and construct
Dλ = {Xi , Yi }Ki=1 , where (Xi , Yi ) are randomly drawn from Db if Bi = 1 or from Du , otherwise.
We train the last layer with binary cross-entropy loss on the resulting dataset Dλ . As a result, we
have a 1-dimensional hyper-parameter λ that controls the degree  to which the  dataset is balanced. We
define two objective functions: (i) the average  error ℓerr (λ) = E  1fλ (X)̸=Y , and (ii) the worst error
over all subgroups ℓworst-err (λ) = maxg∈G E 1fλ (X)̸=Y |G = g where G ∈ G is the group label.
We also examine the case of selective classification and robustness. The selective classifier can
abstain from making a prediction when the confidence is lower then a threshold τ , i.e. fλ (x) < τ . In
this case, we have a 2-dimensional hyper-parmeter λ = (λ, τ ) and an additional objective     function
of the mis-coverage rate (where the predictor decides to abstain) ℓmis-cover (λ) = E 1fλ (x)<τ .


VAE. Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014) are gener-
ative models that leverage a variational approach to learn the latent variables underlying the data, and
can generate new samples by sampling from the learned latent space. We focus on a β-VAE (Higgins
et al., 2016), which balances the reconstruction error (distortion) and the KL divergence (rate):

          R(f ; β) = Epd (x) Eqϕ (z|x) [− log pθ (x|z)] + β · Epd (x) [DKL (qϕ (z|x)||p(z))] ,      (15)
where f consists of an encoder qϕ (z|x) and a decoder pθ (x|z), parameterized by ϕ and θ, respec-
tively, and p(z) is the latent prior distribution. Generally, models with low distortion perform high-
quality reconstruction but generate less realistic samples and vice versa. We have a single parameter
λ = β and two objectives ℓrecon (f ), ℓKLD (f ) defined by the left and right terms in (15), respectively.
Transformer Pruning. We adopt the three dimensional transformer pruning scheme proposed
in (Laufer-Goldshtein et al., 2023): (i) token pruning, removing unimportant tokens from the
input sequence, (ii) layer early-exiting, computing part of the model’s layers for easy exam-
ples, and (iii) head pruning, removing attention heads from the model architecture. We obtain
λ = (λ1 , λ2 , λ3 ) with the three thresholds controlling the pruning in each dimension, and
consider two objectives: (i) the accuracy difference between the pruned model and the  h full model
                                                                                                  i
ℓdiff-acc (λ) = E 1f (X)=Y − 1fλ (X)=Y and (ii) the respective cost ratio ℓcost (λ) = E C(fλ (X))

                                                                                        C(f (X)) .


7    E XPERIMENTS
We briefly describe the experimental setup and present our main results. Detailed setup information,
as well as additional results are provided in Appendixes B and C, respectively.
Baselines. We compare the proposed method to other baselines that differ only in the first stage
by their optimization mechanism. The second testing stage is the same for all baselines (and the
proposed method), therefore all baselines can be considered as variants of Pareto Testing (Laufer-
Goldshtein et al., 2023). We define two simple baselines: UNIFORM - a uniform grid in the
hyper-parameter space. R ANDOM - a uniform random sampling for n = 1 and Latin Hypercube
Sampling (LHS) (McKay et al., 2000) for n > 1. In addition, we compare to multi-objective opti-
mizers: HVI (same acquisition function as in the proposed method) and EHVI (Emmerich et al.,


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       (a) Fairness             (b) Robustness                (c) VAE                  (d) Pruning
Figure 3: Two objectives. Presents constrained (top) and free objectives (bottom). PAR EGO and
EHVI baselines appear in Fig. C.1 for the sake of clarity.
2006) with reference point defined by the maximum loss values, and PAR EGO (Knowles, 2006;
Cristescu & Knowles, 2015) using S MAC 3 implementation (Lindauer et al., 2022). We choose the
values of α for each task according to the range obtained from the initial pool of configurations.
See table B.1 for the range values for each objective. We set δ = 0.1 and δ ′ = 0.0001.
Datasets. We use the following datasets: Fairness - Adult (Dua et al., 2017), predict if the income
is above 50k$ with gender as a sensitive attribute; Robustness - CelebA (Lin et al., 2019), predict
if a person has blond hair, where the spurious correlation is the gender; VAE - MNIST (LeCun,
1998); Pruning - AG News (Zhang et al., 2015), topic news classification.
Two objectives. We examine the following scenarios: Fairness - error is controlled and DDP is
minimized; Robustness - avg. error is controlled and worst error is minimized; VAE - reconstruction
error is controlled and KLD is minimized; Pruning - error difference is controlled and relative cost
is minimized. Results are presented in Figs. 3 and C.1 , showing the mean scores over 50 random
calibration and test splits. Shaded regions correspond to 95% CI. We see that the proposed method is
superior over all baselines in almost all cases. The other baselines present an inconsistent behavior,
showing desired performance in certain tasks or for specific α values, and worse performance in
other cases. This is attributed to the fact that for the baselines the way the configurations are dis-
tributed over the Pareto front is arbitrary. Therefore, sometimes by chance we obtain configurations
that are near the testing limit (hence efficient), while in other cases the nearest configuration is far-
away (inefficient). On the contrary, the proposed method obtains a dense sampling of the relevant
part of the Pareto front, which results in tighter and more stable control across different conditions.
Additional Results. We consider a three-objective scenario of selective classification and robust-
ness, constraining the average error and the miscoverage rate and minimizing the worst error. We
see on Figs. C.2 and C.3 that the proposed method outperforms the baselines. We also explore the
budget for which we can match the performance of a dense uniform grid (with over 6K points) in
Fig. C.4. We show that N = 60 is sufficient, highlighting the computational advantage of the pro-
posed method. In addition, we examine the influence of δ ′ in Fig. C.6, showing that the method is
generally insensitive to δ ′ . Finally, Fig. C.7 shows that using the proposed region is preferable over
a single-sided upper bound, implying that it is important to exclude inefficient configurations.

8    C ONCLUSION
We present a flexible framework for reliable model selection that satisfy statistical risk constraints,
while optimizing additional conflicting metrics. We define a confined region in the objective space
that is a promising target for testing, and propose a BO method that identifies Pareto optimal configu-
rations within this region. By statistically validating the candidate set via multiple hypothesis testing,
we obtain verified control guarantees. Our experiments have demonstrated the effectiveness of our
approach for tuning different types of hyperparameters across various tasks and objectives, including
high-accuracy, fairness, robustness, generation and reconstruction quality and cost considerations.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Anastasios N Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Emmanuel J Candès, Michael I Jordan, and Lihua
  Lei. Learn then test: Calibrating predictive algorithms to achieve risk control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.01052, 2021.
Anastasios N Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Adam Fisch, Lihua Lei, and Tal Schuster. Conformal
  risk control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.02814, 2022.
Peter Auer. Using confidence bounds for exploitation-exploration trade-offs. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 3(Nov):397–422, 2002.
Johannes Bader and Eckart Zitzler. Hype: An algorithm for fast hypervolume-based many-objective
  optimization. Evolutionary computation, 19(1):45–76, 2011.
Rina Foygel Barber, Emmanuel J Candes, Aaditya Ramdas, and Ryan J Tibshirani. Predictive
  inference with the jackknife+. The Annals of Statistics, 49(1):486–507, 2021.
Stephen Bates, Anastasios Angelopoulos, Lihua Lei, Jitendra Malik, and Michael Jordan.
  Distribution-free, risk-controlling prediction sets. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 68(6):1–34, 2021.
Syrine Belakaria, Aryan Deshwal, and Janardhan Rao Doppa. Max-value entropy search for multi-
  objective bayesian optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
  ume 32, 2019.
Syrine Belakaria, Aryan Deshwal, Nitthilan Kannappan Jayakodi, and Janardhan Rao Doppa.
  Uncertainty-aware search framework for multi-objective bayesian optimization. Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 34(06):10044–10052, 2020.
Bernd Bischl, Martin Binder, Michel Lang, Tobias Pielok, Jakob Richter, Stefan Coors, Janek
  Thomas, Theresa Ullmann, Marc Becker, Anne-Laure Boulesteix, et al. Hyperparameter opti-
  mization: Foundations, algorithms, best practices, and open challenges. Wiley Interdisciplinary
  Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 13(2):e1484, 2023.
Clément Chadebec, Louis Vincent, and Stephanie Allassonniere. Pythae: Unifying generative au-
  toencoders in python - a benchmarking use case. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Bel-
  grave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35,
  pp. 21575–21589. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.
Weiyu Chen and James Kwok. Multi-objective deep learning with adaptive reference vectors. Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:32723–32735, 2022.
Cristina Cristescu and Joshua Knowles. Surrogate-based multiobjective optimization: Parego update
  and test. In Workshop on Computational Intelligence (UKCI), volume 770, 2015.
Samuel Daulton, Maximilian Balandat, and Eytan Bakshy. Parallel bayesian optimization of multi-
  ple noisy objectives with expected hypervolume improvement. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:2187–2200, 2021.
Kalyanmoy Deb, Amrit Pratap, Sameer Agarwal, and TAMT Meyarivan. A fast and elitist mul-
  tiobjective genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii. IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation, 6(2):
  182–197, 2002.
Jean-Antoine Désidéri. Multiple-gradient descent algorithm (mgda) for multiobjective optimization.
  Comptes Rendus Mathematique, 350(5-6):313–318, 2012.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Dheeru Dua, Casey Graff, et al. Uci machine learning repository, 2017.
Michael Emmerich, Nicola Beume, and Boris Naujoks. An emo algorithm using the hypervolume
 measure as selection criterion. In International Conference on Evolutionary Multi-Criterion Op-
 timization, pp. 62–76. Springer, 2005.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Michael TM Emmerich, Kyriakos C Giannakoglou, and Boris Naujoks. Single-and multiobjective
 evolutionary optimization assisted by gaussian random field metamodels. IEEE Transactions on
 Evolutionary Computation, 10(4):421–439, 2006.
Matthias Feurer, Katharina Eggensperger, Edward Bergman, Florian Pfisterer, Bernd Bischl, and
 Frank Hutter. Mind the gap: Measuring generalization performance across multiple objectives.
 In International Symposium on Intelligent Data Analysis, pp. 130–142. Springer, 2023.
Peter I Frazier. A tutorial on bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.02811, 2018.
Jacob Gardner, Matt Kusner, Kilian Weinberger, John Cunningham, et al. Bayesian optimization
  with inequality constraints. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 937–945.
  PMLR, 2014.
Chirag Gupta, Aleksandr Podkopaev, and Aaditya Ramdas. Distribution-free binary classification:
  prediction sets, confidence intervals and calibration. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. Advances
 in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Daniel Hernández-Lobato, Jose Hernandez-Lobato, Amar Shah, and Ryan Adams. Predictive en-
  tropy search for multi-objective bayesian optimization. In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 1492–1501. PMLR, 2016.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a
   constrained variational framework. In International conference on learning representations, 2016.
Wassily Hoeffding. Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random variables. The collected
 works of Wassily Hoeffding, pp. 409–426, 1994.
Sture Holm. A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian journal of statis-
  tics, pp. 65–70, 1979.
Hisao Ishibuchi, Ryo Imada, Yu Setoguchi, and Yusuke Nojima. How to specify a reference point
  in hypervolume calculation for fair performance comparison. Evolutionary computation, 26(3):
  411–440, 2018.
Pavel Izmailov, Polina Kirichenko, Nate Gruver, and Andrew G Wilson. On feature learning in
  the presence of spurious correlations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  38516–38532, 2022.
Florian Karl, Tobias Pielok, Julia Moosbauer, Florian Pfisterer, Stefan Coors, Martin Binder, Lennart
  Schneider, Janek Thomas, Jakob Richter, Michel Lang, et al. Multi-objective hyperparameter
  optimization–an overview. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07438, 2022.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.            Auto-encoding variational bayes.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Joshua Knowles. Parego: A hybrid algorithm with on-line landscape approximation for expensive
  multiobjective optimization problems. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 10(1):
  50–66, 2006.
Mina Konakovic Lukovic, Yunsheng Tian, and Wojciech Matusik. Diversity-guided multi-objective
 bayesian optimization with batch evaluations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
 tems, 33:17708–17720, 2020.
HJ Kushner. A new method of locating the maximum point of an arbitrary multipeak curve in the
  presence of noise. Journal of Basic Engineering, 86(1):97–106, 1964.
Stefanos Laskaridis, Alexandros Kouris, and Nicholas D Lane. Adaptive inference through early-
  exit networks: Design, challenges and directions. In Proceedings of the 5th International Work-
  shop on Embedded and Mobile Deep Learning, pp. 1–6, 2021.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bracha Laufer-Goldshtein, Adam Fisch, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Efficiently control-
  ling multiple risks with pareto testing. ICLR, 2023.
Yann LeCun. The mnist database of handwritten digits. http://yann. lecun. com/exdb/mnist/, 1998.
Jing Lei, James Robins, and Larry Wasserman. Distribution-free prediction sets. Journal of the
   American Statistical Association, 108(501):278–287, 2013.
Jing Lei, Max G’Sell, Alessandro Rinaldo, Ryan J Tibshirani, and Larry Wasserman. Distribution-
   free predictive inference for regression. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113
   (523):1094–1111, 2018.
Benjamin Letham, Brian Karrer, Guilherme Ottoni, and Eytan Bakshy. Constrained bayesian opti-
  mization with noisy experiments. Bayesian Analysis, 14(2), 2019.
Xi Lin, Hui-Ling Zhen, Zhenhua Li, Qing-Fu Zhang, and Sam Kwong. Pareto multi-task learning.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Xi Lin, Zhiyuan Yang, Qingfu Zhang, and Sam Kwong. Controllable pareto multi-task learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.06313, 2020.
Marius Lindauer, Katharina Eggensperger, Matthias Feurer, André Biedenkapp, Difan Deng, Car-
 olin Benjamins, Tim Ruhkopf, René Sass, and Frank Hutter. Smac3: A versatile bayesian opti-
 mization package for hyperparameter optimization. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 23:54–1, 2022.
Michael Lohaus, Michael Perrot, and Ulrike Von Luxburg. Too relaxed to be fair. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6360–6369. PMLR, 2020.
Debabrata Mahapatra and Vaibhav Rajan. Multi-task learning with user preferences: Gradient de-
  scent with controlled ascent in pareto optimization. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 6597–6607. PMLR, 2020.
Michael D McKay, Richard J Beckman, and William J Conover. A comparison of three methods for
 selecting values of input variables in the analysis of output from a computer code. Technometrics,
 42(1):55–61, 2000.
Gaurav Menghani. Efficient deep learning: A survey on making deep learning models smaller,
  faster, and better. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–37, 2023.
Jonas Močkus. On bayesian methods for seeking the extremum. In Optimization Techniques IFIP
  Technical Conference: Novosibirsk, July 1–7, 1974, pp. 400–404. Springer, 1975.
Aviv Navon, Aviv Shamsian, Gal Chechik, and Ethan Fetaya. Learning the pareto front with hyper-
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04104, 2020.
Kirtan Padh, Diego Antognini, Emma Lejal-Glaude, Boi Faltings, and Claudiu Musat. Address-
  ing fairness in classification with a model-agnostic multi-objective algorithm. In Uncertainty in
  Artificial Intelligence, pp. 600–609. PMLR, 2021.
Biswajit Paria, Kirthevasan Kandasamy, and Barnabás Póczos. A flexible framework for multi-
  objective bayesian optimization using random scalarizations. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelli-
  gence, pp. 766–776. PMLR, 2020.
Dana Pessach and Erez Shmueli. A review on fairness in machine learning. ACM Computing Surveys
  (CSUR), 55(3):1–44, 2022.
Wolfgang Ponweiser, Tobias Wagner, Dirk Biermann, and Markus Vincze. Multiobjective optimiza-
 tion on a limited budget of evaluations using model-assisted-metric selection. In International
 conference on parallel problem solving from nature, pp. 784–794. Springer, 2008.
Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Daan Wierstra. Stochastic backpropagation and ap-
  proximate inference in deep generative models. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1278–1286. PMLR, 2014.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Michael Ruchte and Josif Grabocka. Scalable pareto front approximation for deep multi-objective
 learning. In 2021 IEEE international conference on data mining (ICDM), pp. 1306–1311. IEEE,
 2021.

Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generaliza-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.08731, 2019.

David Salinas, Jacek Golebiowski, Aaron Klein, Matthias Seeger, and Cedric Archambeau. Opti-
  mizing hyperparameters with conformal quantile regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03623,
  2023.

Ozan Sener and Vladlen Koltun. Multi-task learning as multi-objective optimization. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

Bobak Shahriari, Kevin Swersky, Ziyu Wang, Ryan P Adams, and Nando De Freitas. Taking the
  human out of the loop: A review of bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE, 104(1):
  148–175, 2015.

S Stanton, W Maddox, and AG Wilson. Bayesian optimization with conformal prediction sets. In
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2023.

Vladimir Vovk. On-line confidence machines are well-calibrated. In The 43rd Annual IEEE Sym-
  posium on Foundations of Computer Science., 2002.

Vladimir Vovk, Ivan Petej, and Valentina Fedorova. Large-scale probabilistic predictors with and
  without guarantees of validity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2015.

Vladimir Vovk, Jieli Shen, Valery Manokhin, and Min-ge Xie. Nonparametric predictive distribu-
  tions based on conformal prediction. In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Conformal and
  Probabilistic Prediction and Applications, 2017.

Xilu Wang, Yaochu Jin, Sebastian Schmitt, and Markus Olhofer. Recent advances in bayesian
  optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.03301, 2022.

Christopher KI Williams and Carl Edward Rasmussen. Gaussian processes for machine learning.
  MIT press Cambridge, MA, 2006.

Maciej Wołczyk, Bartosz Wójcik, Klaudia Bałazy, Igor T Podolak, Jacek Tabor, Marek Śmieja,
 and Tomasz Trzcinski. Zero time waste: Recycling predictions in early exit neural networks.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:2516–2528, 2021.

Yongkai Wu, Lu Zhang, and Xintao Wu. On convexity and bounds of fairness-aware classification.
  In The World Wide Web Conference, pp. 3356–3362, 2019.

Yuzhe Yang, Haoran Zhang, Dina Katabi, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. Change is hard: A closer look at
  subpopulation shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12254, 2023.

Qingfu Zhang and Hui Li. Moea/d: A multiobjective evolutionary algorithm based on decomposi-
  tion. IEEE Transactions on evolutionary computation, 11(6):712–731, 2007.

Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. Character-level convolutional networks for text clas-
  sification. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.

Yunchuan Zhang, Sangwoo Park, and Osvaldo Simeone. Bayesian optimization with formal safety
  guarantees via online conformal prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.17815, 2023.

Eckart Zitzler and Lothar Thiele. Multiobjective optimization using evolutionary algorithms—a
  comparative case study. In International conference on parallel problem solving from nature, pp.
  292–301. Springer, 1998.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    A DDITIONAL RELATED WORK
Gradient-Based MOO. When dealing with differentiable objective functions, gradient-based
MOO algorithms can be utilized. The cornerstone of these methods is Multiple-Gradient Descent
(MGD) (Sener & Koltun, 2018; Désidéri, 2012), which ensures that all objectives are decreased
simultaneously, leading to convergence at a Pareto optimal point. Several extensions were proposed
to enable convergence to a specific point on the front defined by a preference vector (Lin et al.,
2019; Mahapatra & Rajan, 2020), or learning the entire Pareto front, using a preference-conditioned
model (Navon et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2020; Chen & Kwok, 2022; Ruchte & Grabocka, 2021).
However, this line of research focuses on differentiable objectives, optimizing the loss space
used during training, which is typically different from the ultimate non-differentiable metrics
used for evaluation (e.g. error rates). Furthermore, it focuses on recovering a single or multiple
(possibly infinitely many) Pareto optimal points, without addressing the actual selection of model
configuration under specific constraints, which is the problem we tackle in this paper.

B    I MPLEMENTATION AND DATASET DETAILS
We provide here further details on the datasets, model architectures, training procedures, and exam-
ined scenarios, which were used in our experiments.
Datasets and Evaluation Details. Detailed information on the datasets and the examined
scenarios is provided in Table B.1, including: the number of samples for each data split
(train/validation/calibration/test), the best and the worst performance for each objective (over the
validation set) and the optimization budget. We emphasize again the purpose of each data split.
The training dataset is used for learning the model’s parameters. The validation data is used for BO
in Algorithm D.1 and for ordering the chosen configurations. The calibration data is used for the
testing procedure. The final chosen λ∗ (12) is used for setting the model configuration. Finally, the
performance of the selected model is examined over the test dataset. We repeat the experiments,
with different splits to calibration and test sets, and report the scores of the test data, averaged over
different trials. We define the range of α bounds according to the values observed for the initial
pool of configurations that is generated at the beginning of the BO procedure. The minimum and
the maximum edge points obtained for each task appear in table B.1, and are also observed in the
examples shown on Fig. C.5. We choose values in between these extreme edge points, but not too
close to either side, since too small values may not be statistically achievable and too large values
are trivially satisfied (with tighter control not significantly improving the free objective).
Fairness. Our model is a 3-layer feed-forward neural network with hidden dimensions [60, 25]. We
train all models using Adam optimizer with learning rate 1e − 3 for 50 epochs and batch size 256.
Robustness. We use a ResNet-50 model pretrained on ImageNet. We train the models for 50 epochs
with SGD with a constant learning rate of 1e − 3, momentum decay of 0.9, batch size 32 and weight
decay of 1e − 4. We use random crops and horizontal flips as data augmentation. We use half of the
CelebA validation data to train the last layer, and the other half for BO.
VAE. We use the implementation provided by (Chadebec et al., 2022) of a ResNet-based encoder
and decoder, trained using AdamW optimizer with β1 = 0.91, β2 = 0.99, and weight decay 0.05.
We set the learning to 1e − 4 and the batch size to 64. The training process consisted of 10 epochs.
We use binary-cross entropy reconstruction loss for training the model, and the mean squared error
normalized by the total number of pixels (728) as the reconstruction objective function for hyperpa-
rameter tuning.
Pruning. We use a BERT-base model (Devlin et al., 2018) with 12 layers and 12 heads per layer.
We follow the recipe in (Laufer-Goldshtein et al., 2023) and attach a prediction head and a token
importance predictor per layer. The core model is first finetuned on the task. We compute the
attention head importance scores based on 5K held-out samples out of the training data. We freeze
the backbone model and train the early-exit classifiers and the token importance predictors on the
training data (115K samples).
Each prediction head is a 2-layer feed-forward neural network with 32 dimensional hidden states,
and ReLU activation. The input is the hidden representation of the [CLS] token concatenated with
the hidden representation of all previous layers, following (Wołczyk et al., 2021).



                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   Table B.1: Datasets Details

    Dataset    Train    Validation   Calibration   Test        Objectives (ℓ1 , ℓ2 )      (best ℓ1 , worst ℓ2 )   (worst ℓ1 , best ℓ2 )   N    N0

   Adult       32,559    3,618         4,522       4,523          (Error, DDP)              (0.154, 0.145)          (0.225, 0.01)         10   5
  CelebA      162,770    19,867        9,981       9,981    (Avg. Error, Worst Error)        (0.045, 0.62)          (0.089, 0.11)         15   5
  MNIST        50,000    10,000        5,000       5,000      (Recon. Error, KLD)             (0.008, 80)           (0.072, 0.01)         10   5
 AG News      120,000     2,500        2,500       2,600   (Acc. Difference, Rel. Cost)        (0.0, 1.0)             (0.8, 0.0)          50   30


                               (a) Fairness                                                   (b) Robustness


                                  (c) VAE                                                        (d) Pruning

Figure C.1: Two objectives, additional baselines (50 random splits) - presenting the scores obtained
for the free objectives. For the fairness task, ParEGO failed to find a valid configurations in 14%
and 2% of the runs for α = 0.166 and α = 0.17, respectively. Therefore we do not show the scores
of to this baseline in these two cases.


Similarly, each token importance predictor is a 2-layer feed-forward neural network with 32 dimen-
sional hidden states, and ReLU activation. The input is the hidden representation of each token in
the current layer and all previous layers (Wołczyk et al., 2021).

C       A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
In this section, we describe additional experiments and results.
Varying Optimization Budget. We examine the effect of varying the optimization budget N . We
show results for the pruning task with N ∈ {10, 20, 50}. In addition, we compare to a dense grid
with uniform sampling of all 3 hyperparmeters with a total of N = 6480 configurations. We see on
Fig. C.4 that the relative cost gradually improves with the increase in N and reaches the performance


                                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure C.2: Three-objectives, in the task of robustness with selective classification (50 random
splits): average error limited is by α1 ∈ [0.05, 0.08], miscoverage limited by α2 = 0.05, and worst
accuracy minimized.


Figure C.3: Three objectives, additional baselines - presenting the scores obtained for the free ob-
jective - worst accuracy.


of the dense grid approach with N = 50. This indicates that using our proposed method we can
significantly decrease the required budget without scarifying performance.
Demonstration of BO Selection. We show the outcomes of the proposed BO procedure across
different tasks in Fig. C.5. The reference point defined in (10) is marked in green, and the bound-
aries of the region of interest are depicted by the dashed lines. The blue points correspond to the
configurations in the initial pool C0 , while the red points correspond to the configurations selected
by our BO procedure. We see that the specified region is significantly smaller compared to the entire
front. Moreover, we observe that through BO we obtain a dense set of configurations that is confined
to the region of interest as desired.
Influence of δ ′ . We examine the influence of δ ′ , which determines the boundaries of the region
of interest. Figure. C.6 shows the scores obtained for different values of δ ′ . We observe that in
most cases there is no noticeable difference in the performance with respect to δ ′ , indicating that our
method is generally insensitive to this choice.
One sided bound. We compare the proposed method to the case that the BO search is constrained
by a one-sided bound at the upper limit defined in (7). Fig. C.7 shows the values of the free objective
across tasks. We see that in most cases performing the search in the defined region of interest
is preferable over a single-sided bound. This shows the benefit of removing low risk, inefficient
configurations from the search space (the green section in Fig. E.2).


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure C.4: Results of the proposed method over AG News for different number of evaluations,
and with a grid of thresholds. Results are averaged over 50 random splits. Accuracy reduction is
controlled and cost is minimized.


                (a) Fairness (α = 0.165)                    (b) Robustness (α = 0.07)


                   (c) VAE (α = 0.03)                         (d) Pruning (α = 0.05)

Figure C.5: Demonstration of the selection outcomes of the proposed BO: the green point is the
defined reference point, the blue points correspond to the initial set of configurations, and the red
points correspond to selected configurations. Dashed lines enclose the region of interest.


D    A LGORITHMS
Our proposed guided BO procedure and the overall method, are summarized in Algorithms D.1,
and D.2, respectively.


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       (a) Fairness            (b) Robustness                 (c) VAE               (d) VAE

Figure C.6: Influence of δ ′ . Showing the scores of the free objective for different values of δ ′ ,
which controls the width of the region of interest, defined in (7)


       (a) Fairness            (b) Robustness                 (c) VAE              (d) Pruning

Figure C.7: Ablation study - one sided bound instead of the defined two-sided region. Presenting
the scores obtained for the free objective.


E     M ATHEMATICAL D ETAILS
E.1   D ERIVATION OF THE R EGION OF I NTEREST
Suppose the loss is bounded above by 1, then Hoeffding’s inequality (Hoeffding, 1994) is given by:
                                                               2
                               P ℓ̂(λ) − ℓ(λ) ≤ −t ≤ e−2nt .                                  (16)
and
                                                             2
                                P ℓ̂(λ) − ℓ(λ) ≥ t ≤ e−2nt .                                     (17)
                                         q
                           2
for t > 0. Taking u = e−2nt , we have t = log(1/u)
                                              2n   , hence:
                                               r            !
                                                  log (1/u)
                           P ℓ̂(λ) − ℓ(λ) ≤ −                  ≤ u.                              (18)
                                                      2n
and
                                                   r               !
                                                       log (1/u)
                              P   ℓ̂(λ) − ℓ(λ) ≥                       ≤ u.                      (19)
                                                          2n
This implies an upper confidence bound
                                                       r
                                                           log (1/u)
                                  ℓ+
                                   HF (λ) = ℓ̂(λ) +                                              (20)
                                                              2n
and a lower confidence bound
                                                      r
                                                          log (1/u)
                                  ℓ−
                                   HF (λ) = ℓ̂(λ) −                 .                            (21)
                                                             2n


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm D.1 Testing-Guided Bayesian Optimization
Definitions: Dval = {Xi , Yi }ki=1 is the validation data. ℓ1 , . . . , ℓc and ℓfree are the objective func-
                                                                                                              high        high
tions, g1 , . . . , gc and gfree are their associated surrogate models. ℓlow                       low
                                                                                      1 , . . . , ℓc and ℓ1 , . . . , ℓc       are
the lower and upper bounds, respectively, for the first c objectives. C0 = {λ0 , . . . , λN0 } is an initial
pool of configurations and L0 = {ℓ̂(λ1 ), . . . , ℓ̂(λN0 )} are the associated objectives. N is our total
budget.
                                                                      high         high
  1: function BO(Dval , ℓ, C0 , L0 , {ℓlow                     low
                                                  1 , . . . , ℓc }, {ℓ1 , . . . , ℓj }, N )
  2:     Nmax ← N − N0
  3:     r ← ℓhigh    1  , . . . , ℓ high
                                     c    , max λ∈C 0
                                                      ℓ free (λ)                                    ▷ Initialize reference point.
  4:     for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . , Nmax − 1 do
  5:            Fit ĝ on (Cn , Ln )                                                                    ▷ Fit surrogate models.
  6:            rc+1 ← minλ∈Rlow ĝfree (λ)                                                           ▷ Update reference point.
  7:            P̂ ← ParetoFront(Ln )                                                                       ▷ Filter Pareto front.
  8:            λn+1 = arg maxλ HV I(ĝ(λ), P̂; r).                                         ▷ Optimize acquisition function.
  9:            Evaluate ℓ̂(λn+1 ) over Dval .                                                  ▷ Evaluate new configuration.
10:             Cn+1 ← Cn ∪ λn+1 .                                                                    ▷ Add new configuration.
11:             Ln+1 ← Ln ∪ ℓ(λ          ˆ      ).                                                 ▷ Add   new objective values.
                                            n+1
            BO
12:      C ← CNmax
13:      return C BO

Algorithm D.2 Configuration Selection
Definitions: f is a configurable model set by an hyperparameter λ. Dval = {Xi , Yi }ki=1 and Dcal =
{Xi , Yi }k+m
          i=k+1 are two disjoint subsets of validation and calibration data, respectively. {ℓ1 , . . . , ℓc } are con-
strained objective functions, and ℓfree is a free objective. {α1 , . . . , αc } are user-specified bounds for the con-
strained objectives. Λ is the configuration space. δ is the tolerance. N is the optimization budget. PARETO O P -
TIMAL S ET returns Pareto optimal points.
 1: function SELECT(Dval , Dcal , Λ, {α1 , . . . , αc }, δ, N )
                      high
 2:    Compute ℓlow
                 i , ℓi    for i ∈ {1, . . . , c} based on (7) and (8)             ▷ Determine the region of interest.
 3:    C0 , L0 ← Randomly sample an initial pool of configurations                         ▷ Generate an initial pool.
                                                             high      high
 4:    C BO ← BO(Dval ,ℓ, C0 , Lo , {ℓlow           low
                                      1 , . . . , ℓc }, {ℓ1 , . . . , ℓj }, N )             ▷ BO via Algorithm D.1.
 5:    C p ←PARETO O PTIMAL S ET(C BO )                                                         ▷ Filter Pareto points.
 6:    Compute pval
                 λ over Dval for all λ ∈ C
                                                 p
                                                                                  ▷ Compute approximated p-values.
 7:    C o ← Order configurations according to increasing pval    λ                           ▷ Order configurations.
 8:    Compute pcal
                 λ over Dcal for all λ ∈ C
                                                o
                                                                                                 ▷ Compute p-values.
 9:    Apply FST: C valid = {λ(j) : j < J}, J = minj {j : pcal       λ   ≥  δ}                           ▷ Apply FST.
10:    λ∗ = minλ∈C valid ℓfree (λ)                                           ▷ Choose best-performing configuration.
11:    return λ∗

In addition, we can use Hoeffding’s inequality to derive a valid p-value under the null hypothesis
Hλ : ℓ(λ) > α. By (18), we get:
                           r            !                           r            !
                              log (1/u)                                log (1/u)
          P ℓ̂(λ) − α ≤ −                  ≤ P ℓ̂(λ) − ℓ(λ) ≤ −                    ≤ u.       (22)
                                  2n                                      2n

For ℓ̂(λ) < α, we rearrange (22) to obtain:
                                                  2

                                   P e−2n(α−ℓ̂(λ)) ≤ u ≤ u,                                                                 (23)
                                                      2
                               −2m(α−ℓ̂(λ))
which implies that pHFλ := e
                                            + is super-uniform, hence is a valid p-value. Comparing


pHF
 λ  to δ, yields the maximum    empirical  loss ℓ̂(λ), evaluated over a calibration set of size m, which
can pass the test with significance level δ:
                                                     r
                                        max             log (1/δ)
                                      α      =α−                  .                                 (24)
                                                           2m
This can be equivalently obtained from the upper bound (20).


                                                               19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A tighter alternative to Hoeffding p-value was proposed in (Bates et al., 2021) based Hoeffding and
Bentkus inequalities. The Hoeffding-Bentkus p-value is given by:

             pHB
              λ = min exp{−mh1 (ℓ̂(λ) ∧ α, α)}, eP Binom(m, α) ≤ ⌈mℓ̂(λ)⌉                      (25)
where h1 (a, b) = a log( ab ) + (1 − a) log( 1−a
                                             1−b ). Note that for a given δ we can numerically extract
from (25) the upper and lower bounds corresponding to a 1 − δ confidence interval, and use it to
define the region of interest as in (7).
E.2   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 5.1
The proof is based on (Angelopoulos et al., 2021; Laufer-Goldshtein et al., 2023), which we repeat
here for completeness.

Proof. Recall that Dval and Dcal are two disjoint, i.i.d. datasets. Therefore, Dcal is i.i.d. w.r.t the
returned configuration set optimized in Algorithm D.1 over Dval .
We now prove that the testing procedure returns a set of valid configurations with FWER bounded
by δ. Let Hλ′ be the first true null hypothesis in the sequence. Given that pλ′ is a super uniform
p-value under Hλ′ , the probability of making a false discovery at λ′ is bounded by δ. This means
that the event that Hλ′ is rejected (false discovery) occurs with probability lower than δ. According
to the sequential testing procedure, all other Hλ that follow are also rejected (regardless of if Hλ is
true or not). Therefore the probability of making any false discovery is bounded by δ, which satisfies
the FWER control requirement.



E.3   H YPERVOLUME
An illustration of the hypervolume defined in (3) is given in Fig. E.1 for the 2-dimensional case. It
can be seen that the hypervolume is equivalent to the volume of the union of the boxes created by
the Pareto optimal points.


Figure E.1: An illustration of the hypervolume in the 2-dimensional case. The reference point is
marked in red and three Pareto optimal points are marked in blue.


E.4   I LLUSTRATION
Figure E.2 shows the partition of the Pareto front to the different regions, and demonstrates the
difference between Pareto Testing and the proposed method.


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure E.2: Left: Illustration of the different parts of the Pareto front. The green region consists of
configurations that are low risk (ℓ1 ≪ α) but inefficient in terms of the free objective ℓ2 . The brown
region consists of configurations that are efficient but high risk (ℓ1 ≫ α) and cannot pass the test. In
the middle we define the region of interest containing configurations that are likely to be both valid
and efficient. Right: comparing the proposed method to Pareto Testing for optimization budget
N = 10. In Pareto Testing there is no control on the distribution of the configurations on the front,
while our method focuses on the region of interest. As a result, there is a gap in the minimization
of ℓ2 for the chosen valid configuration (marked by v) in favor of the proposed method.


                                                  21
