Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


STATISTICAL REJECTION SAMPLING IMPROVES PREF -
ERENCE OPTIMIZATION

 Tianqi Liu∗ , Yao Zhao† , Rishabh Joshi† , Misha Khalman† , Mohammad Saleh† ,
 Peter J. Liu† , Jialu Liu∗
 {tianqiliu,yaozhaoyz,rishabhjoshi,khalman,msaleh,
 peterjliu,jialu}@google.com
 Google Research∗ , Google DeepMind†



                                           A BSTRACT

        Improving the alignment of language models with human preferences remains an
        active research challenge. Previous approaches have primarily utilized online Re-
        inforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF). Recently, offline methods
        such as Sequence Likelihood Calibration (SLiC) and Direct Preference Optimiza-
        tion (DPO) have emerged as attractive alternatives, offering improvements in sta-
        bility and scalability while maintaining competitive performance. SLiC refines its
        loss function using sequence pairs sampled from a supervised fine-tuned (SFT)
        policy, while DPO directly optimizes language models based on preference data,
        foregoing the need for a separate reward model. However, the maximum like-
        lihood estimator (MLE) of the target optimal policy requires labeled preference
        pairs sampled from that policy. The absence of a reward model in DPO constrains
        its ability to sample preference pairs from the optimal policy. Meanwhile, SLiC
        can only sample preference pairs from the SFT policy. To address these limita-
        tions, we introduce a novel offline approach called Statistical Rejection Sampling
        Optimization (RSO) designed to source preference data from the estimated target
        optimal policy using rejection sampling, enabling a more accurate estimation of
        the optimal policy. We also propose a unified framework that enhances the loss
        functions used in both SLiC and DPO from a preference modeling standpoint.
        Through extensive experiments across diverse tasks, we demonstrate that RSO
        consistently outperforms both SLiC and DPO as evaluated by gold reward, Large
        Language Models (LLMs) and human raters.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023;
Anil et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023) have unlocked unprecedented capabilities in diverse tasks, such
as programming and creative writing. Models are pre-trained on large unlabeled corpora and su-
pervised fine-tuned (SFT) on various tasks (Wei et al., 2021; Chung et al., 2022). Subsequently,
RLHF (Stiennon et al., 2020) enhances the alignment of large language models with human prefer-
ences. RLHF introduces notable complexities into the training process, including a reward model, a
policy model, a reference policy, and a value model. It limits the maximum feasible size of a model
due to memory constraints. Additionally, it is not stable during training. Recognizing these chal-
lenges, recent research has pioneered alternatives to RLHF. Notable among these are RRHF (Yuan
et al., 2023), SLiC (Zhao et al., 2022; 2023) and DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023). These methodolo-
gies aim to more effectively align LLMs with human preferences while avoiding the complexities
of reinforcement learning. Given supervised finetuning data Dsft = {(x, yref )} and preference data
Dhf = {(x, yw , yl )} where output text yw is preferred over yl on the same input text x, they di-
rectly fit the policy model on preference data in various ways. RRHF uses a trained reward model
or human raters to compute rewards for multiple sequences generated from difference sources on
the same prompt x, and then apply a ranking loss plus supervised fine-tuning loss. SLiC uses a
contrastive ranking calibration loss plus a regularization loss
              L(θ) = max (0, δ − log πθ (yw |x) + log πθ (yl |x)) − λ log πθ (yref |x),         (1)


                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: RSO first fits a pairwise reward-ranking model from human preference data. This model is
later applied to generate preference pairs with candidates sampled from the optimal policy, followed
by a preference optimization step to align sequence likelihood towards preferences.


where δ is a positive margin and πθ is the learnable conditional probability function by a language
model. SLiC either fits directly on human preference data or on preference data sampled from
the SFT policy. DPO analyzes RLHF’s objective function in the form of KL-regularized reward
maximization, and analytically solves the optimal policy induced by a reward function. Based on
the Bradley-Terry (BT) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952), DPO proposes an MLE to fit on human
preference data directly and expresses the human preference probability in terms of only the optimal
policy π ∗ and reference policy πsft :
                                                                   1
                    p∗ (y1   y2 |x) =                         ∗
                                                                                                    (2)
                                                                    2 |x)        π ∗ (y1 |x)
                                        1 + exp       β log ππsft(y
                                                                 (y2 |x) − β log πsft (y1 |x)

where π ∗ is the function to be estimated and β is a hyparameter in RLHF objective.
Empirically, one can leverage observed preference pairs to approximate p∗ (y1   y2 |x). To estimate
π ∗ as a density estimation problem, the optimal way is to fit a policy model on collected preference
pairs sampled from π ∗ . However, DPO uses the collected human preference data from other policies
directly in all the experiments and lacks a study on the effect of sampling. Although they propose
to sample pairs from the SFT policy and get them labeled by human, it is still not strictly MLE for
the preference model due to the mismatch between the sampling distribution and π ∗ . In reality, it is
very challenging to obtain human preference pairs directly sampled from π ∗ .
In this work, we address the above issues by constructing preference pairs from the approximated π ∗
(Figure 1). Starting with a human preference dataset Dhf collected from other policies, we first train
a pairwise reward-ranking model, then apply a statistical rejection sampling algorithm to generate
response pairs sampled from optimal policy by using SFT policy and the pairwise reward-ranking
model. After that, we label the sampled response pairs by the reward model. Then we fit the
model on labeled pairs via classification loss. DPO claims that the language model is secretly
a reward model, we show that the language model learns better from an explicit reward model
because comparing between two responses (reward) is easier to learn than generating high quality
responses (policy). Our statistical rejection sampling refers to the one in the statistical field (Neal,
2003). In RLHF works (Bai et al., 2022; Stiennon et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023), they usually
refer to rejection sampling as best-of-N or top-k-over-N algorithm, where they sample a batch of N
completions from a language model policy and then evaluate them across a reward model, returning
the best one or the top k. This algorithm has the issue of reward hacking because it trusts the reward
model too much without any regularization. In this paper we show that top-k-over-N is a special case
of our statistical rejection sampling and it is critical to balance between the reward exploitation and
regularization towards the SFT policy. To summarize, our contributions of this work are three-fold.

      • we propose a scalable and easy-to-implement framework to learn from human preference
        data. We provide a comprehensive recipe among different choices of loss functions and
        preference pairs generation. We show the importance of the reward model instead of di-
        rectly optimizing the model on the preference data.


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • we unify DPO and SLiC statistically by showing that they vary by loss functions to fit on
         human preference data: DPO is a logistic regression on human preference data and SLiC is
         almost equivalent to a support vector machine (SVM) with hinge loss. We improve SLiC
         as the SVM counter part of DPO.
       • we design a statistical rejection sampling algorithm to sample pairs from the estimated
         optimal policy and get them labeled by a pairwise reward-ranking model. The proposed
         sampling strategy is shown to be effective on several generative tasks.

2    P RELIMINARIES
Learning from Human Feedback Several works (Ziegler et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2023; Rafailov
et al., 2023) show the significant improvement of conditional language generation by learning from
human feedback data. All algorithms take two inputs:

       • πsft (y|x): a supervised fine-tuned policy (SFT), where x is the prompt and y is the response.
                          (i)   (i)
       • Dhf = {x(i) , yw , yl }N
                                i=1 : a human preference dataset that distinguishes the better re-
         sponse from the worse given the same prompt.

KL-Constrained Reward Maximization Objective Starting with a reward function r(x, y) and
input prompt distribution P, the DPO and RLHF optimizes for the following objective:

                        max Ex∼P,y∼π [r(x, y)] − βDKL π(y|x)||πsft(y|x)               (3)
                           π


Optimal Policy DPO solves the optimal policy πr (y|x) that maximizes the above objective:

                                         1                    1
                             πr (y|x) =      πsft (y|x) exp     r(x, y)                       (4)
                                        Z(x)                  β

for all x ∈ P, where Z(x) = y πsft (y|x) exp β1 r(x, y) is the partition function. β controls the
                               P

balance between exploitation and exploration. When β → 0, all probability mass will concentrate
on the max reward with full exploitation. When β → ∞, optimal policy will be the same as πsft
with full exploration. Rearrange the Equation (4) we get
                                                   πr (y|x)
                                 r(x, y) = β log              + β log Z(x).                              (5)
                                                   πsft (y|x)
The Equation (4) and (5) establish the relation between optimal policy and the reward function. In
reality, the final goal is to have a good policy for response generation and πr (y|x) is usually of more
interest. The key is to effectively estimate the πr (y|x) from the human preference data.

Preference Model Let the ground-truth reward function be r∗ , then the optimal policy π ∗ associ-
ated with r∗ can be represented by Equation (4). For two responses (y1 , y2 ) from the same input x,
Bradley-Terry (BT) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952) assumes that
                                P(y1   y2 |x) = σ(r∗ (x, y1 ) − r∗ (x, y2 )),                            (6)
where P(y1   y2 |x) represents the probability that response y1 is preferred over y2 give prompt
x. Reusing Equation (5), we obtain Equation (2). If we leverage the human preference data to
represent P(y1   y2 |x), the estimation of π ∗ can be viewed as a density estimation problem from
the preference data. We will discuss different ways of estimating π ∗ in Section 3.1.

Reward Model We train a pairwise T5-XXL (Raffel et al., 2020) text-to-text reward-ranking
model1 ρψ (x, y1 , y2 ) on Dhf to approximate P(y1   y2 |x). ρψ (x, y1 , y2 ) takes the text input as:

       • “[CONTEXT] {x} [SUMMARY A] {y1 } [SUMMARY B] {y2 }” for summarization task
    1
      SLiC demonstrates that pairwise reward model is preferred in RL-free learning. Our pairwise reward-
ranking model has accuracy of 73.23% on the validation set of summarization task and 69.75% on the validation
set of AI assistant task.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         • “[CONTEXT] {x} [RESPONSE A] {y1 } [RESPONSE B] {y2 }” for AI assistant task

ρψ (x, y1 , y2 ) outputs “A” or “B” as preferred one. We use the probability of decoding “A” as esti-
mation of the preference probability P̂(y1   y2 |x)2 . Suppose we have a baseline sequence yb with
reward score 0, we can induce the reward score of any sequence y as

                                      rψ (x, y) = logit(ρψ (x, y, yb )),                                   (7)

where logit(x) = log( 1−xx
                           ). This is a result of setting y1 = y, y2 = yb , and r∗ (x, y2 ) = 0 in
Equation (6), where we replace the win rate with the estimated one ρψ (x, y, yb ). Thus, “pointwise”
reward score can be derived from a “pairwise” reward-ranking model with a baseline sequence3 .


3       RSO A PPROACH

3.1     S TATISTICAL E STIMATION OF THE O PTIMAL P OLICY π ∗

Our proposed approach (Figure 1) takes inputs of SFT policy, reward-ranking model, and prompts.
First we sample responses from the optimal policy through rejection sampling approach, then we
fit a classification model on labeled preference pairs. To study the effectiveness of our approach,
we consider a few options on loss and preference dataset construction. Given a preference dataset
                  (i) (i)
Dp = {(x(i) , yw , yl )}, we can estimate π ∗ according to Equation (2). There are two aspects we
need to consider for estimating π ∗ :

         • Choice of loss function: To fit Equation (2) as a binary classifier using (r∗ (x, y1 ) −
           r∗ (x, y2 )) as logit with fixed slope and zero bias, we consider logistic loss used in logistic
           regression and hinge loss used in support vector machine (SVM).
         • Choice of Dp : Equation (2) does not depend on the distribution of y1 , y2 given x. Thus we
           need to decide how to obtain (x, y1 , y2 ) triplets.

                                                                             (i)   (i)
Choice of loss function Given a preference dataset Dp = {(x(i) , yw , yl )}, we can fit a binary
classifier according to Equation (2). DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) uses sigmoid loss on normalized
likelihood (sigmoid-norm) to fit a logitistic regression:

                                                                 πθ (yw |x)           πθ (yl |x)
   Lsigmoid-norm (πθ |πsft , Dp ) = −E(x,yw ,yl )∼Dp log σ γ log              − γ log                 (8)
                                                                 πsft (yw |x)         πsft (yl |x)

where DPO sets γ = β. In this work, we decouple γ from β and treat γ as an equivalent temperature
hyper-parameter. The larger the γ, the more we penalize the mis-classified examples at the decision
boundaries by trusting more on the preference labels.
SLiC (Zhao et al., 2023) proposed to use a hinge calibration loss4 as

           Lhinge (πθ |Dp ) = E(x,yw ,yl )∼Dp [max (0, 1 − [γ log πθ (yw |x) − γ log πθ (yl |x)])]         (9)

Note that we use 1/γ as the margin δ used in SLiC loss (Equation (1)). This is equivalent to a hinge
loss with logit (γ log πθ (yw |x) − γ log πθ (yl |x)). If we normalize the policy probabilities, we get
the SVM variation of DPO as the hinge loss on normalized likelihood (hinge-norm):

                                                                   πθ (yw |x)          πθ (yl |x)
 Lhinge-norm (πθ |πsft , Dp ) = E(x,yw ,yl )∼Dp max 0, 1 − γ log               − γ log
                                                                  πsft (yw |x)         πsft (yl |x)
                                                                                                     (10)
    2
      We randomly flip response pairs and associated labels to remove positional bias.
    3
      In practice, we choose a random decoded sequence from the SFT policy as the baseline. We can in theory
solve n reward scores from n2 comparisons with a baseline sequence via a constraint optimization setting. We
leave this for future study.
    4
      Subtle differences between SLiC loss and hinge-loss will be discussed in “Method” paragraph of Section 5.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Choice of preference data distribution Suppose we have access to the oracle preference data
                (i) (i)      (i) (i)                 ∗
D∗ = {(x(i) , yw , yl ) | yw , yl ∼ π ∗ (y|x(i) )}Ni=1 , we can directly fit an MLE on the dataset.
                                                                                         (i) (i)
In reality, we may not have access to such data, and we have access to Dhf = {(x(i) , yw , yl ) |
 (i) (i)
yw , yl ∼ πunk (y|x(i) )}Ni=1 , where πunk denotes some mixed unknown policies. The mixed un-
                            unk

known policies can include SFT policy, previous or current RLHF policy, or policies from other
agents (Touvron et al., 2023). Given Dhf , we consider the following three choices:
          • direct: directly fit the policy on Dhf according to Equation (2) as DPO without ρψ .
          • sft-sample-rank: use πsft (y|x) to sample response pairs given prompts from the SFT train-
            ing set and label them by ρψ .
          • rso-sample-rank: use πrψ (y|x) induced by rψ (x, y)5 according to Equation (4) to sample
            response pairs labelled by ρψ given prompts from the SFT training set.
Statistically speaking, since we are estimating π ∗ (y|x), it is desired to draw samples from π ∗ (y|x).
“rso-sample-rank” is the best solution towards this direction with samples from πrψ (y|x), which is
closer to π ∗ (y|x) than other two choices.

3.2       S TATISTICAL R EJECTION S AMPLING A LGORITHM

Statistical rejection sampling (Neal, 2003) is an efficient statistical technique to generate observa-
tions from a distribution. If we want to generate a distribution of density πrψ , we can use πsft as the
proposal distribution and follow the steps:
         1. Start with empty Y = {}.
         2. Generate y ∼ πsft (y|x) that is not in Y and u ∼ U [0, 1].
                                                                                        πr (y|x)
                                                              / Y}6 . If u < M πψsft (y|x) , then we
         3. Let M = min{m | mπsft (y|x) ≥ πrψ (y|x) for all y ∈
            accept y and add it to Y. Otherwise, we reject y.
         4. Repeat step 2 and 3 until we get enough Y.


Figure 2: Statistical rejection sampling illustration. There are three curves in the figure: M times
SFT policy, reward, optimal policy. The sample is first generated by SFT policy, then gets accepted
or rejected depending on whether a uniform random variable locates in acceptance or rejection
region. If the sample has high SFT policy probability but low optimal policy probability and reward
score, it has a higher chance of being rejected.

Figure 2 is an illustration7 of the statistical rejection sampling approach. A Python implementation
(Algorithm 1) with derivation is shown in Appendix A.1. The computation efficiency is discussed
in Appendix A.10 Regarding the algorithm, we have:
    5
        rψ (x, y) is induced from ρψ by Equation (7).
    6
        M can be expensive to compute. In practice, we don’t compute M . Instead we compute an estimation of
πrψ (y|x)
           directly from 64 sequences sampled by the SFT policy. See Section A.1 for details.
M πsft (y|x)
   7
    Although the output space of language models is a huge high-dimensional discrete space, we use a contin-
uous 1-d input space for illustration purpose.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 1. Let rmax be the maximum rewards among the response candidates not yet accepted. As
the number of response candidates goes to infinity, Algorithmh 1 can
                                                                     generate num samples
                                                                                         i distinct
                                                                     1
samples from πrψ with expected acceptance rate Ey∼πsft (y|x) exp β · (rψ (x, y) − rmax ) .

If β → ∞, each sample generated from the SFT policy will be accepted with probability 1. If β → 0,
only the highest reward response will be accepted and all other responses will be rejected. This is the
rejection sampling (top-k-over-N) referred by AnthropicHH (Bai et al., 2022) and Llama2 (Touvron
et al., 2023). β indicates how much we trust the reward model. If the reward model is very accurate
and robust, we should set a small β. Otherwise, we should set a larger β. In practice, we treat β as
a hyper-parameter and pick one according to validation metrics.


4   R ELATED W ORK

Preference Optimization RLHF has been a popular approach in learning from human prefer-
ence (Touvron et al., 2023; Stiennon et al., 2020). Recent works have proposed alternative solutions
to reinforcement learning (Zhao et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2023; Rafailov et al., 2023; Dong et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023; Song et al., 2023). By optimizing the model’s compatibility with prefer-
ence datasets under models such as the BT model, these methods fit on human or model ranked data
pairs. SLiC (Zhao et al., 2023) proposes a contrastive loss to fit on response pairs sampled from the
SFT policy. Similarly, RRHF (Yuan et al., 2023) uses a zero-margin likelihood contrastive loss on
ranked list of responses. DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) fits a model directly on human preference data
using the BT model. SLiC and RRHF lack theoretical understanding, and DPO does not optimally
estimate the policy density proposed. Our work unifies the losses of SLiC and DPO, and proposes an
improved estimation of the optimal policy. We sample preference pairs from the estimated optimal
policy, which is closer to on-policy online RLHF.

Rejection Sampling Statistical rejection sampling (Neal, 2003) is a statistical approach used to
generate samples from a target distribution. AnthropicHH (Bai et al., 2022) and ReST (Gulcehre
et al., 2023) refer to “rejection sampling” as selecting top k sampled candidates for further tuning.
Llama2 (Touvron et al., 2023) propose to use the same approach with PPO (Schulman et al., 2017)
to improve RLHF. Our work shows the existing approach is a special case of the proposed algorithm.


5   E XPERIMENTS

Tasks We study RSO on Reddit TL;DR summarization (Stiennon et al., 2020) and AnthropicHH
dialogue (Bai et al., 2022) datasets. The Reddit TL;DR summarization dataset contains both fine-
             tldr                               tldr    tldr
tune data Dsft    and human feedback data Dhf        . Dsft  contains 117k/6k/6k examples in train, vali-
                          tldr
dation and test splits. Dhf consists of 93k human preferences on decodes from multiple models.
The AnthropicHH is a dialogue dataset with x as conversation between a human query and an AI
                                     helpful
assistant. We use the helpful slice Dhf      from 161k/9k examples in train and test splits. We use the
positive responses as SFT targets. Besides, we study CNN/DailyMail datasets and show that RSO
works well on cross-task generalization from Reddit TL;DR (Appendix A.7).

Method Starting from a T5-large (770M) SFT policy and a T5-XXL (11B) pairwise reward-
ranking model, we consider nine settings as discussed in Section 3.1. The settings are all the com-
binations between loss functions and preference data distribution. DPO approach is the same as
sigmoid-norm-direct. SLiC is almost the same as hinge-sft-sample-rank in our setting with two
tiny differences. The first difference is that we drop the regularization loss (second term in Equa-
tion (1)) due to lack of significantly improvement the final metrics (Appendix A.6). The second
difference is that SLiC uses a tournament-style procedure to rank candidates in a list. Unless specif-
ically mentioned, we set β = 0.5 and γ = 0.05. To construct preference pairs, we first sample 64
response candidates from the SFT policy using temperature sampling with temperature = 0.7 and
top k = 40. Then we sub-sample 8 samples. We use batch size 32 and learning rate 1e-5 with
Adafactor optimizer (Shazeer & Stern, 2018). For each run, we pick the checkpoint with the highest
reward-ranking model win rate against the SFT target.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Evaluation Our experiments use four different approaches to evaluate: Proxy Reward Model,
Gold Reward Model, AutoSxS, and Human Evaluation. Proxy Reward Model computes win rate
of generated response against SFT target on the trained T5-XXL pairwise reward-ranking model.
Follow the recipe in Gao et al. (2023), we train a PaLM 2-S (Anil et al., 2023) on the same data as
Gold Reward Model8 . AutoSxS uses PaLM 2-L few-shot in-context learning with details covered in
Appendix A.4. Human Evaluation asks human raters to assign a quality score on each response and
determine the best one among three systems (details in Section 5.3).


5.1    P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON TWO TASKS

We include two additional baselines related to rejection sampling, RAFT (Dong et al., 2023) and
ReST (Gulcehre et al., 2023). For RAFT, we pick the best decoded sequence as new SFT target. For
ReST, we first normalize the reward scores to [0, 1], then pick the decoded sequences that are greater
than 0.7 as new sft targets. This is one round of grow and improve with normalized reward threshold
0.79 . The comparison results are shown in Table 1. RSO variants show significant gains over RAFT,
ReST, DPO, and SLiC variants on two tasks. Regarding preference pairs construction, “rso-sample-
rank” brings gains on top of “direct” and “sft-sample-rank” with a clear margin. Regarding the
loss function, sigmoid-norm and hinge-norm perform similarly. The improved hinge-norm loss is
better than hinge loss used in SLiC on AutoSxS. Hinge loss shows reward hacking in Reddit TL;DR
dataset with higher Proxy Reward win rates but lower AutoSxS than other losses. To compare
different methods qualitatively, we showcase an example with responses from different policies on
Reddit TL;DR and AnthropicHH tasks in Figure 4 and Figure 5 in Appendix A.3, respectively.

 Approach                      Ablation                                      Metrics
                   Loss            Preference Pair  Proxy Reward (%)        Gold Reward (%)      AutoSxS (%)
                                        Reddit TL;DR
 RAFT              cross-entropy   -                      74.84                   68.51              53.77
 ReST              cross-entropy   -                      49.03                   46.17              34.36
 DPO               sigmoid-norm direct                    84.35                   76.09              67.72
                   sigmoid-norm sft-sample-rank           88.63                   78.14              69.02
 RSOsigmoid-norm   sigmoid-norm rso-sample-rank           92.37                   82.22              71.86
 SLiCdirect        hinge           direct                 86.92                   79.76              60.54
 SLiCsample-rank   hinge           sft-sample-rank        90.15                   80.19              67.34
                   hinge           rso-sample-rank        93.36                   84.40              69.26
                   hinge-norm      direct                 83.93                   76.43              66.63
                   hinge-norm      sft-sample-rank        88.04                   76.57              68.46
 RSOhinge-norm     hinge-norm      rso-sample-rank        92.80                   83.45              70.84
                                        AnthropicHH
 RAFT              cross-entropy   -                      58.21                   40.00              24.99
 ReST              cross-entropy   -                      43.48                   30.33              15.58
 DPO               sigmoid-norm direct                    51.63                   36.13              24.01
                   sigmoid-norm sft-sample-rank           85.09                   58.65              39.56
 RSOsigmoid-norm   sigmoid-norm rso-sample-rank           86.94                   59.15              40.98
 SLiCdirect        hinge           direct                 35.95                   27.56              15.69
 SLiCsample-rank   hinge           sft-sample-rank        80.82                   54.55              30.66
                   hinge           rso-sample-rank        82.21                   55.22              32.56
                   hinge-norm      direct                 49.55                   37.23              22.89
                   hinge-norm      sft-sample-rank        82.40                   56.55              35.96
 RSOhinge-norm     hinge-norm      rso-sample-rank        84.44                   57.75              38.58

Table 1: Compare different methods with T5-large policy to leverage human feedback data. Proxy
reward, golden reward and few-shot PaLM 2-L win rate against SFT target text are reported.



   8
      The Gold Reward Model has accuracy of 76.07% on the validation set of summarization task and 70.18%
on the validation set of AI assistant task.
    9
      The threshold is suggested by the original paper. We pick one round of grow and improve as a fair com-
parison to one round of RSO, since RSO can also be done with multiple rounds.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.2   RSO ABLATION

Effect of γ and β in RSO To study the effect of γ, we fix the statistical rejection sampling β = 0.5,
and vary γ = 0.005, 0.05, 0.5 in the loss function on Reddit TL;DR dataset. Figure 3a shows that
γ = 0.05 provides the optimal win rate. To study the effect of β for rejection sampling, we fix the
γ = 0.05 in the loss function and vary β = 0, 0.05, 0.5, 5 on Reddit TL;DR dataset. Figure 3b
shows that β = 0.5 provides the optimal win rate.


                                                                   (b) Proxy reward win rate of various β
(a) Proxy reward win rate of var-                                  in statistical rejection sampling (Algo-
ious γ in loss functions (Equa-                                    rithm 1). γ is fixed at 0.05. The hor-
tion (8), (9), (10)). β is fixed at 0.5.                           izontal lines are from the sft-sample-
Shaded areas are 95% confidence in-                                rank preference pairs. Shaded areas
tervals.                                                           are 95% confidence intervals.

Figure 3: Effect of hyper-parameters in loss functions and statistical rejection sampling algorithm.



Preference pairs sampling and ranking To better understand the effect of tournament ranking
and statistical rejection sampling, we compare among different sampling strategies. Since we first
sample 64 responses from the SFT policy and followed by 8 responses by statistical rejection sam-
pling, it is natural to ask: “why not use all of the 64 samples in the calibration?” SLiC uses tourna-
ment ranking, which introduces bias towards higher reward sequences. Starting with n responses,
we can construct n/2 pairs and get them labeled. We call this approach “first-round-rank”. We can
keep the tournament until the winner is decided with a total of n − 1 pairs (each game eliminates one
response). We call this approach “tournament-rank”. We use sigmoid-norm loss and conduct abla-
tion study on six settings (Table 2). We observe that tournament ranking can bring consistent gains
across settings on reward model, but it cannot improve the AutoSxS win rate on rso-8-sample case.
Rso-8-sample-first-round-rank shows to be the optimal choice based on AutoSxS metric, which
means it is not always good to sample more responses or conduct the tournament ranking.

                    Preference Pair                  Proxy Reward (%)   AutoSxS (%)
                    sft-8-sample-first-round-rank          88.63           68.51
                    sft-8-sample-tournament-rank           90.69           68.57
                    rso-8-sample-first-round-rank          92.37           71.86
                    rso-8-sample-tournament-rank           93.35           71.69
                    sft-64-sample-first-round-rank         88.91           68.84
                    sft-64-sample-tournament-rank          91.14           71.08

Table 2: Comparison among different preference pairs sampling and ranking approaches on the
Reddit TL;DR dataset. “k-sample” means sampling k response candidates.


Scale up the policy model To understand how well the RSO can be scaled up to larger policy
models, we train a T5-XXL policy model and fix the loss as sigmoid-norm. Table 3 shows that RSO
scales up well and improves AutoSxS upon DPO by 1.1% and 33.1% on two tasks, respectively.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Approach          Preference Pair   Proxy Reward (%)      AutoSxS (%)
                                                  Reddit TL;DR
                      DPO               direct                  94.04               85.03
                                        sft-sample-rank         97.50               85.66
                      RSOsigmoid-norm   rso-sample-rank         98.29               86.01
                                                   AnthropicHH
                      DPO               direct                  76.84               52.80
                                        sft-sample-rank         94.91               66.79
                      RSOsigmoid-norm   rso-sample-rank         97.54               70.26

Table 3: Comparing sampling strategies to leverage human feedback data on T5-XXL policy model.


5.3        H UMAN E VALUATION R ESULTS

To further verify the improvements of RSO over others, we conduct human evaluation side-by-side
using Amazon Mechanical Turk. Given a document and three responses generated from “direct”,
“sft-sample-rank” and “rso-sample-rank”, raters are asked to assign a pointwise overall quality (1-5)
to each response, and choose the best one. Each task is replicated 3 times and therefore judged by
3 different raters. To eliminate bias, we anonymize all the models and randomly shuffle order of
responses for each task. We aggregate pointwise metrics by averaging the ratings across all replicas,
and we aggregate the choice metric using majority vote. The rating tasks are shown in Appendix A.5.
In total 47 different raters participated in the human evaluation study with a median of 16 tasks per
rater. The human evaluation results are shown in Table 4. “rso-sample-rank” shows to be better
than “direct” and “sft-sample-rank” in all loss functions and tasks evaluated with clear improvement
margins. RSOsigmoid-norm is chosen to be preferred more than 2x as DPO in both tasks. Comparing
between two losses, there is no clear conclusion on which one has higher quality when applying
“rso-sample-rank”. Thus improved loss on SLiC and original loss DPO perform similarly.

               Approach          Loss              Preference Pair   Chosen as Preferred10   Quality
                                                   Reddit TL;DR
               DPO               sigmoid-norm           direct               21%               3.84
                                 sigmoid-norm     sft-sample-rank            10%               3.74
               RSOsigmoid-norm   sigmoid-norm     rso-sample-rank            48%               4.02
                                 hinge-norm             direct               21%               3.80
                                 hinge-norm       sft-sample-rank            11%               3.68
               RSOhinge-norm     hinge-norm       rso-sample-rank            46%               3.97
                                                   AnthropicHH
               DPO               sigmoid-norm           direct               15%               3.04
                                 sigmoid-norm     sft-sample-rank            22%               3.21
               RSOsigmoid-norm   sigmoid-norm     rso-sample-rank            31%               3.37
                                 hinge-norm             direct               13%               3.33
                                 hinge-norm       sft-sample-rank            22%               3.56
               RSOhinge-norm     hinge-norm       rso-sample-rank            33%               3.60

                     Table 4: Human evaluation on ways of constructing preference pairs.



6        C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose RSO recipe to train large language models from human feedback as an
alternative to RLHF. Our recipe is simple and effective with a better sampling strategy than DPO and
SLiC. We unify loss functions used in DPO and SLiC from the preference optimization perspective
with the first as logistic regression and the other as support vector machine. We demonstrate our
approach to be powerful on multiple tasks with comprehensive numerical experiments and analysis.
Future work may include studying RSO on larger scale decoding samples, other loss functions, other
language generation tasks, online variants, and non-human feedback.
    10
         The proportion may not sum up to 100% because there are cases of same preference across all approaches.


                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Rohan Anil, Andrew M Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, et al. Palm 2 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10403, 2023.

Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
  2022.

Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
  Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.

Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Deepanshu Goyal, Rui Pan, Shizhe Diao, Jipeng Zhang, Kashun Shum,
  and Tong Zhang. Raft: Reward ranked finetuning for generative foundation model alignment.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06767, 2023.

Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10835–10866. PMLR, 2023.

Caglar Gulcehre, Tom Le Paine, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Ksenia Konyushkova, Lotte Weerts, Abhishek
  Sharma, Aditya Siddhant, Alex Ahern, Miaosen Wang, Chenjie Gu, et al. Reinforced self-training
  (rest) for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08998, 2023.

Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, Edward Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa
  Suleyman, and Phil Blunsom. Teaching machines to read and comprehend. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 28, 2015.

Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Kellie Lu, Thomas Mesnard, Colton Bishop, Victor
  Carbune, and Abhinav Rastogi. Rlaif: Scaling reinforcement learning from human feedback with
  ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00267, 2023.

Radford M Neal. Slice sampling. The annals of statistics, 31(3):705–767, 2003.

R OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv, pp. 2303–08774, 2023.

Reiner Pope, Sholto Douglas, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Jacob Devlin, James Bradbury, Jonathan
  Heek, Kefan Xiao, Shivani Agrawal, and Jeff Dean. Efficiently scaling transformer inference.
  Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 5, 2023.

Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.18290, 2023.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

Noam Shazeer and Mitchell Stern. Adafactor: Adaptive learning rates with sublinear memory cost.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4596–4604. PMLR, 2018.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lei Shu, Liangchen Luo, Jayakumar Hoskere, Yun Zhu, Canoee Liu, Simon Tong, Jindong Chen,
  and Lei Meng. Rewritelm: An instruction-tuned large language model for text rewriting. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.15685, 2023.

Feifan Song, Bowen Yu, Minghao Li, Haiyang Yu, Fei Huang, Yongbin Li, and Houfeng Wang.
  Preference ranking optimization for human alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.17492, 2023.

Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.

Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Liang Chen, Feifan Song, Binghuai Lin, Yunbo Cao, Tianyu Liu, and Zhi-
  fang Sui. Making large language models better reasoners with alignment. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.02144, 2023.

Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.01652, 2021.

Zheng Yuan, Hongyi Yuan, Chuanqi Tan, Wei Wang, Songfang Huang, and Fei Huang. Rrhf:
  Rank responses to align language models with human feedback without tears. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.05302, 2023.

Yao Zhao, Misha Khalman, Rishabh Joshi, Shashi Narayan, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J
  Liu. Calibrating sequence likelihood improves conditional language generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.00045, 2022.

Yao Zhao, Rishabh Joshi, Tianqi Liu, Misha Khalman, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J Liu. Slic-hf:
  Sequence likelihood calibration with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10425, 2023.

Zhanhui Zhou, Jie Liu, Chao Yang, Jing Shao, Yu Liu, Xiangyu Yue, Wanli Ouyang, and Yu Qiao.
  Beyond one-preference-for-all: Multi-objective direct preference optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.03708, 2023.

Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   S TATISTICAL R EJECTION S AMPLING A LGORITHM

A Python Implementation A Python implementation of the algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Statistical Rejection Sampling Algorithm in Python
from typing import List
import numpy as np


def conduct_rejection_sampling(response_candidates: List[str],
                               response_rewards: List[float],
                               num_samples: int,
                               beta: float):
  """Conducts rejection sampling guided by rewards.

 Args:
   response_candidates: response candidates from the SFT policy
   response_rewards: response rewards.
   num_samples: number of samples to sub-sample.
   beta: beta parameter in KL-constrained reward maximization objective.

 Returns:
   Rejection sampled sequences from the estimated optimal policy.
 """
 candidates = {c: r for c, r in zip(response_candidates, response_rewards)}
 accepted = []
 while len(accepted) < num_samples:
   max_reward = max(candidates.values())
   to_remove = []
   for c, r in candidates.items():
     u = np.random.uniform()
     if u >= np.exp((r - max_reward) / beta):
       continue
     accepted.append(c)
     to_remove.append(c)
     if len(accepted) == num_samples:
       break
   for c in to_remove:
     candidates.pop(c)

 return accepted


Derivation of Algorithm 1 According to Equation (4), we have

                                         1                    1
                       πrψ (y|x) =           πsft (y|x) exp     rψ (x, y) ,                  (11)
                                      Zψ (x)                  β
where Zψ (x) = y πsft (y|x) exp( β1 rψ (x, y)). Then we have
               P


                            πrψ (y|x)         1           1
                                        =           exp     rψ (x, y) .                      (12)
                            πsft (y|x)     Zψ (x)         β
                                                                                      ψ
                                                                                         πr (y|x)
It’s clear that MDx , min{m | m · πsft (y|x) ≥ πrψ (y|x) for all y ∈
                                                                   / Dx } = maxy∈D
                                                                                / x πsft (y|x) ,
then
                                   1                  1
                         MDx =            max exp       rψ (x, y) .                        (13)
                                Zψ (x) y∈D / x        β

Then we have
                       πrψ (y|x)                   1
                                     = exp              rψ (x, y) − max rψ (x, y)   .        (14)
                      MDx πsft (y|x)               β               y ∈D
                                                                     / x

By using the sample version of maxy∈D
                                   / x rψ (x, y), we have derived the Algorithm 1.


A.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Proof. Let the process of generation be the one described in Algorithm 1 and the accepted sequence
set be Dx at the current step, we have

                                                              πrψ (y|x)
               P(sample y and get accepted|x) = P u <                        πsft (y|x)
                                                            MDx πsft (y|x)
                                                     1
                                                =       πr (y|x),                             (15)
                                                   MDx ψ
where MDx , min{m | m · πsft (y|x) ≥ πrψ (y|x) for all y ∈
                                                         / Dx }.


                                                        12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   πrψ (y|x)
                   P(y get accepted|x) = P(u <                   )
                                                 MDx πsft (y|x)

                                                     πrψ (y|x)
                                       = E1 u <
                                                   MD πsft (y|x)
                                                   x
                                                             πrψ (y|x)
                                       = Eπsft E1 u <                     y
                                                           MDx πsft (y|x)

                                                  πrψ (y|x)
                                       = Eπsft
                                                 MDx πsft (y|x)
                                           1
                                       =                                                   (16)
                                         MDx


                                        P(sample y and get accepted|x)
              P(y|y is accepted, x) =                                  = πrψ (y|x).        (17)
                                             P(y get accepted|x)

By Equation (13), we have the acceptance rate

                   1                         1
                      = Ey∼πsft (y|x) exp      · rψ (x, y) − max rψ (x, y)                 (18)
                MDx                          β               y ∈D
                                                               / x


A.3   Q UALITATIVE EXAMPLES OF RSO COMPARING WITH OTHER APPROACHES

The qualitative comparisons between RSO and other approaches are shown in Figure 4 and Figure 5
for Reddit TL;DR and AnthropicHH, respectively.


Figure 4: Example summaries generated by SFT, SLiC, DPO, and RSO policies for a Reddit post.
RSO generates the best summary among the four because it concisely and precisely summarizes key
information in the forum post. Salient details are bolded.



                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Example responses generated by SFT, SLiC, DPO, and RSO policies for a Human-
Assistant dialogue on AnthropicHH dataset. RSO generates the most helpful response among the
four because it gives a clear and straightforward answer for sending a letter quickly through tradi-
tional mail. In contrast, SFT repeats information about email rather than answering the question
about traditional mail. SLiC and DPO are vague and repetitive. Salient details are bolded.


A.4     PA LM 2-L DETAILS AND F EW- SHOT S X S TEMPLATE

A.4.1    DETAILS

The purpose of the AutoSxS is to prevent the artificially high reward scores by Reward Model due to
reward hacking on learned policies. Since the policy is trained using the information in the pairwise
reward-ranking model, it is not necessary the higher the win rate on reward-ranking model, the better
the policy. AutoSxS uses PaLM 2-L few-shot in-context learning to infer 8 decodedsamples with 4
flipped order of response A and B. The label contains three choices: A, B, and tie withscore 1, 0, and
0.5, respectively. To ensure the robustness, we use average score to determine the win or loss if the
magnitude exceeds 0.35. The AutoSxS has been demonstrated as effective and consistent in DPO
using GPT-4 as zero-shot rater. In this work, we replace GPT-4 with PaLM 2-L for our evaluation
using few-shot prompts. The quality of PaLM 2-L on similar tasks has been shown to be close to
human raters (Lee et al., 2023; Shu et al., 2023). The systematic study on consistency and quality of
AutoSxS is beyond the scope of this work.

A.4.2    R EDDIT TL;DR F EW-S HOT P ROMPTS
task: Judge the quality of two TLDRs, choose the options among (A), (B) or same.
context: I’ve (M[21]) been in a relationship for a year and a half with F[22] and it really has never
gone well. I think we want different things and we are not overly compatible. I broke up with her
about a year ago and she tried to kill herself so we got back together. This week I met an F[19] who
I think I’m really compatible with. She and I talked for a few hours and we have a lot in common. I
like her a lot, but she is currently a freshman and I am currently a senior so I will be graduating in
May and going on to a prestigious PhD program starting next fall.
So here are my questions: * What should I do in regards to my current relationship? I know I need
to end it, but I just don’t know how. * What should I do in regards to the other girl? * Do you think
my feelings for the other girl stem from my distaste for my current relationship?
I appreciate any help you give me.
tldr (A): I’m unhappy in my current relationship with a girl I just met, but don’t know how to end


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


it. I have no idea what I’m doing or what to do.
tldr (B): M[21] unhappy in relationship with F[22]. Met an F[19] in town with similar interests and
I really like her. What should I do in regards to current relationship/other girl?
explanation: tldr (A)’s second and third sentences convey similar idea and are redundant. tldr (B)
mentions an important piece of information of the new girl, contains more details than tldr (A) and
is concise at the same time.
choose among (A), (B) or same: (B)
context: Before anything, not a sad story or anything, I don’t think she’s cheating or anything of
the sorts. My country’s equivalent to Valentine’s Day is coming and I had this pretty simple idea to
surprise my girlfriend and it would involve giving her some roses. The thing is, although I know she
would appreciate my intention in and of itself, I don’t know if she would like the actual flowers and
such, so I wanted to find out if she likes roses and if she would like getting some, but without her
realizing it so as not to spoil the surprise. Any ideas on how to get that information out of her? tldr
(A): How do I find out if my girlfriend likes roses without her realizing it?
tldr (B): I want to surprise my girlfriend with some flowers when Valentine’s Day is around the
corner, but I don’t know if she would like the flowers or flowers themselves without her knowing.
explanation: tldr (A) is a concise that captures the main idea. tldr (B) also captures the main point
with more details, but the language ’flowers or flowers themselves’ is not fluent.
choose among (A), (B) or same: (A)
context: Okay, so my younger brothers were out and about when they passed some teenagers who
yelled obscenities at them. My father then went over and told them to knock it off, when they started
yelling obscenities at him. My dad, with a small amount of temper, got angry and yelled at them.
They started recording it and made a video on YouTube where it looked like he was just screaming
at them. After that, we were able to get it taken down only to have it reuploaded with blurred faces.
We have in no way given consent to be in this video. Is there any way we can get them to take it
doen?
tldr (A): my dad got angry at teenagers for yelling obscenities at him, they got a video on youtube
and blurred faces, what can we do to get it taken down?
tldr (B): My brothers were being verbally harassed by kids, father yelled at them, they made a video
of it to get the video taken down, it was like a blur with blurred faces.
explanation: tldr (A) mentions most main points of story while skipping some details like younger
brothers being yelled at and original videos taken down. tldr (B) has a major factual error, they
didn’t make a video to get the video taken down.
choose among (A), (B) or same: (A)
context: Apologize for the throw away account.
My friend is interested in in making his way into the mainstream music industry as an A&R repre-
sentative. He has a 4 year degree in English but did some extra curricular activities around music
business in college. He also has had 2 internships out of college with small time record labels in the
Chicago area. He has been trying for a few years now with no success. He lives in Chicago but has
moved to LA for a year. He returned recently to Chicago. It has been about 3 years since his last
internship, but he has done some online collaboration stuff. Still far and few in between.
My question is what path have any of you taken to make your way into the record industry? Is
networking the only important thing? Is there a set of skills that are specifically looked for?
tldr (A): My friend wants to make his way into the music industry as an A&R representative. What
does he need to know to make it happen?
tldr (B): friend wants to break into the music industry as an A&R rep. what is the best way to do
this?
explanation: tldr (A) and (B) are basically paraphrase of each other. With (A) slightly more verbose
and (B) slightly more concise.
choose among (A), (B) or same: same
context: I was at a concert this weekend supporting my favorite artist. Most of the amphitheater
was standing, however *some* people in my section were not (including some people behind me
and to my right). All of a sudden at the end of the set I got basically shoved in the back and told to
sit down. I told them absolutely not, I want to support my favorite artist (who kept saying STAND
UP, btw). I paid over $100 for these seats and I want to have a great time.. after all this IS a concert.



                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Not to mention, I heard them calling me names before they confronted me so now I was certainly
not going to sit down. Then a few songs later the woman sitting next to me told me what a bitch I
was for not letting the people behind me see. Was I in the wrong here?
tldr (A): I stood up at a concert, people in front of me didn’t and confronted me. Was I in the wrong?
tldr (B): I stood up at a concert even though I was told not to. I got yelled at by a woman who was
sitting next to me. Was I in the wrong?
explanation: tldr (A) doesn’t say who confronted the author or wrongly implied it was the people in
front. tldr (B) is correct but could mention that more people confronted the author than the woman
sitting next.
choose among (A), (B) or same: (B)

A.4.3    A NTHROPIC HH F EW- SHOT P ROMPTS
task: For the following query to a chatbot, which response is more helpful? Choose among (A), (B)
and same.
context: Human: Why can’t humans build a space station on the moon? Assistant: That’s a really
good question. We don’t know yet if we’ll be able to build a space station on the moon, though
it seems quite feasible. But we can also look at the science for something more ambitious, like a
spaceship that’s large enough to make a round trip to Mars. That might be hard to do! Even with the
technology we have now, it’s not clear to scientists how you’d build a spaceship that would travel
for months in space. Human: I think we should start on the Moon first.
response (A): Assistant: I think you’re right that the Moon is a good place to start, since it’s a
natural satellite of Earth. There are a lot of interesting places on the Moon to study, but we have to
go to Mars to check out the atmosphere, the conditions on the ground, and the survival potential of
humans, and to see if there are living things.
response (B): Assistant: The problem is that we don’t know yet if it’s even possible to build a space
station on the moon. But let’s assume we could do it, and see how far we could get with a spaceship
to Mars.
explanation: Response (A) offers a more expansive and engaged exploration of the user’s sentiment
about starting with the Moon, while Response (B) reiterates previous information without addressing
the user’s perspective or adding new insights.
choose among (A), (B) and same: (A)
context: Human: What is garam masala?
Assistant: Garam masala is a mixture of spices, typically consisting of cumin, pepper, garlic, and
either coriander, ginger, or both. It’s frequently used in curries or vegetable dishes, but it’s also
added to some vegetable or meat sides, or used as a spread.
Human: What other things can I add to it to make it unique?
Assistant: Try adding some of the following ingredients, in any combination you like: turmeric
cinnamon cardamom celery seeds fennel fresh chilies, like jalapeños or Thai chiles grated ginger
green onions basil mint
Human: Is there a sweet garam masala?
Assistant: Yes, some garam masasalas are sweetened. They might contain sugar or honey, or they
might be just made with ground cinnamon or cardamom. You might also want to mix some sort of
mango or pineapple relish into your garam masala.
Human: What is a good use for sweet garam masala?
response (A): Assistant: You might use it to flavor vegetable or meat stews, or chilies, or as a
spread on toast. You might mix some into yogurt or fruit salad, or serve it with nuts and chutney on
crackers.
response (B): Assistant: Sweet garam masala is typically used in desserts like ice cream or fudge,
or in sweet curries like risotto or köfte. You can also use it in curries to add a sweet flavor. You can
also use it as a spice rub for meats, like chicken or fish. You can also use it as a spice mix in a curry,
or you can use it to make a sweet sauce for a curry.
explanation: Response (B) offers specific and diverse uses of sweet garam masala, allowing the
user to get a clearer idea of its potential applications in cooking.
choose among (A), (B) and same: (B)


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


context: Human: What is the customary amount to tip a taxi driver?
response (A): Assistant: The standard tip for taxi drivers in the United States is typically a 20% tip.
This is a fairly standard tip that is given to taxi drivers for a job well done, and it’s also a nice gesture
to show your appreciation for their service. The tip can be more or less depending on the driver’s
service and the level of professionalism they showed. If you’re considering tipping a taxi driver, I
would recommend giving them a tip of at least 20%.
response (B): Assistant: A standard 10% tip is recommended.
explanation: Response (A) provides a clear recommendation, contextualizes it to a specific country
(the U.S.), and offers additional guidance based on the quality of service. It’s more comprehensive
than response (B).
choose among (A), (B) and same: (A)

A.5    H UMAN S X S TEMPLATES

Reddit TL;DR and AnthropicHH human evaluation template are shown in Figure 6 and Figure 7,
respectively.


               Figure 6: Example of human evaluation task on Reddit TL;DR dataset.


A.6    R EGULARIZATION IN SL I C

Table 5 shows the SLiC results with different regularization weights. There is no strong gain by
adding the regularization loss. And we drop it to align better with the DPO setting.

A.7    C ROSS - TASK ADAPTATION AND GENERALIZATION
                                                                                         cnndm
The CNN/DailyMail dataset (Hermann et al., 2015) contains only fine-tuned data Dsft             with
287k/13k/11k examples in train, validation and test splits. We use the dataset to test the cross-
task generalization of different approaches. We assume no access to any target or preference texts
of the CNN/DailyMail dataset during training. Starting from a SFT model trained on Reddit TL;DR
  tldr                                                                                tldr
Dsft   , we further optimize the SFT policy using preference data from Reddit TL;DR Dhf    . For “di-
rect”, we use the preference directly. For “sft-sample-rank” and “rso-sample-rank”, we first fit a


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Figure 7: Example of human evaluation task on AnthropicHH dialogue dataset.


                          Regularization   Proxy Reward (%)   AutoSxS (%)
                                0                90.15           67.34
                               0.5               90.45           67.64
                                5                90.25           67.79
                               50                90.83           67.84
                              500                90.06           67.44

Table 5: Comparison on different regularization in SLiC. Adding regularization does not show sig-
nificant improvement.



reward-ranking model and then generete preference pairs using prompts from the training set of
                                                                                      cnndm
CNN/DailyMail. We evaluate the performance using target texts on validation split of Dsft   . From
Table 6, the RSO also consistently improves over SLiC and DPO for cross-task transfer.


        Approach                     Ablation                          Metrics
                          Loss           Preference Pair   Proxy Reward (%) AutoSxS (%)
        DPO               sigmoid-norm direct                    61.31         37.36
                          sigmoid-norm sft-sample-rank           62.72         38.63
        RSOsigmoid-norm   sigmoid-norm rso-sample-rank           69.38         39.71
        SLiCdirect        hinge          direct                  64.18         33.63
        SLiCsample-rank   hinge          sft-sample-rank         67.16         33.21
                          hinge          rso-sample-rank         71.62         35.46
                          hinge-norm     direct                  60.04         33.91
                          hinge-norm     sft-sample-rank         61.77         40.63
        RSOhinge-norm     hinge-norm     rso-sample-rank         69.82         42.18

    Table 6: Compare different methods to leverage human feedback data on CNN/DailyMail.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.8    OTHER BASELINES

In Table 1, we did not include the baselines for RRHF and RLHF. For RRHF, we don’t have access
to other LLM systems and it is hard to establish an apples-to-apples comparison. Furthermore, the
loss function of RRHF is very similar to SLiC. We believe our sampling technique can also improve
RRHF, but we leave it as a future study. For RLHF, we lack expertise on RLHF and DPO shows it
to be a competitive alternative. The main purpose of this work is to improve upon DPO and SLiC
with a better sampling strategy.

A.9    D EEPER E XAMINATION OF B IAS AND FAIRNESS IN L ANGUAGE M ODELS

This section delves into the critical aspects of bias and fairness in language models, particularly in
relation to our proposed methodology. The works of Anil et al. (2023) and Touvron et al. (2023)
offer insightful evaluations of bias and fairness in both pre-trained and aligned language models. In
terms of aligning with human preferences, our approach incorporates two academic datasets: the
Reddit TL;DR summarization (Stiennon et al., 2020) and the AnthropicHH dialogue (Bai et al.,
2022). Our primary objective is to enhance alignment with human preferences, focusing on the
quality of summaries in Reddit TL;DR and the helpfulness in AnthropicHH dialogues.
In practical scenarios, reward scores are often multi-dimensional, and the aim of alignment is to
attain a Pareto optimal frontier (Bai et al., 2022). This allows for the introduction of additional ob-
jectives such as harmlessness, safety, and bias preference pairs. Our method is adaptable, function-
ing with either weighted-averaged reward scores or through integration with multi-objective DPO
loss functions (Zhou et al., 2023). Experimental studies have demonstrated that our RSO method
effectively aligns with human preference pairs.
We posit that our approach has the potential to enhance fairness and reduce bias in language models,
provided it is applied with appropriate human preference pairs. However, it is important to note that
a comprehensive study of fairness and bias falls beyond the scope of this work.

A.10    C OMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY

Compared with PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), RSO only needs a policy network during training,
while PPO needs four networks (policy, value, reward, and reference network). Besides, rso-
sample-rank is fully parallelized over the whole dataset, while PPO needs sampling at each step
and is parallelized within the batch. Now we focus a comparative analysis of the computational effi-
ciency among different offline methodologies. Our comparison includes RAFT (Dong et al., 2023),
ReST (Gulcehre et al., 2023), DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023), SLiC-HF-direct (Zhao et al., 2023), SLiC-
HF-sample-rank (Zhao et al., 2023), and our proposed RSO. Notably, most approaches, except DPO
and SLiC-HF-direct, require the training and inference of a (pairwise) reward model.
Table 7 delineates the efficiency comparison among the considered approaches. For methods involv-
ing a pairwise reward model with nc decoded candidates and nd selected candidates for RSO, the
following specifics are noted:

       • RAFT: Requires nc decodings from the SFT policy and nc − 1 comparisons for tournament
         ranking.
       • ReST: Involves nc SFT decodings and nc −1 comparisons with a randomly chosen baseline
         sequence, followed by normalization of reward scores and truncation based on a threshold.
       • DPO/SLiC-HF-direct: directly optimize on the human preference data without a reward
         model and SFT decoded sequences.
       • SLiC-HF-sample-rank: Samples nd sequences, subsequently employing nd −1 tournament
         ranking comparisons.
       • RSO: Our method samples nc decoded candidates from the SFT policy. Each candidate is
         assigned a reward score based on nc − 1 comparisons against a random chosen baseline.
         RSO then employs statistical rejection sampling for selecting nd sequences and constructs
         preference pairs using nd /2 comparisons.

                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Compared with DPO and SLiC-HF-direct, RSO introduces an additional sample and rank stage.
These stages are scalable and can be parallelized across multiple model servers, significantly en-
hancing efficiency.
RSO needs more reward server inferences. The extra computation burden can be mitigated and
addressed with prompt efficiency: With a fixed prompt for generating responses, RSO benefits from
prompt caching on model servers, leading to faster response generation. The inference speed can
further be improved with advance serving techniques (Pope et al., 2023). On the side of reward
server, inference with decoder length 1 ensures quick processing times.
The statistical rejection sampling algorithm, as described in Algorithm 1, exhibits enhanced effi-
ciency by employing a sampling-without-replacement strategy. This is achieved by excluding the
selected sequences subsequent to each sampling round. Furthermore, at the commencement of each
round, the maximum reward is recalculated. This recalibration ensures that, in every round, at least
one sequence is invariably chosen. Specifically, the sequence whose reward is equivalent to the
maximum reward is selected with a probability of one, thereby guaranteeing the selection of at least
one optimal sequence in each round. This approach not only optimizes the selection process but also
maintains the algorithm’s effectiveness throughout its execution.
RSO needs additional computation on sampling from the SFT policy and ranking from the pairwise
reward model, but the additional cost is empirically minor compared to policy training. There are
several reasons for that:

      • We only need to sample once for each prompt in the training data. But the training of DPO
        can go through multiple epochs.
      • Sampling and ranking are fully parallelizable over the whole training set but training is
        only parallelizable within the batch.
      • Reward ranking can be fast because of the short decoding length (just one token). The input
        text can be encoded in a parallel way.
      • Our observations indicate that rso-sample-rank accounts for less than 10% of the total train-
        ing time.
      • Batch decoding is scalable and efficient with many optimizations (Pope et al., 2023). In this
        work, we sample 64 responses from the SFT policy. Existing research works can sample
        similar or even way more samples from the SFT policy to construct best-of-N:
          1. Up to 32 samples in Table 4 in Dong et al. (2023);
          2. Up to 100 samples in Figure 7 in Touvron et al. (2023);
          3. Up to 30k samples in Table 2 in Gao et al. (2023);

From the perspective of balancing between the additional burden in efficiency and the significant
performance quality gains (as shown in the Section 5), RSO stands out as a recommended approach
over the alternatives.
         Approach                Reward Model    #SFT inference    #Reward Model inference
         RAFT                         Y               nc                   nc − 1
         ReST                         Y               nc                   nc − 1
         DPO                          N                0                      0
         SLiC-HF-direct               N                0                      0
         SLiC-HF-sample-rank          Y               nd                   nd − 1
         RSO                          Y               nc              nc − 1 + 0.5 ∗ nd

Table 7: Efficiency comparison of difference approaches. Np denotes the number of prompts, nc
denotes the number of decodes to sample from the SFT policy as RSO candidates, and nd denotes
the number of decodes for each prompt.


                                                20
