Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L ATENT S PACE S YMMETRY D ISCOVERY
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Equivariant neural networks require explicit knowledge of the symmetry group.
         Automatic symmetry discovery methods aim to relax this constraint and learn
         invariance and equivariance from data. However, existing symmetry discovery
         methods are limited to linear symmetries in their search space and cannot handle the
         complexity of symmetries in real-world, often high-dimensional data. We propose a
         novel generative model, Latent LieGAN (LaLiGAN), which can discover nonlinear
         symmetries from data. It learns a mapping from data to a latent space where the
         symmetries become linear and simultaneously discovers symmetries in the latent
         space. Theoretically, we show that our method can express any nonlinear symmetry
         under certain conditions. Experimentally, our method can capture the intrinsic
         symmetry in high-dimensional observations, which results in a well-structured
         latent space that is useful for other downstream tasks. We demonstrate the use
         cases for LaLiGAN in improving equation discovery and long-term forecasting for
         various dynamical systems.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Symmetry plays an important role in the success of deep
neural networks (Bronstein et al., 2021). Many equiv-
                                                                   V                     V
                                                                                                V/G ≃ ℝ+
ariant networks have been developed to enforce various                      π′(g, ⋅ )
symmetries in data from images to graphs (Weiler &                          G = SO(2)
Cesa, 2019; Cohen et al., 2019a; Zaheer et al., 2017;
Finzi et al., 2020; Kondor & Trivedi, 2018; Cohen et al.,
2019b; Finzi et al., 2021; Bekkers, 2019). A critical            ϕ                         ψ
limitation of existing equivariant networks is that they
require knowing the symmetry a priori.
                                                                              π(g)
However, for complex real-world data, the underlying
symmetries may be unknown or challenging to articulate
through programming. Recent years have seen exciting
                                                                    Z                    Z
                                              ￼



attempts towards automatic symmetry discovery from
data (Dehmamy et al., 2021; Moskalev et al., 2022; Ben-
ton et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021), but most of them Figure 1: An example of SO(2) nonlin-
                                                                                ′            2
search in only a limited space of symmetries, such as ear group action π on V = R and its
subsets of known groups or finite groups. LieGAN (Yang decomposition into an encoder ϕ, a linear
et al., 2023) can discover various types of symmetries, representation π and a decoder ψ. Each
but its search space is still constrained to general linear trajectory is a group action orbit contain-
groups. Successful discovery can only be achieved when ing a random v ∈ V .
observations are measured in an ideal coordinate system
where linear symmetry is present. Unfortunately, real-world data often contain nonlinear symmetries,
such as high-dimensional dynamics that evolve on a low-dimensional manifold (Champion et al.,
2019), or 2D images of 3D objects (Garrido et al., 2023).
Another line of study focuses on learning equivariant representations (Park et al., 2022; Yu et al.,
2022; Dangovski et al., 2021; Quessard et al., 2020). These approaches learn a latent embedding
space with particular symmetries. However, they still require prior knowledge about the symmetry
in the latent space. Also, they often assume additional information about group transformation
associated with each data point, which is not always available in practice.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this work, we propose a novel framework, LaLiGAN, for discovering symmetries of nonlinear
group actions. LaLiGAN decomposes the group transformations into nonlinear mappings between
data space and latent space, and a linear group representation in the latent space. Figure 1 provides
an example of such decomposition, where a nonlinear action of SO(2) on V = R2 corresponds to
standard 2D rotation on latent vectors z = ϕ(v). Then, we utilize an existing symmetry discovery
algorithm (Yang et al., 2023) with careful adaptations for discovering symmetries in the latent space.
Normally, our framework has learnable group representation and does not require information about
specific groups. However, when the symmetry group is known, it can also be used to learn equivariant
representations without the information of group elements associated with each data sample. It is a
highly flexible framework and can be applied to scenarios with scarce domain knowledge.
The significance of latent space symmetry discovery is multi-fold. From the perspective of symmetry
discovery, it further expands the search space of symmetries beyond linear group actions. For
representation learning, learning a latent space in which symmetry becomes linear places a strong
inductive bias on the structure of latent representations. Such a simple latent structure proves to be
useful in various downstream tasks, such as equation discovery and long-term forecasting in temporal
systems. Furthermore, compared to equivariant representation learning, as the symmetry is no longer
fixed but learnable, our method can discover latent spaces with previously unknown symmetries.
In summary, our main contributions include:

 • We develop LaLiGAN, a novel framework for discovering symmetries of nonlinear group actions.
 • We provide the theoretical guarantee that LaLiGAN has the expressive power to approximate any
   nonlinear symmetry under certain conditions.
 • Our method can discover well-structured latent spaces with interpretable symmetries in high-
   dimensional and nonlinear dynamical systems.
 • The discovered symmetry can be applied to equation discovery, leading to simpler equation forms
   and improved long-term prediction accuracy.


2    R ELATED W ORKS

Automatic symmetry discovery. Automatic symmetry discovery aims to search and identify
unknown symmetries in data. Current symmetry discovery techniques vary a lot in their search space
for symmetries, such as learning discrete finite groups (Zhou et al., 2021; Karjol et al., 2023), learning
group subsets that represent the extent of symmetry within known groups (Benton et al., 2020; Romero
& Lohit, 2022; Chatzipantazis et al., 2021), and learning individual symmetry transformations on
dataset distribution (Desai et al., 2022). Attempts have been made to discover general continuous
symmetries based on Lie theory. For example, L-conv (Dehmamy et al., 2021) works with Lie algebra
to approximate any group equivariant functions. LieGG (Moskalev et al., 2022) extracts symmetry
from a learned network from its polarization matrix. LieGAN (Yang et al., 2023) proposes a general
framework for discovering the symmetries of continuous Lie groups and discrete subgroups. These
methods address general linear group symmetry in the data, which is the largest search space so far.
Our work expands the search space to non-linear symmetries.


Learning equivariant representation. Instead of working in the data space where symmetry
transformations can be complicated, many works use autoencoders to learn a latent space with
pre-specified symmetries (Hinton et al., 2011; Falorsi et al., 2018). Among recent works, Yu et al.
(2022); Park et al. (2022) learn equivariant features that can be used for downstream prediction
tasks. Shakerinava et al. (2022); Dangovski et al. (2021) use contrastive losses to learn equivariant
representations in a self-supervised manner. Quessard et al. (2020); Marchetti et al. (2023) focus on
learning disentangled representations that are highly interpretable. Winter et al. (2022); Wieser et al.
(2020) split the latent space into group-invariant and equivariant subspaces. While the emphases of
these works vary, the common assumption is that we have to know the symmetry group a priori. Many
of them also assume additional information such as group element associated with each data point
(Garrido et al., 2023) or paired samples under certain transformations (Shakerinava et al., 2022). Our
goal is more ambitious: design a model to simultaneously learn symmetries and the corresponding
equivariant representations in latent space with minimal supervision.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Discovering governing equations. Latent space discovery of governing equations is first introduced
in SINDy Autoencoder (Champion et al., 2019), which combines the sparse regression technique
for discovering dynamics in Brunton et al. (2016) and an autoencoder network to explore coordinate
transformations that lead to parsimonious equations. Several variants of this method have been
developed to improve accuracy and robustness to noise (Kaheman et al., 2020; Messenger & Bortz,
2021; Fasel et al., 2022). However, due to the absence of physical constraints, their discovered
equations may not respect some physical properties such as isotropy and energy conservation. We
highlight this field as an important application of our symmetry discovery method, where enforcing
symmetry can regularize the latent space and improve the performance of equation discovery models.


3     R EPRESENTATION VS N ONLINEAR G ROUP ACTION

Equivariant neural networks build on the notion of symmetry groups and their transformations on
data. Given a vector space V , a group G transforms v ∈ V via a group action π : G × V → V which
maps the identity element e to identity transformation, i.e. π(e, v) = v, and is compatible with group
element composition, i.e. π(g1 , π(g2 , v)) = π(g1 g2 , v).
Many existing equivariant networks assume that the group acts linearly on the input vector space.
Examples include E(2) symmetry acting on planar image signals Weiler & Cesa (2019), and SO(3)
symmetry acting on spherical signals Cohen et al. (2018). In these cases, the linear group action is
called a group representation. The group representation is defined as a map ρ : G → GL(n) where
ρ(g) ∈ Rn×n is an invertible matrix that transforms any vector v ∈ Rn by matrix multiplication.
Given the group representations on the input and the output spaces, a G-equivariant network f : X →
Y needs to satisfy ρY (g)f (x) = f (ρX (g)x). A special case of equivariance is invariance, where the
group action on the output space is trivial, i.e. ρY (g) = id.
Equivariant networks with such linear symmetry transformations have several limitations. It is not
always possible to find a linear action of the group on the data, e.g. the action of SO(3) on 2D images
of 3D objects. Also, we may not even know the symmetry group G itself, so learning equivariant
representations for known groups is also not an option.
Our goal is to discover both the symmetry group and its nonlinear group action on the data.
Concretely, given the input and output data space X ⊆ Rn , Y ⊆ Rm , and the data samples
(xi , yi ) ∈ X × Y with an underlying function y = f (x), we want to find a group G and its nonlinear
            ′
actions πX    : G × X → X and πY′ : G × Y → Y such that πY′ (g, f (x)) = f (πX           ′
                                                                                           (g, x)). We
denote nonlinear group actions as π·′ to distinguish them from group representations. In the following
sections, we will also refer to group representations and nonlinear group actions as linear symmetries
and nonlinear symmetries.
We will use the theory of Lie groups to describe the continuous symmetry groups of data. We provide
some preliminaries about Lie groups and their representations in Appendix B.


4     L A L I GAN: D ISCOVERING N ONLINEAR S YMMETRY T RANSFORMATIONS

4.1   D ECOMPOSING THE N ONLINEAR G ROUP ACTION

Our major goal is to learn a nonlinear action of a group G on a vector space V : π ′ : G×V → V . While
we can use a neural network fθ to directly approximate this function, it does not guarantee the identity
and compatibility conditions for a proper group action, i.e. fθ (id, x) = x and fθ (g1 , fθ (g2 , x)) =
fθ (g1 g2 , x). Instead, we propose to decompose the nonlinear group action as nonlinear maps and a
linear group representation. Concretely, we represent any nonlinear group action π ′ : G × V → V as
                                       π ′ (g, ·) = ψ ◦ π(g) ◦ ϕ,                                    (1)
where ϕ : V → Z and ψ : Z → V are functions parametrized by neural networks, and π(g) :
G → GL(k) is a group representation acting on the latent vector space Z = Rk . We specify the
dimensionality of Z as a hyperparameter based on specific tasks. One can easily verify that
Proposition 4.1. If ϕ and ψ are inverse of each other, then π ′ (g, ·) = ψ ◦ π(g) ◦ ϕ is a valid group
action that satisfies identity and compatibility axioms.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              lrecon



                                              []
                   x                                                              x̂
                                                z


                               [ ]⋅
                                 Enc.                       Dec.
                                  ϕ                          ψ



                  Generator

                  L      w                                                Discriminator   lGAN


                                  []
                 g = e ΣwiLi
                                  π(g)                                            x′̂

                                 z′ = π(g)z                 Dec.
                                                             ψ
            ￼￼


Figure 2: Overview of the proposed LaLiGAN framework. The encoder maps the original observa-
tions to a latent space. The latent representation is transformed with the linear group action from the
generator. The decoder reconstructs the inputs from original and transformed representations. The
discriminator is trained to recognize the difference between the original and the transformed samples.


In practice, we train the networks ϕ and ψ with a reconstruction loss lrecon = Ev ∥ψ(ϕ(v)) − v∥2 to
ensure they are the approximate inverse of each other. Intuitively, ϕ and ψ form an autoencoder that
maps between the input vector space and a latent space. Through the decomposition of the nonlinear
group action, our method learns (1) the symmetry group on a latent space via its linear representation,
and (2) a pair of inverse mappings between the input space and the symmetric latent space.
We can provide theoretical guarantees for the expressivity of such a decomposition. The following
theorem shows that our proposed decomposition and neural network parametrization can approximate
nonlinear group actions under certain conditions. Detailed proof is deferred to Appendix C.
Theorem 4.2 (Universal Approximation of Nonlinear Group Action). Let G ≤ GL(k; R) be a
compact Lie group that acts smoothly, freely and properly on V = Rk via a continuous group
action π ′ : G × V → V . The group action, restricted to any bounded subset of the group, can be
approximated by the decomposition π ′ (g, ·) ≈ ψ ◦ π(g) ◦ ϕ if it admits a simply connected orbit
space V /G, where ψ and ϕ are fixed arbitrary-width neural networks with one hidden layer, and π is
a linear group representation.

4.2   S YMMETRY D ISCOVERY

Now that we have constructed the nonlinear group action, we proceed to discover the symmetry
group G. We restrict our search space to G ≤ GL(k), where k is the latent dimensionality defined
in the previous decomposition. In this way, we can represent any group element g by its standard
representation π(g) ∈ Rk×k . We expect this search space of the general linear group to be big enough
to cover the types of symmetries in most real-world systems.
We follow the approach in Yang et al. (2023) to discover the linear symmetry with generative
adversarial training. Concretely, a symmetry generator learns a Lie algebra basis {Li ∈ Rk×k }
and generates the standard representations of group elements by sampling the linear combination
coefficients wi ∈ R for the Lie algebra basis:
                                                        X
                                wi ∼ γ(w), π(g) = exp       wi Li                            (2)
                                                              i

where γ is a distribution (e.g. Gaussian) for the coefficients and exp denotes the matrix exponential.
As the Lie algebra basis {Li } uniquely determines the structure of the Lie group, we can learn the
symmetry group by learning these Li via standard gradient-based optimization techniques.
Then, the symmetry generator introduced in (2) samples random group elements that transform the
data points vi = (xi , yi ). The discriminator is trained to distinguish the original “real” data and the


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


transformed “fake” data. The generator and the discriminator are trained adversarially so that the
generator learns to produce group elements that preserve the data distribution while transforming
each data point. The group learned by the generator is then considered the discovered symmetry of
the data. Figure 2 shows the overall pipeline of our method.
We term our method Latent LieGAN (LaLiGAN), as we learn the Lie group representations on a
latent space. A key difference of our method is the nonlinearity of the group action on data, which
is achieved through the decomposition in (10). Besides, we use the latent representations as the
discriminator input. The latent vectors before the group transformations are the “real” samples,
and those after the transformations are “fake”. Optionally, we also concatenate each latent vector
with its reconstruction in observation space as the discriminator input, which is shown to accelerate
convergence. In the most general form, our training objective is formulated as
              ltotal = wGAN · lGAN + wrecon · lrecon , lrecon = Ev ∥(ψ ◦ ϕ)(v) − v∥2 ,
                  h                                                                     i
      lGAN = Ev,g log D(ϕ(v), (ψ ◦ ϕ)(v)) + log(1 − D((π(g) ◦ ϕ)(v), (ψ ◦ π(g) ◦ ϕ)(v))) (3)

where D is the discriminator, π(g) = exp(wi Li ) is the representation of the group element sampled
from the generator, and ϕ and ψ are neural networks that compose the nonlinear group action together
with π(g). The learnable components include D, Li , ϕ and ψ, which are optimized under the joint
objective ltotal . The loss weighting coefficients wGAN and wrecon are selected based on specific tasks.

4.3   S TRUCTURING THE L ATENT S PACE

Disentangled representation. Latent space representations may capture different aspects of the
observations. Consider an image of N 3D objects as an example. A possible latent representation
consists of the orientation of each object ro ∈ R3N , the camera perspective rc ∈ R3 , light intensity
i ∈ R+ , etc. Each component can be transformed by a separate group action, independent of each
other. For these scenarios, we provide the option to specify how the latent space is decomposed
as independent subspaces, i.e. Z = ⊕N   i=1 Zi , each of which is acted on by a symmetry group Gi .
This avoids searching in the unnecessarily large space of group actions with no nontrivial invariant
subspace. This aligns with the notion of disentangled representation in Higgins et al. (2018).

Regularizing the latent structure. The
latent space produced by an encoder net-
work can be largely arbitrary, leading
to fallacious symmetry or no symmetry
at all. We observe some failure modes
caused by undesirable latent space struc-
tures and propose some regularization
methods. First, the latent representations
tend to collapse to a low-dimensional                          (a)                           (b)
subspace where nontrivially parametrized
group representations can act as identity. Figure 3: Potential failure modes in latent space sym-
Such a fallacious symmetry provides an metry discovery. (a) Fallacious symmetry in low-
easy workaround for the symmetry gener- dimensional subspace. (b) Absence of symmetry in a
ator. For example, this happens in Figure biased latent space.
3a, where the transformations generated
by L = [2, −2; −1, 1] ∈ R2×2 leave the
latent representations in a 1D subspace approximately unchanged. This is undesirable because we
want the symmetry generator to learn nontrivial transformations. In practice, we use orthogonal
parametrization in the final linear layer of the encoder to enforce a different output in each dimension.
Another failure mode occurs when the latent representations are not centered at the origin. The linear
group representation v 7→ π(g)v implicitly assumes that the vector space is centered at the origin and
cannot describe the symmetry otherwise. Figure 3b provides an example of a circular latent space
centered at (1, 1). Directly applying the SO(2) transformations result in a different distribution. We
observe that the encoder struggles to learn to center the latent representations at the origin. Therefore,
we enforce this property by normalizing each batch of data to have zero mean before applying the
transformations from the symmetry generator.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.4   A PPLICATIONS OF L ATENT S YMMETRY D ISCOVERY

Learning equivariant representation. Learning equivariant representation can be viewed as a
special case of our method, where the symmetry group G and its representation π are known. Our
encoder ϕ then becomes a G-equivariant function in the sense that
                         ϕ(π ′ (g, x)) = ϕ((ψ ◦ π(g) ◦ ϕ)(x)) = π(g)ϕ(x)                         (4)
In other words, by fixing π to a known group representation, our method learns a G-equivariant
representation z = ϕ(x). Compared to other methods, LaLiGAN can learn equivariant representation
without any knowledge of the group transformation associated with each data sample.

Joint discovery of governing equation. LaLiGAN is analogous to latent space equation discovery
techniques (Champion et al., 2019) in terms of using an autoencoder network for nonlinear coordinate
transformations. We can use the latent space learned by LaLiGAN for discovering equations.
Concretely, if we want to find a latent space governing equation parameterized by θ: ż = Fθ (z),
where z = ϕ(x) is obtained from our encoder network, we fix the encoder ϕ and optimize θ with the
objective leq = Ex,ẋ ∥(∇x z)ẋ − Fθ (z)∥2 .
While equation discovery and symmetry discovery are two seemingly distinct tasks, we will show in
the experiment that learning a symmetric latent space can significantly improve the quality of the
discovered equation in terms of both its simplicity and its long-term prediction accuracy.

5     L ATENT S YMMETRY IN DYNAMICAL S YSTEMS
5.1   DATASETS

Reaction-diffusion. Many high-dimensional datasets in practical engineering and science problems
derive from dynamical systems governed by partial differential equations. These systems often do
not exhibit simple linear symmetries in the observation space, but their dynamics might evolve on
a low-dimensional manifold with interesting symmetry properties. As an example, we consider a
λ − ω reaction-diffusion system (Champion et al., 2019) governed by
                    ut =(1 − (u2 + v 2 ))u + β(u2 + v 2 )v + d1 (uxx + uyy )
                    vt = − β(u2 + v 2 )u + (1 − (u2 + v 2 ))v + d2 (uxx + uyy )                  (5)
with d1 = d2 = 0.1 and β = 1. We discretize the 2D space into a 100 × 100 grid, which leads to an
input dimension of 104 . Figure 4b visualizes a few snapshots of this system. We simulate the system
up to T = 6000 timesteps with step size ∆t = 0.05.
The reaction-diffusion system is an example of low-dimensional latent symmetry in high-dimensional
observations. In fact, the absence of linear symmetry is not exclusive to high-dimensional systems.
We also investigate two low-dimensional dynamics, where their nonlinear evolution prevents any
kind of linear symmetry, but our method can still discover meaningful symmetries in the latent space.

Nonlinear pendulum. The movement of a simple pendulum can be described by q̇ = p, ṗ =
−ω 2 sin(q), with ω being the natural frequency and q and p the angular displacement and angular
momentum. In our experiment, we use ω = 1. We simulate N = 200 trajectories up to T = 500
timesteps with ∆t = 0.02.

Lotka-Volterra System. The Lotka-Volterra equations are a pair of nonlinear ODEs that charac-
terize the dynamics of predator-prey interaction. We consider the canonical form of the equations,
ṗ = a − beq , q̇ = cep − d, where p and q are the logarithm population densities of prey and
predator, and the parameters a, b, c, d indicate the growth and death rate of the two populations. In
our experiment, we use a = 2/3, b = 4/3, and c = d = 1. We simulate N = 200 trajectories up to
T = 104 timesteps with ∆t = 0.002.

5.2   S YMMETRY D ISCOVERY

We train LaLiGAN to learn the nonlinear mappings between observations and latent representations,
along with the linear symmetry in the latent space. We aim to discover the equivariance of latent


                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           (a)                         (b)                         (c)                     (d)
Figure 4: Symmetry discovery in reaction-diffusion system with 2D latent space. (a) Latent represen-
tations of the system at all timesteps. (b) Randomly selected samples from the dataset. (c) Samples
transformed by LaLiGAN are similar to the original data. (d) Samples transformed by the baseline,
linear LieGAN, are significantly different from the original data.


            (a)                     (b)                      (c)                     (d)
Figure 5: Latent symmetry discovery in nonlinear pendulum (upper) and Lotka-Volterra equations
(lower). (a) Original trajectories of the systems. The color of each trajectory corresponds to its
Hamiltonian. (b) The trajectories are mapped to a symmetric latent space. (c) Original trajectories
transformed by LaLiGAN. (d) Original trajectories transformed by linear LieGAN.

dynamics, i.e. zt+1 = f (zt ) ⇒ gzt+1 = f (gzt ). Therefore, we take two consecutive timesteps as
input, encode them to latent representations with the same encoder weights, and apply the same
transformations sampled from the symmetry generator.
For the reaction-diffusion system, we follow the setting in Champion et al. (2019) and set the latent
dimension k = 2. Figure 4a shows how the system evolves in the latent space throughout T = 5000
timesteps. The Lie algebra basis discovered in the latent space is L = [0.06, −3.07; 3.05, −0.04].
This suggests an approximate SO(2) symmetry, which is also evident from the visualization.
For the pendulum and the Lotka-Volterra system, we also set the latent dimensions to 2, which
is the same as their input dimensions. Figure 5b shows the trajectories of these two sys-
tems in the latent space, with the discovered symmetries Lpendulum = [0, −5.24; 2.16, 0] and
LLV = [0, 2.43; −2.74, 0]. These indicate rotation symmetries up to a certain scaling in the latent
dimensions.
The validity of the discovered symmetry can be verified by visually inspecting the difference between
the transformed and the original samples. For the reaction-diffusion system, Figure 4c shows some
samples with random transformations produced by our method, which are similar to the original
data displayed in Figure 4b. We also apply the original LieGAN to this task for comparison, and
the transformed samples are shown in Figure 4d. These samples contain obvious artifacts and are
noticeably different from the original data, which suggests the necessity of our method when linear
symmetry does not exist in observation space.
Similarly, for the pendulum and the Lotka-Volterra system, we use the learned symmetries to
transform each entire trajectory, as is shown in Figure 5c. Each trajectory is transformed from the
original trajectory of the same color. While each individual data point is taken into a new position,
the entire trajectories remain similar before and after transformation, suggesting that the discovered
transformations are indeed the symmetries of these systems. In contrast, the linear symmetries learned
by LieGAN do not preserve valid trajectories in the observation space, as shown in Figure 5d.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.3   E FFECT OF L ATENT D IMENSIONALITY

The latent dimension k is a hyperparameter in our method. However, it is not always possible to
choose the perfect latent dimension that matches the intrinsic dimension of the system and uncovers
symmetry in latent space. To study the robustness of our method under a less ideal hyperparameter
configuration, we set the latent dimension to k = 3 for the reaction-diffusion system and repeat
the experiment. As shown in Figure 6a, the Lie algebra representation is skew-symmetric, which
indicates the symmetry of rotations around a particular axis. This can be easily confirmed as all the
latent representations roughly dwell on a circular 2D subspace. Although it is not the most simple
representation, our method still manages to discover the rotation symmetry as in 2D latent space.


                    (a)                          (b)                 (c)                (d)

Figure 6: Modeling reaction-diffusion system in 3D latent space. (a) The latent representations before
and after our discovered symmetry transformations. (b) The discovered latent space with SINDy but
without LaLiGAN. (c-d) Simulation trajectory in the previous two latent spaces.

5.4   E QUATION D ISCOVERY
                                       Method      LaLiGAN + SINDy                SINDy AE
We demonstrate the benefit of                       ż1 = 0.91z2                ż1 = − 0.85z2
                                         2D
learning latent symmetry by using                   ż2 = − 0.91z1              ż2 = 0.97z1
                                                                                                   2
                                               ż1 = 0.58z2 − 0.40z3   ż1 = 0.65z2 − 0.16z3 + Θ(z )
the latent space to discover gov-                                                                   2
                                         3D    ż2 = − 0.56z1 + 0.54z3 ż2 = − 0.57z1 + 0.18z2 + Θ(z )
erning equations. This is a com-
                                               ż3 = 0.45z1 − 0.57z2                               2
monly considered problem in these                                      ż3 = 0.45z1 − 0.57z2 + Θ(z )
dynamical systems. We use SINDy
(Brunton et al., 2016; Champion Table 1: Equation discovery on 2D/3D latent spaces for R-D
et al., 2019) as the equation discov- system. Complete results are available in Appendix A.1.
ery algorithm, with up to second
order polynomials as candidate functions. The comparison is made between applying SINDy on the
latent space learned by our method (LaLiGAN + SINDy) and using the SINDy autoencoder to learn
its own latent space (SINDy AE). The results for the reaction-diffusion system are shown in Table 1.
The discovered equations from both methods have similar forms in the 2D latent space. In the 3D
latent space, the governing equation learned in the LaLiGAN latent space remains linear. On the
other hand, applying the SINDy autoencoder alone results in a nonsymmetric latent space (Figure 6b)
and a highly complicated governing equation with second-order terms.

Long-term forecasting. To further verify the accuracy of
the discovered equations, we use these equations to simu-
late the dynamics in the latent space. Concretely, given the
initial input frame x0 , we obtain its latent representation
ẑ0 = ϕ(x0 ) and predict the future T timesteps by itera-
tively computing ẑt+1 = ẑt + F (ẑt ) · ∆t, where ż = F (z)
denotes the discovered governing equation. Then, we map
the representations back to the input space by x̂t = ψ(ẑt ).
Figure 6c and 6d show the simulated latent trajectories
from the equations discovered in 3D latent space with and
without LaLiGAN. The trajectory remains close to ground
truth in the symmetric latent space but diverges quickly for
the equation discovered by SINDy AE. We also evaluate Figure 7: Relative MSE losses of long-
the forecasting accuracy quantitatively by the relative MSE term simulations of R-D system.
between the prediction and ground truth in the observation
space, as is shown in Figure 7. Besides the symbolic models in Table 1, we also include Neural ODE
(Chen et al., 2018) as a baseline. Similar to the symbolic equation discovery, it can also predict the


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dynamics at arbitrary timesteps with an ODE parametrized by neural nets. Figure 7 shows that the
discovered equation learned with latent space symmetry outperforms both the equation from vanilla
SINDy AE and the Neural ODE model in this task of long-term dynamics forecasting.
We also conduct the same experiments of equation discovery and long-term forecasting as for the
nonlinear pendulum and the Lotka-Volterra system. While they have simple closed-form governing
equations in the observation space, we find that discovering a latent space with learnable symmetry
can still be beneficial. The symmetry enforces linear governing equations and leads to reduced error
accumulation in long-term forecasting. The detailed results are available in Appendix A.2.

6   L EARNING E QUIVARIANT R EPRESENTATION


 (a) Learned latent space    (b) An original signal transformed by SO(2) × SO(2) latent symmetry

Figure 8: Learning equivariant representation of the double-bump world. (a) Learned latent space as
the direct sum of two 2D subspaces. The color of the data points corresponds to the location of the
rectangular bump in the first component and the triangular bump in the second. (b) From left to right:
(1) an original signal x ∈ R64 ; (2) reconstructed signal ψ(ϕ(x)); (3-4) reconstructed signals from
transformed latent representations, ψ((π(θ1 ) ⊕ I)ϕ(x)) and ψ((I ⊕ π(θ2 ))ϕ(x)). The red lines are
the bump centers in the original signal.
When we know the linear group representation, we can use LaLiGAN for learning the corresponding
group equivariant representation. Unlike previous works (Garrido et al., 2023; Shakerinava et al.,
2022), we learn it without any knowledge of the group element associated with each data point.
We consider the example of a double-bump world in Shakerinava et al. (2022). It consists of a
rectangular and a triangular bump signal, both cyclically shifted in a fixed-length window. We use
the original experiment setting with signal length 64 and bump length 16, visualized in Figure 8b.
The cyclic translation of each bump forms an SO(2) group. As each bump is shifted independently,
the symmetry group for the composed signal is SO(2) × SO(2). Therefore, we use a 4-dimensional
latent space Z = R2 ⊕ R2 and fix the Lie algebra basis to L = L1 ⊕ L2 , L1 = L2 = [0, 1; −1, 0].
Figure 8a shows the latent space learned by LaLiGAN. We observe that rotation in the first component
shifts the rectangular bump, while rotation in the second component simultaneously shifts both
bumps. This is also evident from the transformed and reconstructed samples in Figure 8b. This
provides an example that our method can learn equivariant representations when we do not know the
group transformation of each data point. We also include another experiment on SO(3) equivariant
representation for a 3D object in Appendix A.4.

7   C ONCLUSION
We propose LaLiGAN, a novel generative modeling framework for discovering nonlinear symmetries.
LaLiGAN decomposes the group action as a linear representation on a latent space and a pair of
nonlinear mappings between the latent space and the observation space. By jointly optimizing the
group representation and the nonlinear mappings, it discovers both the symmetry group and its
nonlinear group action on the data. We also show that it can be applied to downstream tasks such as
equation discovery, leading to equations with simpler forms and better long-term prediction accuracy.
In the future, we plan to study how the knowledge of latent space symmetry can be better incorporated
into equation discovery. For example, symmetry can act as a constraint to compress the search space
for equations and accelerate the search. We also plan to investigate the connection between symmetry
and other physical properties such as conservation laws. Given the prevalence of symmetries in the
natural world, our long-term goal is to develop a general framework for automatically discovering
symmetries and other types of governing laws from data and accelerate scientific discovery process.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Erik J Bekkers. B-spline cnns on lie groups. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.12057, 2019.

Gregory Benton, Marc Finzi, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew G Wilson. Learning invariances in neural
  networks from training data. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:17605–17616,
  2020.

Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Taco Cohen, and Petar Veličković. Geometric deep learning:
 Grids, groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13478, 2021.

Steven L Brunton, Joshua L Proctor, and J Nathan Kutz. Discovering governing equations from data
  by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems. Proceedings of the national academy of
  sciences, 113(15):3932–3937, 2016.

Hugo Caselles-Dupré, Michael Garcia Ortiz, and David Filliat. Symmetry-based disentangled
  representation learning requires interaction with environments. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Kathleen Champion, Bethany Lusch, J Nathan Kutz, and Steven L Brunton. Data-driven discovery of
  coordinates and governing equations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(45):
  22445–22451, 2019.

Evangelos Chatzipantazis, Stefanos Pertigkiozoglou, Edgar Dobriban, and Kostas Daniilidis. Learning
  augmentation distributions using transformed risk minimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.08190,
  2021.

Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary
  differential equations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

Taco Cohen, Maurice Weiler, Berkay Kicanaoglu, and Max Welling. Gauge equivariant convolutional
  networks and the icosahedral cnn. In International conference on Machine learning, pp. 1321–1330.
  PMLR, 2019a.

Taco S Cohen, Mario Geiger, Jonas Köhler, and Max Welling. Spherical cnns. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1801.10130, 2018.

Taco S Cohen, Mario Geiger, and Maurice Weiler. A general theory of equivariant cnns on homoge-
  neous spaces. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019b.

Rumen Dangovski, Li Jing, Charlotte Loh, Seungwook Han, Akash Srivastava, Brian Cheung, Pulkit
  Agrawal, and Marin Soljačić. Equivariant contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.00899,
  2021.

Nima Dehmamy, Robin Walters, Yanchen Liu, Dashun Wang, and Rose Yu. Automatic symmetry
  discovery with lie algebra convolutional network. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:2503–2515, 2021.

Krish Desai, Benjamin Nachman, and Jesse Thaler. Symmetry discovery with deep learning. Physical
  Review D, 105(9):096031, 2022.

Luca Falorsi, Pim De Haan, Tim R Davidson, Nicola De Cao, Maurice Weiler, Patrick Forré,
  and Taco S Cohen. Explorations in homeomorphic variational auto-encoding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1807.04689, 2018.

Luca Falorsi, Pim de Haan, Tim R Davidson, and Patrick Forré. Reparameterizing distributions
  on lie groups. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  3244–3253. PMLR, 2019.

Urban Fasel, J Nathan Kutz, Bingni W Brunton, and Steven L Brunton. Ensemble-sindy: Ro-
  bust sparse model discovery in the low-data, high-noise limit, with active learning and control.
  Proceedings of the Royal Society A, 478(2260):20210904, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Marc Finzi, Samuel Stanton, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Generalizing convolutional
 neural networks for equivariance to lie groups on arbitrary continuous data. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3165–3176. PMLR, 2020.

Marc Finzi, Max Welling, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. A practical method for constructing equivari-
 ant multilayer perceptrons for arbitrary matrix groups. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 3318–3328. PMLR, 2021.

Quentin Garrido, Laurent Najman, and Yann Lecun. Self-supervised learning of split invariant
  equivariant representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2023.

Irina Higgins, David Amos, David Pfau, Sebastien Racaniere, Loic Matthey, Danilo Rezende,
   and Alexander Lerchner. Towards a definition of disentangled representations. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1812.02230, 2018.

Geoffrey E Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, and Sida D Wang. Transforming auto-encoders. In Artificial
  Neural Networks and Machine Learning–ICANN 2011: 21st International Conference on Artificial
  Neural Networks, Espoo, Finland, June 14-17, 2011, Proceedings, Part I 21, pp. 44–51. Springer,
  2011.

Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. Multilayer feedforward networks are uni-
  versal approximators. Neural Networks, 2(5):359–366, 1989. ISSN 0893-6080. doi: https:
  //doi.org/10.1016/0893-6080(89)90020-8. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
  science/article/pii/0893608089900208.

Kadierdan Kaheman, J Nathan Kutz, and Steven L Brunton. Sindy-pi: a robust algorithm for parallel
  implicit sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics. Proceedings of the Royal Society A, 476
  (2242):20200279, 2020.

Pavan Karjol, Rohan Kashyap, Aditya Gopalan, et al. A unified framework for discovering discrete
  symmetries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02898, 2023.

Gregor Kasieczka, Tilman Plehn, Anja Butter, Kyle Cranmer, Dipsikha Debnath, Barry M Dillon,
  Malcolm Fairbairn, Darius A Faroughy, Wojtek Fedorko, Christophe Gay, et al. The machine
  learning landscape of top taggers. SciPost Physics, 7(1):014, 2019.

Risi Kondor and Shubhendu Trivedi. On the generalization of equivariance and convolution in neural
  networks to the action of compact groups. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  2747–2755. PMLR, 2018.

John M Lee and John M Lee. Smooth manifolds. Springer, 2012.

Giovanni Luca Marchetti, Gustaf Tegnér, Anastasiia Varava, and Danica Kragic. Equivariant represen-
  tation learning via class-pose decomposition. International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, 2023.

Daniel A Messenger and David M Bortz. Weak sindy: Galerkin-based data-driven model selection.
  Multiscale Modeling & Simulation, 19(3):1474–1497, 2021.

Artem Moskalev, Anna Sepliarskaia, Ivan Sosnovik, and Arnold Smeulders. Liegg: Studying learned
  lie group generators. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:25212–25223, 2022.

Artem Moskalev, Anna Sepliarskaia, Erik J. Bekkers, and Arnold Smeulders. On genuine invariance
  learning without weight-tying, 2023.

Jung Yeon Park, Ondrej Biza, Linfeng Zhao, Jan Willem van de Meent, and Robin Walters. Learning
  symmetric embeddings for equivariant world models. International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2022.

Robin Quessard, Thomas Barrett, and William Clements. Learning disentangled representations and
  group structure of dynamical environments. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:19727–19737, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


David W Romero and Suhas Lohit. Learning partial equivariances from data. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Mehran Shakerinava, Arnab Kumar Mondal, and Siamak Ravanbakhsh. Structuring representations
 using group invariants. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:34162–34174,
 2022.
Dian Wang, Jung Yeon Park, Neel Sortur, Lawson LS Wong, Robin Walters, and Robert Platt. The
  surprising effectiveness of equivariant models in domains with latent symmetry. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Rui Wang, Robin Walters, and Rose Yu. Incorporating symmetry into deep dynamics models for
  improved generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Maurice Weiler and Gabriele Cesa. General e (2)-equivariant steerable cnns. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Mario Wieser, Sonali Parbhoo, Aleksander Wieczorek, and Volker Roth. Inverse learning of
 symmetries. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 18004–18015. Curran Asso-
 ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
 2020/file/d15426b9c324676610fbb01360473ed8-Paper.pdf.
Robin Winter, Marco Bertolini, Tuan Le, Frank Noe, and Djork-Arn’e Clevert. Unsupervised learning
  of group invariant and equivariant representations. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle
  Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=47lpv23LDPr.
Zhirong Wu, Shuran Song, Aditya Khosla, Fisher Yu, Linguang Zhang, Xiaoou Tang, and Jianxiong
  Xiao. 3d shapenets: A deep representation for volumetric shapes. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1912–1920, 2015.
Jianke Yang, Robin Walters, Nima Dehmamy, and Rose Yu. Generative adversarial symmetry
   discovery. International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Hong-Xing Yu, Jiajun Wu, and Li Yi. Rotationally equivariant 3d object detection. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1456–1464, 2022.
Manzil Zaheer, Satwik Kottur, Siamak Ravanbakhsh, Barnabas Poczos, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and
 Alexander J Smola. Deep sets. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Allan Zhou, Tom Knowles, and Chelsea Finn. Meta-learning symmetries by reparameterization.
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A      S UPPLEMENTARY E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
A.1     H IGH -D IMENSIONAL R EACTION -D IFFUSION S YSTEM

  Model                          Discovered equation
                                 ż1 = 0.43z2 − 0.53z3
  LaLiGAN + SINDy                ż2 = − 0.51z1 + 0.66z3
                                 ż3 = 0.47z1 − 0.52z2
                                 u̇1 = − 0.98u2
  LaLiGAN + SINDy + PCA          u̇2 = 0.84u1
                                 u̇3 = 0
                                 ż1 = 0.65z2 − 0.16z3 + 0.20z12 + 0.11z1 z2 + 0.29z1 z3
                                      − 0.41z2 z3 − 0.16z32
  SINDy AE                       ż2 = − 0.57z1 + 0.18z2 − 0.24z1 z2 + 0.46z1 z3 − 0.18z22
                                      − 0.26z2 z3 + 0.29z32
                                 ż3 = 0.45z1 − 0.57z2 − 0.27z12 + 0.18z22 − 0.19z2 z3
                                 u̇1 = 0.95u2 − 0.06u3 + 0.09u1 u2 + 0.16u1 u3 − 0.59u2 u3 − 0.12u23
  SINDy AE + PCA                 u̇2 = − 0.58u1 + 0.29u3 − 0.57u1 u3 − 0.23u2 u3 − 0.10u23
                                 u̇3 = − 0.06u21 + 0.51u1 u2 + 0.08u22 + 0.35u2 u3

    Table 2: Complete equation discovery results on 3D latent space for reaction-diffusion system.

Table 2 shows the complete results of discovering governing equations in 3D latent space for reaction-
diffusion system. Applying the SINDy autoencoder alone results in a highly complicated governing
equation with several second-order terms. Also, we find that the equations learned on the symmetric
latent space can even be further simplified with a linear transformation introduced by principle
component analysis (PCA). The u’s in the equations denote the principle components, sorted by the
variance each component explains. In comparison, the equations from the SINDy autoencoder alone
do not admit a simpler form under the linear PCA transformation.

A.2     N ONLINEAR O RDINARY D IFFERENTIAL E QUATIONS

                          Method                  Discovered equation
                                                  ż1 = − 0.94z2
                          LaLiGAN + SINDy
                                                  ż2 = 0.38z1
                                                  ż1 = 0.99z2
                          SINDy
                                                  ż2 = − 0.98 sin(z1 )
                                                  ż1 = − 0.46 sin(z2 )
                          SINDy AE
                                                  ż2 = 0.51z1 + 0.42 sin(z1 )

                             Table 3: Equation discovery for pendulum.

                        Method                 Discovered equation
                                               ż1 = − 0.65 − 0.56z2
                        LaLiGAN + SINDy
                                               ż2 = − 0.14 + 0.67z1
                                               ż1 = 0.64 − 1.28ez2
                        SINDy
                                               ż2 = − 0.91 + 1.05ez1
                                               ż1 = 12.47 − 5.27z1 + 40.00z2
                        SINDy AE                  +0.19z1 z2 − 0.64z12 − 0.93ez1
                                               ż2 = − 6.91 − 0.65z12

                            Table 4: Equation discovery for L-V system.

Table 3 and 4 show the equation discovery results for the nonlinear pendulum and the Lotka-Volterra
system. For each dataset, we apply three methods for equation discovery: 1) learning a symmetric


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


latent space with LaLiGAN, and training SINDy with the fixed latent space; 2) training SINDy in the
original observation space; 3) training SINDy autoencoder to learn a latent space without symmetry
and discover the equation. Unlike the experiment in the high-dimensional reaction-diffusion system,
we include SINDy without autoencoder because the observation space is low-dimensional in each of
these systems and there indeed exists a closed-form governing equation.
It can be observed that applying LaLiGAN with SINDy still leads to simple linear equations. For the
Lotka-Volterra system, the equation also consists of constant terms because the latent space is not
centered at the origin. On the other hand, SINDy almost recovers the ground truth equations in both
tasks, with no additional or missing terms but only small numerical errors for the coefficients.
However, our method can still achieve better long-term forecasting accuracy with the discovered
equation. Similar to section 5.4, given an initial input frame x0 , we obtain its latent representation
ẑ0 = ϕ(x0 ) and predict the future T timesteps by iteratively calculating ẑt+1 = ẑt + F (ẑt ) · ∆t,
where ż = F (z) denotes the discovered governing equation. Then, we map the representations back
to the input space by x̂t = ψ(ẑt ) to get the prediction in observation space. Figure 9 shows the
relative mean square error at different timesteps. The curve for Neural ODE in the Lotka-Volterra
system is incomplete because the prediction goes to NaN after about 1000 steps. Generally, our
method leads to the slowest error accumulation. By contrast, while SINDy managed to recover the
almost correct equation, the small numerical error can still lead to a very large error after a certain
time period.


                     (a) Pendulum                             (b) Lotka-Volterra system

                        Figure 9: Long-term prediction for nonlinear ODEs.


A.3   M ULTI -D IMENSIONAL L IE A LGEBRA

Our method learns a Lie algebra basis {Li ∈ Rk×k }ci=1 . The dimensionality of the Lie algebra, c,
is a hyperparameter. In the previous experiments, we have set c = 1, meaning that LaLiGAN is
only learning a one-dimensional Lie algebra at a time. Choosing a different c allows us to discover
multiple symmetries simultaneously in the latent space. We demonstrate this with the Lotka-Volterra
equation experiment.


   Figure 10: Discovered 2D Lie algebra and its actions on the latent space and the input space.


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: Left: Original trajectories of the Lotka-Volterra system. Middle: The trajectories mapped
to the discovered latent space. Right: Original trajectories transformed by LaLiGAN with 2D Lie
algebra.


In this experiment, we set the latent dimension to 2 and increase the Lie algebra dimension from 1
to 2. Figure 10 shows the discovered Lie algebra basis, L1 and L2 . One can verify that {L1 , L2 }
forms a valid Lie algebra basis that is closed under the Lie bracket. The actions of L1 and L2 in
the latent space can be visualized by the vector fields (L1 z)i ∂i and (L2 z)i ∂i . It can be observed
that L1 corresponds to a scaling symmetry and L2 corresponds to a rotational symmetry (up to a
certain scaling and a tilt angle). The actions of of L1 and L2 in the input space can be visualized by
the vector fields ( ∂ψ  ij      j        ∂ψ ij       j
                    ∂z ) (L1 z) ∂i and ( ∂z ) (L2 z) ∂i . The rightmost plot shows these vector fields
evaluated on the original trajectories.
It is easier to interpret the meaning of these discovered symmetries by looking at the latent trajectories
in Figure 11. The scaling symmetry L1 changes the Hamiltonian of the system and indicates that the
governing equation of the system zt+1 = f (zt ) does not change with the Hamiltonian. The rotational
symmetry L2 is similar to the original experiment with only one-dimensional Lie algebra, which
approximately takes one point to another within the same trajectory. Its representation differs from
the previous one-dimensional experiment because the latent embeddings of the trajectories have also
changed. Still, it can be interpreted as a time translation symmetry of the system.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4    L EARNING SO(3) E QUIVARIANT R EPRESENTATION


Figure 12: Left: the renderings of the object with three different orientations. Right: The object is
rotated in three random axes from 0 to 2π. The corresponding 2D images are embedded into a 3D
latent space with LaLiGAN. For better visualization, the 3D latent representations are projected to
2D by PCA. The colors of the latent representations correspond to the rotation angles in [0, 2π]. The
mapping to latent space ϕ is continuous with respect to the SO(3) rotations, and each latent trajectory
of rotations around a particular axis roughly forms a circular manifold.

We consider a rotating bookshelf from ModelNet40 (Wu et al., 2015) and transform it in 3D through
SO(3) rotations. The object is then rendered as a 48×48 image, which is the setting from Shakerinava
et al. (2022). Figure 12 left displays the renderings of the object in three different orientations. The
SO(3) action is nonlinear in the input space of 2D images. We use LaLiGAN to learn a latent space
with 3 dimensions where the group action becomes linear.
Figure 12 right shows three latent trajectories. Each trajectory is obtained by rotating the object
around a randomly selected axis in 3D space. The colors of the latent representations correspond
to the rotation angles in [0, 2π]. The smooth transition of colors suggests that the mapping to latent
space ϕ is continuous with respect to the SO(3) rotations. Also, each trajectory roughly forms a
circular manifold.
We note that the trajectories are not in a perfect circular shape. For example, we observe that the
latent representations overlap in some intervals. Concretely, given a particular rotation axis, let
x(θ) denote the 2D rendering of the object with rotation angle θ, and let z(θ) = ϕ(x(θ)) denote
its latent representation. In the 1st and 2nd latent trajectory shown in figure 12, it is observed
that z(θ − δ) ≈ z(θ + δ) for some specific θ and small δ’s. Also, in the 3rd trajectory, we have
z(θ1 ) ≈ z(θ2 ) for some largly different θ1 and θ2 . This can be caused by additional discrete
symmetries in the object, where a transformation such as reflection or rotation up to π leaves our
view of the object unchanged. As our method is not provided with the group element associated
with each object pose, it is unable to distinguish these identical inputs, so that they are mapped to
the same location in the latent space and violate the overall circular structure. However, this kind of
phenomenon does lead to an interesting question for future work: whether or not LaLiGAN can be
extended to also discover these additional symmetries that are not caused by external transformations
but lie in a real-world symmetric object itself.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5    L EARNING THE L ATENT T OROIDAL S TRUCTURE OF F LATLAND


Figure 13: Left column: individual samples from the Flatland environment. Other columns: 2D
projections of the 4D latent representations of equally spaced observations learned by LaLiGAN.
Each marker style corresponds to a specific horizontal position of the ball. Each marker color
corresponds to a specific vertical position. The latent space displays a toroidal structure, similar to
the result in Figure 2 from Quessard et al. (2020).

Our method is related to symmetry-based disentangled representation learning (Caselles-Dupré et al.,
2019; Quessard et al., 2020). For comparison, we consider a simple environment that is studied
in these works, consisting of 84 × 84 pixel observations of a ball moving in a plane. The world is
cyclic, meaning that the ball will appear at the top if it crosses the bottom boundary, and similarly for
left/right. The observations are shown in Figure 13 (left).
Unlike Quessard et al. (2020) which considers sequences of observations o and transformations g,
(o0 , g0 , o1 , g1 , ...), we are interested in discovering the equivariance of a function. Thus, we consider
a function o′ = f (o) that simply translates the ball to the right and to the bottom by 15 pixels,
respectively. An intuitive symmetry here is the cyclic translation equivariance along the two planar
dimensions: if the input is translated by g ∈ SO(2) × SO(2), then the output will be translated by the
same group element, i.e. go′ = f (go). In this experiment, we test whether LaLiGAN can discover a
symmetry group of this function and a latent space where the group action becomes linear.
Following the setting in Quessard et al. (2020), we set the latent dimension to 4 and the search space
of symmetries to SO(4). The discovered Lie algebra basis is
                          0    1.50 −2.24 0                   0     0     0        0
                                                                                   
                    −1.50       0        0     0          0      0     0     −4.25
              L1 =                                 , L2 =                                        (6)
                        2.24     0        0     0            0     0     0     −2.86
                          0      0        0     0             0 4.25 2.86          0

It can be verified that this basis forms a valid Lie algebra that is closed under the Lie bracket. It is a
commutative Lie algebra that matches the structure of SO(2) × SO(2). Note that we do not enforce
any disentanglement in the learning process, so the latent dimensions are entangled. Disentanglement
can be explicitly enforced by decomposing the latent space as independent subspaces as described in
Section 4.3, or promoted by encouraging the sparsity of the Lie algebra generators, but this is not the
emphasis of this work.
The toroidal structure of the latent space can be verified from Figure 13. The visualization is obtained
by projecting the 4D latent representations of equally spaced observations to 2D using Gaussian
random projection. The marker colors and styles correspond to specific vertical and horizontal
positions of the ball, respectively. It can be observed that all markers of a specific style, as well as all
markers in a specific color, form a circular structure. For visual clarity, we also include two subsets: a
vertical traversal along one column and a horizontal traversal along one row. This matches the result
in Figure 2 from Quessard et al. (2020).


                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.6   Q UANTITATIVE E VALUATION OF THE L EARNED S YMMETRIES

               Task             Symmetry          Equivariance error    Logit invariance error
                                LaLiGAN                1.02e-4                 2.79e-3
       Reaction-Diffusion        LieGAN                   -                    3.11e-2
                              SO(2) standard           1.04e-4                 2.84e-3
                                LaLiGAN                3.00e-2                 5.21e-3
          Lotka-Volterra         LieGAN                8.44e-2                 4.05e-1
                              SO(2) standard           3.35e-2                 5.68e-3
                                LaLiGAN                4.01e-3                 5.33e-3
            Pendulum             LieGAN                6.30e-3                 2.11e-2
                              SO(2) standard           7.22e-3                 1.57e-2

             Table 5: Quantitative metrics for the learned symmetries on test datasets.

In this section, we introduce some metrics to evaluate the discovered symmetries quantitatively. Recall
that the symmetries are the equivariances of a function, i.e. f (gx) = gf (x). Thus, a straightforward
metric would be the equivariance error defined as

                                  EEf = Ex,g ∥f (gx) − gf (x)∥2 .                                   (7)

Our symmetry discovery method is unsupervised and does not require fitting a function f . However,
such a function can be fitted after discovering the symmetries, as is done in the dynamical system
experiments. Concretely, the dataset consists of trajectories {x1:T }, and the prediction function is
xt+1 = f (xt ). We use SINDy to learn symbolic equations ż = h(z) (and therefore zt+1 = H(zt ) =
zt +h(zt )∆t) in the latent space as shown in Table 2, 3 and 4. Then, xt+1 = f (xt ) = (ψ ◦H ◦ϕ)(xt ),
where ϕ and ψ are the learned encoder and decoder. Using this function f , we can evaluate the
equivariance error of the learned symmetries on the test datasets. For comparison, we include the
symmetry learned by linear LieGAN (Yang et al., 2023) in the input space (without autoencoder),
where the function f is the SINDy model trained in the input space (third row (SINDy) of Table 3
and 4). Note that this result is unavailable for the high-dimensional reaction-diffusion system because
we did not train SINDy on its input space. Besides, we use the same autoencoder but replace the
representation learned LaLiGAN with a standard representation of SO(2), i.e. L = [0, −1; 1, 0] ∈
R2×2 . Table 5 shows that LaLiGAN reaches the lowest equivariance errors on all of the three
dynamical systems.
Another quantitative metric is inspired by the logit invariance introduced in Moskalev et al. (2023).
For a classification task, we define the logit invariance error to measure the change of logits under
group actions:
                                                1
                                   LIf = Ex,g ∥f (x) − f (gx)∥2 .                                 (8)
                                                2
Here, the function f outputs the logits for classification. In our setting, there is not necessarily
such a classification function. However, we can utilize the learned discriminator in LaLiGAN,
which effectively classifies between the original data distribution and the transformed distribution
by the symmetry generator. A good symmetry should lead to a small difference between these two
distributions. Therefore, we define the discriminator logit invariance error as follows:
                                            1
                                 DLIf = Ev,g ∥D(v) − D(gv)∥2                                        (9)
                                            2
where v = (x, y) are the data points sampled from the dataset. Table 5 shows that LaLiGAN has the
lowest discriminator logit invariance error among the considered symmetries.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.7    L ORENTZ S YMMETRY IN T OP TAGGING

We consider the Top Tagging dataset (Kasieczka et al., 2019), which is also studied in Yang et al.
(2023). The task is a binary classification between top quark jets and the background signals. There
are 2M observations in total, each consisting of the four-momentum of up to 200 particle jets.
This classification task is invariant to the restricted Lorentz group SO+ (1, 3). It is a 6-dimensional Lie
group, including the spatial rotations around three axes and the boosts along three spatial directions.
The original dataset has a linear symmetry in the input space. To test whether LaLiGAN can learn
nonlinear group actions, we transform the original inputs to a high-dimensional space and use it
as the new input space for LaLiGAN. Concretely, we choose 4 spatial modes ui ∈ R128 given by
                                       P4
Legendre polynomials and define u = i=1 xi ui where x = (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 ) is the 4-momentum
from the original dataset.
In our experiment, we set the latent dimension to 4 and the Lie algebra dimension to 6. Figure 14
shows the discovered Lie algebra and its structure constants. Its representation is different from
Figure 5 from Yang et al. (2023), because the latent representations obtained by the encoder are
different from original 4-momentum inputs. However, we can compute the structure constants of this
Lie algebra, which reveal its similar algebraic structure to the ground truth Lorentz algebra so(1, 3).


Figure 14: Left: Discovered 6-dimensional Lie algebra. Right: The structure constants of the
discovered Lie algebra and the ground truth so(1, 3).


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     P RELIMINARIES ON L IE G ROUP R EPRESENTATIONS

A Lie group is both a group and a differentiable manifold. We use Lie groups to describe continuous
symmetry transformations. For example, the rotations in Rn form a Lie group SO(n); all rotations,
translations and reflections in Rn form the Euclidean group E(n). We also referred to general linear
group GL(n; R), which is the group of all n × n invertible matrices with real entries. As we only
consider the field of real numbers in this work, we sometimes omit R and write GL(n) instead. We
may also write GL(V ), which is equivalent to GL(n, R) if V = Rn is a vector space.
The tangent vector space at the identity group element is called the Lie algebra of the Lie group G,
denoted as g = Tid G. The Lie algebra of general linear group GL(n, R) consists of all real-valued
matrices of size n × n.P  As Lie algebra is a vector space, we can use a basis Li ∈ g to describe any
                           c
of its element as A = i=1 wi Li , where wi ∈ R and c is the dimension of the vector space. Lie
algebra can be interpreted as the space of infinitesimal transformations
                                                                 Pc      of the group. Group elements
infinitesimally close to the identity can be written as g = I + i=1 wi Li .
The exponential map exp : g → G gives a mapping from the Lie algebra to the Lie group. For matrix
Lie groups that we are considering, matrix exponential is such a map.
We are interested in how the data is transformed by group elements. Lie group, just like any other
group, transforms the data from a vector space via a group action α : G × V → V . If the action
is linear, we call it a Lie group representation ρ : G → GL(V ), which acts on the vector space
V by matrix multiplication. Such a group representation induces a Lie algebra representation,
dρ : g → gl(V ), which satisfies exp(dρ(L)) = ρ(exp(L)), ∀L ∈ g.
Every matrix Lie group G ≤ GL(n) has a standard representation, which is just the inclusion map of
G into GL(n). In our work, as we only consider these subgroups of general linear group, we learn the
Lie group as its standard representation acting on Rn in the usual way. It is thus convenient to think
of all group elements (and also Lie algebra elements) as n × n matrices, with the group operation
given by matrix multiplication.


C     U NIVERSAL A PPROXIMATION OF N ONLINEAR G ROUP ACTIONS

C.1   P ROOFS

In this section, we provide theoretical justifications for the decomposition of nonlinear group actions
introduced in section 4.1. We represent any nonlinear group action π ′ : G × V → V as
                                          π ′ (g, ·) = ψ ◦ π(g) ◦ ϕ,                              (10)
where ϕ : V → Z and ψ : Z → V are functions parametrized by neural networks, and π(g) : G →
GL(k) is a group representation acting on the latent vector space Z = Rk .
Proposition C.1. If ϕ and ψ are inverse of each other, then π ′ (g, ·) = ψ ◦ π(g) ◦ ϕ is a valid group
action that satisfies identity and compatibility axioms.

Proof. We have
                           π ′ (g2 , π ′ (g1 , x)) = ψ(π(g2 )ϕ(g1 · x))
                                                   = ψ(π(g2 )ϕ(ψ(π(g1 )ϕ(x))))
                                                   = ψ(π(g2 )π(g1 )ϕ(x))
                                                   = ψ(π(g2 g1 )ϕ(x))
                                                = π ′ (g2 g1 , x)                                 (11)
                                      ′
                                    π (e, x) = ψ(ϕ(x)) = x                                        (12)



The following theorem states that our proposed decomposition and neural network parametrization
can approximate nonlinear group actions under certain conditions.


                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem C.2 (Universal Approximation of Nonlinear Group Action). Let G ≤ GL(k; R) be a
compact Lie group that acts smoothly, freely and properly on V = Rk via a continuous group
action π ′ : G × V → V . The group action, restricted to any bounded subset of the group, can be
approximated by the decomposition π ′ (g, ·) ≈ ψ ◦ π(g) ◦ ϕ if it admits a simply connected orbit
space V /G, where ψ and ϕ are fixed arbitrary-width neural networks with one hidden layer, and π is
a linear group representation.

Proof. We establish our theorem as a corollary of the Universal Approximation Theorem (UAT)
(Hornik et al., 1989), which states that any continuous function f ∈ C(Rn , Rm ) can be approximated
by a one-hidden-layer arbitrary-width neural network. The intuition of this proof is to explicitly
construct the mappings between input and latent space and ensure their continuity so that we can use
UAT to approximate them with neural nets.
The Quotient Manifold Theorem states that smooth, free, and proper group actions yield smooth
manifolds as orbit spaces (Lee & Lee (2012), Theorem 21.10). More precisely, the orbit space V /G
has a unique smooth structure with a smooth submersion quotient map s : V → V /G. Also, given
that V /G is simply connected, we can find a global continuous section s′ : V /G → V s.t. s′ ◦ s is
identity restricted on S = imgs′ (V /G). The global section can be constructed by:

      1. Fix a base point p ∈ V /G and choose a point p̃ in the pre-image of p under s, i.e. s(p̃) = p.
      2. For any other point q ∈ V /G, choose a path γ in V /G from p to q.
      3. As V /G is simply connected, V is a universal cover of V /G, so that any path γ in V /G can
         be uniquely lifted to a path γ̃ in V which starts at p̃ and ends at q̃.
      4. Define the section as s′ : V /G → V, q 7→ q̃.

In addition, according to Whitney Embedding Theorem, the smooth manifold V /G can be smoothly
embedded in a higher-dimensional Euclidean space. Denote t : V /G → Rp as one of the possible
embeddings. We do not restrict the exact dimensionality of such an Euclidean space, as long as it
enables us to represent any orbit with part of the latent space.
Before defining the mapping from input to latent, we finally note that as G ≤ GL(k; R), we have a
standard representation ρ : G → Rk×k .
                                2
Now we define α : V → Rk +p , π ′ (g, s′ (ṽ)) 7→ concat(vec(ρ(g)), t(ṽ)), ∀ṽ ∈ V /G, g ∈ G, and we
verify that this function is well defined.
First, V = {π ′ (g, s′ (ṽ))|ṽ ∈ V /G, g ∈ G}, so that α(v) is defined for any v ∈ V .
Then, we need to make sure any v ∈ V is written uniquely in the form of v = π ′ (g)ṽ. ∀x̃i ̸=
x˜j , gi , gj ∈ G, π ′ (gi )x̃i ̸= π ′ (gj )x˜j , because any two orbits never overlap in V .
Also, ∀g1 , g2 ∈ G, g1 ̸= g2 , as π ′ acts freely, we have π ′ (g1 )ṽ ̸= π ′ (g2 )ṽ.
Next, we prove that α defined this way is also continuous. As the value of α is concatenated from
two parts, it suffices to check the continuity for each component, i.e. α1 (π ′ (g, s′ (ṽ))) = vec(ρ(g))
and α2 (π ′ (g, s′ (ṽ))) = t(ṽ).
For any open set t(Ṽ ) ⊂ Rp , the continuity of t and s guarantees that the inverse image, (t ◦
s)−1 t(Ṽ ) = s−1 (Ṽ ), is an open set. As (s|S )−1 = s′ , s′ (Ṽ ) is an open set. The α2 inverse
image of t(Ṽ ) is g∈G π ′ (g, s′ (Ṽ )). Note that ∀g ∈ G, π ′ (g −1 , ·) : V → V is continuous, so that
                       S

π ′ (g, s′ (Ṽ )) is open. Therefore, the α2 inverse image of any open set t(Ṽ ) is a union of open sets,
which is also open, so that α2 is continuous.
Similarly, for any open set vec(ρ(U )) ∈ Rk , U is an open set given the continuity of the stan-
dard
S representation             ρ and the vectorization operation. The α1 inverse image of vec(ρ(U )) is
            ′       ′
    ′
   s (ṽ) π   (U, s   (ṽ)). As the action of G on V is free, i.e. the stabilizer subgroup is trivial for
all v ∈ V , we have π ′ (·, v) : G → V is an injective continuous map, so that its image of an open set
is still open. Thus, we conclude that α1 is also continuous.


                                                        21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


According to the Universal Approximation Theorem, there exists a one-hidden-layer arbitrary-width
neural network ϕ that approximates the continuous α.
Then, we define π(g) = (Ik ⊗ ρ(g)) ⊕ Ip . For some z0 = (vec(ρ(g0 )), t(ṽ0 )) in the image of α, we
have
                               π(g)z0 =((Ik ⊗ ρ(g))vec(ρ(g0 )), t(ṽ0 ))
                                      =(vec(ρ(g)ρ(g0 )), t(ṽ0 ))
                                      =(vec(ρ(gg0 )), t(ṽ0 ))
                                                         S
Finally, we define another mapping β on GZ = g∈G,z∈Z π(g)z, where Z is the image of α, as
β : (vec(ρ(g)), t(ṽ)) 7→ π ′ (g, s′ (ṽ)), ∀ṽ ∈ V /G, g ∈ G. It is well-defined because vec◦ρ is injective
on G, and also continuous because it is the inverse of α. According to the Universal Approximation
Theorem, there exists another neural network ψ that approximates β.
Finally, defining α, π, β as above, for any v = π ′ (g ′ , s′ (ṽ)) ∈ V and g in any bounded subset of G,
we have
                                π ′ (g, v) =π ′ (g, π ′ (g ′ , s′ (ṽ)))
                                           =π ′ (gg ′ , s′ (ṽ))
                                           =β(vec(ρ(gg ′ )), t(ṽ))
                                           =(β ◦ π(g))(vec(ρ(g ′ )), t(ṽ))
                                           =(β ◦ π(g) ◦ α)(π ′ (g ′ , s′ (ṽ))
                                           =(β ◦ π(g) ◦ α)(v)
                                           ≈(ψ ◦ π(g) ◦ ϕ)(v)

The final step relies on the fact that the neural network approximator ψ and the group representation
π(g) are Lipschitz continuous. Concretely, it requires ∥ψ(z1 ) − ψ(z2 )∥ ≤ K∥z1 − z2 ∥, ∀z1 , z2 , for
some positive constant K and similarly for π(g) as a function over Z = img(α). This is true for a
one-layer neural network with ReLU activation, and also for π(g) for any g in a bounded subset of
the group, because π(g) is a bounded linear transformation.
Then, according to the UAT, for any ϵ > 0, there exist neural networks ψ and ϕ and positive constant
K s.t.
      sup ∥(ψ ◦ π(g) ◦ ϕ)(v) − (β ◦ π(g) ◦ α)(v)∥
      v∈V
   ≤ sup ∥(ψ ◦ π(g) ◦ ϕ)(v) − (ψ ◦ π(g) ◦ α)(v)∥ + ∥(ψ ◦ π(g) ◦ α)(v) − (β ◦ π(g) ◦ α)(v)∥
      v∈V
   ≤ sup K∥(π(g) ◦ ϕ)(v) − (π(g) ◦ α)(v)∥ + ϵ
      v∈V

   ≤ sup K 2 ∥ϕ(v) − α(v)∥ + ϵ
      v∈V
        2
   ≤(K + 1)ϵ
which translates to
                                (β ◦ π(g) ◦ α)(v) ≈ (ψ ◦ π(g) ◦ ϕ)(v)


C.2    G ROUP ACTION U NDER A PPROXIMATE I NVERSE

In practice, the networks ϕ and ψ are trained with a reconstruction loss. As the loss is not strictly
zero, they are only approximate but not perfect inverses of each other. As a result, the condition in
Proposition C.1 cannot be strictly true. However, we can show empirically that when the reconstruc-
tion loss is reasonably close to zero, the decomposition in Proposition C.1 leads to an approximate
group action. We use the reaction-diffusion system for demonstration.


                                                        22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A group action needs to satisfy the identity and compatibility axioms. We evaluate the error in terms
of these axioms caused by the imperfect encoder and decoder networks. First, the error with respect
to the identity axiom can be directly described by the reconstruction loss:
                        errid = Ex ∥π ′ (e, x) − x∥2 = Ex ∥ψ(ϕ(x)) − x∥2 = lrecon .                             (13)
In the reaction-diffusion experiment, the test reconstruction loss is 2.58 × 10−3 , which indicates the
autoencoder networks approximately satisfy the identity axiom.
Then, we consider the compatibility error. We sample a random group element g from the generator
and calculate g N . Then, we apply π ′ (g)N = (ψ ◦ π(g) ◦ ϕ)N and π ′ (g N ) = ψ ◦ π(g N ) ◦ ϕ to the
test dataset. The compatibility error is computed as
                                 errcomp = Ex ∥π ′ (g)N (x) − π ′ (g N )(x)∥2 .                                 (14)


(a) An observation (left) transformed by π ′ (g)20 (middle) and π ′ (g 20 ) (right)   (b) Compatibility error vs N

     Figure 15: Group compatibility error caused by imperfect encoder and decoder networks.

Figure 15a shows a sample from test set transformed by π ′ (g)20 , that is, passed through the encoder,
the linear representation π(g) and the decoder for 20 times, and by π ′ (g 20 ), that is, passed through
the autoencoder and the linear representation π(g 20 ) once. The two transformations have the same
effect visually, which indicates that the autoencoder networks approximately satisfy the compatibility
axiom. Further evidence is provided in Figure 15b, where we use the number of compositions
N ∈ [2, 40] and plot the growth of compatibility error with the increase of N . The error remains low
(≈ 1 × 10−2 ) up to 40 times of group element composition.


                                                          23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D        E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

In this section, we provide the detailed hyperparameter settings and dataset generation procedure for
the experiments.

D.1       R EACTION -D IFFUSION

We use the script from SINDy Autoencoder 1 to generate the dataset. We discretize the 2D space into
a 100 × 100 grid, which leads to an input dimension of 104 . We simulate the system up to T = 6000
timesteps with step size ∆t = 0.05. Then, we add random Gaussian noises with standard deviation
10−6 to each pixel and at each timestep. We use the timesteps t ∈ [0, 4800) for training LaLiGAN
and SINDy. For long-term forecasting, we use the timestep t = 4800 as the initial input frame and
simulate up to 600 timesteps with each method. The simulations are then compared with the ground
truth during t ∈ [4800, 5400) to calculate the relative MSE.
We use MLPs with 5 hidden layers and 512 hidden units as the encoder, the decoder and the
discriminator. We also use orthogonal parametrization for the final linear layer of the encoder, which
is discussed in Section 4.3. The dimension of the Lie algebra in the LieGAN generator is set to one.
We use a standard Gaussian as the distribution of the coefficient w in the LieGAN generator.
For the 2D latent space symmetry discovery, we train for 150 epochs with batch size 64. The learning
rates for the autoencoder, the generator and the discriminator are 0.0003, 0.001, 0.001, respectively.
The weights of the reconstruction loss and the GAN loss are set to wrecon = 1 and wGAN = 0.01. As
in LieGAN, we also include a regularization loss term lreg for LieGAN generator, which pushes the
Lie algebra basis away from zero, and the weight for the regularization is set to wreg = 0.1. We also
apply sequential thresholding to the LieGAN generator parameters. Every 5 epochs, matrix entries
with absolute values less than 0.01 times the max absolute values across all entries are set to 0. For
the 3D latent space, the settings are the same as above except that we train for 300 epochs.
For the equation discovery in the 2D and 3D latent spaces, we train SINDy for 300 epochs with
batch size 64 and learning rate 0.001. The SINDy function library contains polynomials up to the
second order. We use L1 regularization on the equation coefficients with weight 0.01. We also apply
sequential thresholding every 100 epochs, setting the coefficients less than 0.1 to zero.

D.2       N ONLINEAR P ENDULUM

We simulate the movement of nonlinear pendulum according to the governing equation, q̇ = p, ṗ ==
− sin(q). For training, we simulate 200 trajectories up to T = 500 timesteps with ∆t = 0.02 with
random initial conditions. For testing, we simulate another 20 trajectories. The initial conditions
are sampled uniformly from q0 ∈ [−π, π] and p0 ∈ [−2.1, 2.1]. Also, we ensure that H = 12 p2 −
cos(q) < 0.99, so that it does not lead to a circular movement.
We use MLPs with 5 hidden layers and 512 hidden units as the encoder, the decoder and the
discriminator. We also use orthogonal parametrization for the final linear layer of the encoder and
batch normalization before the transformation of the symmetry generator, as discussed in Section 4.3.
The dimension of the Lie algebra in the LieGAN generator is set to one. We use a standard Gaussian
as the distribution of the coefficient w in the LieGAN generator.
We train for 70 epochs with batch size 256. The learning rate for the autoencoder, the generator and
the discriminator are all 0.001. The weights of the reconstruction loss and the GAN loss are set to
wrecon = 1 and wGAN = 0.01. The weight for the LieGAN regularization is set to wreg = 0.02. We
also apply sequential thresholding to the LieGAN generator parameters. Every 5 epochs, matrix
entries with absolute values less than 0.3 times the max absolute values across all entries are set to 0.
For the equation discovery, we train SINDy for 30 epochs with batch size 64 and learning rate 0.001.
The SINDy function library contains polynomials up to the second order. We use L1 regularization
on the equation coefficients with weight 0.01. We also apply sequential thresholding every 5 epochs,
setting the coefficients less than 0.1 to zero.

    1
        https://github.com/kpchamp/SindyAutoencoders/tree/master/rd solver


                                                      24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3    L OTKA -VOLTERRA E QUATIONS

We simulate the Lotka-Volterra equations in its canonical form, ṗ = a − beq , q̇ = cep − d, with
a = 2/3, b = 4/3, c = d = 1. For training, we simulate 200 trajectories up to T = 10000 timesteps
with ∆t = 0.002 with random initial conditions. For testing, we simulate another 20 trajectories.
The initial conditions are sampled by first sampling x0 = ep0 and y = eq0 uniformly from [0, 1] and
then computing p0 = log x0 and q0 = log y0 . Also, we ensure that the Hamiltonian of the system
given by H = cep − dp + beq − aq falls in the range of [3, 4.5].
For all the experiments, we use MLPs with 5 hidden layers and 512 hidden units as the encoder, the
decoder and the discriminator. We also use orthogonal parametrization for the final linear layer of the
encoder and batch normalization before the transformation of the symmetry generator, as discussed
in Section 4.3. The dimension of the Lie algebra in the LieGAN generator is set to one. We use a
standard Gaussian as the distribution of the coefficient w in the LieGAN generator.
We train for 30 epochs with batch size 8192. The learning rate for the autoencoder, the generator
and the discriminator are all 0.001. The weights of the reconstruction loss and the GAN loss are set
to wrecon = 1 and wGAN = 0.01. The weight for the LieGAN regularization is set to wreg = 0.01.
We also apply sequential thresholding to the LieGAN generator parameters. Every 5 epochs, matrix
entries with absolute values less than 0.3 times the max absolute values across all entries are set to 0.
For the equation discovery, we train SINDy for 5 epochs with batch size 64 and learning rate 0.001.
The SINDy function library contains polynomials up to the second order. We use L1 regularization
on the equation coefficients with weight 0.01. We also apply sequential thresholding every epoch,
setting the coefficients less than 0.1 to zero.

D.4    D OUBLE B UMP

The signal length is set to 64, so that we have observations x ∈ R64 . The rectangular and the
triangular bump signals both have the length 16. For each sample, we randomly sample a shift
(∆1 , ∆2 ), where ∆i is an integer in [0, 64). The two bump signals are then cyclically shifted and
superimposed. We sample 10000 signals for training and another 1000 for test.
We use a 1D convolution architecture for autoencoder. The encoder consists of three 1D convolution
layers, with the numbers of input channels 1, 16, 32 and the final number of output channels 64,
kernel size 3, stride 1 and padding 1, each followed by ReLU activation and a 1D max pooling layer
with kernel size 2 and stride 2. The output of the final convolution is flattened and fed into an MLP
with 2 hidden layers with 128 and 32 hidden units, and 4 output dimensions. The decoder structure
is the reverse of the encoder structure, It consists of a 2-layer MLP with 32 and 128 hidden units,
and 512 output dimensions. The MLP output is reshaped into 64 channels with size 8. Then three
transposed convolution layers with output channels 32, 16, 1, kernel size 3, stride 2, input padding 1
and output padding 1 are applied. The final output passes through a sigmoid activation to ensure the
output range is in (0, 1). We use MLPs with 4 hidden layers and 128 hidden units as the discriminator.
We also use orthogonal parametrization for the final linear layer of the encoder, as discussed in
Section 4.3. The Lie algebra basis in the LieGAN generator is fixed to the standard representation of
SO(2) × SO(2).
We train for 2000 epochs with batch size 64. The learning rate for the autoencoder and the discrimi-
nator are both 0.001. The weights of the reconstruction loss and the GAN loss are set to wrecon = 1
and wGAN = 0.01.


                                                   25
