Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


NAVIGATING DATASET D OCUMENTATIONS IN AI:
A L ARGE -S CALE A NALYSIS OF DATASET C ARDS ON
H UGGING FACE
 Xinyu Yang ∗                          Weixin Liang∗                     James Zou
 Cornell University                    Stanford University               Stanford University
 xy468@cornell.edu                     wxliang@stanford.edu              jamesz@stanford.edu



                                                  A BSTRACT

             Advances in machine learning are closely tied to the creation of datasets. While data
             documentation is widely recognized as essential to the reliability, reproducibility,
             and transparency of ML, we lack a systematic empirical understanding of current
             dataset documentation practices. To shed light on this question, here we take
             Hugging Face – one of the largest platforms for sharing and collaborating on
             ML models and datasets – as a prominent case study. By analyzing all 7,433
             dataset documentation on Hugging Face, our investigation provides an overview
             of the Hugging Face dataset ecosystem and insights into dataset documentation
             practices, yielding 5 main findings: (1) The dataset card completion rate shows
             marked heterogeneity correlated with dataset popularity: While 86.0% of the top
             100 downloaded dataset cards fill out all sections suggested by Hugging Face
             community, only 7.9% of dataset cards with no downloads complete all these
             sections. (2) A granular examination of each section within the dataset card reveals
             that the practitioners seem to prioritize Dataset Description and Dataset Structure
             sections, accounting for 36.2% and 33.6% of the total card length, respectively,
             for the most downloaded datasets. In contrast, the Considerations for Using the
             Data section receives the lowest proportion of content, accounting for just 2.1% of
             the text. (3) By analyzing the subsections within each section and utilizing topic
             modeling to identify key topics, we uncover what is discussed in each section, and
             underscore significant themes encompassing both technical and social impacts, as
             well as limitations within the Considerations for Using the Data section. (4) Our
             findings also highlight the need for improved accessibility and reproducibility of
             datasets in the Usage sections. (5) In addition, our human annotation evaluation
             emphasizes the pivotal role of comprehensive dataset content in shaping individuals’
             perceptions of a dataset card’s overall quality. Overall, our study offers a unique
             perspective on analyzing dataset documentation through large-scale data science
             analysis and underlines the need for more thorough dataset documentation in
             machine learning research.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Datasets form the backbone of machine learning research (Koch et al., 2021). The proliferation of
machine learning research has spurred rapid advancements in machine learning dataset development,
validation, and real-world deployment across academia and industry. Such growing availability
of ML datasets underscores the crucial role of proper documentation in ensuring transparency,
reproducibility, and data quality in research (Haibe-Kains et al., 2020; Stodden et al., 2018; Hutson,
2018). Documentation provides details about the dataset, including sources of data, methods used
to collect it, and preprocessing or cleaning that was performed. This information holds significant
value for dataset users, as it facilitates a quick understanding of the dataset’s motivation and its
overall scope. These insights are also crucial for fostering responsible data sharing and promoting
interdisciplinary collaborations.
    ∗
        These authors contributed equally to this work.


                                                          1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Despite numerous studies exploring the structure and content of dataset cards across various research
domains (Afzal et al., 2020; Gebru et al., 2021; Papakyriakopoulos et al., 2023; Barman et al.,
2023; Costa-jussà et al., 2020), there remains a notable gap in empirical analyses of community
norms and practices for dataset documentation. This knowledge gap is significant because adherence
to community norms and the quality of dataset documentation directly impact the transparency,
reliability, and reproducibility in the field of data-driven research. For instance, inadequate dataset
descriptions, structural details, or limitations can hinder users from utilizing the dataset appropriately,
potentially resulting in misuse or unintended consequences; the absence of information on data
cleaning and readiness assessment practices in data documentation limits dataset reusability and
productivity gains. Furthermore, without a systematic analysis of current dataset documentation
practices, we risk perpetuating insufficient documentation standards, which can impede efforts to
ensure fairness, accountability, and equitable use of AI technologies.
To address this question, we conducted a comprehensive empirical analysis of dataset cards hosted on
Hugging Face, one of the largest platforms for sharing and collaborating on ML models and datasets,
as a prominent case study. Dataset cards on the Hugging Face platform are Markdown files that serve
as the README for a dataset repository. While several open-source platforms also facilitate the
sharing of ML datasets, such as Kaggle, Papers with Code, and GitHub, we chose Hugging Face
for two primary reasons. Firstly, it stands out as one of the most popular platforms for developers
to publish, share, and reuse ML-based projects, offering a vast repository of ML datasets for study.
Secondly, Hugging Face is one of the few open-source platforms that offer an official dataset card
template. This feature not only enhances the accessibility and user-friendliness of the dataset card
community but also makes the analysis process more efficient and informative.
By analyzing all 7,433 dataset documentation hosted on Hugging Face, our investigation provides
an overview of the Hugging Face dataset ecosystem and insights into dataset documentation prac-
tices. Based on our research findings, we emphasize the importance of comprehensive dataset
documentation and offer suggestions to practitioners on how to write documentation that promotes
reproducibility, transparency, and accessibility of their datasets, which can help to improve the overall
quality and usability of the dataset community. Our study aims to bridge the notable gap in the
community concerning data documentation norms, taking the first step toward identifying deficiencies
in current practices and offering guidelines for enhancing dataset documentation.
a                                           b                                         c


Figure 1: Systematic Analysis of 24,065 Datasets Hosted on Hugging Face. (a) Exponential
Growth of Datasets: The Hugging Face platform has seen a remarkable surge in the number of
datasets, with the count doubling approximately every 18 weeks. (b) Power Law in Dataset Usage:
Dataset downloads on Hugging Face follow a power-law distribution, as indicated by the linear
relationship on the log-log plot. The top 82 datasets account for 80% of the total downloads; datasets
with documentation dominate the top downloaded datasets. (c) Documentation Associated with
Usage: Despite only 30.9% of dataset repositories (7,433 out of 24,065) featuring non-empty dataset
cards, these datasets account for an overwhelming 95.0% of total download traffic on the platform.

2    OVERVIEW

 Finding

    • Exponential Growth of Datasets: The number of datasets on Hugging Face doubles every
      18 weeks.
    • Documentation Associated with Usage: 95.0% of download traffic comes from the 30.9%
      of datasets with documentation.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Exponential Growth of Datasets Our analysis encompasses 24,065 dataset repositories on Hug-
ging Face uploaded by 7,811 distinct user accounts as of March 16th, 2023 (see Table. S5 for varying
documentation practices by creators). The number of datasets exhibits exponential growth, with a
weekly growth rate of 3.97% and a doubling time of 18 weeks (Fig. 1a). As a sanity check, the
number of dataset repositories reached 35,973 by May 23rd, 2023, confirming the exponential trend.

Power Law in Dataset Usage Although Hugging Face has seen a significant increase in the number
of dataset repositories, our analysis reveals a significant imbalance in dataset downloads, which
follows a power law distribution. This means that a small proportion of the most popular datasets
receive the majority of the downloads, while the vast majority of datasets receive very few downloads.
In fact, our analysis shows that just the 82 datasets with the most downloads account for 80% of total
downloads (Fig. 1b). Fig. S4 further demonstrates that the power law distribution persists across
various task domains, even with the varied number of datasets within each domain.

Documentation Associated with Usage Despite the importance of dataset cards, only 58.2%
(14,011 out of 24,065 dataset repositories contributed by 4,782 distinct user accounts) include dataset
cards as Markdown README.md files within their dataset repositories. Among these, 6,578 dataset
cards are empty, resulting in only 30.9% (7,433 out of 24,065 dataset repositories contributed by
1,982 distinct user accounts) featuring non-empty dataset cards (Fig. 1c). As illustrated in Fig. 1b,
dataset cards are prevalent among the most downloaded datasets. Notably, datasets with non-empty
dataset cards account for 95.0% of total download traffic, underscoring a potential positive correlation
between dataset cards and dataset popularity. For the rest of the paper, we focus our analyses on
these 7,433 non-empty dataset cards. We sort these non-empty dataset cards based on the number of
downloads for the corresponding datasets. So top k dataset cards (e.g. k = 100) refer to the dataset
cards corresponding to the k most downloaded datasets.

3      S TRUCTURE OF DATASET D OCUMENTATIONS

 Finding

     • The dataset card completion rate shows marked heterogeneity correlated with dataset
       popularity: While 86.0% of the top 100 downloaded datasets fill out all sections suggested
       by the Hugging Face community, only 7.9% of dataset cards with no downloads complete
       all these sections.


    Section Title     Subsection Title                                                       Description
                                               A brief summary of the dataset, including its intended use, supported tasks, an overview of how and
                       Dataset Summary
                                               why the dataset was created, etc.
     Dataset         Supported Tasks and
    Description                                Brief description of the tag, metrics, and suggested models of the dataset.
                        Leaderboards
                         Languages             The languages represented in the dataset.
                        Data Instances         JSON-formed example and description of a typical instance in the dataset.
      Dataset                                  List and describe the fields present in the dataset. Mention their data type, and whether they are
                          Data Fields
     Structure                                 used as input or output in any of the tasks the dataset currently supports.
                          Data Splits          Criteria for splitting the data, descriptive statistics for the features, such as size, average length, etc.
                      Curation Rationale       Motivation for the creation of the dataset.
                                               The source data (e.g. news text and headlines, social media posts, translated sentences, etc.),
                         Source Data
      Dataset                                  including the data collection process, and data producer.
      Creation            Annotations          Annotation process, annotation tools, annotators, etc.
                    Personal and Sensitive     Statement of whether the dataset contains other data that might be considered sensitive (e.g., data
                           Information         that reveals racial or ethnic origins, financial or health data, etc.).
 Considerations     Social Impact of Dataset   Discussion of the ways the use of the dataset will impact society.
  for Using the      Discussion of Biases      Descriptions of specific biases that are likely to be reflected in the data
       Data         Other Known Limitations    Other limitations of the dataset, like annotation artifacts.
                       Dataset Curators        The people involved in collecting the dataset and their affiliation(s)
     Additional      Licensing Information     The license and link to the license webpage if available.
    Information       Citation Information     The BibTex-formatted reference for the dataset.
                         Contributions         ‘Thanks to @github-username for adding this dataset.’


Table 1: Community-Endorsed Dataset Card Structure. This table shows the sections and their
suggested subsections provided by the Hugging Face community, along with their descriptions.
For more information, please refer to https://github.com/huggingface/datasets/
blob/main/templates/README_guide.md.


                                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Community-Endorsed Dataset Card Structure Grounded in academic literature (Mitchell et al.,
2019) and official guidelines from Hugging Face (HuggingFace, 2021), the Hugging Face community
provides suggestions for what to write in each section. This community-endorsed dataset card
provides a standardized structure for conveying key information about datasets. It generally contains
5 sections: Dataset Description, Dataset Structure, Dataset Creation, Considerations for Using the
Data, and Additional Information (Table. 1). To examine the structure of dataset cards, we used a
pipeline that detects exact word matches for each section title. We then identified the section titles and
checked whether they had contents (Appendix B.1). If a dataset card had all five sections completed,
we considered it to be following the community-endorsed dataset card.

Adherence to Community-Endorsed
Guidelines Correlates with Popularity
Our evaluation found that popular datasets
have better adherence to the dataset card
community-endorsed dataset card structure.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, compliance with
the template varies significantly among
datasets with different download counts.
Among the 7,433 dataset cards analyzed, Figure 2: Highly downloaded datasets consis-
86.0% of the top 100 downloaded dataset tently show better compliance with the community-
cards have completed all five sections of the endorsed documentation structure.
community-endorsed dataset card, while
only 7.9% of dataset cards with no downloads follow it. Fig. S5 further reveals that popular dataset
cards achieve higher completion in all Hugging Face-recommended sections. This implies a potential
correlation between adherence to community-endorsed guidelines and dataset popularity.

4    P RACTITIONERS E MPHASIZE D ESCRIPTION AND S TRUCTURE OVER S OCIAL
     I MPACT AND L IMITATIONS

 Finding

    • Practitioners seem to prioritize on Dataset Description and Dataset Structure sections,
      which account for 36.2% and 33.6% of the total card length, respectively, on the top 100
      most downloaded datasets.
    • In contrast, the Considerations for Using the Data section receives the lowest proportion
      of content, just 2.1%. The Considerations for Using the Data section covers the social
      impact of datasets, discussions of biases, and limitations of datasets.


Social Impact, Dataset Limitations and Biases are Lacking in Most Documentations Following
the community-endorsed dataset card, we conducted an analysis to determine the level of emphasis
placed on each section. Fig. 3b shows the word count distribution among the top 100 downloaded
dataset cards, revealing their high level of comprehensiveness: 91.0% of them have a word count
exceeding 200. We step further into these dataset cards to examine the emphasis placed on each
section. We calculated the word count of each section and its proportion to the entire dataset card. As
shown in Fig. 3c, the Dataset Description and Dataset Structure sections received the most attention,
accounting for 36.2% and 33.6% of the dataset card length, respectively. On the other hand, the
Considerations for Using the Data section received a notably low proportion of only 2.1%.

Section Length Reflects Practitioner Attention The length of sections within dataset cards is
reflective of practitioner attention, and it varies significantly based on the popularity of the dataset.
Highly downloaded datasets tend to have more comprehensive and longer dataset cards (Fig. 3a), with
an emphasis on the Dataset Description and Dataset Structure sections (Fig. 3d). Conversely, less
popular datasets have shorter cards (Fig. 3a) with a greater emphasis on the Additional Information
section (Fig. 3d). Despite this, sections such as Dataset Creation and Considerations for Using the
Data consistently receive lower attention, regardless of download rates (Fig. 3d). This suggests a
need to promote more comprehensive documentation, particularly in critical sections, to enhance
dataset usage and facilitate ethical considerations.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a                                                      b


c                            d


Figure 3: Section Length Reflects Practitioner Attention. (a) Popularity Correlates with Docu-
mentation Length: The top downloaded dataset cards are longer, indicating that they contain more
comprehensive information. (b) Distribution of Word Count Among Top 100 Downloaded Dataset
Cards (c) Section Length Proportions in Top 100 Downloaded Dataset Cards: The Dataset De-
scription and Dataset Structure sections dominate in the top 100 downloaded dataset cards, with
proportions of 36.2% and 33.6%, respectively. In contrast, the Considerations for Using the Data
section receives the least attention, with a proportion of only 2.1%. (d) Section Length Proportion
Changes over Downloads: The section length proportion changes over downloads, with Dataset
Description and Dataset Structure decreasing in length, and Additional Information and Other increas-
ing. Notably, there is a consistently low emphasis placed on the Dataset Creation and Considerations
for Using the Data sections across all dataset cards with different downloads.

5    U NDERSTANDING C ONTENT DYNAMICS IN DATASET D OCUMENTATION

 Finding

    • Strong Community Adherence to Subsection Guidelines: Practitioners contributing to
      the Hugging Face community exhibit high compliance with standards, filling out 14 of the
      17 recommended subsections across five main sections at a rate exceeding 50%.
    • Emergence of the Usage Section Beyond the Community Template: Surprisingly, 33.2%
      of dataset cards includes a Usage section. The community template does not include such
      Usage section in its current form and should include one in the future.


Section Content Detection Pipeline To gain a deeper understanding of the topics discussed in
each section, we conducted a content analysis within each section of the community-endorsed dataset
card structure, which includes suggested subsections within the five main sections. We used exact
keyword matching to identify the corresponding subsections and calculate their filled-out rates. Fig.
4 shows that 14 out of 17 subsections have filled-out rates above 50%, indicating adherence to the
community-endorsed dataset cards.

Limitation Section is Rare, but Long if it Exists The Considerations for Using the Data section
(i.e., limitation section), despite being frequently overlooked and often left empty by practitioners,
holds particular significance. When this section is included, it tends to adhere well to community
guidelines, with subsections having a completion rate exceeding 50% and a reasonably substantial
word count (98.2 words). This suggests that this section has the potential to provide valuable insights
and guidance. This motivates our use of topic modeling to identify key discussion topics within this
section, potentially aiding practitioners in crafting meaningful content.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Highlighting the Hugging Face Community’s Compliance with Subsection Guidelines.
This figure shows subsection filled-out rates within different sections, stratified by download counts.
Each section has multiple subsections, with bars representing the filled-out rate of each subsection.
Green texts indicate filled-out rates above 50%, while red texts indicate rates below 50%. Of the 17
subsections within the five sections of the community-endorsed dataset, 14 have filled-out rates above
50%.
   a                                                   Social Impact of Dataset
         Topic                                                    Representative Sentences
                     • Adding a Spanish resource may help others to improve their research and educational activities.
    Technical or
                     • The creation of the dataset contributes to expanding the scope of NLP research to under-explored languages
  Research Scope
                       across the world.
                     • This dataset can be used to gain insights into the social, cultural, and political views of people in African countries.
   Social Scope or
                     • If this matter isn’t tackled with enough urgency, we might see the rise of a new dark era in Latin America politics,
    Background
                       where many unscrupulous parties and people will manage to gain power and control the lives of many people.


   b                                                     Discussion of Biases
         Topic                                                    Representative Sentences
                     • Gender speakers distribution is imbalanced, percentage of female speakers is mostly lower than 50% across
   Subpopulation
                       languages.
      Biases
                     • The social biases of the time in terms of race, sex, gender, etc. might be encountered in this dataset.
                     • With respect to the potential risks, we note that the subjectivity of human annotation would impact on the quality of
    Biases from
                       the dataset.
     Collection
                     • In terms of data collection, by using keywords and user mentions, we are introducing some bias to the data,
     Procedure
                       restricting our scope to the list of keywords and users we created.

   c                                                   Other Known Limitations
         Topic                                                    Representative Sentences
                     • The nature of the task introduce a variability in the quality of the target translations.
    Data Quality
                     • A number of errors, omissions and inconsistencies are expected to be found within the corpus.
       Processing    • Our augmentation process can sometimes create nonexistent versions of real people.
       Limitation    • Satellite annotation is not as accurate for pixel-level representation due to single-point annotations.


Figure 5: Key Topics in Considerations for Using the Data through Topic Modeling Analysis.
This figure displays the outcomes of the topic modeling assessment on the contents of the (a) Social
Impact of Dataset Subsection, (b) Discussion of Biases Subsection, and (c) Other Known Limitations
Subsection. Each panel illustrates the human-assigned topic label and representative sentences for
each section. Topics are generated by Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA).

Limitation Section Covers Diverse and Crucial Topics The Considerations for Using the Data
section (i.e., limitation section) encompasses diverse and crucial topics. The Hugging Face community
emphasizes three major themes within this section: Social Impact of Dataset, Discussion of Biases,
and Other Known Limitations.
The Social Impact of Dataset aspect explores not only societal implications but also the potential
benefits to technology and research communities. In this section, practitioners discuss issues like


                                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


how the dataset can expand the scope of NLP research (Armstrong et al., 2022), and increase access
to natural language technology across diverse regions and cultures (Tache et al., 2021). Additionally,
the subsection covers sensitive topics related to politics, ethics, and culture within the social scope.
Discussion of Biases delves into subpopulation bias and data collection biases, highlighting the
importance of addressing bias-related issues. Previous research have identified numerous technical
and social biases such as subgroup bias (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018), data collection bias (Wang
et al., 2019), and label bias (Jiang & Nachum, 2020). Our topic modeling results reveal that two
primary biases are discussed by practitioners in this subsection. The first is subpopulation bias, which
includes biases related to gender, age, or race. For instance, an audio dataset (Nsoesie & Galea, 2022)
notes that female speakers are underrepresented, comprising less than 50% of the dataset. The second
major bias arises from the data collection process, specifically the annotation process, which is often
a significant bottleneck and source of errors.
Lastly, Other Known Limitations focuses on technical limitations, particularly data quality and
processing limitations. This comprehensive coverage underscores the multifaceted nature of consider-
ations related to dataset usage. Data quality is often a focus in other disciplines, such as the social
sciences and biomedicine, and there are many insights to draw upon (Paullada et al., 2021; Fedorov,
2010; Fan & Geerts, 2012). Meanwhile, processing limitations encompass a broader range of issues
beyond biases from the collection procedure, such as inaccuracies or the absence of some data points.

Emergence of the Usage Section Beyond the Community Template While Hugging Face’s
community-endorsed dataset card structure comprises five main sections, there are instances where
practitioners encounter valuable information that doesn’t neatly fit into these sections. These addi-
tional sections, referred to as Other sections, can contain important content. Notably, among these
Other sections, discussions related to Usage emerge as a frequent (nearly one-third of the time,
33.2%) and significant theme. These Usage sections offer a diverse range of information, including
details on downloading, version specifications, and general guidelines to maximize the dataset’s
utility. This highlights the importance of considering content that falls outside the predefined template
and suggests a potential area for improvement in dataset card templates.

Quantifying the Impact of Usage Section on Dataset Downloads To assess the influence of
a Usage section in dataset documentation, we conducted a counterfactual analysis experiment
(Appendix. C). We trained a BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) model using dataset card content and
download counts, which were normalized to fall within the range of [0, 1] for meaningful comparisons.
When a dataset card that initially included a Usage section had this section removed, there was a
substantial decrease of 1.85% in downloads, with statistical significance. This result underscores the
significant impact of the Usage section in bolstering dataset accessibility and popularity, emphasizing
its pivotal role in enhancing the documentation and usability of datasets.

6    A NALYZING H UMAN P ERCEIVED DATASET D OCUMENTATION Q UALITY

 Finding

    • Our human annotation evaluation emphasizes the pivotal role of comprehensive dataset
      content in shaping individuals’ perceptions of a dataset card’s overall quality.


Human Annotations for Comprehensive Evaluation of Dataset Card Quality We utilized human
annotations to evaluate the quality of dataset cards, considering seven distinct aspects, drawing from
prior research in dataset documentation literature and the Hugging Face community-endorsed dataset
card (Afzal et al., 2020; Gebru et al., 2021; Papakyriakopoulos et al., 2023; Barman et al., 2023;
Costa-jussà et al., 2020): (1) Structural Organization, (2) Content Comprehensiveness, (3) Dataset
Description, (4) Dataset Structure, (5) Dataset Preprocessing, (6) Usage Guidance, and (7) Additional
Information. While Dataset Description, Dataset Structure, and Additional Information can be found
in sections of community-endorsed dataset cards, we added evaluation aspects highlighted in the
literature, like aspects that constitute the overall presentation (Structural Organization and Content
Comprehensiveness), Data Preprocessing and Usage Guidance. To conduct this assessment, we
randomly selected a subset containing 150 dataset cards and engaged five human annotators. These


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


annotators were tasked with evaluating each dataset card across these seven aspects and providing an
overall quality score within a range of 5 (Appendix B.2). The overall quality is assessed through
the subjective perception of human annotators, taking into account the seven aspects as well as their
overall impression. This evaluation approach aims to provide a comprehensive assessment of dataset
card quality, reflecting the importance of these aspects in effective dataset documentation.


Human Perception of Documentation Quality Strongly Aligns with Quantitative Analysis
Human annotation evaluation of dataset cards shows varying scores across different aspects. While
Dataset Description (2.92/5), Structural Organization (2.82/5), Data Structure (2.7/5), and Content
Comprehensiveness (2.48/5) received relatively higher scores, areas like Data Preprocessing (1.21/5)
and Usage Guidance (1.14/5) scored lower. This aligns with the quantitative analysis that indicates
a greater emphasis on the Dataset Description and Dataset Structure sections. Notably, even the
highest-scoring aspect, Dataset Description, falls below 60% of the highest possible score, indicating
room for improvement in dataset documentation.
Content Comprehensiveness has the strongest positive correlation with the overall quality
of a dataset card (Coefficient: 0.3935, p-value: 3.67E-07), emphasizing the pivotal role of
comprehensive dataset content in shaping individuals’ perceptions of a dataset card’s overall quality.
Additionally, aspects like Dataset Description (Coefficient: 0.2137, p-value: 3.04E-07), Structural
Organization (Coefficient: 0.1111, p-value: 2.17E-03), Data Structure (Coefficient: 0.0880, p-
value: 6.49E-03), and Data Preprocessing (Coefficient: 0.0855, p-value: 2.27E-03) also significantly
contribute to people’s evaluations of dataset documentation quality. Moreover, the length of a
dataset card is positively related to Content Comprehensiveness (p-value: 1.89E-011), reinforcing the
importance of detailed documentation in enhancing dataset quality and usability.


7   R ELATED W ORKS

Dataset has long been seen as a significant constraint in the realm of machine learning research (Halevy
et al., 2009; Sun et al., 2017). The process of creating datasets remains arduous and time-intensive,
primarily due to the costs of curation and annotation (IBM, 2020). Moreover, the quality of data
assumes a pivotal role in shaping the outcomes of machine learning research (Liang et al., 2022).
Consequently, a profound understanding of datasets is indispensable in the context of machine
learning research, and this understanding is most effectively conveyed through comprehensive dataset
documentation.
A long-standing problem in the literature is that there is no industry standard being formed about data
documentation. Therefore, much existing work in the literature has been in exploring, conceptualizing
and proposing different dataset documentation frameworks. Data-focused tools such as datasheets
for datasets and data nutrition labels have been proposed to promote communication between
dataset creators and users, and address the lack of industry-wide standards for documenting AI
datasets (Bender & Friedman, 2018; Bender et al., 2021; Pushkarna et al., 2022; Gebru et al.,
2021; Holland et al., 2018; Chmielinski et al., 2022; Papakyriakopoulos et al., 2023). Additionally,
there are studies that concentrate on leveraging human-centered methods to scrutinize the design
and evaluation aspects of dataset documentation (Fabris et al., 2022; Mahajan & Shaikh, 2021;
Hanley et al., 2020; Hutiri et al., 2022). In the library domain, numerous works have proposed
methods to tackle the absence of universally accepted guidelines for publishing library-linked data.
These efforts are aimed at enhancing data quality, promoting interoperability, and facilitating the
discoverability of data resources (Villazón-Terrazas et al., 2011; Hidalgo-Delgado et al., 2017; Abida
et al., 2020). These tools and frameworks provide detailed information on the composition, collection
process, recommended uses, and other contextual factors of datasets, promoting greater transparency,
accountability, and reproducibility of AI results while mitigating unwanted biases in AI datasets.
Additionally, they enable dataset creators to be more intentional throughout the dataset creation
process. Consequently, datasheets and other forms of data documentation are now commonly included
with datasets, helping researchers and practitioners to select the most appropriate dataset for their
particular needs.
Despite the proliferation of dataset documentation tools and the growing emphasis on them, the
current landscape of dataset documentation remains largely unexplored. In this paper, we present


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a comprehensive analysis of AI dataset documentation on Hugging Face to provide insights into
current dataset documentation practices.


8   D ISCUSSION

In this paper, we present a comprehensive large-scale analysis of 7,433 AI dataset documentation on
Hugging Face. The analysis offers insights into the current state of adoption of dataset cards by the
community, evaluates the effectiveness of current documentation efforts, and provides guidelines for
writing effective dataset cards. Overall, our main findings cover 5 aspects:
• Varied Adherence to Community-Endorsed Dataset Card: We observe that high-downloaded dataset
  cards tend to adhere more closely to the community-endorsed dataset card structure.
• Varied Emphasis on Sections: Our analysis of individual sections within dataset cards reveals
  that practitioners place varying levels of emphasis on different sections. For instance, among the
  top 100 downloaded dataset cards, Dataset Description and Dataset Structure sections receive
  the most attention. In contrast, the Considerations for Using the Data section garners notably
  lower engagement across all downloads, with only approximately 2% of dataset cards containing
  this section. This discrepancy can be attributed to the section’s content, which involves detailing
  limitations, biases, and the societal impact of datasets – a more complex and nuanced endeavor. An
  internal user study conducted by Hugging Face (HuggingFace, 2022) also identified the Limitation
  section within this category as the most challenging to compose.
• Topics Discussed in Each Section: Our examination of subsections within each section of dataset
  cards reveals a high completion rate for those suggested by the Hugging Face community. This
  highlights the effectiveness of the community-endorsed dataset card structure. In particular, our
  study places a special focus on the Considerations for Using the Data section, employing topic
  modeling to identify key themes, including technical and social aspects of dataset limitations and
  impact.
• Importance of Including Usage Sections: We observe that many dataset card creators go beyond the
  recommended structure by incorporating Usage sections, which provide instructions on effectively
  using the dataset. Our empirical experiment showcases the potential positive impact of these Usage
  sections in promoting datasets, underscoring their significance.
• Human Evaluation of Dataset Card Quality: Our human evaluation of dataset card quality aligns
  well with our quantitative analysis. It underscores the pivotal role of Content Comprehensiveness
  in shaping people’s assessments of dataset card quality. This finding offers clear guidance to
  practitioners, emphasizing the importance of creating comprehensive dataset cards. Moreover, we
  establish a quantitative relationship between Content Comprehensiveness and the word length of
  dataset cards, providing a measurable method for evaluation.

Limitations and Future Works Our analysis of ML dataset documentation relies on the distinctive
community-curated resource, Hugging Face, which may introduce biases and limitations due to the
platform’s structure and coverage. For example, Hugging Face’s NLP-oriented concentration could
introduce biases into the dataset categories. However, our method is transferable and could easily be
reproduced for another platform, facilitating future studies (Appendix. E). Additionally, our analysis
of completeness and informativeness is based on word count and topic modeling, which may not
fully capture the nuances of the documentation. Furthermore, measuring dataset popularity based on
downloads alone may not fully reflect the dataset’s impact. Future research could consider additional
factors, such as the creation time of the dataset and research area of the dataset (Appendix. D).
Lastly, our human evaluation serves as a preliminary evaluation. Future analyses could involve a
more diverse group of annotators with varying backgrounds and perspectives.

Research Significance To summarize, our study uncovers the current community norms and
practices in dataset documentation, and demonstrates the importance of comprehensive dataset
documentation in promoting transparency, accessibility, and reproducibility in the AI community.
We hope to offer a foundation step in the large-scale empirical analysis of dataset documentation
practices and contribute to the responsible and ethical use of AI while highlighting the importance of
ongoing efforts to improve dataset documentation practices.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We have assembled a collection of dataset cards as a community resource, which includes
extracted metadata such as the number of downloads and textual analyses. This resource
along with our analysis code can be accessed at https://github.com/YoungXinyu1802/
HuggingFace-Dataset-Card-Analysis. The Hugging Face datasets can be accessed
through the Hugging Face Hub API, which is available at https://huggingface.co/docs/
huggingface_hub/package_reference/hf_api.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Yian Yin and Nazneen Rajani for their helpful comments and discussions. J.Z. is supported
by the National Science Foundation (CCF 1763191 and CAREER 1942926), the US National Insti-
tutes of Health (P30AG059307 and U01MH098953) and grants from the Silicon Valley Foundation
and the Chan-Zuckerberg Initiative.

R EFERENCES
Rabeb Abida, Emna Hachicha Belghith, and Anthony Cleve. An end-to-end framework for integrating
  and publishing linked open government data. In 2020 IEEE 29th International Conference on
  Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises (WETICE), pp. 257–262,
  2020. doi: 10.1109/WETICE49692.2020.00057.
Shazia Afzal, Rajmohan C, Manish Kesarwani, Sameep Mehta, and Hima Patel. Data readiness
  report, 2020.
Ruth-Ann Armstrong, John Hewitt, and Christopher Manning. Jampatoisnli: A jamaican patois
  natural language inference dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03419, 2022.
Nabajeet Barman, Yuriy Reznik, and Maria Martini. Datasheet for subjective and objective quality
  assessment datasets, 2023.
Emily M Bender and Batya Friedman. Data statements for natural language processing: Toward miti-
  gating system bias and enabling better science. Transactions of the Association for Computational
 Linguistics, 6:587–604, 2018.
Emily M Bender, Batya Friedman, and Angelina McMillan-Major. A guide for writing data statements
  for natural language processing, 2021.
Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial
  gender classification. In Conference on fairness, accountability and transparency, pp. 77–91.
  PMLR, 2018.
Kasia S Chmielinski, Sarah Newman, Matt Taylor, Josh Joseph, Kemi Thomas, Jessica Yurkofsky,
  and Yue Chelsea Qiu. The dataset nutrition label (2nd gen): Leveraging context to mitigate harms
  in artificial intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.03954, 2022.
Marta R. Costa-jussà, Roger Creus, Oriol Domingo, Albert Domínguez, Miquel Escobar, Cayetana
 López, Marina Garcia, and Margarita Geleta. Mt-adapted datasheets for datasets: Template and
 repository, 2020.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. CoRR, abs/1810.04805, 2018. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805.
Alessandro Fabris, Stefano Messina, Gianmaria Silvello, and Gian Antonio Susto. Tackling doc-
  umentation debt: A survey on algorithmic fairness datasets. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM
  Conference on Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization, EAAMO ’22,
  New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450394772. doi:
  10.1145/3551624.3555286. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3551624.3555286.
Wenfei Fan and Floris Geerts. Foundations of data quality management. Synthesis Lectures on Data
 Management, 4(5):1–217, 2012.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Valerii Fedorov. Optimal experimental design. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational
  Statistics, 2(5):581–589, 2010.
Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach,
  Hal Daumé III, and Kate Crawford. Datasheets for datasets. Commun. ACM, 64(12):86–92,
  nov 2021. ISSN 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/3458723. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
  3458723.
Benjamin Haibe-Kains, George Alexandru Adam, Ahmed Hosny, Farnoosh Khodakarami, Massive
  Analysis Quality Control (MAQC) Society Board of Directors Shraddha Thakkar 35 Kusko
  Rebecca 36 Sansone Susanna-Assunta 37 Tong Weida 35 Wolfinger Russ D. 38 Mason Christopher
  E. 39 Jones Wendell 40 Dopazo Joaquin 41 Furlanello Cesare 42, Levi Waldron, Bo Wang, Chris
  McIntosh, Anna Goldenberg, Anshul Kundaje, et al. Transparency and reproducibility in artificial
  intelligence. Nature, 586(7829):E14–E16, 2020.
Alon Halevy, Peter Norvig, and Fernando Pereira. The unreasonable effectiveness of data. IEEE
  intelligent systems, 24(2):8–12, 2009.
Margot Hanley, Apoorv Khandelwal, Hadar Averbuch-Elor, Noah Snavely, and Helen Nissenbaum.
 An ethical highlighter for people-centric dataset creation, 2020.
Yusniel Hidalgo-Delgado, Reina Estrada-Nelson, Bin Xu, Boris Villazon-Terrazas, Amed Leiva-
  Mederos, and Andrés Tello. Methodological guidelines for publishing library data as linked data.
  In 2017 International Conference on Information Systems and Computer Science (INCISCOS), pp.
  241–246, 2017. doi: 10.1109/INCISCOS.2017.17.
Sarah Holland, Ahmed Hosny, Sarah Newman, Joshua Joseph, and Kasia Chmielinski. The dataset nu-
  trition label: A framework to drive higher data quality standards. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.03677,
  2018.
HuggingFace. Huggingface dataset card guidebook, 2021. URL https://huggingface.co/
  docs/datasets/dataset_card. Accessed: 2023-05-23.
HuggingFace. Model card user studies.                 https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/
  model-cards-user-studies, 2022.
Wiebke Toussaint Hutiri, Lauriane Gorce, and Aaron Yi Ding. Design guidelines for inclusive speaker
 verification evaluation datasets, 2022.
Matthew Hutson. Artificial intelligence faces reproducibility crisis, 2018.
IBM. Overcome obstacles to get to ai at scale. https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/
  VBMPEQLN, 2020.
Heinrich Jiang and Ofir Nachum. Identifying and correcting label bias in machine learning. In
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 702–712. PMLR, 2020.
Bernard Koch, Emily Denton, Alex Hanna, and Jacob Gates Foster. Reduced, reused and recy-
  cled: The life of a dataset in machine learning research. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=zNQBIBKJRkd.
TK Koo and MY Li. A guideline of selecting and reporting intraclass correlation coefficients for
  reliability research. j chiropr med. 2016; 15 (2): 155–63, 2000.
Weixin Liang, Girmaw Abebe Tadesse, Daniel Ho, L Fei-Fei, Matei Zaharia, Ce Zhang, and James
 Zou. Advances, challenges and opportunities in creating data for trustworthy ai. Nature Machine
 Intelligence, 4(8):669–677, 2022.
Khyati Mahajan and Samira Shaikh. On the need for thoughtful data collection for multi-party
  dialogue: A survey of available corpora and collection methods. In Haizhou Li, Gina-Anne
  Levow, Zhou Yu, Chitralekha Gupta, Berrak Sisman, Siqi Cai, David Vandyke, Nina Dethlefs, Yan
 Wu, and Junyi Jessy Li (eds.), Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Meeting of the Special Interest
 Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pp. 338–352, Singapore and Online, July 2021. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.sigdial-1.36.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben Hutchinson,
 Elena Spitzer, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru. Model cards for model reporting. In
 Proceedings of the conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pp. 220–229, 2019.
Elaine O Nsoesie and Sandro Galea. Towards better Data Science to address racial bias and health
  equity. PNAS Nexus, 1(3), 07 2022. ISSN 2752-6542. doi: 10.1093/pnasnexus/pgac120. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1093/pnasnexus/pgac120. pgac120.
Orestis Papakyriakopoulos, Anna Seo Gyeong Choi, William Thong, Dora Zhao, Jerone An-
  drews, Rebecca Bourke, Alice Xiang, and Allison Koenecke. Augmented datasheets for
  speech datasets and ethical decision-making. In 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Ac-
  countability, and Transparency. ACM, jun 2023. doi: 10.1145/3593013.3594049. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145%2F3593013.3594049.
Amandalynne Paullada, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Emily M. Bender, Emily Denton, and Alex Hanna.
 Data and its (dis)contents: A survey of dataset development and use in machine learning research.
 Patterns, 2(11):100336, nov 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.patter.2021.100336. URL https://doi.
 org/10.1016%2Fj.patter.2021.100336.
Mahima Pushkarna, Andrew Zaldivar, and Oddur Kjartansson. Data cards: Purposeful and transparent
 dataset documentation for responsible ai. In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
 and Transparency, pp. 1776–1826, 2022.
Victoria Stodden, Jennifer Seiler, and Zhaokun Ma. An empirical analysis of journal policy effective-
  ness for computational reproducibility. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(11):
  2584–2589, 2018.
Chen Sun, Abhinav Shrivastava, Saurabh Singh, and Abhinav Gupta. Revisiting unreasonable
  effectiveness of data in deep learning era. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
  computer vision, pp. 843–852, 2017.
Anca Maria Tache, Mihaela Gaman, and Radu Tudor Ionescu. Clustering word embeddings with
  self-organizing maps. application on laroseda – a large romanian sentiment data set. ArXiv, 2021.
Boris Villazón-Terrazas, Luis M Vilches-Blázquez, Oscar Corcho, and Asunción Gómez-Pérez.
  Methodological guidelines for publishing government linked data. Linking government data, pp.
  27–49, 2011.
Tianlu Wang, Jieyu Zhao, Mark Yatskar, Kai-Wei Chang, and Vicente Ordonez. Balanced datasets are
  not enough: Estimating and mitigating gender bias in deep image representations. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5310–5319, 2019.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    I LLUSTRATIONS FOR DATASET C ARDS S UGGESTED BY H UGGING FACE
     C OMMUNITY


     a                                            b


     c


                                                  d


Figure S1: Illustration of Adherence to Community-Endorsed Dataset Card. (a) Community-
Endorsed Dataset Card Struture: Hugging Face community provides a suggested dataset card
structure, which contains five main sections: Dataset Description, Dataset Structure, Dataset
Creation, Considerations for Using the Data, and Additional Information. (b) Example of a Dataset
Card Conforming to the Community Guidelines: A dataset card is considered to conform to the
community guidelines when it includes the five main sections outlined in the community guidelines,
with the corresponding content provided for each section. (c) Example of Dataset Cards Not Following
Community Guidelines (1): A dataset card is considered non-conforming if it omits any of the five
main sections provided in the suggested dataset card structure. (d) Example of Dataset Cards Not
Following Community Guidelines (2): This dataset card contains only a few words and does not
follow the structure at all.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     M ETHOD
B.1    ACCESSING AND PARSING DATASET C ARDS

In this work, we analyze datasets hosted on Hugging Face, a popular platform that provides a wealth
of tools and resources for AI developers. One of its key features is the Hugging Face Hub API, which
grants access to a large library of pre-trained models and datasets for various tasks. With this API,
we obtained all 24,065 datasets hosted on the Hub as of March 16th, 2023.
Dataset cards are Markdown files that serve as the README for a dataset repository. They provide
information about the dataset and are displayed on the dataset’s homepage. We downloaded all
dataset repositories hosted on Hugging Face and extracted its README file to get the dataset cards.
For further analysis of the documentation content, we utilized the Python package mistune (https:
//mistune.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) to parse the README file and extract the
intended content. The structure of dataset cards typically consists of five sections: Dataset Description,
Dataset Structure, Dataset Creation, Additional Information, and Considerations for Using the Data,
as recommended by Hugging Face community. Examples of dataset cards, as shown in Fig. S1,
illustrate the essential components and information provided by dataset cards. We identified and
extracted different types of sections through parsing and word matching of the section heading. A
significant 84% of the section titles in the 7,433 dataset cards matched one of the 27 titles suggested by
the HuggingFace community using the exact keyword matching. This strong alignment underscores
the effectiveness of exact keyword matching as an analytical tool.

B.2    H UMAN -A NNOTATED DATASET C ARD E VALUATION M ETHODOLOGY AND C RITERIA

We conducted an evaluation on a sample of 150 dataset cards from a total of 7,433. The assessment
involved five human annotators to evaluate the dataset cards, who are PhD students with a solid
background in AI fields such as NLP, Computer Vision, Human-AI, ML, and Data Science. Their
extensive experience with datasets ensured a deep understanding of dataset documentation. To
confirm the reliability of our evaluation, we randomly sampled 30 dataset cards for the annotators
to assess and achieved an Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC) of 0.76, which is considered a
good agreement (Koo & Li, 2000). This high level of agreement, combined with the annotators’ deep
expertise in AI research, substantially reinforces the trustworthiness of the annotation results. We
focused on seven key aspects of the dataset cards drawing from prior research in dataset documentation
and the Hugging Face community-endorsed dataset card:

 Aspect                           Description
 Structural Organization          How well is the documentation structured with headings, sections,
                                  or subsections?
 Content Comprehensiveness        How comprehensive is the information provided in the
                                  documentation?
 Dataset Description              How effectively does the documentation describe the dataset?
 Dataset Preprocessing            How well does the documentation describe any preprocessing steps
                                  applied to the data?
 Usage Guidance                   How well does the documentation offer guidance on using the
                                  dataset?
 Additional Information           How well does the documentation provide extra details such as
                                  citations and references?

                           Table S1: Descriptions of Evaluation Aspects


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Each aspect received a score on a scale from 0 to 5, with the following score metrics:

 Score     Description                                      Comment
    5      Exceptionally comprehensive and effective        Covers all subsections in detail
    4      Very good and thorough                           Includes many subsections
                                                            comprehensively
    3      Moderately satisfactory                          Covers some subsections adequately
    2      Insufficient                                     Provides a basic, general overview
    1      Poor and inadequate                              Offers minimal, vague content
    0      Absent                                           Lacks relevant content
                                   Table S2: Metrics of the Scores


C       A DDITIONAL A NALYSIS OF Usage S ECTION
Among 7,433 dataset cards, there are 567 dataset cards uploaded by 52 distinct practitioners that
contain a Usage section, instructing how to use the dataset through text and codes. A specific example
of Usage section is from ai4bharat/naamapadam, which has 469 downloads and has a Usage section
to instruct how to use the dataset (Fig. S2).


                              Figure S2: Example of a Usage Section

Intuitively, a Usage section could give users quick instructions on how to use the dataset, which could
make the dataset more accessible, transparent, and reproducible. To verify this intuition, we conduct
an experiment to quantify how the Usage section will affect the dataset’s popularity.
In our experiment, we trained a BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) Model using the content of dataset
cards and their corresponding download counts. To ensure comparability, the download counts were
normalized to a range of [0,1] and stratified monthly based on the dataset’s creation time. This
ranking system assigned a rank of 1 to the dataset with the highest downloads within a given month,
and a rank of 0 to the dataset with the lowest downloads.
Using the dataset card content, the trained BERT Model predicted the download counts. Subsequently,
we conducted a test using 567 dataset cards that included a Usage section. For this test, we deliberately
removed the Usage section from the dataset cards and employed the BERT Model to predict the
download counts for these modified cards. The resulting predictions are summarized in Table. S3.
The average predicted score of downloads after removing the Usage section is 0.0185 lower compared
to the original dataset card. This indicates a decrease in the number of downloads, highlighting the
negative impact of not including a Usage section.
In future research, it would be valuable to further investigate the effect of adding a Usage section to the
dataset cards that do not have one originally. A randomized controlled trial (RCT) experiment could
be conducted to assess whether the inclusion of a Usage section leads to an increase in downloads.



                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Condition                                          Predicted Score of Downloads
                                         With Usage Section                                                        0.3917
                                         Without Usage Section                                                     0.3732
                                         Change in Score                                                           -0.0185

Table S3: Predicted Impact of Usage Section on Dataset Downloads. This table presents a
comparative analysis of predicted download scores for dataset cards, distinguishing between those
that include a Usage Section and those from which it has been removed. It indicates a potential
decrease in download rates following the removal of the Usage Section.


D           O PTIONAL M ETRICS FOR DATASETS
In our analysis, we employ downloads as a metric to gauge the popularity of the dataset. Numerous
factors can influence the download count, including the dataset’s publication date and its associated
research field. Moreover, aside from dataset downloads, we can incorporate other indicators of dataset
popularity, such as the count of models utilizing the datasets and the corresponding download counts.
To address the concerns of factors that might affect downloads, we expanded our dataset analysis
by extracting more metadata from the Hugging Face dataset information. We collected data such
as the models utilizing the corresponding dataset, the total number of downloads for these models,
and the dataset’s task domain. The primary dataset tasks recognized by Hugging Face encompass
Multimodal, Computer Vision, Natural Language Processing, Audio, Tabular and Reinforcement
Learning. Among the total of 7,433 dataset cards, 1,988 are categorized as NLP dataset cards, 198
are related to computer vision, and 102 pertain to multimodal datasets. We proceeded with additional
analysis by employing the following metrics:
1. We integrated dataset downloads (“direct usage”) with the downloads of models employing the
   dataset (“secondary usage”).
2. A time range (measured in months) was selected, encompassing dataset cards created within the
   designated time frame and specified task domain.
3. Selected dataset cards were ranked within each domain for each time range and then normalized
   to a range of [0, 1].
By adopting this approach, we were able to compare dataset cards created in the same month and task
domain, assessing them based on the metrics of direct and secondary usage metrics. We conducted a
word count analysis using this new metric and attained results consistent with our prior analysis that
datasets with higher rankings tend to have longer dataset cards, as shown in Fig. S3.

               NLP Dataset Card Content Word Count                      Computer Vision Dataset Card Content Word Count                      Multimodal Dataset Card Content Word Count
                                                                 700                                                                   800
      500



::l
      400
                                                       j        600

                                                             c::l 500
                                                                         -
                                                                                                                                  _ 600
                                                                                                                                  C
                                                                                                                                  ::l
8 300                                                        8 400                                                                0
                                                                                                                                  U 400
"E                                                           °E                                                                   "E
O 200                                                        0 300
                                                             S 200                                                                � 200


                                                                                                                              J
      100
                                                                 100

        0                                                          0                                                                     0
            Top 5%   Top 10% Top 20% Top 50% Top 75%   All                   Top 5%   Top 10% Top 20% Top 50% Top 75%   All                  Top 5%   Top 10% Top 20% Top 50% Top 75%   All
                       Rank of Updated Metrics                                          Rank of Updated Metrics                                         Rank of Updated Metrics

Figure S3: Word Count Variation Based on Direct and Secondary Usage Rankings. This figure
demonstrates the relationship between the length of dataset cards and their rankings in terms of direct
and secondary usage. It reveals a distinct pattern: dataset cards with higher rankings tend to have a
greater word count, suggesting a correlation with more thorough and detailed content.

The finding enables us to contemplate an alternative metric option, factoring in publication time,
research area, and secondary dataset usage. However, the results remain aligned with our previ-
ous analysis, which solely considered download counts, highlighting the reasonableness of using
download counts as metrics.


                                                                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E        A PPLICABILITY ACROSS P LATFORMS : A DAPTING TO G IT H UB
Our study demonstrates strong potential for application across various platforms. The foundational
format of Hugging Face’s dataset cards, essentially README files, is a prevalent documentation
standard shared by many platforms, notably GitHub. This commonality implies that our approach
to parsing and analyzing dataset cards can be readily adapted for broader studies. To illustrate, we
present an example of how our analysis methodology can be effectively applied to GitHub, a widely
recognized open-source platform for data and code sharing.
Our expanded analysis involved sourcing datasets from a GitHub repository of Papers With Code1 .
We chose repositories linked to dataset-relevant papers and processed their README files using the
pipeline proposed in our paper on Hugging Face dataset card analysis. This exploration revealed a
more varied structure in GitHub’s dataset cards. For example, 57% of the section titles on GitHub are
unique, compared to just 3% on Hugging Face. Due to their specificity, we excluded these unique
sections and created a categorization list based on Hugging Face’s community-endorsed dataset card
structure, mapping GitHub’s titles through keyword matching. This method successfully categorized
74% of GitHub’s section titles.
As shown in Table. S4, our analysis reveals that both platforms excel in Dataset Description and
Additional Information sections but underperform in Dataset Creation and Considerations for Using
the Data, underscoring points raised in our paper. A notable difference is GitHub’s lower emphasis
on Dataset Structure, highlighting the potentially positive impact of Hugging Face’s community-
endorsed dataset structure. Furthermore, the prevalence of Usage and Experiment sections on GitHub,
absent in Hugging Face, highlights the practical value of these sections in promoting the usability of
datasets. Adopting these sections, as suggested in our paper, could enrich the structure of Hugging
Face’s dataset cards, making them more comprehensive and practically useful.
These results indicate our method’s adaptability to other platforms and provide a benchmark for
evaluating dataset documentation elsewhere. The insights from our Hugging Face study can guide
the categorization and enhancement of dataset documentation across various platforms, especially in
the current situation that most other platforms don’t have a standardized dataset card structure.

 Section Type                               GitHub      Hugging Face   Description
 Dataset Description                          0.62              0.46   Summary, leaderboard,
                                                                       languages, etc.
 Dataset Structure                            0.09              0.34   Format, fields, splits, etc.
 Dataset Creation                             0.08              0.15   Motivation, collection
                                                                       procedures, etc.
 Considerations for Using the Data            0.02              0.08   Limitations, biases, disclaimers,
                                                                       etc.
 Additional Information                       0.62              0.58   Citations, acknowledgements,
                                                                       licensing, etc.
 Experiment                                   0.57               -     Model experiments, training,
                                                                       evaluation on the dataset, etc.
 Usage                                        0.38               -     Instructions for setup,
                                                                       installation, requirements, etc.

Table S4: Comparison of Fill-out Rate of Dataset Documentation on GitHub and Hugging
Face. Dataset cards from both GitHub and Hugging Face perform well in the Dataset Description
and Additional Information sections, but fall short in the Dataset Creation and Considerations for
Using the Data sections. While GitHub places less emphasis on Dataset Structure, it shows a higher
occurrence of Usage and Experiment sections.



    1
        https://github.com/paperswithcode/paperswithcode-data


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F    A DDITIONAL F IGURES AND TABLES


Figure S4: Power Law Distribution Patterns in Dataset Usage across Task Domains. This figure
illustrates the dataset usage distribution within each task domain, demonstrating a consistent power
law distribution, despite the variations in the number of datasets across different domains.


Figure S5: Highly Downloaded Dataset Cards Exhibit Greater Completion across All Sections.
This figure indicates that the top 100 downloaded dataset cards exhibit a higher completion rate
compared to all dataset cards in the sections recommended by the Hugging Face community. However,
there is a consistently low completion rate in the Dataset Creation and Considerations for Using the
Data sections, regardless of the dataset cards’ popularity.


 Category                   Description                         Dataset Adherence to Avg.
                                                                 Card    Guidelines Word
                                                                Number               Count
 Industry organization      Companies (e.g. Hugging Face,         2,527          0.34         219
                            Facebook)
 Academic organization      Universities, Research Labs (e.g.      985           0.31         427
                            Stanford CRFM, jhu-clsp)
 Community                  Non-profit Communities (e.g.          1,387          0.27         190
                            allenai, bio-datasets)
 Industry professional      Engineers, Industry Scientists         985           0.25         256
 Academic professional      Students, Postdocs, Faculty            672           0.16         180
 All dataset cards          7,433 dataset cards analyzed          7,433          0.29         234

Table S5: Differences in the Practices of Dataset Documentation across Creators from Different
Backgrounds. This table highlights the diverse documentation practices across creators from different
backgrounds. Industry organizations, with the most creators, adhere to the guidelines best. Academics,
though fewer, offer the most comprehensive documentation, while academic professionals exhibit
lower guideline adherence and shorter word counts. The information about these creators is gathered
from their linked GitHub, Twitter, and personal websites on their Hugging Face profiles.


                                                 18
