H INDSIGHT-DICE: S TABLE C REDIT A SSIGNMENT
FOR D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Oftentimes, environments for sequential decision-making problems can be quite
         sparse in the provision of evaluative feedback to guide reinforcement-learning
         agents. In the extreme case, long trajectories of behavior are merely punctuated
         with a single terminal feedback signal, leading to a significant temporal delay be-
         tween the observation of a non-trivial reward and the individual steps of behavior
         culpable for achieving said reward. Coping with such a credit assignment chal-
         lenge is one of the hallmark characteristics of reinforcement learning. While prior
         work has introduced the concept of hindsight distributions (Harutyunyan et al.,
         2019) to develop a principled method for reweighting on-policy data according to
         impact on achieving the observed trajectory return, we show that these methods
         experience instabilities which cause inefficient learning in complex environments.
         In this work, we adapt existing importance-sampling ratio estimation techniques
         for off-policy policy evaluation to drastically improve the stability and efficiency
         of these so-called hindsight distribution methods. Our hindsight distribution cor-
         rection facilitates stable, efficient learning across a broad range of environments
         where credit assignment plagues baseline methods.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning is the classic paradigm for addressing sequential decision-making prob-
lems (Sutton & Barto, 1998). Naturally, while inheriting the fundamental challenge of generalization
across novel states and actions from supervised learning, general-purpose reinforcement-learning
agents must also contend with the additional challenges of exploration and credit assignment. While
much initial progress in the field was driven largely by innovative machinery for tackling credit
assignment (Sutton, 1984; 1988; Singh & Sutton, 1996) alongside simple exploration heuristics (ε-
greedy exploration, for example), recent years have seen a reversal with the bulk of attention focused
on a broad array of exploration methods, spanning additional heuristics as well as more principled
approaches (Tang et al., 2017; Pathak et al., 2017; Ecoffet et al., 2021), and relatively little consid-
eration given to issues of credit assignment. This lack of interest in solution concepts, however, has
not stopped the proliferation of reinforcement learning into novel application areas characterized
by long problem horizons and sparse reward signals. Apart from recent works such as AlphaStar
(Vinyals et al., 2019) and DeepNash for Stratego (Perolat et al., 2022), the current reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) paradigm (Lambert et al., 2022) is now a widely popular-
ized example of an environment that operates in perhaps the harshest setting where a single feedback
signal is only obtained after the completion of a long trajectory.
This combination of long horizons with delayed rewards most directly impacts an agent’s ability
to efficiently perform credit assignment (Minsky, 1961; Sutton, 1984; 1988) and thereby worsens
the overall sample complexity needed to synthesize an optimal policy. Consequently, it is perhaps
the credit assignment challenge that poses the greatest impediment to sample-efficient reinforce-
ment learning. While theoretical results encapsulating settings like that of the RLHF paradigm are
nascent (Chatterji et al., 2021; Pacchiano et al., 2023), practical and demonstrably-scalable mecha-
nisms for efficient credit assignment are largely absent from the literature.
With this reality in mind, our work extends the relatively recent solution concept of hindsight distri-
butions as introduced by Harutyunyan et al. (2019), which allow an agent to reason counterfactually
about past decisions at particular states in light of observed future outcomes. While the natural


                                                   1
course of action for algorithm design based on the provision of such a hindsight distribution is to
reweight the on-policy data collected for agent updates, we highlight a key issue where the resulting
importance-sampling ratio is highly unstable and compromises the quality of learning. Even when
ratio clipping is applied, as one often does in off-policy policy-gradient methods (Schulman et al.,
2017), such a heuristic lends stability at the heavy cost of incredibly dampened learning speed.
To remedy this instability, we turn to prior work tackling the orthogonal problem of off-policy policy
evaluation (OPE) (Precup et al., 2000; Jiang & Li, 2016; Thomas & Brunskill, 2016) wherein the
ratio between state visitation probabilities of a behavior policy and target policy has emerged over
recent years as a key quantity of interest for yielding principled, practical OPE algorithms (Hal-
lak & Mannor, 2017; Liu et al., 2018; Gelada & Bellemare, 2019; Liu et al., 2019; 2020; Nachum
et al., 2019; Uehara et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020a;b; Dai et al., 2020) whose variance does not
suffer exponentially in the problem horizon, as it would with a naive application of importance
sampling. Inspired by the potential for technical progress in this separate arena to be repurposed
and operationalized towards achieving more efficient credit assignment techniques, we select one
such approach from the OPE literature known as Dual stationary DIstribution Correction Estima-
tion (DualDICE) (Nachum et al., 2019) and adapt the importance ratio approximation technique
for hindsight distributions. Our resulting Hindsight DIstribution Correction Estimation (H-DICE)
approach empowers policy-gradient methods (Schulman et al., 2017) to empirically avoid the same
catastrophic instability that arises by naively computing the importance ratio between the current
policy and hindsight distribution. We empirically demonstrate over three different and challenging
benchmarks tasks that our method outperforms baseline approaches, which either do not incorpo-
rate any deliberate mechanism for tackling credit assignment or do so in a naive fashion, by a large
margin both in terms of the achieved final rewards and the speed of convergence.
The paper proceeds as follows: in Section 2 we detail our problem formulation as well as background
information on credit assignment with hindsight distributions. In Section 3, we outline our approach
before presenting a detailed empirical evaluation and discussion of results in Section 4. Due to space
constraints, we relegate an overview of related work, mathematical expansions, and ablation studies
to the Appendix.


2     P RELIMINARIES & BACKGROUND

In this section, we begin by specifying our problem formulation before providing brief background
information on the credit assignment problem broadly as well as the specific use of hindsight distri-
butions to address the challenge.
For any natural number N ∈ N, we denote the index set as [N ] ≜ {1, 2, . . . , N }. For any set X , we
denote the set of all probability distributions with support on X as ∆(X ). For another arbitrary set
Y, we denote the class of all functions mapping from X to Y as {X → Y}.

2.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

We formulate a sequential decision-making problem as an infinite-horizon, discounted Markov De-
cision Process (MDP) (Bellman, 1957; Puterman, 1994) defined by M = ⟨S, A, R, T , µ, γ⟩. Here
S denotes a set of states, A is a set of actions, R : S × A → R is a deterministic reward function
providing evaluative feedback signals to the agent, T : S × A → ∆(S) is a transition function
prescribing distributions over next states, µ ∈ ∆(S) is an initial state distribution, and γ ∈ [0, 1) is
the discount factor communicating a preference for near-term versus long-term rewards. Beginning
with an initial state s0 ∼ µ, for each timestep t ∈ N, the agent observes the current state st ∈ S,
selects action at ∼ π(· | st ) ∈ A, receives a reward rt = R(st , at ), and transitions to the next state
st+1 ∼ T (· | st , at ) ∈ S.
Our reinforcement-learning approach is grounded in policy search (Williams, 1992; Sutton et al.,
1999a; Konda & Tsitsiklis, 1999; Mnih et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2017) wherein the agent’s
behavior is represented by a stationary, stochastic policy πθ : S → ∆(A), parameterized by
θ ∈ Θ ⊂ Rd , that encodes a pattern of behavior mapping individual states to distributions
over possible actions. The overall performance of πθ in any MDP M when starting at state
s ∈ S and taking action a ∈ A is assessed by its associated action-value function Qπθ (s, a) =


                                                   2
Figure 1: Left: GridWorld-v1 environment, described in Sec. 4.1, and an example trajectory (de-
noted by arrows) taken by the agent (denoted by the robot). The agent must collect diamonds
while avoiding fire, and only receives a meaningful reward signal upon episode termination. Right:
Learning curves of our proposed method, H-DICE, and baseline methods (PPO, PPO-HCA, and
PPO-HCA-Clip) on Gridworld-v1. H-DICE achieves the maximum reward quickly and stably com-
pared to other methods. PPO learns a suboptimal policy, likely because it does not explicitly model
credit-assignment. While using unclipped HCA ratios to compute advantages (PPO-HCA) results
in highly unstable performance, clipping the ratios (PPO-HCA-Clip) improves results slightly.

     ∞
          γ t R(st , at ) s0 = s, a0 = a , where the expectation integrates over randomness in the ac-
     P
E
    t=0
tion selections and transition dynamics. Taking the corresponding value function as V πθ (s) =
Ea∼πθ (·|s) [Qπθ (s, a)] and letting ΠΘ ≜ {πθ | θ ∈ Θ} ⊂ {S → ∆(A)} denote the policy
class parameterized by Θ (a subset of all stochastic policies), we define the optimal policy π ⋆ as
achieving supremal value with respect to this class V ⋆ (s) = sup V π (s) = max ⋆
                                                                                    Q⋆ (s, a⋆ ) and
                                                                   π∈ΠΘ               a ∈A
Q⋆ (s, a) = sup Qπ (s, a) for all s ∈ S and a ∈ A. We may examine the visitation of a policy
               π∈ΠΘ
                                                                               ∞
πθ through its discounted, stationary state distribution: dπθ (s) = (1 − γ)          γ t Pπ (st = s), where
                                                                               P
                                                                               t=0
Pπ (st = ·) ∈ ∆(S) denotes the distribution over states visited by πθ at each timestep t. Finally, in
alignment with prior work (Bellemare et al., 2017; Harutyunyan et al., 2019), we use Z(τ ) to denote
the random variable representing the return of a trajectory τ .

2.2   A M OTIVATING E XAMPLE FOR C REDIT A SSIGNMENT

Consider the gridworld setting depicted in Figure 1, wherein an agent accrues positive rewards for
collecting diamonds and negative rewards for moving through fire. Importantly, however, the agent
only receives a nonzero reward signal, which is the sum of the rewards accrued in each individual
transition, at the end of a trajectory when it enters the G square and receives no rewards for the
intermediary steps.
In the example trajectory illustrated in Figure 1, the agent first collects a diamond and then transitions
through three fire squares before acquiring a diamond and reaching G, upon which it receives a large
negative reward (due to the three steps into the fire). While a typical policy-gradient method would
place “blame” for this poor outcome on each action in the trajectory and would correspondingly
reduce the probability that these actions are taken by the policy, the actions responsible for collecting
the diamonds were optimal and these actions should be made more likely despite the large negative
reward. Effective credit assignment aims to exactly reach this type of conclusion; not all actions are
equally responsible for a future outcome, and determining which actions are responsible in yielding
a particular end result can enable more efficient policy learning and improved policy performance.

2.3   H INDSIGHT C REDIT A SSIGNMENT

More generally, the credit assignment problem revolves around a given behavior policy of an agent
and asks what is the impact of being in a particular state and executing a particular action on
observed future outcomes? (Harutyunyan et al., 2019; Arumugam et al., 2021). Typically, the future


                                                    3
outcome of interest is the full return Z(τ ) associated with a complete trajectory τ , although one
could also examine intermediate returns observed from any incident states or state-action pairs.
While classic approaches to addressing credit assignment would distribute credit based on temporal
recency to interesting events or outcomes (Klopf, 1972; Sutton, 1984; Singh & Sutton, 1996), a more
recent and cogent mechanism has emerged through the use of a hindsight distribution (Harutyunyan
et al., 2019). For the purposes of this work, a hindsight distribution hπωθ : S × R → ∆(A) induced
by a behavior policy πθ and parameterized by ω ∈ Ω ⊂ Rm is a return-conditioned distribution
over actions taken by policy πθ from a given state and in light of an observed trajectory return. The
utility of the hindsight distribution becomes apparent from the following identity for the advantage
function (Baird III, 1993) computed by policy-gradient (Mnih et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2017;
2018) methods:

                 πθ            πθ         πθ                      πθ (a | s)
               A (s, a) = Q (s, a) − V (s) = E 1 − πθ                             Z(τ ) .          (1)
                                                              hω (a | s, Z(τ ))

If, in hindsight, observing a return Z(τ ) makes a particular action less likely, then the hindsight ratio
     πθ (a|s)
  π
h θ (a|s,Z(τ ))
                > 1 and detracts from the advantage of the action; in contrast, an action that makes the
 ω

return Z(τ ) more plausible in hindsight results in an increased advantage signal as hπθπ(a|s,Z(τ
                                                                                           θ (a|s)
                                                                                                   ))
                                                                                                      <
                                                                                        ω
1. More generally, as the value of the hindsight ratio increases, this update equation reduces the
culpability of the given action for the observed outcome. In the next section, we discuss the practical
challenges that emerge when estimating this hindsight ratio so as to integrate this credit assignment
information within a policy-gradient method.

3     A PPROACH
We begin by examining the natural, straightforward approach to hindsight ratio estimation and high-
light stability issues that arise from using such an estimator. We then proceed to introduce one
alternative avenue for hindsight ratio estimation inspired by prior work in OPE. Finally, we con-
clude by introducing our H-DICE approach, which leverages this ratio estimator for demonstrably
stable credit assignment.

3.1   D IRECT D ENSITY R ATIO I NSTABILITY

As detailed in Section 2.3, the HCA framework derives an expression for advantage function
Aπθ (s, a) of a policy πθ , which, through the return-conditioned hindsight distribution hπθ , explic-
itly assigns the credit each action receives for achieving a particular return from the current state.
Given on-policy trajectory data Dπθ , a direct way to compute this advantage would be to first fit a
hindsight distribution hπωθ to the data via supervised learning and then compute the hindsight ratio
as hπθπ(a|s,Z(τ
        θ (a|s)
                ))
                   , for each state-action pair (s, a) in a trajectory τ . Aπ (s, a) can subsequently be
     ω
computed using expression 1, as done in the approach of Harutyunyan et al. (2019).
However, direct estimation of density ratios can be highly unstable and, as shown in the right of
Figure 1 and Section 4.5, the hindsight ratio is no exception. Using Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) as a base policy-gradient algorithm, we empirically observe that
values the ratio takes through the course of training vary greatly, hindering policy learning (see
curve PPO-HCA in 1). Clipping the ratios to be between zero and one, a common way to stabilize
density ratios (Schulman et al., 2017), improves the stability of learning but still results in suboptimal
performance, as seen by the results of PPO-HCA-Clip. Thus, the question remains: how can we
compute the hindsight ratio in a stable manner?

3.2   H INDSIGHT D ISTRIBUTION C ORRECTION E STIMATION

In this work, we offer one candidate answer to the above question by taking inspiration from the
off-policy policy evaluation (OPE) literature, where recent methods have been developed to accu-
rately and soundly compute the importance sampling ratio between two state-action distributions.
Specifically, we leverage the optimization problem posed by Nachum et al. (2019) in the DualDICE
method.


                                                    4
Our H-DICE method for stable computation of the hindsight ratio hπθπ(a|s,Z(τ
                                                                     θ (a|s)
                                                                             ))
                                                                                adapts their op-
                                                                 ω
timization problem to our setting by focusing on the following optimization over a function
ϕ : S × A × Z → C with bounded range C ≜ [0, C], for some numerical constant C ∈ R≥0 :

                                1
                      min           E(s,a,z)∼Dhπωθ [ϕ(s, a, z)2 ] − E(s,a)∼dπθ [ϕ(s, a, z)]            (2)
                  ϕ:S×A×R→C 2                                         z∼ψ(z)


          π
where Dh θ denotes an empirical state-action-return distribution formed by drawing states under
the dπθ visitation of πθ , returns of πθ observed from state s according to χπθ (·|s), and actions from
the hindsight distribution hπωθ (· | s, z). ψ(z) is an arbitrary distribution over the returns that, in our
experiments, we model as a uniform distribution over all possible returns in the environment, which
results in simplified hindsight ratio calculation. In the main results presented in Section 4, we set
the range threshold C ∈ R≥0 for ϕ to be 1; however, as shown in Appendix D, the choice of C is
largely inconsequential and numerous values result in similar performance.
While Appendix B elaborates in more detail, we briefly mention here that the solution to this opti-
mization, ϕ⋆ , is given by:

                                                          πθ (a|s)
                                    ϕ⋆ (s, a, z) =                        .
                                                     χ (z|s)hπωθ (a|s, z)
                                                      π θ


This allows us to arrive at the following expression for the hindsight ratio of interest:


                                       πθ (a|s)
                                                   = ϕ⋆ (s, a, z)χπθ (z|s)                             (3)
                                     hπωθ (a|s, z)

Importantly, the right hand side of Equation 3 can be estimated from on-policy data Dπθ collected
under πθ . This involves learning the following models, which we instantiate as neural networks:

      1. Return predictor χπη θ : We learn the distribution over returns incurred by policy πθ given
         a state s ∈ S via supervised learning using Dπθ . Note that our approach can be seen
         as a Monte-Carlo estimation of the return distribution and χπη θ could also be learned via
         distributional RL (Bellemare et al., 2017), an avenue we leave to future work.

      2. Hindsight distribution hπωθ : Just as the approach taken by Harutyunyan et al. (2019), we
         learn a hindsight distribution via supervised learning using on-policy data Dπθ .

      3. Hindsight DICE model ϕν : Lastly, our estimate of ϕ⋆ in Equation 3 is given by ϕν opti-
         mized via Equation 2. Naturally, this requires Dπθ along with χπη θ and hπωθ .

As all the aforementioned models used to compute hindsight ratios are (either implicitly or explic-
itly) conditioned on the current policy, πθ , we must reset the weights of the corresponding function
approximators after each policy update and before collecting fresh data from the latest policy. In our
experiments, since these models are implemented as small fully-connected networks, we find that
this does not adversely affect wall-clock time or the computational efficiency of our algorithm.
Like DualDICE, our approach for estimating the hindsight ratio inherits an avoidance of explicitly
computing importance-sampling weights, thereby alleviating the instability that arises from direct
density ratio estimation observed in Section 3.1. The full algorithm for policy learning using H-
DICE is detailed in Algorithm 1. All the models are trained together within the same loop and
there is no required pre-training. Note that although H-DICE and all baseline methods use PPO
(Schulman et al., 2017) as the central policy learning algorithm, our approach is agnostic to this
choice and compatible with any policy-gradient method. Notably and in contrast to many standard
PPO implementations which learn a value-function alongside a policy to compute advantages, H-
DICE does not learn a value-function to compute advantages as a consequence of Equation 1.


                                                       5
            Algorithm 1 Hindsight Distribution Correction Estimation
               Initialize πθ1
               for iteration i = 1 . . . N do
                              πθ              πθ
                  Initialize hω i , ϕν , and χη i
                  Collect a batch of on-policy trajectories Dπθi with πθi
                           πθ        πθ
                  Train χη i and hω i by supervised learning with Dπθi
                                                            πθ       πθ
                  Train H-DICE ϕν by Equation 2 using χη i and hω i
                  Obtain θi+1 via PPO update on πθi with advantages in Equation 1
               end for


4     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we evaluate H-DICE on complex discrete and continuous control tasks to compare
it against baselines and to investigate the learned hindsight ratios. For the sake of brevity, we defer
experiments on the impact of the constant C, the use different distributions for ψ, exploration of
varying update schedules for the auxiliary models, and using the H-DICE advantage estimator on
dense reward settings to the Appendix. We first provide the details of our evaluation domains and
chosen baselines.

4.1   D OMAINS

We evaluate methods on the following domains:
GridWorld: The GridWorld environments, shown in Figures 1 and 8, are environments we develop
which pose a difficult credit-assignment challenge. In each square, the agent can take actions repre-
senting the cardinal directions. Each square in the grid may contain a diamond or a fire; transitioning
into a diamond square gives the agent a reward of +20, while running into a fire square gives the
agent a reward of -100. Moreover, each step the agent takes incurs a reward of -1. An episode ends
either when the agent transitions into the goal square or when the episode length passes a prede-
termined threshold. We create two such grid world settings: GridWorld-v1, a smaller grid with a
maximum episode length of 50, and GridWorld-v2, a larger grid with a maximum episode length
of 100. An optimal agent will accumulate diamonds as quickly as possible while avoiding fire, and
eventually navigate to the goal square to finish the episode.
The credit-assignment challenge in this domain arises from the fact that all rewards are delayed
until the very end of an episode; in other words, the sum of the rewards received for each individ-
ual transition is given as a single cumulative reward at the end of the episode, and all intermedi-
ate rewards given to the agent are zero. We note that delaying the reward in this manner violates
the Markov property of the MDP reward function and, technically, would be better modeled as
a partially-observable MDP (POMDP) (Kaelbling et al., 1998) where rewards are a function of a
latent underlying state not observable to the agent. However, the optimal policy for this particu-
lar POMDP (and future delayed-reward settings we will introduce) can still be learned purely as
a function of the partial observation, obviating the need for considering the underlying latent state
or redefining states around the full trajectory. We also note that this approach of delaying rewards
in an MDP while keeping the rest of the structure the same has been studied extensively in prior
work (Arjona-Medina et al., 2019; Hung et al., 2019; Ren et al., 2022; Gangwani et al., 2020).
This delayed reward setting forces a good agent to disentangle the fact that collecting diamonds
results in positive rewards while moving through fire results in bad rewards by assigning credit
to individual actions within an episode. As we demonstrate in the following sections, this is a
challenging task for algorithms which do not perform explicit credit assignment.
LunarLander: To evaluate methods on a more complex discrete action environment, we turn to the
LunarLander-v2 benchmark from OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016), in which an agent attempts
to successfully land a spaceship within a specified zone. Again, to impose a credit-assignment
challenge in this setting, the environment is modified such that rewards are delayed to the end of the


                                                  6
Figure 2: Training curves of H-DICE and baseline methods in Gridworld-v2 (left), and delayed
reward LunarLander-v2 with maximum episode lengths of 500 (middle) and 1000 (right). The
LunarLander-v2 environment is considered “solved” when returns surpass 200. All environments
utilize a discrete action space. H-DICE outperforms baseline methods in all three environments.


episode. We additionally evaluate the agent with maximum episode lengths of 500 and the default
length of 1000. The environment is considered “solved” when the agent achieves a return of 200.
MuJoCo Gym Suite: Lastly, we benchmark methods on complex continuous control settings us-
ing four environments from the MuJoCo suite (Todorov et al., 2012): HalfCheetah, Humanoid,
Walker2d, and Swimmer. Again, all rewards are delayed to episode termination and, additionally,
episodes in all environments are truncated in length to a maximum of 100 steps to keep learning
tractable. We also evaluate all methods in HalfCheetah with a maximum episode length of 50, as
part of an ablation study.

4.2   BASELINES

We compare H-DICE to three baseline approaches:
Vanilla PPO: Our first baseline is PPO with GAE-advantage calculation (Schulman et al., 2017;
2018), a method which does not perform explicit credit-assignment.
PPO-HCA: This baseline calculates the advantage as proposed by return-conditioned HCA (Haru-
tyunyan et al., 2019) instead of the typical Generalized Advantage Estimate (Schulman et al., 2018)
used in PPO, but computes the hindsight ratio directly by simply dividing the policy and hindsight
distribution likelihoods. As shown in the results, this method of computing hindsight ratios is highly
unstable and results in poor policy performance.
PPO-HCA-Clip: This baseline is identical to PPO-HCA, but attempts to stabilize the hindsight
ratio (which is still computed by dividing the policy and hindsight distribution ratios) by clipping
the ratio to be between zero and one. We choose these bounds since we find smaller clip ranges
improves performance and since the density ratios in H-DICE are between zero and one by virtue of
the fact that, by default when C = 1, the hindsight DICE model and return predictor models output
values between zero and one.

4.3   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We tune H-DICE and each baseline method via a limited grid search over critical hyperparameters.
Specifically, for each domain, we search over the entropy bonus coefficient and the batch size col-
lected before each policy update for each method. For HCA methods and H-DICE, we additionally
tune the number of epochs of supervised learning for the hindsight model, return predictor, and
DICE model. Lastly, for the vanilla PPO baseline, we also tune the coefficient on the value-function
loss. We refer the reader to Appendix G for a detailed account of hyperparameters used. All results
are averaged over three seeds; the solid lines in the plots correspond to the mean return and the
shaded region to one standard deviation from the mean.

4.4   H OW DOES H-DICE PERFORM COMPARED TO BASELINES ON COMPLEX CONTINUOUS
      CONTROL AND DISCRETE CONTROL TASKS IN THE DELAYED REWARD SETTING

Figures 1, 2 and 3 display learning curves of H-DICE and baseline algorithms in a variety of different
discrete and continuous control environments. The vertical axis denotes the returns achieved by


                                                  7
Figure 3: Training curves of H-DICE and baseline methods in Half-Cheetah with a maximum
episode length of 50 and 100, and in other MuJoCo environments with a maximum episode length
of 100. H-DICE outperforms baseline methods in the more difficult Half-Cheetah and Humanoid
environments, and performs similarly to PPO and PPO-HCA-Clip on Swimmer and Walker.


the agent averaged over 10 evaluation episodes whereas the horizontal axis denotes the number of
episodes elapsed since the beginning of training.
H-DICE achieves higher final returns and converges faster than baseline methods in the vast majority
of scenarios. PPO notably struggles to achieve high returns in many of these domains and is typi-
cally outperformed by H-DICE in final returns and learning efficiency. The exception to this is in the
Swimmer and Walker environments, where PPO, PPO-HCA-Clip, and H-DICE perform similarly.
This demonstrates the necessity for explicit credit-assignment in settings where the lack of imme-
diate reward feedback requires reasoning about actions which were responsible for generating the
final return. As illustrated by the poor results of PPO-HCA across domains, computing hindsight ra-
tios directly by dividing the policy and hindsight distribution likelihoods results in instability issues
and leads to suboptimal performance; the variance across seeds is extremely high, and the achieved
returns oscillate drastically particularly in the GridWorld and LunarLander settings. Stabilizing the
hindsight ratios via clipping, the strategy used by PPO-HCA-Clip, alleviates this instability in most
settings, as evidenced by both the improvement in returns and the reduction in variance as compared
to PPO-HCA. As it still explicitly models credit-assignment, PPO-HCA-Clip improves upon PPO
in several settings but is clearly outperformed by H-DICE across most environments, demonstrating
the need for more sophisticated methods for stable hindsight ratio computation.
We also note several interesting trends in the relationship between episode length and method per-
formance. As illustrated by the final achieved rewards in the LunarLander and Half-Cheetah plots in
Figures 2 and 3 respectively, the difference in performance between H-DICE and baseline methods
(particularly PPO) is more pronounced when the maximum episode length is longer. This may be
explained by the fact that credit assignment becomes increasingly important over longer horizons as
the effects of earlier actions can manifest much later in the episode as well as due to the temporal
distance between each action execution and received reward is greater.


4.5   D O THE HINDSIGHT RATIOS LEARNED BY H-DICE ENCODE MEANINGFUL CREDIT
      ASSIGNMENT TRENDS ?

To answer this question, we take a fully trained H-DICE model on GridWorld-v1 and analyze the
learned πθ and hπθ values at a critical state in a trajectory – namely, when the agent is in the position
shown in Figure 1. In this position, the agent can take the RIGHT action to collect a diamond and
go on to get large positive reward but it may also run into fires as shown in the trajectory in Figure
1 and accrue a large negative reward.


                                                   8
In the table below, we show values corresponding to the RIGHT action taken by the agent at this
state (s), for two hypothetical, yet representative, achieved final returns (z) in this environment.
The probability of taking that action under policy πθ at this state and the hindsight probability,
hπωθ (a | s, z), of choosing this action at this state given the final return and the current policy are
also shown. From these values, we also show the naive ratio calculation of hππθθ(a|s,z)
                                                                                    (a|s)
                                                                                           and the same
                                                                                  ω
ratio obtained via H-DICE using Equation 3.

Table 1: Table showing the learned values for action RIGHT from H-DICE at the end of training in
GridWorld-v1 and the corresponding ratios obtained from naive division and H-DICE.

             Return (z)    πθ (a | s)   hπωθ (a | s, z)   Direct Ratio   H-DICE Ratio
               -100         0.785           0.290            2.706          0.168
                70          0.785           0.465            1.687          0.012


From column 3 of the table, we can see that the learned hindsight distribution model indicates that
the probability of taking the RIGHT action and collecting a diamond is much higher for a large
positive return than it is for a large negative return.
The final two columns of the table show the direct hππθθ(a|s,z)
                                                           (a|s)
                                                                 ratio values which are computed by
                                                        ω
simply dividing the two required probabilities, and the approximated ratio obtained via H-DICE
using Equation 3. We observe that the direct ratio, has much larger values, therefore leading to
larger variance and instability in learning even in a simple environment such as GridWorld-v1. On
the other hand, ratios computed using H-DICE are much smaller and hence have lower variance,
while still mirroring the trends of the direct ratio. We posit that this ability to capture the direct
ratio’s trends while reducing variance is a core reason for the improved performance of H-DICE
compared to PPO-HCA. However, there are times when inaccuracies in auxiliary models introduce
bias into the ratio calculation and prevent H-DICE from reflecting the trends of the direct ratio.
Nevertheless, as backed by the results in Section 4, H-DICE succesfully trades off bias for variance
and this is crucial to achieving strong empirical results in challenging credit-assignment settings.
Lastly, while simple settings such as GridWorld-v1 enable us to interpret model outputs at the level
of individual state-action pairs, we suspect that these issues are only exacerbated in more complex
environments, further underscoring the importance of credit assignment in deep RL.


5   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we presented H-DICE, a novel algorithm for stable credit assignment in deep rein-
forcement learning. Building on the Hindsight Credit Assignment (HCA) framework introduced
by Harutyunyan et al. (2019) and noting the instabilities that arise when directly estimating hind-
sight density ratios, we take inspiration from methods in the off-policy policy evaluation literature
(Nachum et al., 2019) to develop a method which computes the hindsight ratio in a stable fashion.
We showed that, in challenging benchmarks with delayed rewards, algorithms that do not assign
credit or do so in a naive fashion struggle to perform well while H-DICE converges to higher returns
much faster and more consistently than baseline methods.
Our work utilizes a formulation of HCA in which the hindsight distribution is conditioned on future
outcome information in the form of returns. However, it is likely that H-DICE will struggle in sparse-
reward settings where there is a lack of diversity in observed returns. To address this challenge in
future work, we hope to extend this work to state-conditioned HCA, a formulation in which the
hindsight distribution is conditioned on future states in a trajectory rather than the return. We expect
this variant to fare better in sparse-reward, language conditioned and goal-reaching settings.
While we conducted some preliminary experiments in an effort to extend H-DICE to operate in
an off-policy fashion in Appendix C, the core algorithm is still an on-policy algorithm built atop
conventional policy-gradient methods. An interesting line of future-work will be to extend credit
assignment to off-policy algorithms which are typically more data efficient. By incorporating ideas
from OPE and density-ratio estimation to address credit assignment, we hope that other advances in
these research areas (Choi et al., 2022) open the door for further symbiotic progress on both fronts.


                                                    9
R EFERENCES
Vyacheslav Alipov, Riley Simmons-Edler, Nikita Putintsev, Pavel Kalinin, and Dmitry Vetrov.
  Towards practical credit assignment for deep reinforcement learning.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.04499, 2021.
Nishanth Anand and Doina Precup. Preferential Temporal Difference Learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 286–296. PMLR, 2021.
Jose A Arjona-Medina, Michael Gillhofer, Michael Widrich, Thomas Unterthiner, Johannes Brand-
  stetter, and Sepp Hochreiter. RUDDER: Return decomposition for delayed rewards. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Dilip Arumugam, Peter Henderson, and Pierre-Luc Bacon. An Information-Theoretic Perspective
  on Credit Assignment in Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.06224, 2021.
Leemon C. Baird III. Advantage Updating. Technical report, Wright Laboratory, Wright-Patterson
  Air Force Base, 1993.
Marc G. Bellemare, Will Dabney, and Rémi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforcement
 learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 70,
 ICML’17, pp. 449–458. JMLR.org, 2017.
Richard Bellman. A Markovian Decision Process. Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics, pp.
  679–684, 1957.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym, 2016.
Lars Buesing, Theophane Weber, Yori Zwols, Sebastien Racaniere, Arthur Guez, Jean-Baptiste
  Lespiau, and Nicolas Heess. Woulda, coulda, shoulda: Counterfactually-guided policy search,
  2018.
Niladri Chatterji, Aldo Pacchiano, Peter Bartlett, and Michael Jordan. On the theory of reinforce-
  ment learning with once-per-episode feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 34:3401–3412, 2021.
Veronica Chelu, Diana Borsa, Doina Precup, and Hado van Hasselt. Selective credit assignment.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.09699, 2022.
Kristy Choi, Chenlin Meng, Yang Song, and Stefano Ermon. Density ratio estimation via infinitesi-
  mal classification. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2552–
  2573. PMLR, 2022.
Bo Dai, Ofir Nachum, Yinlam Chow, Lihong Li, Csaba Szepesvári, and Dale Schuurmans.
  CoinDICE: Off-policy confidence interval estimation. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 33:9398–9411, 2020.
Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O. Stanley, and Jeff Clune. Go-explore: a
  new approach for hard-exploration problems, 2021.
Tanmay Gangwani, Yuan Zhou, and Jian Peng. Learning guidance rewards with trajectory-space
  smoothing, 2020.
Carles Gelada and Marc G Bellemare. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning by bootstrapping the
  covariate shift. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp.
  3647–3655, 2019.
Assaf Hallak and Shie Mannor. Consistent on-line off-policy evaluation. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 1372–1383. PMLR, 2017.
Assaf Hallak, Aviv Tamar, Rémi Munos, and Shie Mannor. Generalized emphatic temporal dif-
  ference learning: Bias-variance analysis. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 30, 2016.


                                                 10
Anna Harutyunyan, Will Dabney, Thomas Mesnard, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Bilal Piot, Nico-
  las Heess, Hado P van Hasselt, Gregory Wayne, Satinder Singh, Doina Precup, and Remi Munos.
  Hindsight credit assignment. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc,
  E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2019/file/195f15384c2a79cedf293e4a847ce85c-Paper.pdf.

Ashley Hill, Antonin Raffin, Maximilian Ernestus, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Rene Traore,
  Prafulla Dhariwal, Christopher Hesse, Oleg Klimov, Alex Nichol, Matthias Plappert, Alec Rad-
  ford, John Schulman, Szymon Sidor, and Yuhuai Wu. Stable baselines. https://github.
  com/hill-a/stable-baselines, 2018.

Chia-Chun Hung, Timothy Lillicrap, Josh Abramson, Yan Wu, Mehdi Mirza, Federico Carnevale,
  Arun Ahuja, and Greg Wayne. Optimizing agent behavior over long time scales by transporting
  value. Nature communications, 10(1):5223, 2019.

Nan Jiang and Lihong Li. Doubly robust off-policy value evaluation for reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 652–661. PMLR, 2016.

Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Anthony R Cassandra. Planning and Acting in
  Partially Observable Stochastic Domains. Artificial Intelligence, 101(1-2):99–134, 1998.

A Harry Klopf. Brain Function and Adaptive Systems: A Heterostatic Theory. Air Force Cambridge
  Research Laboratories, Air Force Systems Command, United States Air Force, 1972.

Vijay Konda and John Tsitsiklis. Actor-Critic Algorithms. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 12, 1999.

Nathan Lambert, Louis Castricato, Leandro von Werra, and Alex Havrilla. Illustrating Reinforce-
  ment Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF), 2022. URL https://huggingface.co/
  blog/rlhf.

Qiang Liu, Lihong Li, Ziyang Tang, and Dengyong Zhou. Breaking the curse of horizon: Infinite-
  horizon off-policy estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.

Yao Liu, Adith Swaminathan, Alekh Agarwal, and Emma Brunskill. Off-policy policy gradient with
  state distribution correction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.08473, 2019.

Yao Liu, Pierre-Luc Bacon, and Emma Brunskill. Understanding the curse of horizon in off-policy
  evaluation via conditional importance sampling. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 6184–6193. PMLR, 2020.

Thomas Mesnard, Théophane Weber, Fabio Viola, Shantanu Thakoor, Alaa Saade, Anna Harutyun-
  yan, Will Dabney, Tom Stepleton, Nicolas Heess, Arthur Guez, Éric Moulines, Marcus Hutter,
  Lars Buesing, and Rémi Munos. Counterfactual credit assignment in model-free reinforcement
  learning, 2021.

Marvin Minsky. Steps toward Artificial Intelligence. Proceedings of the IRE, 49(1):8–30, 1961.

Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1928–1937. PMLR, 2016.

Ofir Nachum, Yinlam Chow, Bo Dai, and Lihong Li. DualDICE: Behavior-Agnostic Estimation of
  Discounted Stationary Distribution Corrections. NeurIPS, 2019.

Aldo Pacchiano, Aadirupa Saha, and Jonathan Lee. Dueling RL: Reinforcement Learning with
  Trajectory Preferences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  6263–6289. PMLR, 2023.

Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A. Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction, 2017.


                                                11
Julien Perolat, Bart De Vylder, Daniel Hennes, Eugene Tarassov, Florian Strub, Vincent de Boer,
  Paul Muller, Jerome T Connor, Neil Burch, Thomas Anthony, et al. Mastering the game of
  stratego with model-free multiagent reinforcement learning. Science, 378(6623):990–996, 2022.
Doina Precup, Richard S Sutton, and Satinder P Singh. Eligibility Traces for Off-Policy Policy
  Evaluation. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 759–766, 2000.
Martin L. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes—Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY, 1994.
Zhizhou Ren, Ruihan Guo, Yuan Zhou, and Jian Peng. Learning long-term reward redistribution via
  randomized return decomposition, 2022.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel.            High-
  dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation, 2018.
Satinder P Singh and Richard S Sutton. Reinforcement learning with replacing eligibility traces.
  Machine learning, 22(1-3):123–158, 1996.
Richard S. Sutton. Temporal Credit Assignment in Reinforcement Learning. PhD thesis, University
  of Massachusetts Amherst, 1984.
Richard S Sutton. Learning to Predict by the Methods of Temporal Differences. Machine Learning,
  3(1):9–44, 1988.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Introduction to Reinforcement Learning. MIT Press, 1998.
Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy Gradient Meth-
  ods for Reinforcement Learning with Function Approximation. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 12, 1999a.
Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between MDPs and semi-MDPs: A framework
  for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial Intelligence, 112(1-2):181–211,
  1999b.
Richard S Sutton, A Rupam Mahmood, and Martha White. An emphatic approach to the problem
  of off-policy temporal-difference learning. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):
  2603–2631, 2016.
Haoran Tang, Rein Houthooft, Davis Foote, Adam Stooke, Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schulman,
  Filip De Turck, and Pieter Abbeel. Exploration: A study of count-based exploration for deep
  reinforcement learning, 2017.
Philip Thomas and Emma Brunskill. Data-efficient off-policy policy evaluation for reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2139–2148. PMLR, 2016.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
  In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 5026–5033,
  2012. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2012.6386109.
Masatoshi Uehara, Jiawei Huang, and Nan Jiang. Minimax weight and Q-function learning for
 off-policy evaluation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9659–9668. PMLR,
 2020.
Hado van Hasselt, Sephora Madjiheurem, Matteo Hessel, David Silver, André Barreto, and Diana
  Borsa. Expected eligibility traces. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
  gence, volume 35, pp. 9997–10005, 2021.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
  level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.


                                               12
Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Machine Learning, 8(3):229–256, 1992.
Huizhen Yu. On convergence of emphatic temporal-difference learning. In Conference on Learning
  Theory, pp. 1724–1751. PMLR, 2015.
Ruiyi Zhang, Bo Dai, Lihong Li, and Dale Schuurmans. GenDICE: Generalized Offline Estimation
  of Stationary Values. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020a.
Shangtong Zhang, Bo Liu, and Shimon Whiteson. GradientDICE: Rethinking generalized offline
  estimation of stationary values. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11194–
  11203. PMLR, 2020b.


                                                13
A    R ELATED W ORK
The classic workhorse for addressing credit assignment in reinforcement learning has been the el-
igibility trace (Klopf, 1972; Sutton, 1984; 1988) which awards credit in a geometrically-decaying
fashion to states or state-action pairs on the basis of temporal recency to surprising events, as mea-
sured by the temporal-difference (TD) error. While these traditional approaches laid the groundwork
for the field, the scale of modern problems makes them woefully insufficient and impractical. More
recently, a new class of emphatic TD methods have emerged (Sutton et al., 2016; Hallak et al., 2016;
Yu, 2015; Anand & Precup, 2021; Chelu et al., 2022) which includes a so-called interest function
that enables more nuanced and non-linear attribution of credit for incident states along a sampled tra-
jectory. The theory surrounding these methods, however, operate in general terms without concrete
specification of such an interest function. Since scalable methods for leveraging interest functions
when learning option initiation sets exist (Sutton et al., 1999b), future work may find it fruitful to
learn interest functions using our H-DICE approach in the context of emphatic TD methods. Finally,
recent work on expected eligibility traces (van Hasselt et al., 2021; Chelu et al., 2022) acknowledges
the trajectory as a random variable and aims to learn eligibility traces that award credit to those re-
alizations of the trajectory that were not observed but could have occurred under the given behavior
policy; indeed, the hindsight distribution studied in this work can be shown to emerge through an
information-theoretic treatment of credit assignment where such randomness is accounted for (Aru-
mugam et al., 2021). Still, expected eligibility traces suffer from the same temporal recency heuristic
that plagues traditional eligibility traces, whereas the hindsight distribution enables non-linear re-
weighting of on-policy data.
Our work extends the hindsight credit assignment (HCA) work of Harutyunyan et al. (2019), rectify-
ing instabilities in using hindsight distributions for credit assignment. While Alipov et al. (2021) find
that an alternative form of clipping applied to hindsight probabilities can improve stability in Atari
games, our experiments demonstrate across a broad spectrum of domains that clipping can greatly
stall the speed at which learning progresses with HCA. In contrast, an alternative and scalable ap-
proach to tackling credit assignment emerges through the concept of return redistribution (Arjona-
Medina et al., 2019; Hung et al., 2019; Ren et al., 2022; Gangwani et al., 2020). Unfortunately,
practical agents employing return redistribution rely on recurrent network architectures whose per-
formance and susceptibility to vanishing gradients rises as the problem horizon increases. Although
methods such as Gangwani et al. (2020) and Ren et al. (2022) do not use recurrent network archi-
tectures, they use simplistic methods such as uniform reward decomposition or least squares reward
decomposition, which do not necessarily have to assign any meaningful or interpretable credit to
the transitions. In contrast, hindsight distributions for data re-weighting retain an elegant idea from
classic temporal-difference learning; namely, that local information can be stitched together across
timesteps to yield globally effective solutions. There have also been recent approaches that explore
the relationship between causality and counterfactuals to the RL credit assignment problem (Mes-
nard et al., 2021; Buesing et al., 2018); while applying such powerful tools from causal inference
does seem like a plausible and even promising avenue for credit assignment in RL, the main draw-
back to these existing approaches is assuming a perfect causal model of the environment and, with
greater limitation, the ability to perform perfect counterfactual inference queries where one factor of
variation is manipulated ceteris paribus or while keeping everything else fixed. In contrast, H-DICE
is theoretically grounded within the framework of importance sampling (Harutyunyan et al., 2019)
without such cumbersome assumptions.


                                                   14
B    S OLUTION TO THE OPTIMIZATION IN E QUATION 2

In this section, we show that the solution to the following optimization introduced in Section 3.2:

                                1
                       min          E(s,a,z)∼Dhπθ [ϕ(s, a, z)2 ] − E(s,a)∼dπθ [ϕ(s, a, z)]
                    ϕ:S×A×Z→C 2                                       z∼ψ(z)

is given by

                                                         dπθ (s, a)ψ(z)
                                        ϕ∗ (s, a, z) =       π
                                                         Dh θ (s, a, z)

One can also consult the salient exposition of Nachum et al. (2019) for an alternative rationale and
calculation but specialized to their OPE setting instead of our credit assignment focus. We begin by
expanding the expectations inside the objective:


              1                           2
                E          hπθ [ϕ(s, a, z) ] − E(s,a)∼dπθ [ϕ(s, a, z)]
              2 (s,a,z)∼D                        z∼ψ(z)
                    Z                                      Z
                  1     h πθ
               =      D (s, a, z)ϕ(s, a, z) dsdadz − dπθ (s, a)ψ(z)ϕ(s, a, z)dsdadz
                                               2
                  2
              s∈S,a∈A,z∈Z                             s∈S,a∈A,z∈Z
                 Z
                      1 hπθ
               =        D (s, a, z)ϕ(s, a, z)2 − dπθ (s, a)ψ(z)ϕ(s, a, z) dsdadz
                      2
         s∈S,a∈A,z∈Z


Minimizing this quantity can be achieved by enforcing first-order optimality conditions. We first
differentiate the above integral using the Leibniz Integral Rule, which allows for the derivative to
move inside the integral:

                Z
                  ∂ 1 hπθ                     2     πθ
                       D (s, a, z)ϕ(s, a, z) − d (s, a)ψ(z)ϕ(s, a, z) dsdadz
                 ∂ϕ 2
         s∈S,a∈A,z∈Z
                 Z
                       πθ
              =      Dh (s, a, z)ϕ(s, a, z) − dπθ (s, a)ψ(z) dsdadz
              s∈S,a∈A,z∈Z


We now equate this expression for the derivative to zero and solve for ϕ. Similar to the proof in
DualDICE Nachum et al. (2019), we look for the value of ϕ(s, a, z) such that this gradient is equal
to zero pointwise over all state-action-return triples and get:

                                                         dπθ (s, a)ψ(z)
                                        ϕ∗ (s, a, z) =       π
                                                         Dh θ (s, a, z)

which we can then write as:


                                               dπθ (s)πθ (a | s)ψ(z)
                             ϕ∗ (s, a, z) =
                                         Dh (s)χπθ (z | s)hπωθ (a | s, z)
                                                 πθ


                                                       πθ (a | s)
                              =⇒ ϕ∗ (s, a, z) = π                                                   (4)
                                                χ θ (z | s)hπωθ (a | s, z)

The final simplification follows from the fact that ψ(z) is chosen to be a uniform distribution over all
possible returns; hence, ψ(z) is a constant term independent of the precise realiziation z, therefore,


                                                      15
can be ignored. Ignoring this constant simply changes the magnitude of all policy updates – this is
preferred over dividing by the constant, which again, introduces the risk of instability.
For instance, the policy updates are smaller in magnitude when the advantage A(s, a) ≥ 0 because:
                     dπθ (s)πθ (a | s)ψ(z)                   dπθ (s)πθ (a | s)
                                       π           ≤
                                                      Dh (s)χπθ (z | s)hπωθ (a | s, z)
                    πθ                                   πθ
                 Dh (s)χπθ (z | s)hω (a | s, z)
                                         θ


                      πθ (a | s)ψ(z)        πθ (a | s)
                  =⇒                     ≤ πθ
                       hπωθ (a | s, z)     hω (a | s, z)

                              πθ (a | s)ψ(z)                      πθ (a | s)
                  =⇒ 1 − πθ                    A(s, a) ≥ 1 − πθ                  A(s, a)
                              hω (a | s, z)                     hω (a | s, z)

and vice-versa when A(s, a) < 0.
             π
dπθ (s) = Dh θ (s) follows from the fact that hπθ is the hindsight distribution learned from the state-
visitation distribution of πθ . Empirically, we use the same data that we collected from the policy to
train the hindsight distribution as well and we update them with the same schedule.
This finally gives us the following expression for the hindsight ratio of interest:
                                   πθ (a | s)
                                                 = ϕ∗ (s, a, z)χπθ (z | s)                         (5)
                                 hπωθ (a | s, z)

There are several choices for ψ(z), which in principle can be any valid distribution over the returns;
a good choice of ψ(z) would enable easy computation of the hindsight ratio of interest. There are
several potential choices for ψ(z), including χπ (z | s, a) or χπ (z | s). Using the first distribution
would require values of ϕ to be divided by values of this distribution, risking instability issues that
arise when having probabilities or likelihoods as a divisor (indeed, this is the problem we aimed
to avoid in the first place). Sampling returns with respect to the latter distribution is especially
appealing since it conveniently cancels out with the return predictor distribution which multiples
with the output of ϕ to obtain the hindsight ratio in Equation 5. However, as shown in Appendix E,
sampling returns from χπ (z | s) in the second expectation empirically yields poorer performance
than sampling returns from a uniform distribution. We leave other choices for ψ(z) to future work.
                                                                                π
Note that we cannot use an arbitrary distribution to model the returns in Dh θ (s, a, z) because we
                                       π
need to decompose this term into Dh θ (s)χπθ (z | s)hπθ (a | s, z). Here, it is important that the
returns are sampled from the policy πθ and that the distribution χπθ is the distribution of returns
achieved from a state under policy πθ , as this is what the hindsight distribution is conditioned on.


                                                   16
C    U PDATING THE AUXILIARY MODELS WITH OFF - POLICY SCHEDULES
A potential drawback of H-DICE stems from the fact that four models must be updated at once to
learn the hindsight ratio, which can lead to greater training overhead and challenges with hyperpa-
rameter tuning. This issue is exacerbated by the fact that all these models must be updated in an
on-policy fashion as per the methodology detailed in Section 3.2. This overhead could be allevi-
ated if the auxiliary models could be updated with off-policy schedules, i.e., less frequently than the
policy network, thereby allowing them to be trained with data collected from previous versions of
the policy. To this end, we aim to study the impact of updating the auxiliary models with various
off-policy schedules on final performance.
We perform an ablation on GridWorld-v2 and HalfCheetah environment where we progressively
slow down the updates to the auxiliary models relative to the update frequency of the policy. In the
plots shown in Figure 4, the curves labeled as N x indicate that the auxiliary models are all updated
N times slower than the policy model, and as a result with N times more data (which will contain
trajectories collected from previous iterations of the policy). Note that auxiliary models’ weights are
still reset before their updates.
As seen in Figure 4, there is hardly any performance loss when updating with off-policy schedules.
In some instances, for example when the auxiliary models are updated 50x less frequently than the
policy in HalfCheetah, there see a small improvement over updating all models in lockstep. We
conjecture that this similarity in performance may be a result of the trade-off between updating
models in a fully on-policy fashion but limiting the volume of training data for the auxiliary models,
and being more off-policy which enables models to be trained with more data.


Figure 4: Training curves of varying off policy schedules on GridWorld-v2 and HalfCheetah. There
is almost no performance loss when updating with off-policy schedules and in some cases we can
even see improvements.

Finally, we note that updating the auxiliary models in an off-policy fashion strays away from the
theoretical justification for H-DICE developed in Section 3.2, but enables H-DICE to be computa-
tionally efficient with little to no cost to empirical performance.

D    A BLATION : I MPACT OF H INDSIGHT DICE M ODEL R ANGE
Figure 5 studies the impact of the output range of the Hindsight DICE model (which is controlled
by C, as detailed in Section 3.2) on policy performance. All policies are trained with H-DICE, and
the only axis of variation across experiments in each environment is the choice of C. Results are
averaged across 3 seeds for each choice of C. Policy performance is similar across choices of C in
the Gridworld-v2 and delayed reward Half-Cheetah environments indicating that the choice of this
hyperparameter is not very important.
We further note that when C = 1, the hindsight ratio calculate by H-DICE lies in the range [0, 1].
As a result, the model is not capable of making “double-sided” updates, i.e., down-weighting an
action at a state even when the observed returns from that state are positive (and vice versa). This
is no longer the case when C > 1 but this boost in expressivity risks a potential cost to stability as
evidenced by the results of PPO-HCA.


                                                  17
Figure 5: Impact of the range of the Hindsight DICE on policy performance in Gridworld-v2 (left)
and Delayed Reward Half-Cheetah with a maximum episode length of 100. For a given value of C,
the output range of the Hindsight DICE model is set to be [0, C]. The performance of H-DICE is
similar across choices of C.


E    A BLATION : C HOICE OF ψ RETURN DISTRIBUTION


Figure 6: Impact of return sampling distribution ψ on policy performance in Gridworld-v1 and de-
layed reward LunarLander-v2 and Half-Cheetah-v3. Sampling rewards with a uniform distribution
outperforms sampling with respect to the conditional distribution χ(z|s) in the more difficult Lu-
narLander and HalfCheetah settings.


Figure 6 examines the impact of ψ – the distribution from which returns are sampled in the second
expectation in expression 2 – on final performance in Gridworld-v1, LunarLander-v2 with delayed
rewards, and Half-Cheetah-v3 with delayed rewards. All policies again are trained with H-DICE,
with only the choice of ψ changing between experiments. As justified in Appendix B, we study
two options for ψ: a uniform distribution over returns, and the state-conditioned return distribution
χπθ (z|s). Note that computing the hindsight ratio using the uniform distribution requires χπθ (z|s)
to be multiplied with ϕ∗ (s, a, z), while using χπθ (z|s) enables the hindsight ratio to be directly
obtained from ϕ∗ (s, a, z). Despite both choices being theoretically justified, the results in Figure
6 clearly demonstrate that sampling with the uniform distribution results results in superior perfor-
mance as compared to sampling from χπθ (z|s). We hypothesise that this is because the Hindsight
DICE model alone is not sufficient to capture the complex credit assignment structures in an envi-
ronment and the scaling offered by the return model is crucial in learning more expressive hindsight
ratios. This is further supported by the fact that both choices of ψ perform similarly in the Grid-
World but using the state-conditioned return distributions struggles in more complex environments
like LunarLander and HalfCheetah.


                                                 18
F   U SING H-DICE IN DENSE REWARD SETTINGS


Figure 7: Performance of H-DICE and PPO in LunarLander-v3 and HalfCheetah-v3 (both with
maximum episode lengths of 1000) in dense reward settings. Note that these are the default settings
of the environments. H-DICE learns stably and quickly in LunarLander, outperforming PPO. How-
ever, H-DICE despite learning stably, is much slower than PPO in HalfCheetah.


In Figure 7, we compare the performance of H-DICE with PPO in a dense reward setting, where
we don’t anticipate a pressing need for effective credit assignment. We seek to answer whether H-
DICE can be a competitive substitute to the GAE advantage calculation often used with PPO in a
wide range of settings. From the results we can see that H-DICE learns more stably and achieves
marginally better performance than PPO on LunarLander over three seeds but is outperformed by
PPO on HalfCheetah. We also note that H-DICE was more stable, in terms of variation across seeds,
than PPO in both environments.


                                                19
G     T RAINING D ETAILS AND H YPERPARAMETERS

In this section, we provide training details and hyperparameters for all environments and all methods.
To aid in the stability of training, χπη θ , hπωθ , and ϕν utilize techniques such input normalization and
clipping of gradient norms. We additionally limit the output range of ϕν by applying a sigmoid at
the output to improve training stability (a technique also used by Nachum et al. (2019)), and also
find that collecting large amounts of data between updates improved performance.
For training the policy model, we used the usual PPO loss combined with the advantage calculation
from 1. To train the Hindsight DICE model, we used the loss from equation 2. To train the hindsight
model, we used a cross-entropy loss or a Gaussian log-likelihood loss depending on whether the
actions were discrete or continuous. For the return model, we used a Gaussian log-likelihood loss
to predict the mean returns from that state and used this distribution to obtain the probability of the
given returns.
An extensive list of hyperparameters and the values used for each domain are provided below. While
we swept across some of the key hyperparameters such as value loss coefficient, entropy coefficent,
number of epochs, etc., other hyperparameters were chosen from Stable Baselines Hill et al. (2018).
This is by no means an extensive hyperparameter sweep, especially for the HCA and H-DICE mod-
els which have additional hyperparameters as compared to vanilla PPO.
We used PyTorch for our experiments and training was done on single NVIDIA RTX A5000 GPU.
The code will be released on acceptance.


G.1    G RIDW ORLD EXPERIMENTS


             Table 2: Hyperparameters for the GridWorld experiments for all methods

                                            PPO      PPO-HCA        PPO-HCA-Clip         H-DICE
      Entropy Coefficient                   0.1      0.1            0.1                  0.1
      Value Loss Coefficient                1e-4     -              -                    -
      PPO Learning Rate                     3e-4     3e-4           3e-4                 3e-4
      Update Every Episodes                 50       50             50                   50
      Epsilon Clip                          0.2      0.2            0.2                  0.2
      PPO Epochs                            30       30             30                   30
      GAE Lambda                            0.95     -              -                    -
      Gamma                                 0.99     0.99           0.99                 0.99
      PPO Max Grad Norm                     -        -              -                    -
      HCA Max Grad Norm                     -        10             10                   10
      Density Pred Max Grad Norm            -        -              -                    10
      Return Pred Max Grad Norm             -        -              -                    10
      Hindsight Distribution Epochs         -        10             10                   10
      Hindsight DICE Model Epochs           -        -              -                    10
      Return Model Epochs                   -        -              -                    10
      Auxiliary Models Learning Rate        -        3e-4           3e-4                 3e-4
      Auxiliary Models Batchsize            -        256            256                  256
      Return Model Normalize Targets        -        -              -                    True



The PPO policy was initialized with a trunk of 2 hidden layers with 64 ReLU activated hidden units
each. The value head and actor head were initialized as separate heads on top of this for PPO. There
is no value head for the HCA and H-DICE models.
For the HCA and H-DICE models, each auxiliary model was initialized with 2 layers with 128 ReLU
activated hidden units. In the table above, “auxiliary models” refers to the Hindsight Distribution,
Hindsight DICE Model and Return predictor together.


                                                   20
G.2   L UNAR L ANDER EXPERIMENTS

The hyperparameters that changed from Table 2 are presented below. The rest of the hyperparame-
ters are the same.

          Table 3: Hyperparameters for the LunarLander-v2 experiments for all methods

                                        PPO     PPO-HCA        PPO-HCA-Clip       H-DICE
      Entropy Coefficient               0.0     0.0            0.0                0.01
      Value Loss Coefficient            0.5     -              -                  -
      PPO Learning Rate                 3e-4    3e-5           3e-4               3e-4
      Update Every Episodes             300     300            300                300
      PPO Epochs                        80      80             80                 80
      PPO Max Grad Norm                 0.5     0.5            0.5                0.5
      Hindsight Epochs                  -       20             20                 20
      Hindsight DICE Model Epochs       -       -              -                  1
      Return Model Epochs               -       -              -                  20


This time, the PPO policy was initialized with a trunk of 3 hidden layers with 128 ReLU activated
hidden units each.
For the HCA and H-DICE models, each auxiliary model was initialized with 2 layers with 128 ReLU
activated hidden units.

G.3   H ALF C HEETAH EXPERIMENTS

Once again, the hyperparameters that changes from Table 2 are presented below and the other hy-
perparameters stay the same.

          Table 4: Hyperparameters for the HalfCheetah-v3 experiments for all methods

                                     PPO     PPO-HCA       PPO-HCA-Clip        H-DICE
          Entropy Coefficient        0.01    0.01          0.01                0.01
          Value Loss Coefficient     0.5     -             -                   -
          PPO Learning Rate          3e-4    3e-5          3e-4                3e-4
          Update Every Env Steps     6144    6144          6144                6144
          PPO Epochs                 80      80            80                  80
          PPO Max Grad Norm          0.5     0.5           0.5                 0.5


The PPO policy was initialized with a trunk of 3 hidden layers with 128 ReLU activated hidden units
each.
For the HCA and H-DICE models, each auxiliary model was initialized with 2 layers with 128 ReLU
activated hidden units.


                                                21
H    G RIDW ORLD - V 2
We provide an image of GridWorld-v2 in this section. Note that the dynamics and reward structure of
GridWorld-v2 are the same as in GridWorld-v1 as described in Section 4.1 with the exception of the
maximum episode length, which is set to 100 in GridWorld-v2 (as opposed to 50 in GridWorld-v1).


                            Figure 8: The GridWorld-v2 Environment


                                                22
