Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D ECOMPOSING THE E NIGMA : S UBGOAL - BASED
D EMONSTRATION L EARNING FOR F ORMAL T HEOREM
P ROVING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

          Large language models (LLMs) present an intriguing avenue of exploration in
          the domain of formal theorem proving. Nonetheless, the full utilization of these
          models, particularly in terms of demonstration formatting and organization, remains
          an underexplored area. In an endeavor to enhance the efficacy of LLMs, we
          introduce a subgoal-based demonstration learning framework, consisting of two
          primary elements: Firstly, drawing upon the insights of subgoal learning from
          the domains of reinforcement learning and robotics, we propose the construction
          of distinct subgoals for each demonstration example and refine these subgoals in
          accordance with the pertinent theories of subgoal learning. Secondly, we build
          upon recent advances in diffusion models to predict the optimal organization,
          simultaneously addressing two intricate issues that persist within the domain of
          demonstration organization: subset selection and order determination. Through
          the integration of subgoal-based learning methodologies, we have successfully
          increased the prevailing proof accuracy from 38.9% to 44.3% on the miniF2F
          benchmark. Furthermore, the adoption of diffusion models for demonstration
          organization can lead to an additional enhancement in accuracy to 45.5%, or a 5×
          improvement in sampling efficiency compared with the long-standing state-of-the-
          art method.1


1       I NTRODUCTION

Mathematical theorem proving constitutes a significant milestone in the pursuit of artificial intelli-
gence. Recently, machine learning methodologies have spurred advancements in both formal and
informal theorem proving domains (Polu & Sutskever, 2020; Lewkowycz et al., 2022). Our study falls
into the former category. In contrast to informal theorem proving, formal methods have the advantage
of leveraging interactive proof assistants (Paulson, 2000) to automatically validate proofs generated
by models, delegating the verification task to computational systems rather than human intervention.
This significantly reduces the costs associated with proof checking, and has been applied in software
verification (Klein et al., 2009) and research-level mathematics (Castelvecchi et al., 2021).
Recently, advances in large language models (LLMs) shed new light on the domain of formal theorem
proving. The complexity of automated theorem proving comes from the necessity of searching
through a vast space of possible logical statements and proof methods, in order to determine the
truth-value of a given theorem. LLMs reduce the difficulty of the searching problem by factorizing
the formal proof automation task into two in-context learning (§5.2) problems (Wu et al., 2022a;
Jiang et al., 2022a; First et al., 2023). Given a mathematical statement, an LLM first generates its
informal proof as a draft. It then generates a formal sketch based on this draft, which is ready for
an off-the-shelf prover to verify its correctness automatically.2 In both of these steps, the quality of
the demonstrative in-examples either written by humans or generated by machines is the key to the
performance of the system.

    1
    All data and code will be open-sourced upon publication.
    2
    In practice, the informal proof often serves as inline comments in the formal sketch to better guide the
generation procedure.


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                              Statement                Bernoulli
                         Statement                               Subgoal-based Proof
            Suppose n is a positive natural number                                                                                      Noise
            such that 𝑛! + 2 − 3 ∗ 𝑛 is a prime      Step 1: Show that n > 2.
            number. Show that n must be equal to
            3.                                       Step 2: Assume n is not greater than 2.
                                                                                                                 Reverse   Forward
                                                     Step 3: Deduce that n = 1 or n = 2.                         Process   Process
                     Informal Proof
                                                     Step 4: Show that this leads to a contradiction with
          Factoring, we get 𝑛! − 3𝑛 + 2 =            the prime assumption.
           𝑛−2 𝑛−1 .                                                                                          Statement
                                                     Step 5: Use the inequality n > 2 to find the
          Either 𝑛 − 1 or 𝑛 − 2 is odd, and the      expression for the given polynomial.
          other is even. Their product must          Step 6: Show that the polynomial is prime.
          yield an even number. The only
                                                     Step 7: Use the prime_product lemma to deduce
          prime that is even is 2, which is when     that either n - 1 = 1 or n - 2 = 1.                      Statement
          𝑛 is 3 or 0. Since 0 is not a positive                                                                                        Optimal
          number, the answer is 3.                   Step 8: Use the inequality n > 2 to show that n = 3.                            Subset & Order


                                     (a) Subgoal-based Proof                                                (b) Demonstration Reorganization
Figure 1: Left: An instance of informal proof and subgoal-based proof. Right: Employing diffusion
models to identify a more effective subset of demonstration examples, as well as the optimal order
for these examples.
In this paper, we seek to improve the efficacy of LLMs in formal theorem proving by delving deeper
into the format and the organization of these demonstrative in-context examples. We present a
subgoal-based demonstration learning framework, comprising two main components. First, we
restructure an informal proof into a subgoal-based proof (Figure 1(a)), drawing upon the insights
of subgoal learning from reinforcement learning and robotics, where studies show that breaking
down complex tasks into smaller yet more uniformed subgoals enhances the learning efficiency
of the agents (Eysenbach et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021). To construct subgoal-based proofs that
can be easily processed and handled by LLMs, we start with human-written informal proofs and
then iteratively refine them through interaction with ChatGPT (Team, 2022), guided by the subgoal
learning theory (§2.1). Second, a recent study (Wu et al., 2022b) points out that the selection and the
ordering of the in-context examples have a significant impact on performance. The lengthy formal
sketches in automatic theorem proving intensify this impact, as we can only present very few cases
of demonstrations. In response to that, we train a diffusion model to organize the demonstrative
in-examples for the translation process from subgoal-based proof to its corresponding formal sketch
of each instance (§2.2). This approach identifies a more effective subset of demonstration examples
as well as the most beneficial order of these examples (Figure 1(b)).
The proposed method significantly outperforms competing approaches in formal theorem proving
tasks, achieving a pass rate of 45.5% on miniF2F dataset (Zheng et al., 2021), a 6.6% absolute
and 17.0% relative improvement over the previous state-of-the-art system (Jiang et al., 2022a).
Furthermore, the adoption of diffusion models for demonstration selection and ordering can lead
to a significant improvement in sampling efficiency, reaching previous state-of-the-art (38.5%) on
miniF2F with only 20 (compared to 100) calls to the LLM.

2       S UBGOAL - BASED D EMONSTRATION L EARNING
Given a theorem statement x, the goal of proof synthesis is to generate a formal sketch y which can
be verified by an off-the-shelf automated theorem prover (e.g., Sledgehammer) (Jiang et al., 2022a).
In this section, we elaborate the subgoal-based demonstration learning framework that consists of two
key components, subgoal-based proof (§2.1) and demonstration reorganization (§2.2). The subgoal-
based proof replaces the informal proof, breaking down a complex problem into smaller subgoals that
offer more fine-grained and uniform guidance to the LLMs. The demonstration reorganization takes
place in the stage of generating the formal sketch based on the subgoal-based proof. This procedure is
non-trivial. Given the limited context length of the LLMs, selecting relevant yet diverse demonstration
examples has a significant impact on the final pass rate of these formal sketches. We denote the set
of all N demonstration examples by E = {E1 , E2 , ⋯, EN }. Each of them contains a mathematical
statement, an informal proof (or a subgoal-based proof ), and a formal sketch.3 . In the remainder
of this section, we first describe the iterative refinement process that produces the subgoal-based
proofs given the informal proof, guided by the principles in the subgoal learning theory (Zhang et al.,
2021). We then explain our solution to the demonstration reorganization. Starting from collecting
    3
        A more comprehensive illustration of these terms is provided in Figure 3.


                                                                                               2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


arrangements that have yielded successful proofs, we use these as training data for a diffusion model,
which progressively determines the most favorable reorganization during inference.

2.1    S UBGOAL - BASED P ROOF
The significance of LLMs to formal theorem proving is that they grant us the ability to leverage
informal proofs to guide formal theorem proving, which otherwise has to be based on expensive
heuristics-based brute-force search. Despite considerable progress (Lewkowycz et al., 2022; OpenAI,
2023), this approach suffers from the flawed informal proofs generated by the LLMs (Jiang et al.,
2022a). We propose to use subgoal-based proofs to replace the informal proofs, where the subgoals
are strictly aligned with the states in the automatic provers. Following Zhang et al. (2021), we seek to
obtain a valid sequence of subgoals which satisfies the condition that each subgoal in this sequence
should be reachable from the initial state (i.e., the statement) and attain the final state (i.e., the passing
state of the proof). These valid sequences integrate the guidance from the LLMs better with the search
space of the automatic theorem provers, thereby leveraging the ability of the LLMs to the maximum
extent. However, it is non-trivial to get these valid subgoal proofs as human-written subgoals often
fall short of the above constraints. To address this problem, we iteratively refine the subgoal proof, in
the spirit of self-play in reinforcement learning (Silver et al., 2016), making calls to both the LLM
and the off-the-shelf automated theorem prover.
Subgoal Refinement. We start with manually written subgoal-based proofs, and denote these as
                        (0)
the initial seed set {Ei }N   i=1 . This set contains subgoal-based proofs formed on the informal proofs
and the statement, yet not guaranteed to be a valid sequence. We denote the sequence of subgoals
in an instance as (s0 , s1 , s2 , ⋯, s∆ , s∆+1 ), where ∆ is the total number of subgoals and s0 and s∆+1
are two special subgoals that align with the initial and final states of the automatic prover. During the
                                                                                              (k−1) N
k-th iteration, we randomly select a subset of instances from the previous iteration {Ei           }i=1 as
the in-context demonstration for the LLM to generate subgoals for a given instance. According to
the definition, si is considered to be a valid subgoal if and only if it can be reached from s0 and can
reach s∆+1 . Therefore, for each of the subgoal, we recursively call the proof assistant to verify the
validness of the most recently developed subgoal and only after ∆ recursions we can obtain the new
                                                                           (k)
valid sequence of subgoals and adds that into the next iteration as Ei . This process improves the
consistency of the derived subgoals in style, thus making it easier for the LLM to learn from in the
inference stage. We provide a detailed description of the algorithm in the Appendix.

2.2    D EMONSTRATION R EORGANIZATION
The demonstration examples can be lengthy in formal theorem proving. If we assume a maximum
context length of 3072 tokens, only 4.79 examples on average can be included. Our experiments echo
the findings by Wu et al. (2022b). These instance-based demonstration examples have a significant
impact on performance. Only certain orders of carefully chosen demonstration examples lead to
successful theorem proving. Consequently, identifying the optimal subset from the pool and ordering
them into meaningful in-context demonstration examples is of great significance, which unfortunately
is an NP-complete problem. We formulate the demonstration reorganization problem as finding the
(Sub)hamiltonian graph where the nodes represent demonstration examples, and a traverse following
the path corresponds to the selection and ordering of them. Building upon the recent success of
applying diffusion models in addressing NP-complete problems (Graikos et al., 2022; Sun & Yang,
2023), we further treat this problem as a diffusion process on the graph. This solution has two
main advantages. First, it addresses the example selection and ordering problem simultaneously.
Second, the inference can be performed in parallel, which greatly reduces the time of discovering the
optimal arrangement given the demonstration examples. We start from collecting successful pairs of
in-context demonstration example organization and the corresponding statement x as the training
data for the diffusion model. We randomly organize (select and order) the demonstration examples
and query the LLM to see if it can generate the proof successfully. The passing cases will be used as
the starting configuration ψ 0 in the diffusion process given the statement x.

Training. The aim of employing diffusion models is to predict the optimal organization, denoted as
ψ 0 ,4 conditioning on the theorem statement x. From the standpoint of variance inference, diffusion
   4
    ψ0 represents the sequence of demonstrations that, when fed into the prompt, results in a successful formal
sketch.


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


models adopt the following formulations to model pθ (ψ 0 ∣x),

                                   pθ (ψ 0 ∣x) ∶= ∫ pθ (ψ 0∶T ∣x)dψ 1∶T ,                            (1)

where ψ 1 , ⋯, ψ T serve as latent variables with the same dimensionality as ψ 0 . The learned reverse
process progressively denoises these latent variables in order to reconstruct ψ 0 . This procedure can
be formalized as follows,
                                                           T
                               pθ (ψ 0∶T ∣x) = p(ψ T ) ∏ pθ (ψ t−1 ∣ψ t , x).                        (2)
                                                          t=1


The forward process gradually corrupts ψ 0 to generate noised latent variables,
                                                       T
                                     q(ψ 1∶T ∣ψ 0 ) = ∏ q(ψ t ∣ψ t−1 ).                              (3)
                                                      t=1


The goal of the training process is to maximize the evidence lower bound (ELBO),
                                                                  pθ (ψ 0∶T ∣x)
                            E [log pθ (ψ 0 ∣x)] ≥ Eq [log                           ]
                                                                qθ (ψ 1∶T ∣ψ 0 , x)
                                                                                                     (4)
               = Eq [log pθ (ψ 0 ∣ψ 1 , x) − ∑ DKL [q(ψ t−1 ∣ψ t , ψ 0 )∥pθ (ψ t−1 ∣ψ t , x)]].
                                            t>1

We employ a Graph Neural Network (GNN) for the encoding and denoising process of the graph.
Following Austin et al. (2021), we adopt discrete diffusion models to model binary random variables.
Inference. During the inference stage, we obtain samples ψ ∼ pθ (ψ 0 ∣x) and subsequently recon-
struct the order of demonstration examples from ψ. We then incorporate examples sequentially into
the LLM context, and define the output of the demonstration organization module as the sequence
of examples upon reaching the LLM length constraint. More details of the implementation of the
diffusion model, the implementation of GNN, and techniques used in the sampling process of ψ can
be found in the Appendix.

3     E XPERIMENTS
3.1   F ORMAL E NVIRONMENT
Interactive Theorem Provers. Interactive Theorem Provers (ITPs), such as Isabelle (Paulson,
1994), constitute the backbone of contemporary mathematical verification systems. They facilitate
the integration of mathematical definitions and theorems into a consistent logical framework, such as
Higher-Order Logic or Dependent Type Theory, which is operationalized by their kernels. The kernel
plays a pivotal role in the verification process, meticulously examining each theorem to ascertain its
recognition by the ITP and thereby ensuring the integrity of the system. The theorem proving process
within an ITP is characterized by the articulation of the theorem in the ITP’s programming language,
followed by an iterative simplification into more manageable objectives or subgoals. The theorem is
deemed proven once it can be distilled down to pre-established facts. The selection of Isabelle for our
paper is motivated by its intuitive interface, its compatibility with a range of logical frameworks, and
its comprehensive library of formalized mathematics.

Sledgehammer. Sledgehammer (Paulsson & Blanchette, 2012) serves as a powerful tool for
automating reasoning within the interactive theorem prover Isabelle. It functions by transmuting the
goals encapsulated in Isabelle/HOL’s higher-order logic into alternative logics, such as first-order
logic. These transmuted goals are then passed to off-the-shelf automated theorem provers, including
E, CVC4, Z3, Vampire, and SPASS. In the event that any of these automated theorem provers
successfully derives the proof in their respective formats, Sledgehammer undertakes the task of
reconstructing the proof within the Isabelle/HOL framework using certified provers, namely metis,
meson, and smt. This reconstructed proof, being more interpretable to humans, significantly enhances
the system’s usability, thereby contributing to the efficiency and effectiveness of (interactive) theorem
proving.

                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   DATASET AND E VALUATION
Dataset. We evaluate our approach using the miniF2F dataset (Zheng et al., 2021), which comprises
488 formal mathematical problems derived from high-school competitions, expressed in three formal
languages: Lean, HOL-Light, and Isabelle. The dataset is divided into a validation and a test set, each
including 244 problems. The problems within the dataset are sourced from three distinct categories:
260 problems are extracted from the MATH dataset (Hendrycks et al., 2021), 160 problems are
extracted from actual high-school mathematical competitions (AMC, AIME, and IMO), and 68
problems are crafted to mirror the difficulty level of the aforementioned competitions.
Evaluation. The task at hand entails the generation of formal sketches for problems in the miniF2F
dataset. The validity of a formal sketch depends on two criteria: first, the absence of “cheating”
keywords such as “sorry” and “oops” that prematurely terminate a proof prior to its completion;
second, the capacity of the interactive theorem prover Isabelle to authenticate the corresponding
formal statement with the proof. To make working with Isabelle easier, we use the Portal-to-Isabelle
API, as introduced by Jiang et al. (2022a). Given the absence of a training split in the miniF2F
dataset, we leverage optimal organizations that yield successful proofs from the miniF2F-valid set
to train the diffusion model. As proposed by Lample et al. (2022), we employ the cumulative pass
rate as a measure for the results obtained from performing inference using diffusion models on the
miniF2F-valid set. This involves integrating the pass rates from both the data collection stage for
training and the inference stage. When it comes to other scenarios, namely conducting inference on
the miniF2F-test or cases where the diffusion model is not employed, we simply provide the pass
rate.

3.3   BASELINES

We leverage the following baselines to substantiate the effectiveness of our proposed methodology:

Symbolic Automated Provers. We first employ Sledgehammer, a proof automation tool that is
extensively utilized within the Isabelle environment. We adhere to the default configuration of
Sledgehammer as provided in Isabelle2021, which encompasses a 120-second timeout and a suite
of five automated theorem provers (Z3, CVC4, SPASS, Vampire, E). In alignment with Jiang et al.
(2022a), we employ Sledgehammer supplemented with heuristics, integrating 11 prevalent tactics (i.e.,
auto, simp, blast, fastforce, force, eval, presburger, sos, arith, linarith, auto simp: field simps) with
Sledgehammer. If all the tactics fail or take longer than 10 seconds, the system reverts to the base
Sledgehammer.

Search-based Methods. In addition to the above, we incorporate baselines that utilize Monte-Carlo
tree search (Silver et al., 2016) to discover the proof. This includes Thor (Jiang et al., 2022b) and
another version of Thor that employs an expert iteration on autoformalized data (i.e., Thor+expert
iteration (Wu et al., 2022a)). Thor combines language models with automatic theorem provers to
overcome the challenge of selecting beneficial premises from a vast library. Thor+expert iteration
enhances a neural theorem prover by training it on theorems that have been automatically formalized.

LLM-based Method. Lastly, we incorporate an LLM-based baseline, Draft, Sketch and
Prove (DSP) (Jiang et al., 2022a). DSP turns informal proofs into formal sketches and leverages these
formal sketches to steer an automated prover. Notably, we employ the variant of DSP that is imple-
mented with the 540B Minerva model (Lewkowycz et al., 2022), as this particular implementation
demonstrated superior performance in their paper. Similar to our method, this DSP variant also uses
the Sledgehammer tool, maintaining consistency in tool usage across both approaches.
We exclude representative methods such as HyperTree Proof Search (HTPS) (Lample et al., 2022)
and GPT-f with expert iteration (Polu et al., 2022), which are implemented using Lean (de Moura
et al., 2015), a different interactive theorem prover. The disparity in tactics and automation between
Lean and Isabelle renders them not directly comparable to our method.

3.4   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
Throughout our work, we employ ChatGPT (i.e., the gpt-3.5-turbo-0301 version) as the LLM. For
the creation of the formal sketch, the temperature and max tokens parameters of gpt-3.5-turbo-0301


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Pass rates on the miniF2F dataset with Isabelle. Numbers in bold denote the best performance.
Numbers with a ⋆ correspond to the cumulative pass rate (Lample et al., 2022) since the evaluated
statements are part of the training for diffusion models. See §3.2 for more details about cumulative
pass rate.
                                                           valid     test
                           Sledgehammer                   9.9%      10.4%
                           Sledgehammer+heuristic        18.0%      20.9%
                           Thor                          28.3%      29.9%
                           Thor + expert iteration       37.3%      35.2%
                           DSP (540B Minerva)            42.6%      38.9%
                           Ours                         48.0%⋆     45.5%

Table 2: Ablation results on the miniF2F dataset with Isabelle. Numbers with a ⋆ correspond to the
cumulative pass rate.
                                                   valid           test
                       Ours                     48.0%⋆ (±0.4)     45.5%(±0.6)
                       - subgoal & diffusion    41.4%(±0.9)       38.7%(±1.2)
                       - subgoal                44.3%⋆ (±0.7)     40.6%(±0.6)
                       - diffusion              46.9%(±1.3)       44.1%(±0.9)


are set to 0 and 1024, respectively. For each subgoal proof, we make one formal sketch attempt, as
suggested by previous literature (Jiang et al., 2022a). In terms of the establishment of the subgoal-
based proof, we set the number of refinement iterations to be 15, with the number of demonstration
examples, denoted as N , being set to 61. For demonstration organization, we employ a randomized
demonstration organization approach to generate proofs for 116 distinct statements on miniF2F-valid,
which yield 137 successful proofs. We then partition the corresponding demonstration contexts into a
training set and a validation set, comprising 81 and 56 instances respectively. The training of our
diffusion models is conducted with a learning rate of 5e − 4, a batch size of 16, and over a span of 50
epochs. We set the number of diffusion steps, represented as T , to 80. We employ an early stopping
strategy on the validation set and report the performance averaged in three repetitive experiments.
3.5   M AIN R ESULTS
The experiment results, as shown in Table 1, yield several key observations: (1) Our proposed method
achieves a pass rate of 48.0% on miniF2F-valid and 45.5% on miniF2F-test, surpassing all competing
methods. This superior performance is attributable to our novel application of diffusion models
for demonstration reorganization coupled with subgoal-based proof; (2) The methods Thor and
Thor + expert iteration struggle due to the enormously large action space. This space significantly
overshadows that of games, thereby posing challenges to the comprehensive utilization of the Monte
Carlo tree search. Consequently, these methods underperform when compared to LLM-based
methods; and (3) DSP has pioneered the introduction of the informal proof, a critical step in the
LLM-based formal theorem proving task. However, human-written informal proofs do not offer
optimal compatibility with large language models. Our method, grounded in the subgoal-learning
theory, is capable of inferring subgoal-based proofs that are more amenable to large language models.

4     A NALYSIS
4.1   A BLATION S TUDY
In our ablation study, we examine four variations of our model on the miniF2F dataset, as detailed
in Table 2. The models include our full method (Ours), and three variants: one excluding the
subgoal-based proof, denoted as “-subgoal”, which utilizes informal proofs instead; one without the
diffusion method, referred to as “-diffusion”, employing a randomized selection for demonstrations;
and one, denoted as “-subgoal & diffusion”, representing the basic form of gpt-3.5-turbo, where both
the subgoal-based proof and diffusion method are omitted, functioning without subgoal-based proofs
or diffusion models. To quantify the uncertainty associated with our method, we have supplemented


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           Problems Solved on the miniF2F-test                                                    Problems Solved on the miniF2F-test
                          110        subgoal+diff                                                                          diffusion
                                     informal+diff                                                              110        gnn
                                     subgoal                                                                               topk
                          105        informal
                                                                                                                105
                          100
      # Problems Solved


                                                                                            # Problems Solved
                                                                                                                100
                          95

                          90                                                                                    95

                          85                                                                                    90
                          80
                                                                                                                85
                                20             40              60            80   100                                 20     30        40     50      60       70   80   90   100
                                                     # LLM Calls Per Problem                                                                # LLM Calls Per Problem

                                         (a) Subgoal-based Proof                                                      (b) Demonstration Reorganization

Figure 2: Number of problems solved on miniF2F-test against the number of LLM calls per problem,
where the x-axis represents the number of independent problem-solving attempts. Left: a comparative
assessment between the informal proof and subgoal-based proof under two distinct conditions:
presence and absence of the diffusion model. Right: a comparative exploration of different in-context
learning methods.

our results with standard deviation values. For the variants employing diffusion models (“Ours” and
“-subgoal”), we trained three separate diffusion models as detailed in §3.4. For the variants without
diffusion models (“’-subgoal & diffusion” and “-diffusion”), the experiment was repeated three times.
Our full model achieves the highest performance on both validation and test sets. This underscores
the importance of both subgoal-based proof and demonstration reorganization. The model without
both components showed the lowest performance, further emphasizing the significance of these
components. The models missing either the subgoal-based proof or reorganization components
also show decreased performance, indicating the substantial role of each component. Additionally,
it is noteworthy that the methods incorporating diffusion models exhibit relatively more stable
performance, affirming the stability benefits of these models in our study.

4.2               O N THE E FFECT OF S UBGOAL - BASED P ROOF
We further use four different variants to explore the impact of subgoal-based proof. Figure 2(a)
displays the results of this experiment, where “informal” denotes the utilization of informal proofs
instead of subgoal-based proof, and “diff” indicates the integration of demonstration reorganization.
The results indicate a significant difference between the approaches that incorporate subgoal-based
proof (“subgoal” and “subgoal+diff”) and those that do not (“informal” and “informal+diff”). This
trend remains consistent across all LLM call numbers, suggesting a noteworthy positive effect of
subgoal-based proof on the overall performance of our method.

4.3               O N THE E FFECT OF D EMONSTRATION R EORGANIZATION

To further investigate the effect of a diffusion model for demonstration reorganization, we draw a
comparative analysis between its performance and two alternative in-context learning methodologies:
the Graph Neural Network (GNN) and the Top-K. The Top-K method calculates Ada embeddings
for test problem statements and in-context examples, subsequently selecting the top-k most similar
examples, as measured by dot product, ensuring those with higher similarity are positioned nearer
to the test problem in the prompt. The GNN is congruent with a modified version of our proposed
model when the inference diffusion step is set to 1, while the efficacy of the Top-K methodology has
been extensively substantiated in the literature (Liu et al., 2021). Figure 2(b) presents the empirical
results, manifesting that the diffusion model’s performance increment diminishes as the number of
LLM calls escalates to 100. This phenomenon stems from the fact that the module is trained on
data collated from successful proofs via randomized organization sampling. Consequently, it may
encounter difficulties in discerning the optimal organization for data that deviates significantly from
its training dataset. Nevertheless, this limitation does not overshadow the potential of diffusion models
to economize the number of LLM calls. Notably, with demonstration reorganization, our method
exhibits an impressive capability of successfully deriving proofs for 94 problems (equivalently, a pass


                                                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Statement: Suppose n is a natural number such that n leaves a remainder of 3 when divided by 7. Show that (2n+1) leaves a
    remainder of 0 when divided by 7.

    Subgoal-based Proof:
    Step 1: Express n as 7𝑘 + 3 for some k ∈ ℕ
    Step 2: Substitute the expression for 𝑛 into the expression for 2𝑛 + 1 and simplify.
    Step 3: Show that the resulting expression is divisible by 7.

    Formal Sketch:
             mathd_numbertheory_370:
           n :: nat
                h0 :

          -
      (* Step 1: Express n as 7𝑘 + 3 for some k ∈ ℕ. *)

              div_mult_mod_eq[of "n" "7"]

              h0
                  c0:
      (* Step 2: Substitute the expression for 𝑛 into the expression for 2𝑛 + 1 and simplify. *)

              c0


                  c1:
      (* Step 3: Show that the resulting expression is divisible by 7.*)

              c1


                            Figure 3: A formal sketch generated by our proposed method.

rate of 38.5%), with a mere 20 LLM calls. Remarkably, this result is comparable with that of the
DSP method, which necessitates 5× the number of LLM calls.

4.4     C ASE S TUDY
To better comprehend the efficacy of our proposed method, we present a formal sketch of a problem
that remains unproven by earlier state-of-the-art methods. As demonstrated in Figure 3, it is apparent
that our strategy successfully decomposes the complex objective into three manageable subgoals,
each solvable by the LLM. We provide additional comprehensive examples in the Appendix.

5     R ELATED W ORK
5.1     M ACHINE L EARNING FOR F ORMAL T HEOREM P ROVING
Machine learning-based formal theorem proving systems primarily fall into two categories: those
focusing on proof search strategies and premise selection, and those harnessing Large Language
Models (LLMs) for autoformalization and proof generation. The first category, represented by works
like Expert Iteration (Polu et al., 2022) and PACT (Han et al., 2021), devise novel learning strategies
to enhance proof search, extracting self-supervised data from kernel-level proof terms. Systems such
as HyperTree Proof Search (HTPS) (Lample et al., 2022) and Thor (Jiang et al., 2022b) integrate
language models with automated theorem provers, while Magnushammer (Mikuła et al., 2023)
presents a transformer-based approach for premise selection. While these techniques have proven
effective, they struggle with increasing computational costs as theorems grow more complex. The
second category exploits the potential of LLMs in the formalization of mathematical proofs. Both
Wu et al. (2022a) and Jiang et al. (2022a) demonstrate that LLMs can convert mathematical problems
into formal specifications, with the latter utilizing these translations to guide an automated prover.
Baldur (First et al., 2023) extends this approach by generating entire proofs at once and introducing a
proof repair model to enhance proving power. However, these approaches have yet to fully leverage
the power of LLMs due to a lack of emphasis on the format and organization of demonstration
examples. Our work aims to address this gap by introducing a subgoal-based demonstration learning
framework that refines the use of LLMs in formal theorem proving.

                                                                           8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.2   I N - CONTEXT L EARNING
In the field of In-Context Learning (ICL), research primarily focuses on two main areas: (1) the
selection of in-context examples, and (2) the arrangement of these examples in the learning context.
With regard to the first area, Liu et al. (2021) suggest a retrieval-based prompt selection method,
offering a thoughtful alternative to random example selection. This method aims to find examples
that are semantically similar to a test sample to form related prompts. Building on this idea, Rubin
et al. (2021) propose an effective retrieval process for prompts, using a pre-trained language model.
Sorensen et al. (2022) further the exploration by introducing a new way to select prompt templates
that don’t need labeled examples or direct access to the model. Instead, they choose the template
that maximizes the mutual information between the input and the corresponding model output. Su
et al. (2022) present a two-step framework that is efficient in annotation. It first selects a set of
examples from unlabeled data, and then retrieves task examples from the annotated set during testing.
Lastly, Agrawal et al. (2022) focus on creating strategies specifically for machine translation tasks,
emphasizing the importance of the quality and domain of in-context examples, and warning against
the negative effects of unrelated noisy examples. Works in the second area examine the significance
of the order in which prompts are presented. Zhao et al. (2021) point out the instability in few-shot
learning caused by the order of training examples and suggest a calibration method to tackle this. Lu
et al. (2021) delve deeper into this analysis, demonstrating the sensitivity of prompt order in few-shot
learning situations. Even though previous efforts have made remarkable progress in either choosing
or sequencing in-context examples, our research sets a new precedent by combining both elements.
In this paper, we step out of these isolated areas of concentration, looking into an approach based on
diffusion models that effectively tackles both the challenges of the selection and ordering at the same
time.

5.3   S UBGOAL L EARNING
Subgoal learning is a pivotal concept in reinforcement learning. It can enable AI systems to solve
complex, long-horizon tasks more effectively. Crucially, theoretical analyses have shed light on
key concepts including the computational benefits of rewarding subgoals (Zhai et al., 2022), the
structure of Markov decision processes beneficial for hierarchical reinforcement learning (Wen
et al., 2020), the complexity of optimal option selection for planning (Jinnai et al., 2019a), and
the integration of temporal abstraction into RL (Fruit et al., 2017). Empirical analyses in this field
mainly focus on subgoal exploration, subgoal generation for planning, and curriculum learning for
subgoals. Subgoal exploration aims to find the optimal or efficient exploration of subgoals, employing
a variety of strategies. These include minimizing cover time (Jinnai et al., 2019b), learning dynamical
distances (Hartikainen et al., 2019), maximizing entropy (Pitis et al., 2020), and utilizing asymmetric
self-play (OpenAI et al., 2021). Subgoal planning research encompasses diverse algorithms for
improved decision-making. For example, SoRB (Eysenbach et al., 2019) uses RL to build a graph
for subgoal sequences, DC-MCTS (Parascandolo et al., 2020) applies learned sub-goal proposals
to partition tasks, PAIR (Li et al., 2022) combines online RL and offline supervised learning, and
Moro et al. (2022) extend MCTS with Hindsight Experience Replay for goal-oriented planning.
The research centered on curriculum learning proposes various techniques to create a learning
curriculum that gradually intensifies subgoal complexity, thereby optimizing learning efficiency
and effectiveness (Zhang et al., 2020; 2021). While there have been preliminary efforts to apply
similar principles in the construction of prompts for LLMs (Khot et al., 2022), the deployment of
subgoal learning theories to manage intricate tasks, such as formal theorem proving, remains largely
unexplored. Our work pioneers the use of subgoal learning in this domain, with a focus on format
and organization.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have developed a subgoal-based demonstration learning framework that significantly
enhances LLMs’ efficacy in formal theorem proving. Our approach combines insights from subgoal
learning and diffusion models, effectively addressing the challenges of demonstration formatting and
organization. As a result, we achieve a 17.0% relative improvement in proof pass rate on the miniF2F
benchmark and a 5× improvement in sampling efficiency. Our work lays the foundation for future
endeavors in leveraging AI for generating, validating, and contributing novel insights to automated
theorem proving.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Sweta Agrawal, Chunting Zhou, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Marjan Ghazvininejad. In-
  context examples selection for machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.02437, 2022.
Jacob Austin, Daniel D Johnson, Jonathan Ho, Daniel Tarlow, and Rianne van den Berg. Structured
  denoising diffusion models in discrete state-spaces. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:17981–17993, 2021.
Xavier Bresson and Thomas Laurent. An experimental study of neural networks for variable graphs.
  2018.
Davide Castelvecchi et al. Mathematicians welcome computer-assisted proof in ‘grand unifica-
  tion’theory. Nature, 595(7865):18–19, 2021.
Leonardo de Moura, Soonho Kong, Jeremy Avigad, Floris Van Doorn, and Jakob von Raumer. The
  lean theorem prover (system description). In Automated Deduction-CADE-25: 25th International
  Conference on Automated Deduction, Berlin, Germany, August 1-7, 2015, Proceedings 25, pp.
  378–388. Springer, 2015.
Ben Eysenbach, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Sergey Levine. Search on the replay buffer: Bridging
  planning and reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.
Emily First, Markus N Rabe, Talia Ringer, and Yuriy Brun. Baldur: Whole-proof generation and
 repair with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04910, 2023.
Ronan Fruit, Matteo Pirotta, Alessandro Lazaric, and Emma Brunskill. Regret minimization in mdps
  with options without prior knowledge. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30,
  2017.
Alexandros Graikos, Nikolay Malkin, Nebojsa Jojic, and Dimitris Samaras. Diffusion models as
  plug-and-play priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.09012, 2022.
Jesse Michael Han, Jason Rute, Yuhuai Wu, Edward W Ayers, and Stanislas Polu. Proof artifact
  co-training for theorem proving with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06203, 2021.
Kristian Hartikainen, Xinyang Geng, Tuomas Haarnoja, and Sergey Levine. Dynamical distance
  learning for semi-supervised and unsupervised skill discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.08225,
  2019.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song,
  and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2103.03874, 2021.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 448–456.
  pmlr, 2015.
Albert Q Jiang, Sean Welleck, Jin Peng Zhou, Wenda Li, Jiacheng Liu, Mateja Jamnik, Timothée
  Lacroix, Yuhuai Wu, and Guillaume Lample. Draft, sketch, and prove: Guiding formal theorem
  provers with informal proofs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.12283, 2022a.
Albert Qiaochu Jiang, Wenda Li, Szymon Tworkowski, Konrad Czechowski, Tomasz Odrzygóźdź,
  Piotr Miłoś, Yuhuai Wu, and Mateja Jamnik. Thor: Wielding hammers to integrate language
  models and automated theorem provers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  8360–8373, 2022b.
Yuu Jinnai, David Abel, David Hershkowitz, Michael Littman, and George Konidaris. Finding options
  that minimize planning time. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3120–3129.
  PMLR, 2019a.
Yuu Jinnai, Jee Won Park, David Abel, and George Konidaris. Discovering options for exploration
  by minimizing cover time. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3130–3139.
  PMLR, 2019b.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish
  Sabharwal. Decomposed prompting: A modular approach for solving complex tasks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2210.02406, 2022.

Gerwin Klein, Kevin Elphinstone, Gernot Heiser, June Andronick, David Cock, Philip Derrin,
  Dhammika Elkaduwe, Kai Engelhardt, Rafal Kolanski, Michael Norrish, et al. sel4: Formal
  verification of an os kernel. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 22nd symposium on Operating
  systems principles, pp. 207–220, 2009.

Guillaume Lample, Timothee Lacroix, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Aurelien Rodriguez, Amaury Hayat,
 Thibaut Lavril, Gabriel Ebner, and Xavier Martinet. Hypertree proof search for neural theorem
  proving. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:26337–26349, 2022.

Aitor Lewkowycz, Anders Andreassen, David Dohan, Ethan Dyer, Henryk Michalewski, Vinay Ra-
  masesh, Ambrose Slone, Cem Anil, Imanol Schlag, Theo Gutman-Solo, et al. Solving quantitative
  reasoning problems with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14858, 2022.

Alexander C Li, Mihir Prabhudesai, Shivam Duggal, Ellis Brown, and Deepak Pathak. Your diffusion
  model is secretly a zero-shot classifier. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16203, 2023.

Yunfei Li, Tian Gao, Jiaqi Yang, Huazhe Xu, and Yi Wu. Phasic self-imitative reduction for sparse-
  reward goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 12765–12781. PMLR, 2022.

Jiachang Liu, Dinghan Shen, Yizhe Zhang, Bill Dolan, Lawrence Carin, and Weizhu Chen. What
   makes good in-context examples for gpt-3? arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.06804, 2021.

Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. Fantastically ordered
  prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2104.08786, 2021.

Maciej Mikuła, Szymon Antoniak, Szymon Tworkowski, Albert Qiaochu Jiang, Jin Peng Zhou,
 Christian Szegedy, Łukasz Kuciński, Piotr Miłoś, and Yuhuai Wu. Magnushammer: A transformer-
 based approach to premise selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04488, 2023.

Lorenzo Moro, Amarildo Likmeta, Enrico Prati, Marcello Restelli, et al. Goal-directed planning via
  hindsight experience replay. In International Conference on Learning Representations, pp. 1–16,
  2022.

OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2303.08774, March 2023. doi: 10.
 48550/arXiv.2303.08774.

OpenAI OpenAI, Matthias Plappert, Raul Sampedro, Tao Xu, Ilge Akkaya, Vineet Kosaraju, Peter
 Welinder, Ruben D’Sa, Arthur Petron, Henrique P d O Pinto, et al. Asymmetric self-play for
  automatic goal discovery in robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.04882, 2021.

Giambattista Parascandolo, Lars Buesing, Josh Merel, Leonard Hasenclever, John Aslanides, Jes-
  sica B Hamrick, Nicolas Heess, Alexander Neitz, and Theophane Weber. Divide-and-conquer
  monte carlo tree search for goal-directed planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.11410, 2020.

Lawrence C Paulson. Isabelle: A generic theorem prover. Springer, 1994.

Lawrence C Paulson. Isabelle: The next 700 theorem provers. arXiv preprint cs/9301106, 2000.

Lawrence C Paulsson and Jasmin C Blanchette. Three years of experience with sledgehammer,
  a practical link between automatic and interactive theorem provers. In Proceedings of the 8th
  International Workshop on the Implementation of Logics (IWIL-2010), Yogyakarta, Indonesia.
  EPiC, volume 2, 2012.

Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, Stephen Zhao, Bradly Stadie, and Jimmy Ba. Maximum entropy gain
   exploration for long horizon multi-goal reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 7750–7761. PMLR, 2020.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Stanislas Polu and Ilya Sutskever. Generative language modeling for automated theorem proving.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03393, 2020.
Stanislas Polu, Jesse Michael Han, Kunhao Zheng, Mantas Baksys, Igor Babuschkin, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Formal mathematics statement curriculum learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01344,
  2022.
Ohad Rubin, Jonathan Herzig, and Jonathan Berant. Learning to retrieve prompts for in-context
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08633, 2021.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
Taylor Sorensen, Joshua Robinson, Christopher Michael Rytting, Alexander Glenn Shaw, Kyle Jef-
  frey Rogers, Alexia Pauline Delorey, Mahmoud Khalil, Nancy Fulda, and David Wingate. An
  information-theoretic approach to prompt engineering without ground truth labels. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.11364, 2022.
Hongjin Su, Jungo Kasai, Chen Henry Wu, Weijia Shi, Tianlu Wang, Jiayi Xin, Rui Zhang, Mari
  Ostendorf, Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah A Smith, et al. Selective annotation makes language models
  better few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.01975, 2022.
Zhiqing Sun and Yiming Yang. Difusco: Graph-based diffusion solvers for combinatorial optimization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08224, 2023.
OpenAI Team. Chatgpt: Optimizing language models for dialogue, 2022.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Zheng Wen, Doina Precup, Morteza Ibrahimi, Andre Barreto, Benjamin Van Roy, and Satinder Singh.
  On efficiency in hierarchical reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:6708–6718, 2020.
Yuhuai Wu, Albert Qiaochu Jiang, Wenda Li, Markus Rabe, Charles Staats, Mateja Jamnik, and
  Christian Szegedy. Autoformalization with large language models. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:32353–32368, 2022a.
Zhiyong Wu, Yaoxiang Wang, Jiacheng Ye, and Lingpeng Kong. Self-adaptive in-context learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10375, 2022b.
Yuexiang Zhai, Christina Baek, Zhengyuan Zhou, Jiantao Jiao, and Yi Ma. Computational benefits of
  intermediate rewards for goal-reaching policy learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
  73:847–896, 2022.
Tianjun Zhang, Benjamin Eysenbach, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Sergey Levine, and Joseph E Gon-
  zalez. C-planning: An automatic curriculum for learning goal-reaching tasks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.12080, 2021.
Yunzhi Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Lerrel Pinto. Automatic curriculum learning through value
  disagreement. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:7648–7659, 2020.
Zihao Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and Sameer Singh. Calibrate before use: Improving
  few-shot performance of language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  12697–12706. PMLR, 2021.
Kunhao Zheng, Jesse Michael Han, and Stanislas Polu. Minif2f: a cross-system benchmark for
  formal olympiad-level mathematics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00110, 2021.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A        M ORE D ETAILS ABOUT S UBOGAL - BASED P ROOF
We provide a detailed description on the subgoal refinement method (see §2.1) through Algorithm 1.
                                                              (k)
In the k-th iteration, we construct demonstration examples {Ei }N  i=1 using improved subgoal-based
                         (k)                                                         (k−1)
proofs. To construct Ei , we first extract the statement and formal sketch from Ei         , then use
an LLM to generate subgoals. Afterward, a Refine module is called to confirm the validity of the
created subgoals and adjust any subgoals identified as infeasible.
A subgoal s∆ is deemed “reachable” from s1 if, for any si where 1 < i ≤ ∆, the ATP solvers can
bridge the gap between si−1 and si , under the assumption that all preceding subgoals sj (where
j < i) are true. This concept is crucial in cases where the proof structure necessitates the independent
verification of lemma a, b from s1 , followed by the substantiation of s2 utilizing both lemma a and
b. In such scenarios, as per our definition of reachability, the verification of (si−1 , si ) inherently
presumes the truth of all prior subgoals, denoted as all sj with j < i, which are encapsulated within
the context C in VERIF AND CORRECT. Specifically, the verification of (sa , sb ) presupposes s1
and sa , and the verification of (sb , s2 ) presupposes s1 , sa , and sb . If the ITP valid the steps, the
subgoal is deemed reachable; otherwise, it is considered unattainable.
In practice, the reachability of subgoals is tested using the VERIFY function in Algorithm 4, which
integrates both an Interactive Theorem Prover (ITP) and a Large Language Model (LLM). It amends
the formal sketch for a subgoal, assigns the LLM to complete the missing segments, and then validates
these with the ITP. If the ITP affirms the steps, the subgoal is considered reachable; otherwise, it is
deemed unattainable. In instances where the LLM consistently fails to generate provable subgoals
for the theorem prover, the VERIFY AND CORRECT function will revert to returning the original
subgoal pair (si , si+1 ).
We present an example to elucidate this process further (see Figures 4 to 12).5 As shown in
Figure 4, the LLM creates two subgoals for the theorem amc12a 2003 p4, leading to {s0 , s1 , s2 , s3 }.
Refining these subgoals involves calling verify and correct(s0 , s1 ) to improve the subgoal s1 . This
is depicted in Figures 5 to 12. We first use the LLM to reconstruct the subgoal related to the
first step, but this attempt fails (Figure 5). Then we break down the subgoal s1 into three more
detailed subgoals (Figure 6), each of which is then verified using the same LLM (Figures 7 to 9).
Due to the unsuccessful reconstruction of the second subgoal (Figure 8), it is further broken down
into two more specific subgoals (Figure 10). The last two subgoals pass the verification process
successfully (Figures 11 and 12). Finally, the output of verify and correct(s0 , s1 ), namely S 0→1 , is
defined as the set that includes the steps from 1 to 4 shown in Figure 12.

Algorithm 1 Iterative Subgoal Refinement
 Requires:            E XTRACT           extraction of statement and formal sketch
                      C OMPOSE           composing of a statement, formal sketch
                                         and subgoals to form a demonstration example
               I NITIALIZE SUBGOALS generate subgoals with a LLM
                                                 (0)    (0)       (0)
    function ITERATIVE REFINEMENT({E1 , E2 , ⋯, EN })
       for k in 1, 2, . . . , K do
           for i in 1, 2, . . . , N do
                                        (k−1)
               x, y ← E XTRACT(Ei             )
               s0 , s1 , ⋯, s∆ , s∆+1 ← I NITIALIZE SUBGOALS(x, y, E (k−1) )
               S 0→(∆+1) ← REFINE((s0 , s∆+1 , {s1 , s2 , ⋯, s∆ }))
                  (k)
               Ei ← C OMPOSE(x, y, S 0→(∆+1) )
           end for
       end for
                    (K)       (K)      (K)
       return {E1 , E2 , ⋯, EN }
    end function


    5
        To simplify the illustration, we leave out redundant demonstration examples.


                                                        13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Refinement Algorithm
 Requires:   V ERIFY AND CORRECT            verify the validness of the subgoals and correct them
                                            if necessary
  function REFINE(si , sj+1 , {si+1 , ⋯, sj })
     if i = j then return V ERIFY AND CORRECT(si , si+1 )
     end if
     S i→i+1 ← REFINE(si , si+1 , {})
     S i+1→j+1 ← REFINE(si+1 , sj+1 , {si+2 , ⋯, sj })
     return S i→i+1 ∪ S i+1→j+1
  end function


Algorithm 3 Verify and Correct
 Requires:        V ERIFY        verify if si+1 is reachable from si
                 C ORRECT correct the pair of subgoals if necessary
                      M          the maximum number of LLM calls, which is set to 10 in our experiments
                      C          context including formal sketch and current subgoal-based proof
  function V ERIFY AND CORRECT(si , si+1 , C)
      budget ← M
      Q←∅             ▷ A priority queue; lower pos values indicate proximity to the formal statement
      Q.PUSH((−C.pos(si+1 ), (si , si+1 ))) ▷ Push subgoals based on their distance to the formal
  statement
      valid subgoals ← []
      while Q ≠ ∅ and budget > 0 do
           , (s, s′ ) ← Q.POP()                        ▷ Retrieve subgoal closest to the formal statement
          budget ← budget − 1                                          ▷ LLM call consumed by Verify
          if V ERIFY(s, s′ , C) then
               valid subgoals.APPEND((s, s′ ))
          else
               budget ← budget − 1                                    ▷ LLM call consumed by Correct
               subgoals ← []
               subgoals, C ← C ORRECT(s, s′ , C) ▷ Fix subgoal s′ or generate granular subgoals,
  then update the context
               for (sj , sj+1 ) in subgoals do
                    Q.PUSH((−C.pos(sj+1 ), (sj , sj+1 )))
               end for
          end if
      end while
      if valid subgoals ≠ ∅ then
          return valid subgoals
      else
          return [(si , si+1 )]
      end if
  end function


Algorithm 4 Verify
 Requires:      ITP    Interactive Theorem Prover, i.e., Isabelle in our experiments
               LLM Large Language Model, i.e., GPT-3.5-turbo in our experiments
  function V ERIFY(si , si+1 , C)
     llm output ← LLM(C.verify prompt(si , si+1 , C))
     if ITP(llm output) = pass then
          return True
     else
          return False
     end if
  end function


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 5 Correct
 Requires:      LLM        Large Language Model, i.e., GPT-3.5-turbo in our experiments
              PARSE        Parse the output of LLM to extract subgoals
                           which correspond to the same segment of the formal sketch as si+1
              UPDATE Replace si+1 in C with newly generated subgoals
  function C ORRECT(si , si+1 , C)
     llm output ← LLM(C.correct prompt(si , si+1 , C))
     subgoals ← PARSE(llm output, si+1 , C)
     C ← UPDATE(llm output, si+1 , C)
     return subgoals, C
  end function


                                              15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Your task is to transform a formal proof, written in a style suitable for a theorem-proving system, into a more explanatory and narrative
       style, suitable for humans. The task involves adding explanatory comments that break down the formal proof into understandable steps,
       providing context and insight into the underlying logical structure and reasoning.

       Input:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
         fixes a b::real
         assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
         shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
         define x y where "x=ln a" and "y=ln b"
         have "y>0"
            using \<open>b>1\<close> unfolding y_def using ln_gt_zero sledgehammer
         moreover have "x \<ge>y"
            using \<open>a\<ge>b\<close> unfolding x_def y_def using assms(2) sledgehammer
         ultimately have "x>0"
            sledgehammer
         have "?L = (x-y)/x + (y-x)/y"
            apply (subst (1 2) ln_div)
            using assms unfolding x_def y_def sledgehammer
         also have "... = 2 - (y/x + x/y)"
            using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> sledgehammer
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed

       Output:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
         fixes a b::real
         assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
         shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
                                                                                                                                  ! "
         (* Step 1: With the definitions 𝑥 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑎, 𝑦 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑏, and the constraints 𝑦 > 0 and 𝑥 ≥ 𝑦, the equation simplifies into 2 − − . *)
                                                                                                                                       "   !
         define x y where "x=ln a" and "y=ln b"
         have "y>0"
            using \<open>b>1\<close> unfolding y_def using ln_gt_zero sledgehammer
         moreover have "x \<ge>y"
            using \<open>a\<ge>b\<close> unfolding x_def y_def using assms(2) sledgehammer
         ultimately have "x>0"
            sledgehammer
         have "?L = (x-y)/x + (y-x)/y"
            apply (subst (1 2) ln_div)
            using assms unfolding x_def y_def sledgehammer
         also have "... = 2 - (y/x + x/y)"
            using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> sledgehammer
                                             "     ! #                                                   !   "
         (* Step 2: Using the inequality (   !
                                               −   "
                                                     ) ≥ 0, it is shown that the simplified equation 2 − " − ! is less than or equal to 0. *)
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed



Figure 4: Illustration of the Initialize subgoals function as denoted in Algorithm 1. ChatGPT is
leveraged to generate the subgoal-based proof with respect to a formal sketch.


                                                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Your task is to complete the missing part of a Isabelle proof based on the corresponding description provided. The proof will consist of
       several steps, and you will need to use your knowledge of mathematical concepts and logical reasoning to fill in the gap.

       Input:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
         fixes a b::real
         assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
         shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
                                                                                                                                   !   "
         (* Step 1: With the definitions 𝑥 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑎, 𝑦 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑏, and the constraints 𝑦 > 0 and 𝑥 ≥ 𝑦, the equation simplifies into 2 − " − !. *)

                                             "     ! #                                                  ! "
         (* Step 2: Using the inequality (     −     ) ≥ 0, it is shown that the simplified equation 2 − − is less than or equal to 0. *)
                                             !     "                                                    " !
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed

       Output:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
         fixes a b::real
         assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
         shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
                                                                                                                                   !   "
         (* Step 1: With the definitions 𝑥 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑎, 𝑦 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑏, and the constraints 𝑦 > 0 and 𝑥 ≥ 𝑦, the equation simplifies into 2 − " − !. *)
         define x y where "x=ln a" and "y=ln b"
         have "x > 0" and "y > 0"
           using assms by (simp_all add: ln_gt_zero)
         have "?L = 2 - y / x - x / y"
           using assms x_def y_def by (simp add: add_divide_distrib diff_divide_distrib ln_div)
                                             "     ! #                                                   !   "
         (* Step 2: Using the inequality (   !
                                               −   "
                                                     ) ≥ 0, it is shown that the simplified equation 2 − " − ! is less than or equal to 0. *)
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed



Figure 5: An instance of the “verify” component within the Verify and correct function in Algo-
rithm 2. ChatGPT encounters a failure in reconstructing the proof associated with step 1, thereby
deeming it an unsuitable subgoal.


                                                                              17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       The Isabelle Proof Assistant was unable to verify Step 1. To resolve this, consider providing more detailed information or clarity to
       enhance the explanation for this particular step.

       Input:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
         fixes a b::real
         assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
         shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
                                                                                                                                   !   "
         (* Step 1: With the definitions 𝑥 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑎, 𝑦 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑏, and the constraints 𝑦 > 0 and 𝑥 ≥ 𝑦, the equation simplifies into 2 − " − !. *)
            define x y where "x=ln a" and "y=ln b"
            have "y>0"
               using \<open>b>1\<close> unfolding y_def using ln_gt_zero sledgehammer
            moreover have "x \<ge>y"
               using \<open>a\<ge>b\<close> unfolding x_def y_def using assms(2) sledgehammer
            ultimately have "x>0"
               sledgehammer
            have "?L = (x-y)/x + (y-x)/y"
               apply (subst (1 2) ln_div)
               using assms unfolding x_def y_def sledgehammer
            also have "... = 2 - (y/x + x/y)"
               using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> sledgehammer
                                                "     ! #                                                  ! "
            (* Step 2: Using the inequality (     −     ) ≥ 0, it is shown that the simplified equation 2 − − is less than or equal to 0. *)
                                                !     "                                                    " !
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed

       Output:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
         fixes a b::real
         assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
         shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
         (* Step 1: Define 𝑥 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑎 and 𝑦 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑏. *)
         define x y where "x=ln a" and "y=ln b"
         (* Step 2: With the conditions set as 𝑦 > 0 and 𝑥 ≥ 𝑦, we transition the equation to be framed in terms of 𝑥 and 𝑦, thereby yielding
       "$!   !$"
           +     . *)
        "        !
            have "y>0"
               using \<open>b>1\<close> unfolding y_def using ln_gt_zero sledgehammer
            moreover have "x \<ge>y"
               using \<open>a\<ge>b\<close> unfolding x_def y_def using assms(2) sledgehammer
            ultimately have "x>0"
               sledgehammer
            have "?L = (x-y)/x + (y-x)/y"
               apply (subst (1 2) ln_div)
               using assms unfolding x_def y_def sledgehammer
                                                      !   "
            (* Step 3: Simplify the expression to 2 − " − !. *)
            also have "... = 2 - (y/x + x/y)"
               using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> sledgehammer
                                                "     ! #                                                  ! "
            (* Step 4: Using the inequality (     −     ) ≥ 0, it is shown that the simplified equation 2 − − is less than or equal to 0. *)
                                                !     "                                                    " !
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed



Figure 6: An instance of the “correct” component within the Verify and correct function in Algo-
rithm 2. ChatGPT works on the decomposition of the original subgoal (i.e., step 1 in the input) into a
series of more granular subgoals (i.e., step 1 - 3 in the output).



                                                                               18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Your task is to complete the missing part of a Isabelle proof based on the corresponding description provided. The proof will consist of
       several steps, and you will need to use your knowledge of mathematical concepts and logical reasoning to fill in the gap.

       Input:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
         fixes a b::real
         assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
         shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
         (* Step 1: Define 𝑥 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑎 and 𝑦 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑏. *)

            (* Step 2: With the conditions set as 𝑦 > 0 and 𝑥 ≥ 𝑦, we transition the equation to be framed in terms of 𝑥 and 𝑦, thereby yielding
       !"#   #"!
           +     . *)
        !     #
            have "y>0"
               using \<open>b>1\<close> unfolding y_def using ln_gt_zero sledgehammer
            moreover have "x \<ge>y"
               using \<open>a\<ge>b\<close> unfolding x_def y_def using assms(2) sledgehammer
            ultimately have "x>0"
               sledgehammer
            have "?L = (x-y)/x + (y-x)/y"
               apply (subst (1 2) ln_div)
               using assms unfolding x_def y_def sledgehammer
                                                      #   !
            (* Step 3: Simplify the expression to 2 − ! − #. *)
            also have "... = 2 - (y/x + x/y)"
               using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> sledgehammer
                                                !     # $                                                  # !
            (* Step 4: Using the inequality (     −     ) ≥ 0, it is shown that the simplified equation 2 − − is less than or equal to 0. *)
                                                #     !                                                    ! #
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed


       Output:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
         fixes a b::real
         assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
         shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
         (* Step 1: Define 𝑥 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑎 and 𝑦 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑏. *)
         define x y where "x=ln a" and "y=ln b"
         (* Step 2: With the conditions set as 𝑦 > 0 and 𝑥 ≥ 𝑦, we transition the equation to be framed in terms of 𝑥 and 𝑦, thereby yielding
       !"#   #"!
           +     . *)
        !        #
            have "y>0"
               using \<open>b>1\<close> unfolding y_def using ln_gt_zero sledgehammer
            moreover have "x \<ge>y"
               using \<open>a\<ge>b\<close> unfolding x_def y_def using assms(2) sledgehammer
            ultimately have "x>0"
               sledgehammer
            have "?L = (x-y)/x + (y-x)/y"
               apply (subst (1 2) ln_div)
               using assms unfolding x_def y_def sledgehammer
                                                     #  !
            (* Step 3: Simplify the expression to 2 − − . *)
                                                      !   #
            also have "... = 2 - (y/x + x/y)"
               using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> sledgehammer
                                                !     # $                                                  # !
            (* Step 4: Using the inequality (     −     ) ≥ 0, it is shown that the simplified equation 2 − − is less than or equal to 0. *)
                                                #     !                                                    ! #
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed



Figure 7: An instance of the “verify” component within the Verify and correct function in Algo-
rithm 2. ChatGPT successfully reconstructs the proof associated with step 1, thus validating it as a
viable subgoal.


                                                                               19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Your task is to complete the missing part of a Isabelle proof based on the corresponding description provided. The proof will consist of
       several steps, and you will need to use your knowledge of mathematical concepts and logical reasoning to fill in the gap.

       Input:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
         fixes a b::real
         assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
         shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
         (* Step 1: Define 𝑥 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑎 and 𝑦 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑏. *)
         define x y where "x=ln a" and "y=ln b"
         (* Step 2: With the conditions set as 𝑦 > 0 and 𝑥 ≥ 𝑦, we transition the equation to be framed in terms of 𝑥 and 𝑦, thereby yielding
       !"#   #"!
           +     . *)
        !        #

                                                      #   !
            (* Step 3: Simplify the expression to 2 − − . *)
                                                      !   #
            also have "... = 2 - (y/x + x/y)"
               using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> sledgehammer
                                                !     # $                                                  # !
            (* Step 4: Using the inequality (     −     ) ≥ 0, it is shown that the simplified equation 2 − − is less than or equal to 0. *)
                                                #     !                                                    ! #
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed


       Output:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
          fixes a b::real
          assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
          shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
          (* Step 1: Define 𝑥 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑎 and 𝑦 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑏. *)
          define x y where "x=ln a" and "y=ln b"
          (* Step 2: With the conditions set as 𝑦 > 0 and 𝑥 ≥ 𝑦, we transition the equation to be framed in terms of 𝑥 and 𝑦, thereby yielding
       !"#    #"!
        !
            + # . *)
            have "y>0"
               using \<open>b>1\<close> unfolding y_def using ln_gt_zero sledgehammer
            moreover have "x \<ge> y"
               using \<open>b\<le>a\<close> unfolding x_def y_def using ln_mono sledgehammer
            hence "(x - y)/x + (y - x)/y = 2 - y/x - x/y"
               using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> by (simp add: diff_divide_distrib)
                                                        # !
            (* Step 3: Simplify the expression to 2 − ! − #. *)
            also have "... = 2 - (y/x + x/y)"
               using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> sledgehammer
                                                !     # $                                                  # !
            (* Step 4: Using the inequality (     −     ) ≥ 0, it is shown that the simplified equation 2 − − is less than or equal to 0. *)
                                                #     !                                                    ! #
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed



Figure 8: An instance of the “verify” component within the Verify and correct function in Algo-
rithm 2. ChatGPT encounters a failure in reconstructing the proof associated with step 2, thereby
deeming it an unsuitable subgoal.


                                                                                20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Your task is to complete the missing part of a Isabelle proof based on the corresponding description provided. The proof will consist of
       several steps, and you will need to use your knowledge of mathematical concepts and logical reasoning to fill in the gap.

       Input:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
         fixes a b::real
         assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
         shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
         (* Step 1: Define 𝑥 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑎 and 𝑦 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑏. *)
         define x y where "x=ln a" and "y=ln b"
         (* Step 2: With the conditions set as 𝑦 > 0 and 𝑥 ≥ 𝑦, we transition the equation to be framed in terms of 𝑥 and 𝑦, thereby yielding
       !"#   #"!
           +     . *)
        !        #
            have "y>0"
               using \<open>b>1\<close> unfolding y_def using ln_gt_zero sledgehammer
            moreover have "x \<ge>y"
               using \<open>a\<ge>b\<close> unfolding x_def y_def using assms(2) sledgehammer
            ultimately have "x>0"
               sledgehammer
            have "?L = (x-y)/x + (y-x)/y"
               apply (subst (1 2) ln_div)
               using assms unfolding x_def y_def sledgehammer
                                                      #   !
            (* Step 3: Simplify the expression to 2 − ! − #. *)

                                                !     # $                                                  # !
            (* Step 4: Using the inequality (     −     ) ≥ 0, it is shown that the simplified equation 2 − − is less than or equal to 0. *)
                                                #     !                                                    ! #
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed


       Output:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
         fixes a b::real
         assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
         shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
         (* Step 1: Define 𝑥 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑎 and 𝑦 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑏. *)
         define x y where "x=ln a" and "y=ln b"
         (* Step 2: With the conditions set as 𝑦 > 0 and 𝑥 ≥ 𝑦, we transition the equation to be framed in terms of 𝑥 and 𝑦, thereby yielding
       !"#   #"!
           +     . *)
        !        #
            have "y>0"
               using \<open>b>1\<close> unfolding y_def using ln_gt_zero sledgehammer
            moreover have "x \<ge>y"
               using \<open>a\<ge>b\<close> unfolding x_def y_def using assms(2) sledgehammer
            ultimately have "x>0"
               sledgehammer
            have "?L = (x-y)/x + (y-x)/y"
               apply (subst (1 2) ln_div)
               using assms unfolding x_def y_def sledgehammer
                                                      #   !
            (* Step 3: Simplify the expression to 2 − ! − #. *)
            also have "... = 2 - (y/x + x/y)"
               using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> sledgehammer
                                                !     # $                                                  # !
            (* Step 4: Using the inequality (     −     ) ≥ 0, it is shown that the simplified equation 2 − − is less than or equal to 0. *)
                                                #     !                                                    ! #
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed



Figure 9: An instance of the “verify” component within the Verify and correct function in Algo-
rithm 2. ChatGPT successfully reconstructs the proof associated with step 3, thus validating it as a
viable subgoal.


                                                                                21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       The Isabelle Proof Assistant was unable to verify Step 2. To resolve this, consider providing more detailed information or clarity to
       enhance the explanation for this particular step.

       Input:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
          fixes a b::real
          assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
          shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
          (* Step 1: Define 𝑥 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑎 and 𝑦 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑏. *)
          define x y where "x=ln a" and "y=ln b"
          (* Step 2: With the conditions set as 𝑦 > 0 and 𝑥 ≥ 𝑦, we transition the equation to be framed in terms of 𝑥 and 𝑦, thereby yielding
       !"#    #"!
        !
            + # . *)
         have "y>0"
            using \<open>b>1\<close> unfolding y_def using ln_gt_zero sledgehammer
         moreover have "x \<ge>y"
            using \<open>a\<ge>b\<close> unfolding x_def y_def using assms(2) sledgehammer
         ultimately have "x>0"
            sledgehammer
         have "?L = (x-y)/x + (y-x)/y"
            apply (subst (1 2) ln_div)
            using assms unfolding x_def y_def sledgehammer
                                                  #  !
         (* Step 3: Simplify the expression to 2 − − . *)
                                                   !   #
         also have "... = 2 - (y/x + x/y)"
            using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> sledgehammer
                                             !     # $                                                  # !
         (* Step 4: Using the inequality (     −     ) ≥ 0, it is shown that the simplified equation 2 − − is less than or equal to 0. *)
                                             #     !                                                    ! #
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed

       Output:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
         fixes a b::real
         assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
         shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
         (* Step 1: Define 𝑥 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑎 and 𝑦 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑏. *)
         define x y where "x=ln a" and "y=ln b"
         (* Step 2: Show that 𝑦 > 0 and 𝑥 ≥ 𝑦. *)
         have "y>0"
            using \<open>b>1\<close> unfolding y_def using ln_gt_zero sledgehammer
         moreover have "x \<ge>y"
            using \<open>a\<ge>b\<close> unfolding x_def y_def using assms(2) sledgehammer
         ultimately have "x>0"
            sledgehammer
                                                                               !"# #"!
         (* Step 3: Use the definitions of 𝑥 and 𝑦 to rewrite the expression as ! + # . *)
         have "?L = (x-y)/x + (y-x)/y"
            apply (subst (1 2) ln_div)
            using assms unfolding x_def y_def sledgehammer
                                                   #   !
         (* Step 4: Simplify the expression to 2 − ! − #. *)
         also have "... = 2 - (y/x + x/y)"
            using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> sledgehammer
                                             !     # $                                                  # !
         (* Step 5: Using the inequality (     −     ) ≥ 0, it is shown that the simplified equation 2 − − is less than or equal to 0. *)
                                             #     !                                                    ! #
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed



Figure 10: An instance of the “correct” component within the Verify and correct function in
Algorithm 2. ChatGPT works on the decomposition of the original subgoal (specifically, step 2 in the
input) into a series of more granular subgoals (specifically, step 2 - 3 in the output).


                                                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Your task is to complete the missing part of a Isabelle proof based on the corresponding description provided. The proof will consist of
       several steps, and you will need to use your knowledge of mathematical concepts and logical reasoning to fill in the gap.

       Input:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
         fixes a b::real
         assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
         shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
         (* Step 1: Define 𝑥 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑎 and 𝑦 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑏. *)
         define x y where "x=ln a" and "y=ln b"
         (* Step 2: Show that 𝑦 > 0 and 𝑥 ≥ 𝑦. *)
                                                                                  !"#  #"!
         (* Step 3: Use the definitions of 𝑥 and 𝑦 to rewrite the expression as    !
                                                                                      + # . *)
         have "?L = (x-y)/x + (y-x)/y"
            apply (subst (1 2) ln_div)
            using assms unfolding x_def y_def sledgehammer
                                                  #  !
         (* Step 4: Simplify the expression to 2 − − . *)
                                                     !   #
         also have "... = 2 - (y/x + x/y)"
            using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> sledgehammer
                                             !      # $                                                  # !
         (* Step 5: Using the inequality (     −      ) ≥ 0, it is shown that the simplified equation 2 − − is less than or equal to 0. *)
                                             #      !                                                    ! #
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed


       Output:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
         fixes a b::real
         assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
         shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
         (* Step 1: Define 𝑥 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑎 and 𝑦 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑏. *)
         define x y where "x=ln a" and "y=ln b"
         (* Step 2: Show that 𝑦 > 0 and 𝑥 ≥ 𝑦. *)
         have "y>0"
            using \<open>b>1\<close> unfolding y_def using ln_gt_zero sledgehammer
         moreover have "x \<ge>y"
            using \<open>a\<ge>b\<close> unfolding x_def y_def using assms(2) sledgehammer
         ultimately have "x>0"
            sledgehammer
                                                                                !"#   #"!
         (* Step 3: Use the definitions of 𝑥 and 𝑦 to rewrite the expression as     +     . *)
                                                                                   !      #
         have "?L = (x-y)/x + (y-x)/y"
            apply (subst (1 2) ln_div)
            using assms unfolding x_def y_def sledgehammer
                                                  #  !
         (* Step 4: Simplify the expression to 2 − − . *)
                                                     !   #
         also have "... = 2 - (y/x + x/y)"
            using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> sledgehammer
                                             !      # $                                                   #   !
         (* Step 5: Using the inequality (   #
                                               −    !
                                                      ) ≥ 0, it is shown that the simplified equation 2 − ! − # is less than or equal to 0. *)
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed



Figure 11: An instance of the “verify” component within the Verify and correct function in Algo-
rithm 2. ChatGPT successfully reconstructs the proof associated with step 2, thus validating it as a
viable subgoal.


                                                                               23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Your task is to complete the missing part of a Isabelle proof based on the corresponding description provided. The proof will consist of
       several steps, and you will need to use your knowledge of mathematical concepts and logical reasoning to fill in the gap.

       Input:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
         fixes a b::real
         assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
         shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
         (* Step 1: Define 𝑥 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑎 and 𝑦 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑏. *)
         define x y where "x=ln a" and "y=ln b"
         (* Step 2: Show that 𝑦 > 0 and 𝑥 ≥ 𝑦. *)
         have "y>0"
            using \<open>b>1\<close> unfolding y_def using ln_gt_zero sledgehammer
         moreover have "x \<ge>y"
            using \<open>a\<ge>b\<close> unfolding x_def y_def using assms(2) sledgehammer
         ultimately have "x>0"
            sledgehammer
                                                                               !"# #"!
         (* Step 3: Use the definitions of 𝑥 and 𝑦 to rewrite the expression as ! + # . *)

                                                   #    !
         (* Step 4: Simplify the expression to 2 − ! − #. *)
         also have "... = 2 - (y/x + x/y)"
            using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> sledgehammer
                                             !     # $                                                  # !
         (* Step 5: Using the inequality (     −     ) ≥ 0, it is shown that the simplified equation 2 − − is less than or equal to 0. *)
                                             #     !                                                    ! #
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed


       Output:
       theorem amc12a_2003_p24:
         fixes a b::real
         assumes "b \<le>a" and "1<b"
         shows "ln (a/b) / ln a + ln (b/a) / ln b \<le>0" (is "?L \<le> _")
       proof –
         (* Step 1: Define 𝑥 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑎 and 𝑦 = 𝑙𝑛 𝑏. *)
         define x y where "x=ln a" and "y=ln b"
         (* Step 2: Show that 𝑦 > 0 and 𝑥 ≥ 𝑦. *)
         have "y>0"
            using \<open>b>1\<close> unfolding y_def using ln_gt_zero sledgehammer
         moreover have "x \<ge>y"
            using \<open>a\<ge>b\<close> unfolding x_def y_def using assms(2) sledgehammer
         ultimately have "x>0"
            sledgehammer
                                                                               !"# #"!
         (* Step 3: Use the definitions of 𝑥 and 𝑦 to rewrite the expression as ! + # . *)
         have "?L = (x-y)/x + (y-x)/y"
            apply (subst (1 2) ln_div)
            using assms unfolding x_def y_def sledgehammer
                                                   #   !
         (* Step 4: Simplify the expression to 2 − ! − #. *)
         also have "... = 2 - (y/x + x/y)"
            using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> sledgehammer
                                             !     # $                                                  # !
         (* Step 5: Using the inequality (     −     ) ≥ 0, it is shown that the simplified equation 2 − − is less than or equal to 0. *)
                                             #     !                                                    ! #
         also have "... \<le> 0"
         proof –
            have "sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1"
               sledgehammer
            have "0\<le> (sqrt (x/y) - sqrt (y/x))^2"
               sledgehammer
            also have "... = x / y - 2 + y / x"
               unfolding power2_eq_square using \<open>x>0\<close> \<open>y>0\<close> \<open>sqrt (x/y) * sqrt (y/x) = 1\<close>
               sledgehammer
            finally show ?thesis
               sledgehammer
         qed
         finally show ?thesis.
       qed



Figure 12: An instance of the “verify” component within the Verify and correct function in Algo-
rithm 2. ChatGPT successfully reconstructs the proof associated with step 3, thus validating it as a
viable subgoal.


                                                                             24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B       M ORE D ETAILS ABOUT D EMONSTRATION R EORGANIZATION
B.1      PARAMETERIZATION

In alignment with Austin et al. (2021), we adopt discrete diffusion models to model binary random
variables. Explicitly, the forward process is given by:
                               q(ψ t ∣ψ t−1 ) = Cat (ψ t ; p = δ(ψ t−1 )Qt ) ,                          (5)
                                                              (1 − βt )      βt
where δ(ψ) symbolizes the one-hot encoding of ψ, Qt = [                            ] denotes the transition
                                                                 βt       (1 − βt )
matrix, βt corresponds to the corruption ratio and satisfies that ∏t=1 (1 − βt ) ≈ 0. The marginal at
                                                                        T

step t and the posterior at step t − 1 can be articulated as:
                          q(ψ t ∣ψ 0 ) = Cat (ψ t ; p = δ(ψ 0 )Qt ) ,
                                                              δ(ψ t )Q⊺t ⊙ δ(ψ 0 )Qt−1                  (6)
                    q(ψ t−1 ∣ψ t , ψ 0 ) = Cat (ψ t−1 ; p =                            ),
                                                                 δ(ψ 0 )Qt δ(ψ t )⊺
where Qt = Q1 Q2 . . . Qt . In consonance with Austin et al. (2021), we employ a denoising neural
network which is tasked with the prediction of p(ψ0 ∣ψt ), thereby enabling the parameterization of
the reverse process:
                         pθ (ψ t−1 ∣ψ t , x) ∝ ∑ q(ψ t−1 ∣ψ t , ψ 0 )pθ (ψ 0 ∣ψ t , x).                 (7)
                                                ψ


B.2      I MPLEMENTATION OF GNN

Our work employs a modified version of GNN, a model that exhibits anisotropic characteristics
and is enhanced by edge gating methodologies (Bresson & Laurent, 2018; Sun & Yang, 2023). We
define t as sinusoidal representations (Vaswani et al., 2017) associated with the denoising timestep t.
Consider hℓi and eℓij as the features of node i and edge ij at a specific layer ℓ, respectively. During
the transition between layers, these features disseminate via an anisotropic message propagation
paradigm as follows:
                  êℓ+1
                    ij = P eij + Q hi + R hj ,
                          ℓ ℓ     ℓ ℓ    ℓ ℓ

                                         ℓ+1
                   ij = eij + MLPe (BN(êij )) + MLPt (t),
                  eℓ+1   ℓ
                                                                                                        (8)
                  hiℓ+1 = hℓi + ReLU(BN(U ℓ hℓi + SUMj∈Ni (σ(êℓ+1
                                                               ij ) ⊙ V hj ))),
                                                                       ℓ ℓ



where P ℓ , Qℓ , Rℓ , U ℓ , V ℓ ∈ Rd×d denote layer-specific learnable parameters with d denoting the
dimension of hidden state. BN signifies the Batch Normalization operation (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015),
while SUM represents sum pooling. ⊙ designates the Hadamard product, and Ni encapsulates the set
of neighboring nodes of node i. Lastly, a two-layer multi-layer perceptron is denoted by MLP(⋅).
                                                                  (K)
In our experiments, we define h0i = W [Ada(x); Ada(Ei )] where W ∈ Rd×3072 is a learnable
                            (K)
parameter. Ada(x), Ada(Ei ) ∈ R1536×1 denote the ada embeddings 6 of the statement x and the
i-th demonstration example, respectively. The operator [⋅; ⋅] denotes the concatenation operation
between two vectors. e0ij are initialized as sinusoidal features of the edges.

B.3      S AMPLING P ROCESS

A straightforward strategy for creating a demonstration organization is by directly sampling ψ ∼
pθ (ψ 0 ∣x). However, this strategy introduces two key challenges: (1) A cycle in ψ might be
present, indicating that at least one demonstration example is selected multiple times; (2) ψ could
include multiple separate sub-graphs, making it difficult to define the relative position between
two demonstration examples from two different sub-graphs. Taking a cue from treating diffusion
models as discriminative approaches (Li et al., 2023), we start by randomly creating 200 potential
    6
        https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/embeddings


                                                      25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


solutions. Using the diffusion model’s ability to provide conditional density estimates, we rate these
200 potential solutions and select the one with the highest score to build the final demonstration
organization. We then reconstruct the sequence of demonstration examples from ψ, adding examples
one by one into the LLM context until we hit the length limit of the LLM.

B.4   H YPERPARAMETERS AND H ARDWARE S ETUP

In the course of our experiment, we employ a 3-layer Anisotropic Graph Neural Network with a
hidden state dimensionality set to 256. We sweep the learning rate from [1e − 4, 2e − 4, 5e − 4, 7e − 4]
and sweep batch size from [4, 8, 16, 32]. The processes of training and inference for the diffusion
models are conducted on a NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU.


C     M ORE I N - DEPTH A NALYSIS

C.1   I MPACT OF P ROMPT W ORDING

To systematically investigate the influence of varying prompt wordings on the effectiveness of our
proposed method, we further conduct an experiment on the miniF2F-test set. The specific prompt is
as follows:

Assume the role of a mathematician proficient in Isabelle.
When provided with both informal and formal statements of a problem,
your responsibility is to formulate a formal proof that Isabelle
can verify.


                                  Prompt Type             pass@100
                                  Original (Proposed)       45.5%
                                  Alternative Prompt        41.0%

Table 3: Comparison of pass rates with different prompt wordings over 100 autoformalization
attempts on the miniF2F-test set.

As can be observed in Table 3, the original prompt yielded slightly better results compared to the
alternative prompt. This suggests that the phrasing of the prompt can have an influence on the
performance, and our original choice was more effective in achieving higher pass rates.

C.2   S ENSITIVITY TO E XAMPLE O RDERING

To assess the robustness and adaptability of our model, we explored the sensitivity of the model to
the ordering of examples. Specifically, we maintained the examples derived from our diffusion model
but altered their sequence. The experiment involves randomizing the sequence of examples after they
were organized using the diffusion model. We then evaluated the model’s ability to solve problems
under this modified setup. The evaluation was conducted over 20 autoformalization attempts on the
miniF2F-test set.

                              Method             # of Problems Solved
                              Ours (Ordered)               94
                              Shuffled Order               39

                                Table 4: Impact of example ordering.

The results in Table 4 demonstrate that the ordering of examples significantly impacts the model’s
performance. It is evident that the structured order provided by the diffusion model is important, as
disrupting this order resulted in a substantial decline in the number of problems solved.


                                                  26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.3   I MPACT OF D EMONSTRATION S ELECTION AND P RESENTATION O RDER

We conducted experiments comparing our method, which meticulously selects and orders demonstra-
tions, to an alternative approach where the demonstrations are shuffled.

                                 Method     # of Problems Solved
                                 Ours                   94
                                 Shuffled               39

                  Table 5: Comparison of our method vs. shuffled demonstrations

The results in Table 5 underscore the significance of both the selection and the order in which
demonstrations are presented. It is evident that a methodical approach to selecting and ordering
demonstrations yields superior results compared to a scenario where demonstrations are presented in
a shuffled manner.

C.4   I MPACT OF I NCREASING D EMONSTRATIONS

We conduct experiments to elucidate the impact of varying the number of demonstrations on the
performance of our model.

                      Number of Demonstrations          # of Problems Solved
                      Ours                                        94
                      1 example                                   16
                      2 examples                                  29
                      3 examples                                  34

             Table 6: Performance analysis with varying numbers of demonstrations.

The empirical results in Table 6 underscore the collective significance of all demonstrations in
enhancing the model’s performance. It is evident that the incorporation of multiple demonstrations is
pivotal, substantiating the efficacy of our diffusion-based model.

C.5   I MPACT OF R ANDOMLY G ENERATED P ROBLEM NAMES

The incorporation of original problem names could potentially facilitate models like ChatGPT in
associating them to readily available solutions online. This scenario posits a risk of primarily
assessing the model’s capability to translate human proof sketches to subgoals and formal proofs,
rather than its proficiency in innovating novel subgoals. To mitigate this concern and uphold the
rigor of our evaluation, we initiated experiments substituting original problem names with random
identifiers and analyzed the ensuing impact on performance. The evaluation was conducted over 20
autoformalization attempts on the miniF2F-test set.

                                 Method      Original        Random
                                 Ours         38.5%          39.8%
                                 Top-K        35.7%          34.8%

Table 7: Performance comparison with original and random problem names on the miniF2F-test set.

The results in Table 7 indicate that our method maintains robust performance, even manifesting
a marginal enhancement when random names are deployed. This steadfastness in performance,
regardless of the naming conventions adopted, accentuates the robustness and adaptability of our
approach across diverse experimental conditions.


                                                 27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.6   I MPACT OF P ROOF S KETCH Q UALITY

To comprehensively assess the robustness of our method in relation to the quality of informal proof
sketches, we conducted an additional experiment that involved the generation of informal proofs
using gpt-3.5-turbo-0613 for problems from the miniF2F-valid dataset. Utilizing the methodology
outlined in §2.1, we constructed subgoal-based proofs for these informal proofs. For this purpose,
a set of 61 problems was carefully chosen to serve as demonstration samples, aligning with the
experimental setup specified in §3.4. The results of this experiment are shown in Table 8.

                 Method                                   valid                  test
                 Ours (DSP Informal Proofs)            48.0% (±0.4)       45.5% (±0.6)
                 Ours (GPT-3.5 Informal Proofs)        47.7% (±0.5)       45.0% (±0.7)

                Table 8: Performance comparison with varying proof sketch quality.

The results from Table 8 demonstrate that our method maintains a notable degree of robustness
against variations in the quality of informal proof sketches. This robustness indicates the adaptability
and dependability of our approach when confronted with different levels of proof sketch quality,
affirming its practical applicability in diverse scenarios.

C.7   E VALUATION OF O PTIMAL O RGANIZATION S EARCH

To further evaluate the efficiency of our method, we conducted experiments involving 200 randomized
organization sampling attempts for each statement within the miniF2F-valid and miniF2F-test datasets.
These efforts aimed to determine the potential of finding an optimal organization for each statement.
The results of this extensive search are displayed in Table 9.

                          Method                               valid      test
                          Ours                              48.0%        45.5%
                          Optimal Organization Search       48.4%        44.3%

                Table 9: Performance comparison with optimal organization search.

These results corroborate previous observations (Jiang et al., 2022a) that the advantages of extensive
organization searches tend to level off beyond a certain number of attempts (in this case, 100). These
results highlight the inherent challenges of the miniF2F dataset and emphasize the effectiveness of
our diffusion model.

C.8   A NALYSIS OF S LEDGEHAMMER U SAGE

In order to provide a comprehensive understanding of how our method and DSP (Jiang et al., 2022a)
utilize the Sledgehammer tool, we have conducted a detailed analysis. This analysis was carried out
on a machine with 64 CPU cores, focusing on the average number of Sledgehammer calls and their
execution times for each solved statement. The results are shown in the Table 10, which illustrates
the average number of Sledgehammer calls and their corresponding durations (in seconds) for each
method.

                          Method          Calls        Duration (seconds)
                                      valid    test    valid           test
                          DSP          2.33    2.39     3.29           2.98
                          Ours         2.88    3.22     4.16           4.94

                  Table 10: Average number of Sledgehammer calls and durations.

The results in Table 10 indicate that our method exhibits a slight increase in both the frequency of
Sledgehammer calls and their execution times in comparison with DSP. Specifically, this increase is


                                                  28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


primarily observed in statements that our method can solve but DSP cannot. For these statements, the
number of Sledgehammer calls on the miniF2F-valid and miniF2F-test are 3.21 and 5.38, respectively.
This suggests that the need for Sledgehammer becomes more important as the problem complexity
increases.

D       D ISCUSSIONS ABOUT C ORRELATION B ETWEEN I NPUT S TATEMENTS AND
        O RGANIZATION
We further investigate the relationship between input statements and the demonstration organization
generated by diffusion models within the miniF2F dataset. Our aim was to determine whether the
diffusion model tends to generate a generic organization broadly applicable across various statements
or if it tailors unique organizations to individual statements.
The empirical results suggest that there is not a “one-size-fits-all” optimal demonstration organization.
Specifically, even the most adaptable organization we identified could successfully prove only 3
distinct statements. Furthermore, we only observed 4 instances of such adaptable organizations
on the miniF2F-test. This highlights the tailored nature of each organization to its corresponding
statement. The limited scope of even the most adaptable organization indicates the challenge in
identifying the optimal demonstration organization for each unique statement. This complexity
further emphasizes the effectiveness of our model in efficiently searching for and determining the
most suitable demonstration organization for individual statements.

E       D ISCUSSIONS ABOUT THE T RAIN /T EST DATA L EAKAGE
The potential for train/test leakage, stemming from the use of original problem names from the
miniF2F dataset, was brought to our attention. In response, we undertook a thorough analysis. Our
findings indicated that about 32.0% of problems could be identifiable by ChatGPT based on their
names, and approximately 40% of informal statements were susceptible to leakage. To further
elucidate this, a comprehensive manual search was conducted on the test set’s informal statements
and their corresponding proofs. This search revealed that around 40% had been available online
before September 1, 2021, with platforms like Mathway and Mathematics Stack Exchange being
significant contributors. Despite a number of miniF2F problems lacking Isabelle solutions, we revised
the potentially leaked statements. Experiments with randomized identifiers further confirmed that our
method’s performance is not contingent on data leakage (see Appendix C.5).

F       A DDITIONAL E XAMPLES
We provide additional cases in Figure 13 to 18 to demonstrate the efficacy of our method.7
Figures 13 to 15 display examples where our method effectively guides the proof process. For instance,
in Figure 13, the method leverages demonstrations involving division and modulus operations,
successfully navigating towards a clear proof path. Similarly, in Figure 14, it utilizes demonstrations
based on squaring and square root operations, accurately predicting potential subgoals. Figure 15
continues this trend, demonstrating our method’s consistent ability to discern viable subgoals, thus
facilitating the construction of proofs.
Additionally, Figures 16 to 18 display the same statements as Figures 13 to 15 but with the demon-
stration examples reordered. This reorganization illustrates the impact of demonstration order on
the generation of proofs, revealing how changes in the order can lead to unexpected errors. The
comparison between these two groups highlights the significance of demonstration organization in
influencing final performance.


    7
     In Figures 13 to 18, identical statements are guided by a consistent set of demonstration examples, but in a
different order. Some less relevant demonstration examples have been omitted due to space constraints.


                                                       29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       As a mathematician familiar with Isabelle, your task is to provide a formal proof in response to a given problem statement.
       Your proof should be structured and clearly written, meeting the following criteria:
       - It can be verified by Isabelle.
       - Each step of the proof should be explained in detail using comments enclosed in "(*" and "*)".
       - The explanation for each step should be clear and concise, avoiding any unnecessary or apologetic language.
       Please ensure that your proof is well-organized and easy to follow, with each step building upon the previous one.


       Problem:
       Let 𝑛 be an integer and 𝑝 be a prime number. Show that 𝑝 divides 𝑛 if and only if 𝑛! is congruent to 0 modulo 𝑝.

       Proof:
       theorem numbertheory_prmdvsneqnsqmodpeq0:
          fixes n :: int
             and p :: nat
          assumes "prime p"
          shows "p dvd n \<longleftrightarrow> (n^2) mod p = 0"
          (* Step 1: Assume that 𝑝 divides 𝑛. Show that 𝑛! is congruent to 0 modulo 𝑝.
             Step 2: Assume that 𝑛! is congruent to 0 modulo 𝑝. Show that 𝑝 divides 𝑛. *)
       proof -
          (* Step 1: Assume that 𝑝 divides 𝑛. Show that 𝑛! is congruent to 0 modulo 𝑝.*)
          assume "p dvd n"
          then show "(n^2) mod p = 0" sledgehammer
          (* Step 2: Assume that 𝑛! is congruent to 0 modulo 𝑝. Show that 𝑝 divides 𝑛. *)
          next assume "(n^2) mod p = 0"
          then show "p dvd n" sledgehammer
       qed

       Problem:
       Prove that for any natural number 𝑛, 3 divides 𝑛" + 2𝑛.

       Proof:
       theorem induction_divisibility_3divnto3m2n:
          fixes n::nat
          shows "3 dvd n^3 + 2 * n"
          (* Step 1: Prove the base case 𝑛 = 0.
             Step 2: Assume the statement is true for some 𝑛 and prove it for 𝑛 + 1.
             Step 3: Expand (𝑛 + 1)" +2(𝑛 + 1) and simplify.
             Step 4: Use the assumption that 3 divides 𝑛" + 2𝑛 to show that 3 divides 3𝑛! + 3𝑛 + 3.
             Step 5: Combine steps 3 and 4 to show that 3 divides (𝑛 + 1)" +2(𝑛 + 1) .
             Step 6: Conclude that the statement is true for all natural numbers 𝑛. *)
       proof (induct n)
          (* Step 1: Prove the base case 𝑛 = 0.*)
          case 0
             then show ?case sledgehammer
          (* Step 2: Assume the statement is true for some 𝑛 and prove it for 𝑛 + 1.*)
          next case (Suc n)
          have ?case when "n=0"
             using that sledgehammer
          moreover have ?case when "n>0"
          proof -
          (* Step 3: Expand (𝑛 + 1)" +2(𝑛 + 1) and simplify.*)
             have "(n + 1)^3 + 2 * (n + 1) = (n^3+3*n^2+3*n+1) + (2*n+2)"
                unfolding power3_eq_cube power2_eq_square sledgehammer
             also have "... = n^3+2*n + 3*n^2+3*n+3" sledgehammer
             finally have "(n+1)^3+2*(n+1) = n^3+2*n + 3*n^2+3*n+3".
          (* Step 4: Use the assumption that 3 divides 𝑛" + 2𝑛 to show that 3 divides 3𝑛! + 3𝑛 + 3.*)
             moreover have "3 dvd n^3+2*n" using Suc(1) sledgehammer
             moreover have "3 dvd 3*n^2+3*n+3" sledgehammer
          (* Step 5: Combine steps 3 and 4 to show that 3 divides (𝑛 + 1)" +2(𝑛 + 1) .*)
             ultimately have "3 dvd (n+1)^3+2*(n+1)" sledgehammer
          (* Step 6: Conclude that the statement is true for all natural numbers 𝑛. *)
             then show ?thesis sledgehammer
          qed
          ultimately show ?case sledgehammer
       qed

       Problem:
       Suppose 𝑛 is a natural number such that 𝑛 leaves a remainder of 3 when divided by 7. Show that (2𝑛 + 1) leaves a remainder of 0 when divided by 7.

       Proof:
       theorem mathd_numbertheory_370:
          fixes n :: nat
          assumes h0 : "n mod 7 = (3::nat)"
          shows "(2*n+1) mod 7 = (0::nat)"                                Prompt

                                                                 ChatGPT Output
         (* Step 1: Express 𝑛 as 7𝑘 + 3 for some 𝑘𝜖ℕ$.
            Step 2: Substitute the expression for 𝑛 into the expression for 2𝑛 + 1 and simplify.
            Step 3: Show that the resulting expression is divisible by 7. *)
       proof -
         (* Step 1: Express 𝑛 as 7𝑘 + 3 for some 𝑘𝜖ℕ$.*)
         have "n = 7 * (n div 7) + (n mod 7)" using div_mult_mod_eq[of "n" "7"] sledgehammer
         also have "... = 7 * (n div 7) + 3" using h0 sledgehammer
         finally have c0: "n = 7 * (n div 7) + 3".
         (* Step 2: Substitute the expression for 𝑛 into the expression for 2𝑛 + 1 and simplify.*)
         have "2*n+1 = 2*(7*(n div 7) + 3) + 1" using c0 sledgehammer
         also have "... = 14*(n div 7) + 7" sledgehammer
         also have "... = 7*(2*(n div 7) + 1)" sledgehammer
         finally have c1: "2*n+1 = 7*(2*(n div 7) + 1)".
         (* Step 3: Show that the resulting expression is divisible by 7. *)
         show "(2*n+1) mod 7 = 0" using c1 sledgehammer
       qed


Figure 13: A case from miniF2F-valid. Our method identifies viable subgoals and leverages demon-
stration examples with division and modulus operations to complete the proof.


                                                                                    30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       As a mathematician familiar with Isabelle, your task is to provide a formal proof in response to a given problem statement.
       Your proof should be structured and clearly written, meeting the following criteria:
       - It can be verified by Isabelle.
       - Each step of the proof should be explained in detail using comments enclosed in "(*" and "*)".
       - The explanation for each step should be clear and concise, avoiding any unnecessary or apologetic language.
       Please ensure that your proof is well-organized and easy to follow, with each step building upon the previous one.

       Problem:
                                                                                !
       Suppose that 𝑥 is a positive real number. Show that 2 − 2 ≥ 2 − 𝑥 −           .
                                                                                "#


       Proof:
       theorem algebra_amgm_faxinrrp2msqrt2geq2mxm1div2x:
          fixes x :: real
          assumes "x > 0"
          shows "2 - sqrt 2 \<ge> 2 - x - 1/ (2 * x)"
                                           !
          (* Step 1: Show that 2 ≤ 𝑥 + .
                                            "#
            Step 2: Rearrange the inequality to get 2𝑥 " + 1 − 2𝑥 2 ≥ 0.
            Step 3: Factor the expression to get ( 2𝑥 − 1)" ≥ 0.
            Step 4: Conclude that the inequality is true. *)
       proof -
                                         !
         (* Step 1: Show that 2 ≤ 𝑥 + .*)
                                            "#
         have c0: "2 * x > 0" using assms sledgehammer
         have "sqrt 2 \<le> x + 1 / (2 * x)"
         proof -
            define y where "y = sqrt 2"
            have c1: "2 = y * y"
            proof -
               have "2 = (sqrt 2) * (sqrt 2)" sledgehammer
               then have "... = y * y" using \<open>y = sqrt 2\<close> sledgehammer
               then show ?thesis sledgehammer
            qed
            have "(2 * x) * x + 1 - (2 * x) * (sqrt 2) = (y * y * x * x) + 1 - (2 * x) * y" using c1 y_def sledgehammer
            also have "... = (y*x) * (y*x) - 2 * (y*x) + 1" sledgehammer
            also have "... = (y*x - 1) * (y*x - 1)" sledgehammer
            also have "... \<ge> 0" sledgehammer
            ultimately have c2: "(2 * x) * x + 1 - (2 * x) * (sqrt 2) \<ge> 0" sledgehammer
            have "(2*x) * (x + 1/(2*x) - sqrt 2) = (2 * x) * x + (2 * x) * (1/(2*x)) - (2*x) * sqrt 2" sledgehammer
            also have "... = (2 * x) * x + 1 - (2*x) * sqrt 2" using c0 sledgehammer
            (* Step 2: Rearrange the inequality to get 2𝑥 " + 1 − 2𝑥 2 ≥ 0.*)
            also have "... \<ge> 0" using c2 sledgehammer
            (* Step 3: Factor the expression to get ( 2𝑥 − 1)" ≥ 0.*)
            ultimately have "(2*x) * (x + 1/(2*x) - sqrt 2) \<ge> 0" sledgehammer
            hence "x + 1/(2*x) - sqrt 2 \<ge> 0" using mult_pos_pos sledgehammer
            (* Step 4: Conclude that the inequality is true. *)
            then show ?thesis sledgehammer
         qed
         then show ?thesis sledgehammer
       qed

       Problem:
       Suppose that 𝑥 and 𝑦 are two real numbers such that 𝑥 + 𝑦 = 13 and 𝑥𝑦 = 24. Find 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " and show that it is equal to 11.

       Proof:
       theorem mathd_algebra_510:
          fixes x y :: real
          assumes h0 : "x+y=13"
             and h1 : "x*y=24"
          shows "sqrt (x^2 + y^2) = 11"
          (* Step 1: Use the identity 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " = 𝑥 + 𝑦 " − 2𝑥𝑦 to find 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " in terms of 𝑥 and 𝑦.
             Step 2: Substitute the given values of 𝑥 and 𝑦 to find 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " .
             Step 3: Show that 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " = 121.
             Step 4: Take the square root of both sides to find 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " .
            Step 5: Show that 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " = 11. *)
       proof -
         (* Step 1: Use the identity 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " = 𝑥 + 𝑦 " − 2𝑥𝑦 to find 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " in terms of 𝑥 and 𝑦. *)
         have c0: "x^2 + y^2 = (x+y)^2 - 2*x*y" sledgehammer
         (* Step 2: Substitute the given values of 𝑥 and 𝑦 to find 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " . *)
         also have "... = (13)^2 - 2*24" using h0 h1 sledgehammer
         (* Step 3: Show that 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " = 121. *)
         also have "... = 121" sledgehammer
         finally have c1: "x^2 + y^2 = 121" sledgehammer
         (* Step 4: Take the square root of both sides to find 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " . *)
         then show ?thesis sledgehammer
         (* Step 5: Show that 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " = 11. *)
       qed

       Problem:
                                                             #$%
       Suppose that 𝑥 and 𝑦 are two real numbers such that         = 7 and 𝑥𝑦 = 19. Find 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " .
                                                              "


       Proof:
       theorem mathd_algebra_332:
          fixes x y ::real
          assumes "(x + y) / 2 = 7"
             and "sqrt (x * y) = sqrt 19"
          shows "x^2 + y^2 = 158"                                          Prompt
                                                                   ChatGPT Output
         (* Step 1: Use the identity (𝑥 + 𝑦)" = 𝑥 " + 2𝑥𝑦 + 𝑦 " to find 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " in terms of 𝑥 + 𝑦 and 𝑥𝑦.
            Step 2: Substitute the given values of 𝑥 + 𝑦 and 𝑥𝑦 to find 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " .
            Step 3: Show that 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " = 158. *)
       proof -
         (* Step 1: Use the identity (𝑥 + 𝑦)" = 𝑥 " + 2𝑥𝑦 + 𝑦 " to find 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " in terms of 𝑥 + 𝑦 and 𝑥𝑦. *)
         have c0: "x^2 + y^2 = (x+y)^2 - 2*x*y" sledgehammer
         (* Step 2: Substitute the given values of 𝑥 + 𝑦 and 𝑥𝑦 to find 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " . *)
         also have "... = (2*7)^2 - 2*(sqrt 19)^2" using assms sledgehammer
         (* Step 3: Show that 𝑥 " + 𝑦 " = 158. *)
         also have "... = 158" sledgehammer
         finally show "x^2 + y^2 = 158" sledgehammer
       qed

Figure 14: A case from miniF2F-test. Our method predicts viable subgoals and utilizes demonstration
examples involving squaring and square root operations to finalize the proof.

                                                                                         31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      As a mathematician familiar with Isabelle, your task is to provide a formal proof in response to a given problem statement.
      Your proof should be structured and clearly written, meeting the following criteria:
      - It can be verified by Isabelle.
      - Each step of the proof should be explained in detail using comments enclosed in "(*" and "*)".
      - The explanation for each step should be clear and concise, avoiding any unnecessary or apologetic language.
      Please ensure that your proof is well-organized and easy to follow, with each step building upon the previous one.

      Problem:
                                                       ("#$)
      Given a real number $n$ such that 𝑛 ≠ 3 and              = 2, show that 𝑛 = 11.
                                                       ("&')


      Proof:
      theorem mathd_algebra_181:
         fixes n :: real
         assumes h0 : "n \<noteq> 3" and h1 : "(n+5) / (n-3) = 2"
         shows "n=11"
                                            ("#$)
        (* Step 1: Use the given equation           = 2 to obtain an equation involving 𝑛.
                                            ("&')
           Step 2: Simplify the equation to obtain an expression for 𝑛.
           Step 3: Show that the expression for 𝑛 is equal to 11. *)
      proof -
                                           ("#$)
        (* Step 1: Use the given equation        = 2 to obtain an equation involving 𝑛. *)
                                            ("&')
        have "n+5 = 2 * (n-3)" using h0 h1 sledgehammer
        (* Step 2: Simplify the equation to obtain an expression for 𝑛. *)
        thus ?thesis sledgehammer
        (* Step 3: Show that the expression for 𝑛 is equal to 11. *)
      qed

      Problem:
      Prove by induction that the sum of the first 𝑛 odd numbers is 𝑛( .

      Proof:
      theorem induction_sum_odd:
         fixes n :: nat
         assumes "n > 0"
         shows "(\<Sum> (k::nat) = 0..(n-1). 2 * k + 1) = n^2"
         (* Step 1: Base case: Show that the sum of the first odd number is 1.
            Step 2: Inductive step: Assume that the sum of the first 𝑛 odd numbers is 𝑛( . Show that the sum of the first 𝑛 + 1 odd numbers is (𝑛 + 1)( .
            Step 3: Combine the two steps to complete the proof. *)
         using assms
      proof (induct n)
         (* Step 1: Base case: Show that the sum of the first odd number is 1. *)
         case (Suc n)
         have ?case when "n=0" using that sledgehammer
         (* Step 2: Inductive step: Assume that the sum of the first 𝑛 odd numbers is 𝑛( . Show that the sum of the first 𝑛 + 1 odd numbers is (𝑛 + 1)( . *)
         moreover have ?case when "n>0"
         proof -
            have "(\<Sum>k = 0..(n-1). 2 * k + 1) = n^2" using Suc(1) that sledgehammer
            then have "(\<Sum>k = 0..(n-1). 2 * k + 1) + (2 * n + 1) = n^2 + 2 * n + 1" sledgehammer
            then show ?thesis sledgehammer
         qed
         (* Step 3: Combine the two steps to complete the proof. *)
         ultimately show ?case sledgehammer
      qed simp

      Problem:
      For any natural number 𝑛 greater than or equal to 9, there exists a natural number 𝑥 such that 𝑥 ( is equal to the quotient of the difference between the
      factorial of 𝑛 + 2 and the factorial of 𝑛 + 1 divided by the factorial of 𝑛.

      Proof:
      theorem amc12b_2020_p6:
         fixes n :: nat
         assumes h0: "9 \<le> n"
         shows "\<exists>x::nat. (real_of_nat x)^2 = (fact (n + 2)
                - fact (n + 1)) / fact n"
                                                                            Prompt
                                                                    ChatGPT Output
        (* Step 1: Use the definition of factorial to simplify the expression.
           Step 2: Rearrange the expression to obtain a perfect square.
           Step 3: Show that the perfect square is a natural number. *)
      proof -
        (* Step 1: Use the definition of factorial to simplify the expression. *)
        have "(fact (n + 2) - fact (n + 1)) / fact n = ((n+2)*(n+1)*fact n - (n+1)*fact n) / fact n" using fact_reduce[of "n+1"] sledgehammer
        (* Step 2: Rearrange the expression to obtain a perfect square. *)
        also have "... = (n+1) * (n+2) - (n+1)" sledgehammer
        also have "... = (n+1)^2" sledgehammer
        (* Step 3: Show that the perfect square is a natural number. *)
        finally show ?thesis using assms sledgehammer
      qed

Figure 15: A case from miniF2F-test. Our method recognizes viable subgoals and successfully
finishes the proof.


                                                                                        32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      As a mathematician familiar with Isabelle, your task is to provide a formal proof in response to a given problem statement.
      Your proof should be structured and clearly written, meeting the following criteria:
      - It can be verified by Isabelle.
      - Each step of the proof should be explained in detail using comments enclosed in "(*" and "*)".
      - The explanation for each step should be clear and concise, avoiding any unnecessary or apologetic language.
      Please ensure that your proof is well-organized and easy to follow, with each step building upon the previous one.

      Problem:
      Prove that for any natural number 𝑛, 3 divides 𝑛! + 2𝑛.

      Proof:
      theorem induction_divisibility_3divnto3m2n:
         fixes n::nat
         shows "3 dvd n^3 + 2 * n"
         (* Step 1: Prove the base case 𝑛 = 0.
            Step 2: Assume the statement is true for some 𝑛 and prove it for 𝑛 + 1.
            Step 3: Expand (𝑛 + 1)! +2(𝑛 + 1) and simplify.
            Step 4: Use the assumption that 3 divides 𝑛! + 2𝑛 to show that 3 divides 3𝑛" + 3𝑛 + 3.
            Step 5: Combine steps 3 and 4 to show that 3 divides (𝑛 + 1)! +2(𝑛 + 1) .
            Step 6: Conclude that the statement is true for all natural numbers 𝑛. *)
      proof (induct n)
         (* Step 1: Prove the base case 𝑛 = 0.*)
         case 0
            then show ?case sledgehammer
         (* Step 2: Assume the statement is true for some 𝑛 and prove it for 𝑛 + 1.*)
         next case (Suc n)
         have ?case when "n=0"
            using that sledgehammer
         moreover have ?case when "n>0"
         proof -
         (* Step 3: Expand (𝑛 + 1)! +2(𝑛 + 1) and simplify.*)
            have "(n + 1)^3 + 2 * (n + 1) = (n^3+3*n^2+3*n+1) + (2*n+2)"
               unfolding power3_eq_cube power2_eq_square sledgehammer
            also have "... = n^3+2*n + 3*n^2+3*n+3" sledgehammer
            finally have "(n+1)^3+2*(n+1) = n^3+2*n + 3*n^2+3*n+3".
         (* Step 4: Use the assumption that 3 divides 𝑛! + 2𝑛 to show that 3 divides 3𝑛" + 3𝑛 + 3.*)
            moreover have "3 dvd n^3+2*n" using Suc(1) sledgehammer
            moreover have "3 dvd 3*n^2+3*n+3" sledgehammer
         (* Step 5: Combine steps 3 and 4 to show that 3 divides (𝑛 + 1)! +2(𝑛 + 1) .*)
            ultimately have "3 dvd (n+1)^3+2*(n+1)" sledgehammer
         (* Step 6: Conclude that the statement is true for all natural numbers 𝑛. *)
            then show ?thesis sledgehammer
         qed
         ultimately show ?case sledgehammer
      qed

      Problem:
      Let 𝑛 be an integer and 𝑝 be a prime number. Show that 𝑝 divides 𝑛 if and only if 𝑛" is congruent to 0 modulo 𝑝.

      Proof:
      theorem numbertheory_prmdvsneqnsqmodpeq0:
         fixes n :: int
            and p :: nat
         assumes "prime p"
         shows "p dvd n \<longleftrightarrow> (n^2) mod p = 0"
         (* Step 1: Assume that 𝑝 divides 𝑛. Show that 𝑛" is congruent to 0 modulo 𝑝.
            Step 2: Assume that 𝑛" is congruent to 0 modulo 𝑝. Show that 𝑝 divides 𝑛. *)
      proof -
         (* Step 1: Assume that 𝑝 divides 𝑛. Show that 𝑛" is congruent to 0 modulo 𝑝.*)
         assume "p dvd n"
         then show "(n^2) mod p = 0" sledgehammer
         (* Step 2: Assume that 𝑛" is congruent to 0 modulo 𝑝. Show that 𝑝 divides 𝑛. *)
         next assume "(n^2) mod p = 0"
         then show "p dvd n" sledgehammer
      qed

      Problem:
      Suppose 𝑛 is a natural number such that 𝑛 leaves a remainder of 3 when divided by 7. Show that (2𝑛 + 1) leaves a remainder of 0 when divided by 7.

      Proof:
      theorem mathd_numbertheory_370:
         fixes n :: nat
         assumes h0 : "n mod 7 = (3::nat)"
         shows "(2*n+1) mod 7 = (0::nat)"                               Prompt

                                                                ChatGPT Output
        (* Step 1: Express 𝑛 in terms of 7𝑘 + 3 for some 𝑘 ∈ ℕ.
           Step 2: Substitute the expression for 𝑛 into (2𝑛 + 1) and simplify.
           Step 3: Show that the result from Step 2 leaves a remainder of 0 when divided by 7. *)
      proof -
        (* Step 1: Express 𝑛 in terms of 7𝑘 + 3 for some 𝑘 ∈ ℕ. *)
        have "n = 7 * (n div 7) + (n mod 7)" using div_mult_mod_eq[of "n" "7"] sledgehammer
        also have "... = 7 * (n div 7) + 3" using h0 sledgehammer
        finally have c0: "n = 7 * (n div 7) + 3" .
        (* Step 2: Substitute the expression for 𝑛 into (2𝑛 + 1) and simplify.*)
        have "(2*n+1) = 2*(7*(n div 7) + 3) + 1" using c0 sledgehammer
        also have "... = 14*(n div 7) + 7" sledgehammer
        also have "... = 7*(2*(n div 7) + 1)" sledgehammer
        finally have c1: "(2*n+1) = 7*(2*(n div 7) + 1)" .
        (* Step 3: Show that the result from Step 2 leaves a remainder of 0 when divided by 7. *)
        have "(2*(n div 7) + 1) mod 7 = 0" using mod_mult_self2[of "2*(n div 7) + 1" "7"] sledgehammer
      Step error: Outer syntax error (line 1): command expected, but identifier error (line 1) was found At command \"<malformed>\" (line 1)


Figure 16: A case from miniF2F-valid. The shuffled demonstration organization results in the
incorrect application of the “mod mult self 2” theorem.



                                                                                   33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



       As a mathematician familiar with Isabelle, your task is to provide a formal proof in response to a given problem statement.
       Your proof should be structured and clearly written, meeting the following criteria:
       - It can be verified by Isabelle.
       - Each step of the proof should be explained in detail using comments enclosed in "(*" and "*)".
       - The explanation for each step should be clear and concise, avoiding any unnecessary or apologetic language.
       Please ensure that your proof is well-organized and easy to follow, with each step building upon the previous one.

       Problem:
       Suppose that 𝑥 and 𝑦 are two real numbers such that 𝑥 + 𝑦 = 13 and 𝑥𝑦 = 24. Find 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! and show that it is equal to 11.

       Proof:
       theorem mathd_algebra_510:
          fixes x y :: real
          assumes h0 : "x+y=13"
             and h1 : "x*y=24"
          shows "sqrt (x^2 + y^2) = 11"
          (* Step 1: Use the identity 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! = 𝑥 + 𝑦 ! − 2𝑥𝑦 to find 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! in terms of 𝑥 and 𝑦.
             Step 2: Substitute the given values of 𝑥 and 𝑦 to find 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! .
             Step 3: Show that 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! = 121.
             Step 4: Take the square root of both sides to find 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! .
             Step 5: Show that 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! = 11. *)
       proof -
          (* Step 1: Use the identity 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! = 𝑥 + 𝑦 ! − 2𝑥𝑦 to find 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! in terms of 𝑥 and 𝑦. *)
          have c0: "x^2 + y^2 = (x+y)^2 - 2*x*y" sledgehammer
          (* Step 2: Substitute the given values of 𝑥 and 𝑦 to find 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! . *)
          also have "... = (13)^2 - 2*24" using h0 h1 sledgehammer
          (* Step 3: Show that 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! = 121. *)
          also have "... = 121" sledgehammer
          finally have c1: "x^2 + y^2 = 121" sledgehammer
         (* Step 4: Take the square root of both sides to find 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! . *)
         then show ?thesis sledgehammer
         (* Step 5: Show that 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! = 11. *)
       qed

       Problem:
                                                                                "
       Suppose that 𝑥 is a positive real number. Show that 2 − 2 ≥ 2 − 𝑥 −           .
                                                                                !#


       Proof:
       theorem algebra_amgm_faxinrrp2msqrt2geq2mxm1div2x:
          fixes x :: real
          assumes "x > 0"
          shows "2 - sqrt 2 \<ge> 2 - x - 1/ (2 * x)"
                                           "
          (* Step 1: Show that 2 ≤ 𝑥 + .
                                            !#
            Step 2: Rearrange the inequality to get 2𝑥 ! + 1 − 2𝑥 2 ≥ 0.
            Step 3: Factor the expression to get ( 2𝑥 − 1)! ≥ 0.
            Step 4: Conclude that the inequality is true. *)
       proof -
                                            "
         (* Step 1: Show that 2 ≤ 𝑥 + .*)
                                           !#
         have c0: "2 * x > 0" using assms sledgehammer
         have "sqrt 2 \<le> x + 1 / (2 * x)"
         proof -
            define y where "y = sqrt 2"
            have c1: "2 = y * y"
            proof -
               have "2 = (sqrt 2) * (sqrt 2)" sledgehammer
               then have "... = y * y" using \<open>y = sqrt 2\<close> sledgehammer
               then show ?thesis sledgehammer
            qed
            have "(2 * x) * x + 1 - (2 * x) * (sqrt 2) = (y * y * x * x) + 1 - (2 * x) * y" using c1 y_def sledgehammer
            also have "... = (y*x) * (y*x) - 2 * (y*x) + 1" sledgehammer
            also have "... = (y*x - 1) * (y*x - 1)" sledgehammer
            also have "... \<ge> 0" sledgehammer
            ultimately have c2: "(2 * x) * x + 1 - (2 * x) * (sqrt 2) \<ge> 0" sledgehammer
            have "(2*x) * (x + 1/(2*x) - sqrt 2) = (2 * x) * x + (2 * x) * (1/(2*x)) - (2*x) * sqrt 2" sledgehammer
            also have "... = (2 * x) * x + 1 - (2*x) * sqrt 2" using c0 sledgehammer
            (* Step 2: Rearrange the inequality to get 2𝑥 ! + 1 − 2𝑥 2 ≥ 0.*)
            also have "... \<ge> 0" using c2 sledgehammer
            (* Step 3: Factor the expression to get ( 2𝑥 − 1)! ≥ 0.*)
            ultimately have "(2*x) * (x + 1/(2*x) - sqrt 2) \<ge> 0" sledgehammer
            hence "x + 1/(2*x) - sqrt 2 \<ge> 0" using mult_pos_pos sledgehammer
            (* Step 4: Conclude that the inequality is true. *)
            then show ?thesis sledgehammer
         qed
         then show ?thesis sledgehammer
       qed

       Problem:
                                                             #$%
       Suppose that 𝑥 and 𝑦 are two real numbers such that         = 7 and 𝑥𝑦 = 19. Find 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! .
                                                              !


       Proof:
       theorem mathd_algebra_332:
          fixes x y ::real
          assumes "(x + y) / 2 = 7"
             and "sqrt (x * y) = sqrt 19"
          shows "x^2 + y^2 = 158"                                          Prompt
                                                                   ChatGPT Output
         (* Step 1: Use the identity 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! = (𝑥 + 𝑦)! −2𝑥𝑦 to find 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! in terms of 𝑥 and 𝑦.
            Step 2: Substitute the given values of 𝑥 and 𝑦 to find 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! .
            Step 3: Show that 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! = 158. *)
       proof -
         (* Step 1: Use the identity 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! = (𝑥 + 𝑦)! −2𝑥𝑦 to find 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! in terms of 𝑥 and 𝑦.*)
         have c0: "x^2 + y^2 = (x+y)^2 - 2*x*y" sledgehammer
         (* Step 2: Substitute the given values of 𝑥 and 𝑦 to find 𝑥 ! + 𝑦 ! . *)
         also have "... = 2*7^2 - 2*19 " using assms sledgehammer
       Step error: Outer syntax error (line 1): command expected, but identifier error (line 1) was found At command \"<malformed>\" (line 1)


Figure 17: A case from miniF2F-test. The shuffled demonstration organization leads to an unsuitable
conjecture, “... = 272 − 219,” which cannot be proved using the Sledgehammer.
                                                                                         34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       As a mathematician familiar with Isabelle, your task is to provide a formal proof in response to a given problem statement.
       Your proof should be structured and clearly written, meeting the following criteria:
       - It can be verified by Isabelle.
       - Each step of the proof should be explained in detail using comments enclosed in "(*" and "*)".
       - The explanation for each step should be clear and concise, avoiding any unnecessary or apologetic language.
       Please ensure that your proof is well-organized and easy to follow, with each step building upon the previous one.

       Problem:
                                                        ("#$)
       Given a real number $n$ such that 𝑛 ≠ 3 and              = 2, show that 𝑛 = 11.
                                                        ("&')


       Problem:
       Prove by induction that the sum of the first 𝑛 odd numbers is 𝑛( .

       Proof:
       theorem induction_sum_odd:
          fixes n :: nat
          assumes "n > 0"
          shows "(\<Sum> (k::nat) = 0..(n-1). 2 * k + 1) = n^2"
          (* Step 1: Base case: Show that the sum of the first odd number is 1.
             Step 2: Inductive step: Assume that the sum of the first 𝑛 odd numbers is 𝑛( . Show that the sum of the first 𝑛 + 1 odd numbers is (𝑛 + 1)( .
             Step 3: Combine the two steps to complete the proof. *)
          using assms
       proof (induct n)
          (* Step 1: Base case: Show that the sum of the first odd number is 1. *)
          case (Suc n)
          have ?case when "n=0" using that sledgehammer
          (* Step 2: Inductive step: Assume that the sum of the first 𝑛 odd numbers is 𝑛( . Show that the sum of the first 𝑛 + 1 odd numbers is (𝑛 + 1)( . *)
          moreover have ?case when "n>0"
          proof -
             have "(\<Sum>k = 0..(n-1). 2 * k + 1) = n^2" using Suc(1) that sledgehammer
             then have "(\<Sum>k = 0..(n-1). 2 * k + 1) + (2 * n + 1) = n^2 + 2 * n + 1" sledgehammer
             then show ?thesis sledgehammer
          qed
          (* Step 3: Combine the two steps to complete the proof. *)
          ultimately show ?case sledgehammer
       qed simp

       Proof:
       theorem mathd_algebra_181:
          fixes n :: real
          assumes h0 : "n \<noteq> 3" and h1 : "(n+5) / (n-3) = 2"
          shows "n=11"
                                            ("#$)
          (* Step 1: Use the given equation       = 2 to obtain an equation involving 𝑛.
                                             ("&')
            Step 2: Simplify the equation to obtain an expression for 𝑛.
            Step 3: Show that the expression for 𝑛 is equal to 11. *)
       proof -
                                            ("#$)
         (* Step 1: Use the given equation        = 2 to obtain an equation involving 𝑛. *)
                                             ("&')
         have "n+5 = 2 * (n-3)" using h0 h1 sledgehammer
         (* Step 2: Simplify the equation to obtain an expression for 𝑛. *)
         thus ?thesis sledgehammer
         (* Step 3: Show that the expression for 𝑛 is equal to 11. *)
       qed


       Problem:
       For any natural number 𝑛 greater than or equal to 9, there exists a natural number 𝑥 such that 𝑥 ( is equal to the quotient of the difference between the
       factorial of 𝑛 + 2 and the factorial of 𝑛 + 1 divided by the factorial of 𝑛.

       Proof:
       theorem amc12b_2020_p6:
          fixes n :: nat
          assumes h0: "9 \<le> n"
          shows "\<exists>x::nat. (real_of_nat x)^2 = (fact (n + 2)
                 - fact (n + 1)) / fact n"                                    Prompt
                                                                     ChatGPT Output
         (* Step 1: Simplify the expression on the right-hand side of the equation using the definition of factorial.
            Step 2: Rearrange the equation to obtain an expression for 𝑥 ( .
            Step 3: Show that the expression for 𝑥 ( is a perfect square.
            Step 4: Conclude that there exists a natural number 𝑥 such that 𝑥 ( is equal to the given expression. *)
       proof -
         (* Step 1: Simplify the expression on the right-hand side of the equation using the definition of factorial. *)
         have "(fact (n + 2) - fact (n + 1)) / fact n = ((n + 2) * fact (n + 1) - fact (n + 1)) / fact n" by (simp add: fact_reduce)

         Step error: Failed to finish proof (line 1): goal (1 subgoal):
             1. (2 + real n) * ((1 + real n) * fact n) - (1 + real n) * fact n = fact n + real n * fact n + real n * (fact n + real n * fact n)
         At command \“by\” (line 1)



Figure 18: A case from miniF2F-test. The shuffling of the optimal demonstration organization leads
to a complex and unresolved equation, which further results in a failure to properly simplify the
factorial expression.


                                                                                         35
