Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D IFF S IM : A LIGNING D IFFUSION M ODEL AND M OLEC -
ULAR DYNAMICS S IMULATION FOR ACCURATE B LIND
D OCKING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Predicting the ligand’s binding conformation within a target protein is a pivotal
         step in drug discovey. Based on prior knowledge of the binding site (protein
         pocket) on the target protein, biochemical researchers use molecular docking soft-
         ware to generate the ligand conformation within that pocket. Despite its speed,
         molecular docking is ill-suited for blind docking where the pocket is unknown,
         and the generated ligand conformation often lacks required precision. Recently,
         deep generative models, especially diffusion models, have been proposed for ac-
         curate blind docking. However, it is found that while deep generative models
         excel in locating the pocket, they still lag behind traditional methods in terms of
         conformation generation. Thus, bridging such gap with a hybrid approach is natu-
         rally expected to further improve the model performance. Therefore, in this study,
         we introduce a blind docking approach named DiffSim to seamlessly integrate the
         diffusion model with molecular dynamics (MD) simulation. We propose a novel
         loss function to align reverse diffusion sampling with MD simulation trajectories,
         aiming to efficiently generate ligand conformations informed by MD-modelled
         protein-ligand interactions at atomic resolution. Through theoretical analysis, we
         unveil the consistency in dynamics between diffusion models and MD simulation,
         demonstrating that the diffusion model is essentially a coarse-grained simulator
         for MD simulation. Empirical results demonstrate the effectiveness of our ap-
         proach and highlight the potential of combining physics-informed MD simulation
         with deep learning models in drug discovery.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Identifying bioactive ligands for a specific target within a vast compound library is a significant chal-
lenge in drug development, made laborious and costly by the need to experimentally test thousands
of compounds (Blanes-Mira et al., 2022). To reduce the overall cost of drug discovery, molecular
docking (Raval & Ganatra, 2022) serves as an efficient technique to computationally predict binding
conformations of small molecules within the binding site (also called protein pocket) of a target pro-
tein, drastically reducing the conformation space that otherwise needs to be explored through time-
consuming and cost-intensive experiments. However, scoring functions used in molecular docking
often rely on simplifications about molecular interactions (Singh et al., 2022), which are inadequate
for modeling intricate protein-ligand interactions and may lead to inaccurate ligand conformation
predictions. In addition, traditional molecular docking methods require prior knowledge of the ap-
proximate binding site on the target protein, which makes them ill-suited for blind docking where
the binding site is unknown. To overcome the limitations of traditional molecular docking, machine
(deep) learning models have emerged, aiming to achieve accurate blind docking. Numerous mod-
els focus on tackling particular subtasks of blind docking, including pocket searching (Krivák &
Hoksza, 2018; Jiménez et al., 2017; Yan et al., 2022), conformation generation (Xu et al., 2022; Zhu
et al., 2022), and scoring functions (Wang & Zhang, 2017; Liao et al., 2019; Shen et al., 2022). Some
latest models (Zhang et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022; Stärk et al., 2022; Corso et al., 2022) have been
dedicated to addressing the entire process of blind docking, including all subtasks in an end-to-end
manner, which can directly generate ligand conformations conditioned on target proteins.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        diffusion-based                                                                         MD simulation
   molecular generative model                      cell environment
                                                       simulation
   𝐳𝐳 𝑇𝑇   𝐳𝐳t   𝐳𝐳t−1      𝐳𝐳0
                                                                                                              ...             MD trajectory


                                              target protein                                                                          align
                                      feedbacks

                                                               molecular dynamics
                   generated ligand                             (MD) simulation
                    conformations
                                      selected ligand                                                         ...            reverse diffusion
                                      conformations



                 active learning-based
                       selection                                                        reverse process of diffusion model

                                        (a)                                                                  (b)

Figure 1: Overview of DiffSim. (a) The figure illustrates the fundamental concept behind DiffSim,
a hybrid approach seamlessly integrating the diffusion model with molecular dynamics (MD) sim-
ulation. (b) The figure illustrates the specific approach of DiffSim: aligning reverse diffusion with
MD trajectories to achieve physics-informed modeling for accurate blind docking.


Despite the progress made in deep learning-based molecular docking, there is an ongoing debate
about whether deep learning could surpass traditional docking methods. Based on a series of experi-
ments, it has been found that while deep learning models excel in pocket searching, their accuracy in
ligand conformation generation lags behind traditional molecular docking methods given the same
pockets (Yu et al., 2023). Thus, a natural enhancement strategy to further improve model perfor-
mances involves adopting a hybrid approach, such as incorporating traditional molecular docking
into deep learning models. Some prior efforts (Jeon & Kim, 2020; Ma et al., 2021) have been di-
rected towards such strategy, but exhibit certain limitations, such as operating on two-dimensional
(2D) molecular representation rather than directly manipulating three-dimensional (3D) structure.
Bringing traditional paradigms in computational biochemistry into the scope, molecular docking is
frequently used in conjunction with molecular dynamics (MD) simulation (Morris & Corte, 2021).
This combination allows for a delicate and holistic characterization of protein-ligand interactions.
Specifically, molecular docking is used as an initial step to predict several possible binding poses
and rank them based on binding affinities. The top-ranked protein-ligand complexes by docking
can then be further refined using molecular dynamics simulation to obtain more accurate ligand
conformations. However, the computational cost of molecular dynamics simulation is prohibitively
high, which makes it infeasible to be used on large datasets.
Inspired by the paradigm in computational biochemistry and recent prominence of diffusion mod-
els in generating reasonable ligand conformations for blind docking, we propose an intuitive and
effective hybrid approach called DiffSim, which seamlessly integrates MD simulation and diffusion
models. We devise a loss function to align ligand trajectories derived from MD simulation and re-
verse diffusion trajectories sampled from the diffusion model. DiffSim allows the MD-informed
diffusion model to harness the strengths of both sides: the physics-based insights as well as confor-
mation refinement capability provided by MD, and the sampling efficiency of the diffusion model.
Intuitively, our hybrid approach DiffSim can help mitigate potential challenges in drug discovery
which limits the capacity of diffusion models to generate accurate ligand conformations, encom-
passing two major aspects that are applicable to a broader range of deep generative models as well:
• DiffSim leverages MD simulation to introduce conformation flexibility into diffusion mod-
  els. Most existing models treat proteins as static and regard ligands as rigid bodies with limited
  degrees of freedom, which could fail to capture the inherent dynamics of proteins and intricate
  conformational change of ligands. By integrating MD simulation into diffusion models, DiffSim
  incorporates the dynamic nature of both proteins and ligands with flexibility at atomic resolution,
  moving beyond the limitations of static and rigid structure.
• DiffSim explicitly infuses knowledge of protein-ligand interaction provided by MD simu-
  lation into diffusion models. Previous diffusion models as well as other deep-learning based
  blind docking models make simplifications of protein-ligand interactions, typically considering
  only atomic distances and atom types, which render them inadequate for incorporating complex


                                                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    protein-ligand interactions. Hybridization of diffusion models and MD simulation empowers Diff-
    Sim to embed intricate protein-ligand interaction inherent in MD simulation.
DiffSim combines the strengths of MD simulations and diffusion models in order to achieve accu-
rate and efficient blind docking. In addition to achieving complementarity between the two, we the-
oretically showcase the consistency of their dynamics, which further substantiates the rationale for
DiffSim to seamlessly integrate MD simulation and diffusion models by aligning their trajectories.
Specifically, we demonstrate that diffusion models are, in their essence, coarse-grained simulators
for MD simulation, which could be a strong backup for our hybrid approach DiffSim as well as a
physics-based perspective for the recent success of diffusion-based molecular generative models.
Empirically, DiffSim demonstrates superior performance over existing models in terms of com-
monly used evaluation metrics.
To summarize, the main contributions of our work are:
• We propose a novel hybrid approach for accurate and efficient blind docking named DiffSim,
  which seamlessly integrates diffusion models and MD simulation by aligning reverse diffusion
  trajectories and MD simulation trajectories. To strike a balance between MD computational cost
  and the need for conformation refinement, we introduce an active learning approach to selectively
  curate an MD trajectory dataset based on the training set.
• To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to explicitly unveil the theoretical connection
  between diffusion-based molecular conformation generation and MD simulation, which serves as
  a physics-based support for the alignment strategy adopted by DiffSim as well as a new perspective
  on recent success of diffusion-based molecular generative models.
• We devise a loss function to guide the reverse diffusion trajectories sampled from the diffusion
  model to align with the trajectories of MD simulation. Experimental results show that DiffSim
  have state-of-the-art capability of generating accurate ligand conformations for blind docking.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1    D EEP G ENERATIVE M ODELS FOR L IGAND C ONFORMATION G ENERATION

Ligand conformation generation is essentially a conditional generation task, which requires the lig-
and to bind to a specific protein. Graph- (Tan et al., 2022) and SMILES-based (Skalic et al., 2019;
Xu et al., 2021) generative models produce topological (2D) structures of molecules conditioned on
protein context. Although 3D molecular conformations can be obtained by combining 2D genera-
tive models with conformation generation modules (Grow et al., 2019; Nguyen et al., 2020), which
embed 2D structures into 3D space, choosing suitable embedding algorithms can be quite tricky.
Numerous recent works have turned to 3D conditional generative models to directly produce rea-
sonable binding poses. While these models offer exciting possibilities, they also present significant
challenges in modelling the complex protein-ligand interactions. Ragoza et al. (2022) generate
pocket-aware 3D molecules by voxelizing molecules in atomic density grids, but ligands and pro-
tein pockets are separately encoded. DiffAb (Luo et al., 2022) adopts a pairwise embedding MLP
to encode the Euclidean distances and dihedral angles between amino acids, but ignore atomic-level
intricacy. TargetDiff (Guan et al., 2023), EQUIBIND (Stärk et al., 2022) and TANKBind (Lu et al.,
2022) encode the interaction between the ligand atoms and the protein atoms with GNNs, but only
take atomic distances and atom types into account. Besides, most existing models make simplifica-
tions by confining ligands and proteins to quite limited degrees of freedom. For example, DiffSBDD
(Schneuing et al., 2022) and DiffDock (Corso et al., 2022) keeps the protein fixed throughout the
generation procedure, which does not align well with the actual binding process where both ligands
and proteins exhibit conformational flexibility.
Our approach DiffSim leverages MD simulation to go beyond rigid docking and explicitly captures
the intricate protein-ligand interaction at atomic resolution.

2.2    H YBRID A PPROACHES FOR B LIND D OCKING

Despite the advances in deep learning models for blind docking, questions have emerged regarding
whether they are superior to traditional approaches. Yu et al. (2023) find that deep learning models


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


including Stärk et al. (2022); Lu et al. (2022); Corso et al. (2022) excel in searching protein pockets
while traditional methods like Yu et al. (2022) are better at docking on given pockets.
Integration of deep learning models and traditional methods opens up a promising avenue to tackling
the challenges of blind docking. For example, Zhang et al. (2021); Gomes et al. (2022); Yang
et al. (2022) use molecular docking ad molecular dynamics simulations to further screen the ligands
generated by deep learning models. However, these approaches simply use traditional methods after
the calculations of deep generative models. Thus, the final selected ligands are not always optimal.
Some research directly incorporates traditional methods into the generative process of deep gener-
ative models. SBMolGen (Ma et al., 2021) generates ligand molecules by a SMILES-based search
tree and RNN, evaluates them by molecular docking, and the docking results are fed back into the
search tree to update the weightings. MORLD (Jeon & Kim, 2020) employs docking tools to calcu-
late binding affinities, which are then integrated as rewards in a reinforcement learning framework to
generate and optimize ligands. Nevertheless, both SBMolGen and MORLD operate on the SMILES
representation of ligands and utilize RDKit (Landrum, 2006) and OpenBabel (O’Boyle et al., 2011)
to generate 3D conformation of the ligands, rather than directly manipulating 3D structure.
Our method DiffSim is a hybrid approach seamlessly combining physics-based molecular dynam-
ics simulation with a diffusion model, which directly generates 3D structures. DiffSim involves
molecular dynamics simulation to interfere the generative process of the diffusion model.

3         M ETHOD
This section is organized as follows: In Section 3.1, we provide an overview of relevant concepts:
MD simulation, score-based generative model (referred to as diffusion model in this paper), and
DiffDock (a state-of-the-art diffusion model for blind docking we build our experiments upon).
Section 3.2 outlines our hybrid approach DiffSim and the proposed loss function for alignment. In
Section 3.3, we introduce an active learning approach to select a subset of training data for MD sim-
ulation. Section 3.4 delves into the theoretical connection of MD simulation and diffusion models.
We demonstrate that diffusion models can serve as coarse-grained simulators for MD simulation and
provide a bias-variance tradeoff perspective on DiffSim.

3.1       P RELIMINARIES

3.1.1       M OLECULAR DYNAMICS S IMULATION

We consider an MD trajectory M of a molecule with T time frames. M(t) = x(t) , v (t) denotes a
snapshot at time t ∈ [T ]. There x(t) ∈ RN ×3 and v (t) ∈ RN ×3 denote the 3D coordinates and the
velocities of each atom, respectively.
MD simulations simulate physical movements of atoms in a system and generate the atomic tra-
jectories with certain initial conditions and boundary conditions. This is obtained by solving the
                                                               (t)                 ∂U (x(t) )
first-order differential equation of the Newton’s second law:Fi = mi ai (t) = −        (t)    where
                                                                                         ∂xi
    (t)
Fi is the net force acting on the i-th atom of the system at a given point in the t-th timeframe, mi
              (t)
is the mass, ai is the acceleration and U (x) is the potential energy function defined by force field.
Numerical methods are utilized to advance the trajectory over small time increments ∆t with the
assistance of some integrator.

3.1.2       S CORE - BASED G ENERATIVE M ODEL
Score-based generative models (Song & Ermon, 2019), referred to as diffusion models in this paper,
have garnered increasing interest in molecular generation (Ganea et al., 2021).
Diffusion process. Assume a diffusion process {x(s)}Ss=0 indexed by a continuos time variable
s ∈ [0, S], such that x(0) ∼ p0 , for which we have a dataset of i.i.d. samples, and x(S) ∼ pS , for
which we have a tractable form to generate samples efficiently. Let ps (x) be the probability density
of x(s). The diffusion process is modeled as the solution to an Itô SDE:
                                     dx = f (x, s)ds + g(s)dw,                                    (1)


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where w is a standard Wiener process, f (·, s) : Rd → Rd is a vector-valued function called the drift
coefficient of x(s), and g(·) : R → R is a scalar function known as the diffusion coefficient of x(s).
Reverse process. By starting from samples of x(S) ∼ pS and reversing the diffusion process, we
can obtain samples x(0) ∼ p0 . The reverse-time SDE is also a diffusion process as:

                      dx = f (x, s) − g(s)2 ∇x log ps (x) ds + g(s)dw,

                                                                                            (2)

where w is a standard Wiener process when time flows backwards from S to 0, and ds is an infinitesi-
mal negative timeframe. The score of a distribution can be estimated by training a score-based model
on samples with score matching.

3.1.3    DIFFDOCK

DiffDock (Corso et al., 2022) is a state-of-the-art diffusion model for blind docking, upon which
we conduct our experiment. A diffusion process is defined over translations, rotations, and torsion
angles of the ligand. Translations of the ligand position, rigid rotations of the ligand, changes in
torsion angles at each rotatable bond are associated with the 3D translation group T(3), the 3D
rotation group SO(3), and a copyp of 2D rotation group SO(2) repectively. In all three groups, the
forward SDE is defined as dx = dσ 2 (t)/dtdw where σ 2 = σtr       2    2
                                                                     , σrot       2
                                                                            , or σtor for T(3), SO(3),
SO(2) respectively and where w is the corresponding Brownian motion.

3.2     D IFF S IM S TRATEGY: S EARCH AND R EFINE IN A U NIFIED F RAMEWORK

With a seed ligand conformation generated by RDKit ETKDG (Landrum et al., 2013) as input, we
train DiffSim by aligning the reverse diffusion trajectory of the conformation with its MD simulation
trajectory to generate accurate ligand conformations for blind docking. Specifically, we consider
there are N iteration steps, and denote the conformation sampled from the reverse diffusion process
at step i as Cirev and the conformation optimized through MD simulation at step i as Cisim . The loss
function for alignment is as:
                                        N
                                        X
                                   L=          wi RMSD(Cirev , Cisim ),                             (3)
                                         i=1
                               q P
                                  1    n
where RMSD(Cirev , Cisim ) =      n
                                              rev  sim 2
                                       j=1 ||rj − rj || , with the total number of atoms denoted
as n, the position vectors of the j-th atom of the reverse diffusion process and MD simulation
process denoted as rrev       sim
                     j and rj , respectively. To encourage the desired alignment similarity, we
devise different weighting schedules in experiments, including equal weighting wi = N1 and gradual
                     i/N
weighting wi = PNe ej/N . Equal weighting assigns each iteration step with equal importance while
                   j=1
gradual weighting emphasizes alignments at later stages since the conformation gradually converges
to the ground truth over time, with later steps providing more accurate representations.
However, a critical prerequisite for alignment is that the diffusion model and MD simulation exhibit
comparable sampling efficiencies. This poses a significant challenge in aligning the two due to
the inherent discrepancy between their sampling efficiencies. Directly aligning them from the initial
conformation would result in a noticeable lag in the sampling efficiency of MD simulation compared
to the diffusion model. Empirically, the diffusion model can reach the same bounded conformation
within a mere 20 steps, whereas millions of steps of all-atom MD simulations would be required to
achieve the same outcome (Lu et al., 2023).
To tackle such challenge and facilitate meaningful alignment between the diffusion model and MD
simulation, DiffSim utilizes the diffusion model alone in the initial few steps of reverse diffusion be-
fore conducting MD-informed reverse diffusion through the loss function for alignment. The initial
few steps serve the purpose of “pocket searching”, rapidly exploring the vast conformational space
and narrowing it down to a limited subspace. The subsequent MD-informed steps are intended for
“conformation refinement” to achieve more accurate and physics-informed ligand conformations.
With the subspace as the starting point for alignment, MD simulation can better keep pace with the
diffusion model and fully exert the conformation refinement capabilities.


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   ACTIVE L EARNING - BASED S ELECTION FOR MD S IMULATION

Despite a powerful technique to investigate the structural and dynamical protein-ligand properties,
MD simulation consumes considerable computational resources (Liu et al., 2016). For example, one-
microsecond simulation of a relatively small system running on 24 processors requires months of
computation to complete (Durrant & McCammon, 2011), and expensive petascale supercomputers
are required to study larger systems (Sothiselvam et al., 2014). The substantial computational cost
of MD simulation makes it practically infeasible to apply on the entire training set.
To strike a balance between computational resources and the need for meticulous conformation
refinement, we introduce an active learning approach to select a subset from the training data, for
which MD simulation can be most effectively leveraged. In particular, we choose ligands whose final
conformations, after reverse diffusion, exhibit root mean square deviation (RMSD) values exceeding
2Å, while maintaining centroid distance values below 1Å. 1Å, 2Å, and 5Å have been the most
commonly used thresholds in the literature(Lu et al., 2022; Stärk et al., 2022; Corso et al., 2022; Yu
et al., 2023), and from the practical aspect of computational cost, we consider the number of ligands
that satisfy these criteria, leading to the choice of 1Å and 2Å as thresholds for centroid distance and
RMSD, respectively. This criterion signifies the successful identification of approximate binding
site locations, yet highlights the need for further conformation refinement.

3.4   D IFF S IM AS I NTERMEDIARY BETWEEN N EWTONIAN AND L ANGEVIN DYNAMICS

We leverage the connection between Newtonian dynamics and Langevin dynamics to offer theo-
retical insights into DiffSim’s alignment of MD simulation and diffusion model. We demonstrate
diffusion models and Langevin dynamics are mathematically equivalent so that diffusion models
can be conceptualized as carrying out coarse-grained MD simulations. Further, we formulate a gen-
eralized bias-variance decomposition and develop a bias-variance tradeoff perspective on DiffSim.
Diffusion Models: Coarse-grained Simulators for MD Simulation
In MD simulation, the motions of all atoms are described by Newton’s second law (i.e., Newtonian
dynamics). When it comes to a small subset of degrees of freedom, the Langevin equation serves
as a successful description of the dynamics in such subspace (i.e., Langevin dynamics). Langevin
dynamics can be regarded as Newtonian dynamics with effective force fields and added frictional
forces as well as (time-dependent) fluctuating forces. In particular, assume we would like to consider
motion along a small subset of the whole coordinate space defined by the coordinates q1 , ..., qM for
M ≪ N . The Langevin equations which model the dynamics in this subspace are then:
                   d2          ∂                           d
              µj     2
                       qj = −     W (q1 , . . . , qM ) − γj qj + σj ξj (t)(j = 1, 2, ..., M ),         (4)
                   dt         ∂qj                          dt
The first term on its r.h.s. describes the force field of an effective potential W (q1 , . . . , qM ), the
second term describes the velocity dependent frictional forces, and the third term the fluctuating
forces ξj (t) with coupling constants σj .W (q1 , . . . , qM ) includes the effect of the thermal motion of
the remaining n − M degrees of freedom on the motion along the coordinates q1 , . . . , qM .
Lemma 3.1. Diffusion process, the reverse process, and Langevin equation, as defined in Equation
1, 2, and 4, respectively, are mathematically equivalent in form.

Proof. Consider stochastic differential equations in the form of a first order differential equation
                                 ∂t x(t) = A[x(t), t] + B[x(t), t] · η(t),                             (5)
subject to the initial condition x(0) = x0 .
Note that diffusion process 1 and reverse process 2 are special cases of 5.
The Langevin equation 4, written here in the form µq̈ = f (q) − γ q̇ + σξ(t), is also a special case
of 5. In fact,  defining x ∈ R2 with components
                                                 x1 = m q̇, x2 =  mq reproduces 5     if one defines

                  f (x2 /m) − γx1 /m                       σ 0                           ξ(t)
A[x(t), t] =                            , B[x(t), t] =               , and η(t) =               .
                           x1                              0 0                             0
We thus conclude that diffusion process, reverse process, and Langevin equation are mathematically
equivalent in form as Equation 5.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We showed that the diffusion model is driven by Langevin dynamics, which captures the dynamics
within a subspace encompassing only a fraction of all degrees of freedom. The stochastic terms
serve to describe the effect of the remaining degrees on the degrees of interest. Specifically, in our
experiments which employ DiffDock as the diffusion model, the subset of degrees refers to transla-
tional, rotational, and torsional degrees of freedom. Since Langevin dynamics is a modification of
Newtonian dynamics for handling constrained degrees of freedom, one can conceptualize diffusion
models as carrying out MD simulations within a subset of degrees of freedom.
Balancing Bias and Variance: A Tradeoff Perspective on DiffSim
We further show the rationale for aligning MD simulation, representing Newtonian dynamics, and
diffusion models, characterized by Langevin dynamics, from a bias-variance tradeoff perspective.
Let C gt ∈ RN ×3 denotes the ground-truth ligand conformation, and {Ci }N    i=1 ∼ N (µ, Σ) denotes
N initial conformation drawn randomly from an isotropic Gaussian distribution, which undergo the
reverse diffusion and MD simulation, resulting in N final conformations {Cirev }N            sim N
                                                                                 i=1 and {Ci }i=1 ,
                     rev        sim
respectively. ϕ, φci , and φ ci ∈ R3N are defined as vec(C gt ), vec(C rev ) and vec(C sim ), re-
spectively, where vec refers to the vectorization of a multi-dimensional tensor by concatenating its
last dimension into a single vector. The bias and variance of φ ci are as Bias(cφi ) := E{c φi − ϕ},
                                               T                                        rev       sim
Cov(c φi ) := E{(φ̂i − E{cφi })(cφi − E{cφi }) , where φ ci denote a generic form of φci and φ  ci .
Define φ := [c φ1 φ c2 ... φ  d N ]. We also overload the definition of bias by defining Bias(φ) :=
[E{cφ1 − ϕ} E{c    φ2 − ϕ} ... E{d    φN − ϕ}]
We formulate a generalized bias-variance decomposition in Lemma 3.2 (proof in Appendix A).
Lemma 3.2. For a positive semi-definite weighting matrix W and a matrix X, we define ∥X∥2W :=
XT W X. The following generalized bias-variance decomposition holds as
                 X                          X
               n    E RMSD2i = Tr{W             Cov(φbi )} + Tr{∥ Bias(φ)∥2W }
                     i                           i

where n denotes the total number of atoms within the ligand.
Remark. DiffSim uses active learning to select ligands with small centroid distances but large
RMSD values. This selection criteria is analogous to choosing generated conformations having
small mean square error with repect to their ground-truth counterparts, when measured by a diag-
onal weighting matrix W that assigns greater weights to heavy atoms and smaller weights to light
atoms. Interestingly, such interpretation of W can be extended to MD simulation and the diffusion
model. In both contexts, lighter atoms tend to exhibit greater mobility compared to heavier ones,
which makes the conformation refinement process lean more towards the lighter atoms, resulting in
ligand conformations that closely align with their ground-truth counterparts when the measurement
                                                                   0
                                                               φi }N
is defined with W placing greater weights on light atoms. Let {c       i=1 denote inital conformations,
    d N                                                              a
{cφi }i=1 as generated conformations after reverse diffusion, {c φi }N   i=1 as selected conformations
                                m
after active learning, and {cφi }N     as final  conformations after   MD-informed    reverse diffusion.
          P              m     P i=1           a     P               d     P               0
We have RM SD(c       φi ) ≤      RM SD(c   φi ) ≤      RM SD(c φi ) ≤ RM SD(c           φi ).

We hypothesize that φ bsim exhibits lower bias but higher variance while φ
                                                                         brev displays higher bias but
lower variance, ultimately presenting a dynamic tradeoff between bias and variance within DiffSim.
To elaborate, by offering a delicate characterization of protein-ligand interaction at atomic reso-
lution, MD simulation is expected to guide the system towards an ideal conformation with lower
bias. However, due to its deterministic nature, distinct initial conformations can lead to divergent
conformations, hence higher variance in final outcomes. Conversely, the diffusion model introduces
additional stochastic terms of Langevin dynamics and explores a conformation space with a subset
of degrees of freedom. While the stochastic terms and the reduced set of degrees may introduce a
relatively high bias by diminishing the likelihood of locating the optimal conformation, they lead to
more stable outcomes, resulting in lower variance.
In computational biochemistry, attempts have been made to use Langevin dynamics for MD simu-
lation in order to reduce the computational cost and improve numerical stability of MD simulation
(Lange & Grubmüller, 2006; Leimkuhler & Matthews, 2013; Paquet et al., 2015). The numerical
stability issue, to some extent, supports our hypothesis that MD simulation can exhibit high variance,
while Langevin dynamics (diffusion model) help mitigate the variance.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Furthermore, active learning can also play a role in bias-variance tradeoff. It selects the samples
with small centroid distances but large RMSDs, which indicates high bias but probably low variance
(since the approximate binding site has been identified). MD simulation can then focus on these
samples and fit them with low-bias regularization to further reduce the mean square error.

4       E XPERIMENT
4.1       DATASET

We follow the approach used in prior research (Corso et al., 2022; Stärk et al., 2022) by evaluat-
ing DiffSim on PDBBind dataset (Liu et al., 2017) v2020, a collection of protein-ligand structures
sourced from Protein Data Bank (PDB) (Berman et al., 2003), and employing time-based splits to
create training, validation, and test sets. Specifically, 17,347 complexes discovered before 2019
are for training and validation. 125 unique proteins are randomly selected from 1512 complexes
discovered in 2019 or later, and 363 new complexes containing these proteins are as the test set.
We select 711 complexes from the aforementioned training set to curate the MD trajectory dataset
through the active learning approach described in section 3.3.

4.2       MD S IMULATION S ETUP

MD simulations are performed on each pair of the selected ligand conformations and their corre-
sponding target proteins. We use CHARMM36 forcefield (Lee et al., 2016) and GPU-accelerated
GROMACS (Van Der Spoel et al., 2005), a MD software for simulations of proteins, lipids, and nu-
cleic acids. Ligands and proteins are preprocessed to prepare their MD simulation input files. Specif-
ically, Ligand hydrogenation is carried out by ProteinsPlus (Schöning-Stierand et al., 2022) server1 .
Ligand topology and parameter files are generated using ACPYPE (Sousa da Silva & Vranken,
2012) Server2 . Missing protein residues are fixed by Swiss-PdbViewer (Guex & Peitsch, 1997).
The preprocessed protein-ligand complex is solvated in a truncated periodic TIP3P water box, and
the minimum distance from the box surface to the complex atoms is set to 12 Å. Counter ions are
added to neutralize systems, followed by energy minimization to reduce unreasonable collisions of
atoms within the complex. Subsequently, a 100 ps NVT (constant volume and temperature) simula-
tion is conducted at 310K (human body temperature), followed by a 100 ps NPT (constant pressure
and temperature) simulation at standard atmospheric pressure before initiating MD simulation.
Following Min et al. (2022), we exclude complexes with certain conditions which cause failed MD
simulations: 1) complicated ligands with failed forcefield parametrization; 2) proteins with too many
missing residues to repair; and 3) specific types of proteins unsuitable for simulation in a water box.
Consequently, MD simulation is conducted on 412 protein-ligand complexes. For each complex, 10
ns simulation was performed, and 20 snapshots were sampled to form a trajectory.

4.3       E VALUATION

We compare our approach DiffSim with existing deep learning-based blind docking models on com-
monly used evaluation metrics, namely ligand RMSD and centroid distance. Ligand RMSD calcu-
lates root-mean-square deviation of corresponding atomic positions between a generated ligand and
its ground-truth counterpart. Centroid distance is defined as the Euclidean distance between the
averaged coordinate of a generated ligand and its ground-truth counterpart.
Both DiffSim and DiffDock sample 40 initial conformations from an isotropic Gaussian distribution
and obtain 40 ligand conformations through reverse diffusion. Among the 40 conformations, the
one with the lowest RMSD is designated as “top-1” and the five conformations with the lowest
RMSDs as “top-5”. In contrast, TANKBind and EQUIBIND generate a single result, equivalent
to directly generating the top-1 ligand. As shown in the Tab. 1 and Tab. 2, DiffSim demonstrates
superior performance on both RMSD and centroid distance over existing models, which indicates
that DiffSim is capable of generating more accurate ligand conformations.
    1
        https://proteins.plus
    2
        https://www.bio2byte.be/acpype/


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Top-1 PDBBind Docking. For EQUIBIND (Stärk et al., 2022) and TANKBind (Lu et al.,
2022), we report the best-performing variants on each metric as described in their paper. DiffSim
(equal weight) and DiffSim (gradual weighting) refer to DiffSim trained using the alignment loss
function with an equal weighting schedule and a gradual weighting schedule, respectively. DiffSim-
w/o search refers to directly aligning reverse diffusion with MD trajectory from the initial confor-
mation. DiffSim-w/o AL refers to random selection for MD simulation without active learning.
                                         Ligand RMSD                   Centroid Distance
                                Percentiles ↓ % below thresh. ↑ Percentiles ↓ % below thresh. ↑
            Methods           25th 50th 75th 5Å         2Å   25th 50th 75th 5Å          2Å
    EQUIBIND (/|+Q|+Q2|+S) 2.1 5.6 10.3 46.4            24.6    0.9 2.0 6.2 71.0          50.6
     TANKBind (/|-R|-C|-P)     2.4 4.0 7.7 61.7         19.6    1.0 1.7 4.2 77.4          56.5
            DiffDock          1.35 2.52 4.58 77.35     41.16   0.79 1.86 5.00 74.86      53.87
       DiffSim-w/o search     2.30 3.28 5.72 62.30     36.85   0.82 1.94 5.43 75.92      50.30
         DiffSim-w/o AL       1.39 2.52 4.76 75.43     39.40   0.68 1.97 3.10 81.79      65.24
      DiffSim (equal weight)  1.30 2.47 4.50 77.90     40.33   0.45 0.97 2.29 85.91      71.82
     DiffSim (gradual weight) 1.31 2.44 4.65 77.62     41.71   0.44 0.97 2.14 85.64      72.10


                                  Table 2: Top-5 PDBBind Docking
                                        Ligand RMSD                         Centroid Distance
                               Percentiles ↓   % below thresh. ↑     Percentiles ↓   % below thresh. ↑
           Methods           25th 50th 75th 5Å          2Å       25th 50th 75th 5Å          2Å
           DiffDock          1.52 2.88 5.43 72.10       37.40      0.50 1.13 2.50 83.37       68.34
      DiffSim-w/o search     1.67 3.29 5.62 70.34       35.28      0.56 1.39 2.94 80.10       62.42
        DiffSim-w/o AL       1.62 3.00 5.37 71.97       35.19      0.53 1.22 2.56 83.32       66.50
     DiffSim (equal weight) 1.52 2.93 5.20 73.70        37.07      0.48 1.10 2.50 84.09       67.96
    DiffSim (gradual weight) 1.52 2.85 5.34 72.60       37.51      0.50 1.12 2.43 83.70       68.45


Compared to DiffDock, DiffSim exhibits a more pronounced advantage in top-1 ligand than top-5
ligands, which reflects the bias-variance tradeoff perspective discussed in Section 3.4. This exper-
imental observation can be attributed to the incorporation of MD simulation, which increases the
likelihood of achieving ideal conformations (low bias) while introduces higher variance in final out-
comes. Consequently, DiffSim exhibits a more substantial advantage for top-1 ligand than top-5
ligands whose performances can be affected by variance.

4.4    A BLATION S TUDY

We conduct ablation studies to investigate factors that influence the performance of DiffSim. As
shown in Tab. 1 and Tab. 2, directly aligning reverse diffusion with MD trajectory from the ini-
tial conformation (denoted as ’DiffSim-w/o search’) causes noticeable decreases in performances,
which emphasizes the necessity of ’pocket searching’ in the initial few steps by exlusively using
the diffusion model and highlights DiffSim’s strategy of integrating search and refine in a unified
framework. Replacing the active learning approach by random selection (denoted as ’DiffSim-w/o
AL’) also results in suboptimal outcomes, which indicates that prioritizing informative samples is
crucial in harnessing the full potential of MD simulation and facilitating meaningful integration of
diffusion model and MD simulation.


5     C ONCLUSIONS

We propose a new hybrid approach called DiffSim, which aligns reverse diffusion and MD simula-
tion trajectory. DiffSim facilitates diffusion-based generation of accurate ligand conformations, aug-
mented by physics-informed MD insights that transcend the constraints of static and rigid structures
and incorporate intricate dynamics of protein-ligand interactions. We demonstrate the theoretical
connection between diffusion models and MD simulation, which provides theoretical underpinnings
for DiffSim’s alignment strategy and inspires a new perspective for recent success of diffusion-
based molecular generative models. Empirically, DiffSim demonstrates state-of-the-art capability
of generating accurate ligand conformations for blind docking. DiffSim is anticipated to bring fresh
insights to other model architectures beyond diffusion models in AI-enhanced drug discovery.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Helen Berman, Kim Henrick, and Haruki Nakamura. Announcing the worldwide protein data bank.
  Nature structural & molecular biology, 10(12):980–980, 2003.
Clara Blanes-Mira, Pilar Fernández-Aguado, Jorge de Andrés-López, Asia Fernández-Carvajal, An-
  tonio Ferrer-Montiel, and Gregorio Fernández-Ballester. Comprehensive survey of consensus
  docking for high-throughput virtual screening. Molecules, 28(1):175, 2022.
Gabriele Corso, Hannes Stärk, Bowen Jing, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Diffdock: Dif-
  fusion steps, twists, and turns for molecular docking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01776, 2022.
Jacob D Durrant and J Andrew McCammon. Molecular dynamics simulations and drug discovery.
  BMC biology, 9(1):1–9, 2011.
Octavian Ganea, Lagnajit Pattanaik, Connor Coley, Regina Barzilay, Klavs Jensen, William Green,
  and Tommi Jaakkola. Geomol: Torsional geometric generation of molecular 3d conformer en-
  sembles. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:13757–13769, 2021.
Isabela de Souza Gomes, Charles Abreu Santana, Leandro Soriano Marcolino, Leonardo Henrique
   França de Lima, Raquel Cardoso de Melo-Minardi, Roberto Sousa Dias, Sérgio Oliveira de Paula,
   and Sabrina de Azevedo Silveira. Computational prediction of potential inhibitors for sars-cov-2
   main protease based on machine learning, docking, mm-pbsa calculations, and metadynamics.
   Plos one, 17(4):e0267471, 2022.
Christopher Grow, Kaifu Gao, Duc Duy Nguyen, and Guo-Wei Wei. Generative network complex
  (gnc) for drug discovery. Communications in information and systems, 19(3):241, 2019.
Jiaqi Guan, Wesley Wei Qian, Xingang Peng, Yufeng Su, Jian Peng, and Jianzhu Ma. 3d equiv-
   ariant diffusion for target-aware molecule generation and affinity prediction. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2303.03543, 2023.
Nicolas Guex and Manuel C Peitsch. Swiss-model and the swiss-pdb viewer: an environment for
  comparative protein modeling. electrophoresis, 18(15):2714–2723, 1997.
Woosung Jeon and Dongsup Kim. Autonomous molecule generation using reinforcement learning
 and docking to develop potential novel inhibitors. Scientific reports, 10(1):22104, 2020.
José Jiménez, Stefan Doerr, Gerard Martı́nez-Rosell, Alexander S Rose, and Gianni De Fabritiis.
  Deepsite: protein-binding site predictor using 3d-convolutional neural networks. Bioinformatics,
  33(19):3036–3042, 2017.
Radoslav Krivák and David Hoksza. P2rank: machine learning based tool for rapid and accurate
  prediction of ligand binding sites from protein structure. Journal of cheminformatics, 10:1–12,
  2018.
Greg Landrum. Rdkit: Open-source cheminformatics. 2006. Google Scholar, 2006.
Greg Landrum et al. Rdkit: A software suite for cheminformatics, computational chemistry, and
  predictive modeling. Greg Landrum, 8:31, 2013.
Oliver F Lange and Helmut Grubmüller. Collective langevin dynamics of conformational motions
  in proteins. The Journal of chemical physics, 124(21), 2006.
Jumin Lee, Xi Cheng, Sunhwan Jo, Alexander D MacKerell, Jeffery B Klauda, and Wonpil Im.
  Charmm-gui input generator for namd, gromacs, amber, openmm, and charmm/openmm simula-
  tions using the charmm36 additive force field. Biophysical journal, 110(3):641a, 2016.
Benedict Leimkuhler and Charles Matthews. Robust and efficient configurational molecular sam-
  pling via langevin dynamics. The Journal of chemical physics, 138(17), 2013.
Zhirui Liao, Ronghui You, Xiaodi Huang, Xiaojun Yao, Tao Huang, and Shanfeng Zhu. Deepdock:
  enhancing ligand-protein interaction prediction by a combination of ligand and structure infor-
  mation. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM), pp.
  311–317. IEEE, 2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tingting Liu, Dong Lu, Hao Zhang, Mingyue Zheng, Huaiyu Yang, Yechun Xu, Cheng Luo, Weil-
  iang Zhu, Kunqian Yu, and Hualiang Jiang. Applying high-performance computing in drug dis-
  covery and molecular simulation. National science review, 3(1):49–63, 2016.
Zhihai Liu, Minyi Su, Li Han, Jie Liu, Qifan Yang, Yan Li, and Renxiao Wang. Forging the basis
  for developing protein–ligand interaction scoring functions. Accounts of chemical research, 50
  (2):302–309, 2017.
Wei Lu, Qifeng Wu, Jixian Zhang, Jiahua Rao, Chengtao Li, and Shuangjia Zheng. Tankbind:
 Trigonometry-aware neural networks for drug-protein binding structure prediction. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 35:7236–7249, 2022.
Wei Lu, Ji-Xian Zhang, Weifeng Huang, Ziqiao Zhang, Xiangyu Jia, Zhenyu Wang, Leilei Shi,
 Chengtao Li, Peter Wolynes, and Shuangjia Zheng. Dynamicbind: Predicting ligand-specific
 protein-ligand complex structure with a deep equivariant generative model. 2023.
Shitong Luo, Yufeng Su, Xingang Peng, Sheng Wang, Jian Peng, and Jianzhu Ma. Antigen-specific
  antibody design and optimization with diffusion-based generative models for protein structures.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:9754–9767, 2022.
Biao Ma, Kei Terayama, Shigeyuki Matsumoto, Yuta Isaka, Yoko Sasakura, Hiroaki Iwata, Mitsugu
  Araki, and Yasushi Okuno. Structure-based de novo molecular generator combined with artificial
  intelligence and docking simulations. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 61(7):
  3304–3313, 2021.
Yaosen Min, Ye Wei, Peizhuo Wang, Nian Wu, Stefan Bauer, Shuxin Zheng, Yu Shi, Yingheng
  Wang, Xiaoting Wang, Dan Zhao, et al. Predicting the protein-ligand affinity from molecular
  dynamics trajectories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.10230, 2022.
Connor J Morris and Dennis Della Corte. Using molecular docking and molecular dynamics to
  investigate protein-ligand interactions. Modern Physics Letters B, 35(08):2130002, 2021.
Duc Duy Nguyen, Kaifu Gao, Menglun Wang, and Guo-Wei Wei. Mathdl: mathematical deep
  learning for d3r grand challenge 4. Journal of computer-aided molecular design, 34:131–147,
  2020.
Noel M O’Boyle, Michael Banck, Craig A James, Chris Morley, Tim Vandermeersch, and Geof-
  frey R Hutchison. Open babel: An open chemical toolbox. Journal of cheminformatics, 3(1):
  1–14, 2011.
Eric Paquet, Herna L Viktor, et al. Molecular dynamics, monte carlo simulations, and langevin
  dynamics: a computational review. BioMed research international, 2015, 2015.
Matthew Ragoza, Tomohide Masuda, and David Ryan Koes. Generating 3d molecules conditional
 on receptor binding sites with deep generative models. Chemical science, 13(9):2701–2713, 2022.
Keval Raval and Tejas Ganatra. Basics, types and applications of molecular docking: A review. IP
  International Journal of Comprehensive and Advanced Pharmacology, 7(1):12–16, 2022.
Arne Schneuing, Yuanqi Du, Charles Harris, Arian Jamasb, Ilia Igashov, Weitao Du, Tom Blun-
  dell, Pietro Lió, Carla Gomes, Max Welling, et al. Structure-based drug design with equivariant
  diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13695, 2022.
Katrin Schöning-Stierand, Konrad Diedrich, Christiane Ehrt, Florian Flachsenberg, Joel Graef,
  Jochen Sieg, Patrick Penner, Martin Poppinga, Annett Ungethüm, and Matthias Rarey. Pro-
  teins plus: a comprehensive collection of web-based molecular modeling tools. Nucleic Acids
  Research, 50(W1):W611–W615, 2022.
Chao Shen, Xujun Zhang, Yafeng Deng, Junbo Gao, Dong Wang, Lei Xu, Peichen Pan, Tingjun
  Hou, and Yu Kang. Boosting protein–ligand binding pose prediction and virtual screening based
  on residue–atom distance likelihood potential and graph transformer. Journal of Medicinal Chem-
  istry, 65(15):10691–10706, 2022.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sakshi Singh, Qanita Bani Baker, and Dev Bukhsh Singh. Molecular docking and molecular dy-
  namics simulation. In Bioinformatics, pp. 291–304. Elsevier, 2022.
Miha Skalic, Davide Sabbadin, Boris Sattarov, Simone Sciabola, and Gianni De Fabritiis. From
 target to drug: generative modeling for the multimodal structure-based ligand design. Molecular
 pharmaceutics, 16(10):4282–4291, 2019.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Shanmugapriya Sothiselvam, Bo Liu, Wei Han, Haripriya Ramu, Dorota Klepacki, Gemma Cather-
  ine Atkinson, Age Brauer, Maido Remm, Tanel Tenson, Klaus Schulten, et al. Macrolide antibi-
  otics allosterically predispose the ribosome for translation arrest. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 111(27):9804–9809, 2014.
Alan W Sousa da Silva and Wim F Vranken. Acpype-antechamber python parser interface. BMC
  research notes, 5:1–8, 2012.
Hannes Stärk, Octavian Ganea, Lagnajit Pattanaik, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Equibind:
  Geometric deep learning for drug binding structure prediction. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 20503–20521. PMLR, 2022.
Cheng Tan, Zhangyang Gao, and Stan Z Li. Target-aware molecular graph generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.04829, 2022.
David Van Der Spoel, Erik Lindahl, Berk Hess, Gerrit Groenhof, Alan E Mark, and Herman JC
  Berendsen. Gromacs: fast, flexible, and free. Journal of computational chemistry, 26(16):1701–
  1718, 2005.
Cheng Wang and Yingkai Zhang. Improving scoring-docking-screening powers of protein–ligand
  scoring functions using random forest. Journal of computational chemistry, 38(3):169–177, 2017.
Mingyuan Xu, Ting Ran, and Hongming Chen. De novo molecule design through the molecular
 generative model conditioned by 3d information of protein binding sites. Journal of Chemical
 Information and Modeling, 61(7):3240–3254, 2021.
Minkai Xu, Lantao Yu, Yang Song, Chence Shi, Stefano Ermon, and Jian Tang. Geodiff: A geo-
 metric diffusion model for molecular conformation generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02923,
 2022.
Xu Yan, Yingfeng Lu, Zhen Li, Qing Wei, Xin Gao, Sheng Wang, Song Wu, and Shuguang Cui.
  Pointsite: a point cloud segmentation tool for identification of protein ligand binding atoms. Jour-
  nal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 62(11):2835–2845, 2022.
Ruoqi Yang, Xuan Zha, Xingyi Gao, Kangmin Wang, Bin Cheng, and Bin Yan. Multi-stage virtual
  screening of natural products against p38α mitogen-activated protein kinase: predictive modeling
  by machine learning, docking study and molecular dynamics simulation. Heliyon, 8(9):e10495,
  2022.
Yuejiang Yu, Chun Cai, Zhengdan Zhu, and Hang Zheng. Uni-dock: A gpu-accelerated docking
  program enables ultra-large virtual screening. 2022.
Yuejiang Yu, Shuqi Lu, Zhifeng Gao, Hang Zheng, and Guolin Ke. Do deep learning models really
  outperform traditional approaches in molecular docking? arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07134, 2023.
Haiping Zhang, Junxin Li, Konda Mani Saravanan, Hao Wu, Zhichao Wang, Du Wu, Yanjie Wei,
  Zhen Lu, Youhai H Chen, Xiaochun Wan, et al. An integrated deep learning and molecular
  dynamics simulation-based screening pipeline identifies inhibitors of a new cancer drug target
  tipe2. Frontiers in pharmacology, 12:772296, 2021.
Yangtian Zhang, Huiyu Cai, Chence Shi, Bozitao Zhong, and Jian Tang. E3bind: An end-to-end
  equivariant network for protein-ligand docking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.06069, 2022.
Jinhua Zhu, Yingce Xia, Chang Liu, Lijun Wu, Shufang Xie, Yusong Wang, Tong Wang, Tao Qin,
   Wengang Zhou, Houqiang Li, et al. Direct molecular conformation generation. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2202.01356, 2022.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P ROOF
A.1      P ROOF OF L EMMA 3.2

Lemma 3.2. For a positive semi-definite weighting matrix W and a matrix X, we define ∥X∥2W :=
XT W X. The following generalized bias-variance decomposition holds as
                 X                          X
               n    E RMSD2i = Tr{W             Cov(φ bi )} + Tr{∥ Bias(φ)∥2W }
                    i                         i

where n denotes the total number of atoms within the ligand.

Proof.
      nE RMSD2i =E ∥cφi − ϕ∥2W (recall that ϕ refers to the ground-truth conformation)


                     φi − ϕ)T W (φ̂i − ϕ)

                =E (c
                                    φi − ϕ)T

                =E Tr W (c φi − ϕ)(c
                                     φi − ϕ)T

                = Tr W E (cφi − ϕ)(c
                                                                            φi ))T

                = Tr W E (cφi − E{c φi } + Bias(c     φi − E{c
                                                φi ))(c        φi } + Bias(c
                                                        φi ))T

                = Tr W Cov(cφi ) + W (Bias(cφi ))(Bias(c
                             φi − E{c
                      + W E{(c                   φi ))T
                                     φi })}(Bias(c
                                                φi })T

                      +W (Bias(c
                               φi ))E (cφi − E{c
                                                          φi ))T

                    = Tr W Cov(cφi ) + W (Bias(c
                                               φi ))(Bias(c
                                              φi )∥2W .
                               φi )} + ∥ Bias(c
                    = Tr{W Cov(c
The fourth equality exploits the linearity of the trace to commute it with the expectation value.
The fifth equality uses the identity ϕ = E{φ̂} − Bias(φ̂). The seventh equality uses the fact that
E{φ̂ − E{φ̂}} = 0.
                                                                                       φi )∥2W =
                                                                           P
Sum L.H.S and R.H.S of the above derivation over i, and note that             i ∥ Bias(c
               2
Tr{∥ Bias(φ)∥W }, thus completing the proof.


                                                  13
