Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H OW FA R A RE L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS F ROM
AGENTS WITH T HEORY- OF -M IND ?
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



  2EVHUYDWLRQ


                                                :KLOH 7RP LV DZD\  (OOD
              7RP SXWV D FKRFRODWH EDU
                                                SXWV WKH FKRFRODWH EDU LQ             7RP FRPHV EDFN
               LQ WKH JUHHQ FXSERDUG
  ,QIHUHQFH                                       WKH EOXH FXSERDUG                                                 $FWLRQ
   &XUUHQW  $VN DERXW RWKHUV¶ PHQWDO VWDWHV                         7 '  3UREH DFWLRQV DV D VLWXDWHG DJHQW
  4  :KHUH ZLOO 7RP ORRN IRU WKH FKRFRODWH EDU"                  4  ,I \RX ZHUH WKHUH  ZKDW ZRXOG \RX GR"
  $  *UHHQ FXSERDUG                                              $  7HOO 7RP WKDW WKH FKRFRODWH EDU LV LQ WKH EOXH FXSERDUG

    0RGHOV DUH JLYHQ ZKDW WR UHDVRQ DERXW  IURP 4                    0RGHOV QHHG WR VHOI GLVFRYHU ZKDW WR UHDVRQ DERXW

    5HDVRQLQJ  ³7RP WKLQNV WKDW WKH FKRFRODWH LV LQ WKH              0XOWL 6WHS 5HDVRQLQJ  ³7RP ZDQWV WKH FKRFRODWH
  JUHHQ FXSERDUG VLQFH KH LV QRW DZDUH RI LW EHLQJ PRYHG ´       +H ZLOO ORRN IRU LW LQ WKH JUHHQ FXSERDUG  EXW LW KDV EHHQ
                                                                 PRYHG  , FDQ KHOS E\ LQIRUPLQJ KLP RI WKH PRYH ´


Figure 1: Given observations, current social reasoning tasks ask models questions targeting specific
inferences (left). We propose T4D to probe whether LLMs can decide proper actions using theory-of-
mind as a situated agent (right). They key challenges in T4D are 1) models have to identify relevant
inferences about mental states without being directed towards one and 2) to arrive at proper action
choices, more steps of reasoning are required.

                                                    A BSTRACT

         Thinking is for Doing. Humans can infer other people’s mental states from
         observations–an ability called Theory-of-Mind (ToM)–and subsequently act prag-
         matically on those inferences. Existing question answering benchmarks such as
         ToMi ask models questions to make inferences about beliefs of characters in a story,
         but do not test whether models can then use these inferences to guide their actions.
         We propose a new evaluation paradigm for large language models (LLMs): Think-
         ing for Doing (T4D), which requires models to connect inferences about others’
         mental states to actions in social scenarios. Experiments on T4D demonstrate that
         LLMs such as GPT-4 and PaLM 2 seemingly excel at tracking characters’ beliefs
         in stories, but they struggle to translate this capability into strategic action.
         Our analysis reveals the core challenge for LLMs lies in identifying the implicit
         inferences about mental states without being explicitly asked about as in ToMi,
         that lead to choosing the correct action in T4D. To bridge this gap, we introduce
         a zero-shot prompting framework, Foresee and Reflect (FaR), which provides
         a reasoning structure that encourages LLMs to anticipate future challenges and
         reason about potential actions. FaR boosts GPT-4’s performance from 50% to 71%
         on T4D, outperforming other prompting methods such as Chain-of-Thought and
         Self-Ask. Moreover, FaR generalizes to diverse out-of-distribution story structures
         and scenarios that also require ToM inferences to choose an action, consistently
         outperforming other methods including few-shot in-context learning.


                                                             1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1       I NTRODUCTION

Humans act with specific intentions, often grounded in reasoning about their environment and the
mental states of others. For example, if Tom’s friend Anne is looking for her backpack in the office,
and Tom knows it is in the kitchen, Tom will intervene to help Anne by suggesting she check the
kitchen. This proactive action stems from Tom’s understanding of three aspects: 1) Anne’s goal of
finding her backpack; 2) the knowledge of backpack being in the kitchen; and 3) Anne’s belief of
thinking the backpack is in the office. Reasoning about Anne’s mental states allows Tom to conclude
that the mismatch between belief and knowledge prevents Anne from reaching her goal, and his
intervention can help. Such capabilities to reason about and act on another individual’s beliefs,
intentions, and emotions are referred to as Theory-of-Mind (ToM), a critical element of human social
interactions (Premack & Woodruff, 1978; Frith & Frith, 2003)
The rise of large language models (LLMs) has prompted extensive research into their potential for
Theory-of-Mind (ToM) capabilities (Sap et al., 2022; Kosinski, 2023; Ullman, 2023; Shapira et al.,
2023a). These investigations predominantly rely on established psychological tests, such as the False
Belief Test (Wimmer & Perner, 1983; Baron-Cohen et al., 1985; Perner et al., 1987). While existing
benchmarks (Nematzadeh et al., 2018; Le et al., 2019) gauge LLMs’ proficiency in inferring mental
states from scenarios (see Figure 1 left), they often overlook an essential human capability: acting1
on inferred mental states. Simply put: humans often act based on inferred intentions and beliefs. In
contrast, despite LLMs’ performance in the False Belief Test, they often fail to infer what actions
would be most useful in scenarios that humans would find trivial, a crucial consideration for the
development of next-generation AI agents, from virtual assistants to embodied robots.
We introduce a new evaluation paradigm: Thinking for Doing (T4D) (see Fiske, 1992) to probe
whether models can determine proper actions based on the mental states of others, rather than merely
being able to answer questions about mental states. At its core, T4D envisions models as agents
processing a series of observations to determine the most apt action from a set of options. Specifically,
we adopt stories from a widely-used ToM benchmark: ToMi (Le et al., 2019), based on Sally-Anne
False Belief Test (Baron-Cohen et al., 1985) into observations in T4D. This integration ensures that
models must utilize mental state reasoning, particularly when a character is identified to hold a false
belief (as depicted in Figure 1). The crux of T4D’s novelty, as visualized in Figure 1, lies in its
objective: instead of merely eliciting inferences from mental state reasoning, it compels models to
determine actions based on the former.
T4D presents a new zero-shot challenge for LLMs. We find the highest performance (GPT-4)
capped at 50% while human annotators reach over 95% agreement. To gain deeper insights into
the challenges LLMs encounter in T4D, we identify three reasoning patterns from human-written
rationales: question decomposition, theory-of-mind inferences, and commonsense assumptions. Then
we test LLMs in oracle settings, providing models with oracle reasoning steps based on the identified
patterns. As demonstrated in Section 4.2, the primary challenge LLMs face in T4D is pinpointing the
correct evidence to inform their actions. When we provide models with specific hints about relevant
inferences, their performance significantly improves, approaching human levels.
The clear potential of LLMs to perform T4D with proper guidance leads to the question: Can
we develop a method that improves LLMs’ T4D performance without providing oracle hints but
instead teaching models to better structure their reasoning process? In response, we introduce a
new zero-shot prompting framework Foresee and Reflect (FaR) that guides model’s inferences by
providing a reasoning structure using future thinking. FaR has two components: Foresee, where
it prompts the models to predict future events based on observations and Reflect, where models
reason on which action choice better helps the characters with potential challenges. Comparison
with prompting strategies including Chain-of-Thought Wei et al. (2022), Tree-of-Thought (Yao
et al., 2023a) (zero-shot), and Self-Ask (Press et al., 2022) shows that FaR improves LLM zero-shot
performance by as much as 50% while other methods do not display significant improvement.
To explore FaR’s strengths and limitations in more depth, we perform ablation studies aiming to
answer two questions: are both foresight and reflection needed for improving LLMs and what happens
if we feed models noisy future predictions? We find that both components are crucial for tackling T4D
and that LLMs are sensitive to noisy reasoning steps about the future in FaR, making how to help

    1
        We use “acting” to refer to performing action in social scenarios like providing information to others.


                                                          2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


LLMs recover from noisy foresight an intriguing future direction. To examine whether FaR overfits on
the ToMi-converted T4D task, we also conduct generalization study by testing on out-of-distribution
story structures and a non-False-Belief ToM task. We find that FaR shows consistent improvement
across generalization tests, even outperforming few-shot prompting. Our contributions are as follows:

      1. We propose Thinking for Doing, a evaluation paradigm to challenge whether models can
         connect social reasoning to actions.
      2. We find LLMs struggle on T4D and our analysis indicates the key bottleneck is identifying
         implicit inference steps.
      3. We design Foresee and Reflect (FaR), a zero-shot prompting framework that dramatically
         improves LLMs’ performance on T4D. Analysis and generalization studies show that FaR
         robustness generalize to diverse contexts.


2   BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK

Theory-of-Mind and Language Models Theory-of-mind has been studied extensively in psychol-
ogy and cognitive science (Premack & Woodruff, 1978; Baron-Cohen et al., 1985; Frith & Frith,
2003), and clinical psychology tests such as False Belief Test (Wimmer & Perner, 1983) (FBT) were
developed to test ToM abilities in children. More recently, as neural language models (LM) display
impressive performance in many language understanding tasks, more studies aim to answer whether
LMs exhibit ToM (Sap et al., 2022; Kosinski, 2023; Ullman, 2023; Shapira et al., 2023a; Sclar et al.,
2023; Trott et al., 2023) using False Belief-templated story datasets such as ToM-bAbI (Nematzadeh
et al., 2018) and ToMi (Le et al., 2019). Though stories cover limited range of interactions, other
sources of ToM tests also face challenges, such as scalability due to costs of human-generated
interactions (Bara et al., 2021) and noises in text-game environments (Zhou et al., 2023). This work
focuses on False-Belief tests for ToM, the most studied subarea, and revisits the format of such tasks
when testing LLMs. Specifically, while probing work shows that LLMs display some degree of ToM
but lack robustness (Sap et al., 2022; Shapira et al., 2022), we find that when asked FBT in a more
realistic scenario, models fail even on the unperturbed tasks.

Large Language Models and Agents A line of recent work aims to build language agents (Andreas,
2022; Mahowald et al., 2023) that can perform “actions”. Actions range from mimicking human social
behavior (Park et al., 2023), completing tasks using websites (Gur et al., 2023), and tool using (Yao
et al., 2023b; Schick et al., 2023). Our work distinguishes from them by focusing on actions that
require proper mental state modeling of other individuals (ToM), attributing the performance gap
between answering inference questions only and choosing actions based on inferences, and designed
a zero-shot prompt that improves models’ capability that robustly generalizes.

Prompting Techniques for LLM Recent advancements in the area of LLMs have given rise to a
plethora of few-shot (Brown et al., 2020) and instruction (Mishra et al., 2021) prompting techniques,
including Chain-of-Thought prompting (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022), Least-to-most prompting (Zhou
et al., 2022), and search-based approaches like Tree-of-Thought (ToT) (Yao et al., 2023a), Graph-of-
Thought (Besta et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023c), and RAP (Hao et al., 2023).
However, the primary objective of our work is not to introduce a new prompting technique. Instead,
we focus on the benefits of imposing a structured framework on the LLM’s reasoning process,
particularly in the context of Theory of Mind (ToM) tasks. Specifically, our analysis (Section 4.2)
reveals essential elements of reasoning that can help LLM agents act (Foresee (F) and Reflect (R)),
and we capture this in our proposed approach FaR. Moreover, any prompting method that supports
granular, multi-step reasoning and captures the Foreseeing and Reflecting steps is well-equipped to
address the intricacies of ToM tasks.


3   T HINKING FOR D OING (T4D): TASK AND DATA

Here we formulate the Thinking for Doing (T4D) task that requires models to use social reasoning to
choose a proper action as a situated agent.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1    T4D TASK

In grounded social scenarios, an agent’s perspective can be distilled into four primary variables:
1. Observations O (e.g., Tom entered the kitchen. Tom wants a chocolate. Ella moves the chocolate.),
2. Task T (e.g., Based on the above observations, who needs help?), 3. Inferences I (e.g., Tom is
unaware of the chocolate’s current location.), and 4. Action A (e.g., Inform Tom about the chocolate’s
location.). For a comprehensive illustration of these variables in context, please refer to Figure 1.
Traditional social reasoning tasks typically challenge models with questions targeting specific in-
ferences. For example, they might pose a question like “Where will Jackson look for the onion?”
accompanied by a set of candidate answers (Nematzadeh et al., 2018; Sap et al., 2019; Le et al.,
2019). This is depicted in the left side of Figure 1. Formally, this kind of task can be represented as
estimation of P (I|O, TI ), where TI denotes the inference-directed task articulated by the specific
question and its associated answer options.
However, in many real-world AI applications, particularly for embodied agents, decisions often
revolve around actions rather than explicit inferences. These decisions are influenced by underlying,
often implicit, inferences. To bridge this gap, we introduce Thinking for Doing (T4D), a task designed
to assess a model’s ability to determine the appropriate action based solely on observations, without
being directed towards a particular inference. Effectively, T4D represents a shift from directly probing
for specific inferences (TI ) to eliciting actions (TA ). In the T4D framework, the model’s task is
not simply to make an inference but to decide on an action based on inferred mental states. This
decision-making process involves estimating P (A|O, TA ), where TA encapsulates the action-oriented
task, such as determining Who would you prefer to assist the most? with potential actions A like
Assist Jackson or Assist Noah. Crucially, in T4D, inferences I act as a latent variable, inferred from
the observable O to subsequently influence the chosen action A, i.e. P (A|O, TA , I).

3.2    C ONVERTING T O M B ENCHMARKS TO T4D

This study focuses on a critical abil-
                                         7R0L  /H HW  DO  DQG RWKHUV      7 ' 7R0  2XUV
ity in social intelligence–Theory of
Mind (ToM) and converts a widely-         2EVHUYDWLRQV  2ZHQ HQWHUHG       2EVHUYDWLRQV  2ZHQ HQWHUHG WKH ORXQJH
                                         WKH ORXQJH  $YHU\ KDWHV WKH      $YHU\ KDWHV WKH SHDFK  1DWKDQ HQWHUHG WKH
used existing benchmark: ToMi (Le        SHDFK  1DWKDQ HQWHUHG WKH        ORXQJH  7KH VXLW LV LQ WKH FXSERDUG  $YHU\
et al., 2019) from probing inferences    ORXQJH  7KH VXLW LV LQ WKH       HQWHUHG WKH EDVHPHQW  2ZHQ OLNHV WKH MHDQV
to probing agent’s action decisions.     FXSERDUG  $YHU\ HQWHUHG WKH      2ZHQ H[LWHG WKH ORXQJH  1DWKDQ PRYHG WKH
In the classic Sally-Anne Test setup     EDVHPHQW  2ZHQ OLNHV WKH MHDQV   VXLW WR WKH EDVNHW  1DWKDQ H[LWHG WKH ORXQJH
                                         2ZHQ H[LWHG WKH ORXQJH  1DWKDQ   $YHU\ H[LWHG WKH EDVHPHQW  2ZHQ HQWHUHG
(used by ToMi), participants interpret   PRYHG WKH VXLW WR WKH EDVNHW     WKH EDVHPHQW  1DWKDQ DQG 2ZHQ SODQ WR XVH
a stroy. For instance, consider Owen     1DWKDQ H[LWHG WKH ORXQJH  $YHU\  WKH VXLW VRRQ
who mistakenly believes the suit is      H[LWHG WKH EDVHPHQW               4XHVWLRQ  %DVHG RQ WKH DERYH
                                          4XHVWLRQ  :KHUH ZLOO 2ZHQ ORRN  REVHUYDWLRQV  ZKR DPRQJ WKH LQGLYLGXDOV
placed in the cupboard (Figure 2).
                                         IRU WKH VXLW"                    ZRXOG PRVW EHQHILW IURP UHFHLYLQJ KHOSIXO
ToMi asks models to deduce Owen’s        $QVZHU HLWKHU $ RU % IURP WKH    LQIRUPDWLRQ"
mental states, with the expected an-     IROORZLQJ RSWLRQV  $  FXSERDUG   $QVZHU IURP WKH IROORZLQJ RSWLRQV  $  2ZHQ
swer being that Owen will search for     %  EDVNHW                        %  1DWKDQ &  $YHU\ '  1RQH RI WKH DERYH

the suit inside the cupboard (due to
mistaken beliefs).                     Figure 2: Task input comparison of ToMi that asks an inference
                                                question given observations and our converted T4D that requires
To shift the focus towards actions as models to choose an action
an agent who could potentially inter-
vene and help other characters, we introduce an intent: both Owen and Nathan intend to use the suit
in the near future. By explicitly stating both characters’ intentions, we aim to deter models from
adopting a rudimentary heuristic, like automatically assisting the character with immediate plans.
However, we also ensure that this complexity does not obfuscate the task for humans. As validated
in section 3.3, despite the shared intent to use the suit, human consensus consistently identifies
Owen as the one needing help due to his misunderstanding about the suit’s location. In our modified
task, termed T4D, models are prompted to identify which character they would assist the most by
providing accurate information about the onion’s location. Thus, in the T4D adaptation, models must
deduce from the narrative that: 1) Owen remains under the false impression that the suit is in the
cupboard, and 2) considering his impending need for the suit, accurate knowledge about its location
would significantly benefit him. We programmatically convert the stories of ToMi (around 500) to
T4D due to ToMi’s templatic nature. Details of conversion are in Appendix B.


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3        H UMAN AGREEMENT ON T4D

Before using T4D to evaluate our models, we seek to verify its validity by testing it with human
ToM (e.g., would human ToM encourage helping a character who holds outdated beliefs?). To do so,
we randomly sampled around 80 instances for evaluation by n = 20 human raters. To ensure this
human study reflects how most people would use ToM in real life, we do not pre-train these raters
extensively on the ToM tasks and do not provide any answers in the task examples. Our findings
underscore the robustness of T4D tasks: every instance garnered agreement from at least 17 of the 20
raters. Moreover, over 90% of the instances achieved agreement levels exceeding 95% (19 or all 20
raters in consensus). This strong human consensus shows that the design of T4D naturally aligns
with human perspectives on decision-making.


4         LLM S S TRUGGLE ON T4D W HILE H UMANS F IND IT E ASY

Here we test LLMs on our T4D task and compare with their performance on the original ToMi set
that we convert from. We use PaLM 2 (Anil et al., 2023) Bison (S) and Unicorn (L) 2 , ChatGPT
(GPT-3.5) (OpenAI, 2022), and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) accessed between June and August, 2023.

4.1        T HINKING I S “Easy”, T4D I S C HALLENGING FOR LLM S

We focus on zero-shot performance following
recent studies (Sap et al., 2022; Shapira et al., Table 1: LLMs’ accuracy on T4D compared with
2023a; Sclar et al., 2023) to probe LLM’s ca- ToMi. We find gap between human performance on T4D
pabilities to understand and use theory-of-mind. is much larger than that on ToMi (*we count humans
Specifically, we provide answer options and in- correct when there is more than 95% agreement).
struct models to output one answer option. The
results comparing LLM’s performance on ToMi                 Models              ToMi T4D-ToM
and T4D-ToM are shown in Table 1. We find           PaLM  2-S (Bison)             87        16
that both PaLM 2 and GPT models perform             PaLM 2-L (Unicorn)            87        30
close to perfect human scores on ToMi (best         GPT-3.5-turbo (ChatGPT)       74        15
model GPT-4 gets 93% vs human 100%) but the         GPT-4                         93        50
                                                    Random Guessing               50        26
performance gap enlarges significantly across
                                                    Human                        100       90*
all models when tested on T4D-ToM (GPT-4
50% vs human 90%). This discrepancy underscores the challenges posed by T4D for even the
strongest contemporary LLMs.

4.2        W HAT M AKES T4D C HALLENGING FOR LLM S ?

To better understand why LLMs find T4D challenging, we conducted a study to understand the
reasoning processes that humans use to tackle T4D tasks. By collecting and analyzing human-written
rationales, we identified distinct dimensions of reasoning that seem particularly challenging for
LLMs. Next, we discuss these challenges and experiments with oracle hints to determine if they can
indeed aid the models in overcoming these reasoning hurdles. The major reasoning challenges, along
with examples and our proposed oracle hints, are summarized in Table 2 and we include example
rationales in Appendix C.
Question Decomposition (QD) We find that humans often break down the overarching T4D task
into more specific follow-up questions such as “Who might have an information gap?” and “What
information I can provide?”. This decomposition bridges the gap between the general question and
the provided observations. To emulate this in models, we added oracle hints, spotlighting specific
information, derived from the decomposition process. Essentially, we guide the models with oracle
inference results (IQ ), restructuring the task as i.e, P (A|O, TA , IQ ).
Theory-of-Mind Inferences (ToM) The second major reasoning challenge is the core inference
tested in the Sally-Anne test – can models correctly infer that Sally will look for the item in the
old location because she left the room before Anne moved the item? We make the ToM reasoning
      2
          https://blog.google/technology/ai/google-palm-2-ai-large-language-model/


                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Reasoning-Level breakdown. Following the example task from Figure 2, we show 3 types
of reasoning challenges with example specific reasoning steps and design oracle hints to make each
challenge easier to analyze what makes LLMs struggle on T4D.
          Reasoning
                                  Example Reasoning Steps                   How to Provide Oracle Hints
          Challenges
                           Who would benefit from info?                 Add hint after question:
          Question
                           –>Nathan and Owen plan to use the suit       "HINT: this information is about
      Decomposition (QD)
                           –>Do they know the suit’s location?          an item’s location"
                           Nathan and Owen plan to use the suit soon
                                                                        Provide oracle ToM inference:
        Theory-of-Mind     –>They need to know the location
                                                                        "Owen will look for the suit in
            (ToM)          Owen left before the suit was moved
                                                                        the cupboard"
                           –>Owen thinks the suit is in the cupboard
                           Nathan moved the suit to the basket          Make assumptions explicit:
        Common Sense       –>Though not mentioned, we can               "Cupboard and basket are in lounge"
       Assumption (CSA)    assume that the basket is lounge             "Characters do not leave room
                           as Nathan is not said to exit the room       unless explicitly stated"



challenge easier by providing oracle ToM inferences (IT oM ) in the observations: “Sally will look for
the [ITEM] in the [OLD CONTAINER]”. This shifts the task to P (A|O, TA , IT oM ).
Common Sense Assumptions (CSA) The ambiguity inherent in ToMi, as noted by Sclar et al.
(2023), presents another challenge. To solve the task, models must assume that both containers are
located in the room, even though this is never mentioned explicitly in the observations. We make
these assumptions explicit in the observations, i.e, P (A|O, TA , KCS ), where we use KCS to indicate
commonsense knowledge not explicitly present in the observation.

Analysis Results As illustrated in Figure 3,                                Effect of Adding Reasoning Dimensions
providing oracle hints yields varying results                      80                                               GPT-3.5-Turbo
                                                                                                                    GPT-4
across the identified reasoning dimensions.                        70                                               PaLM2-S
                                                                                                                    PaLM2-L
                                                                   60
Guiding models with hints related to item lo-
cation (+QD) and incorporating oracle-derived                      50
                                                        Accuracy


character beliefs (+ToM) significantly enhances                    40

task performance. In contrast, merely clarify-                     30

ing assumptions (+CSA) has a limited effect on                     20

boosting model accuracy.                                           10

                                                                   0
We hypothesize that providing QD or ToM in-                 +QD              +ToM            +CSA
                                                                          Task Settings
ferences helps models by supplying suggestive
evidence, either in the form of leading questions Figure 3: Increase in performance with provided
(IQ ) or relevant ToM inferences (IT oM ). These reasoning levels. Adding oracle inferences about ques-
results also suggest that the underlying reason tion decomposition (especially for PaLM2) and ToM
for the low performance of LLMs on T4D is dramatically improve performance.
attributed not to the task design but to their failure in drawing correct inferences and reasoning.
Thus, a key bottleneck in LLMs that makes T4D challenging (but easy for humans) is navigating
the unconstrained latent inference space I to locate the proper inference that makes choosing which
action intent clear.


5   F ORESEE AND R EFLECT (FA R) P ROMPTING

Building on the insights from our T4D-ToM task analysis, we investigate can we help LLMs identify
an implicit inference path that leads to correct action choices without hints. Given observations,
humans find it natural to identify relevant inferences and arrive at decisions such as “who should I
provide information to?” However, ensuring that LLMs perform similarly structured reasoning is
challenging. Although evidence points to LLMs’ ability to infer, they do not necessarily connect
these inferences to coherent reasoning about actions.
Our main methodology is to provide LLMs with a generalizable reasoning structure that guides the
models to relevant inferences. To this end, we introduce the Foresee and Reflect (FA R) framework.
This framework equips LLMs with a structured reasoning paradigm, prompting them to: 1) extrapolate
potential future events from given observations, and 2) introspect on actionable steps that would best


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      ̒                          о+´Ò̡͟
            *ķŊƈƖƢôͯÙįƇͯhôƼƈéƗͯ͛*Ù¶͜                                      ˻ ĴĿĿŌ˺ņ ĿļľĸĿŌ ĹňŇňŅĸ ĴĶŇļłŁņ˻˪  ĴĿĿŌ ŃĿĴŁņ Ňł ňņĸ ŇĻĸ ŀĴŅĵĿĸ ņłłŁ˫
                                                                       ĴĿĿŌ ŊļĿĿ ĸŁŇĸŅ ŇĻĸ Ņłłŀ˫
   ŊļĿĿ όŅņŇ ŇĻļŁľ ĴĵłňŇ ĿļľĸĿŌ ĹňŇňŅĸ ĸŉĸŁŇņ ĴŁķ ļķĸŁŇļĹŌ                ˻ łŇĸŁŇļĴĿ ĶĻĴĿĿĸŁĺĸ ̻˻˪  ĴĿĿŌ ŀļĺĻŇ ŁłŇ ľŁłŊ ŊĻĸŅĸ ŇĻĸ ŀĴŅĵĿĸ
 ŃłŇĸŁŇļĴĿ ĶĻĴĿĿĸŁĺĸņ ŇĻĴŇ ĸĴĶĻ ļŁķļŉļķňĴĿ ŀļĺĻŇ ĵĸ ĹĴĶļŁĺ˫           ļņ ņļŁĶĸ  ŁŁĸ ŀłŉĸķ ļŇ˫
  ĻĸŁ   ŊļĿĿ ŅĸϒĸĶŇ łŁ ŊĻĸŇĻĸŅ   ĶĴŁ ĻĸĿŃ ŇĻĸŀ ŊļŇĻ ŇĻĸ                   ˻ ĴŁ   ĻĸĿŃ ŊļŇĻ ļŇ ŁłŊ ĵŌ ŃŅłŉļķļŁĺ ļŁĹłŅŀĴŇļłŁ˲˻˪ !ĸņ˨   ĶĴŁ
 ĶĻĴĿĿĸŁĺĸņ ļĹ   ŃŅłŉļķĸ ŇĻĸŀ ŊļŇĻ ļŁĹłŅŀĴŇļłŁ ŁłŊ˫  ļŁĴĿĿŌ˨          ļŁĹłŅŀ  ĴĿĿŌ ŇĻĴŇ ŇĻĸ ŀĴŅĵĿĸ ļņ ļŁ ŇĻĸ ĵĴņľĸŇ˫
 ŊļĿĿ ĶĻłłņĸ Ĵ όŁĴĿ ĴŁņŊĸŅ ĵĴņĸķ łŁ ŇĻĸ ŅĸĴņłŁļŁĺ˫                        ˻ łŇĸŁŇļĴĿ ĶĻĴĿĿĸŁĺĸ ̼˻˪  ĴĿĿŌ ŀļĺĻŇ Łĸĸķ ļŁĹłŅŀĴŇļłŁ łŁ ĻłŊ Ňł
  łŅŀĴŇ ĴŁņŊĸŅ Ĵņ ĹłĿĿłŊņ˪                                            ŃĿĴŌ ŀĴŅĵĿĸņ˫
 ̒                                                                        ˻ ĴŁ   ĻĸĿŃ ŊļŇĻ ļŇ ŁłŊ ĵŌ ŃŅłŉļķļŁĺ ļŁĹłŅŀĴŇļłŁ˲˻˪ !ĸņ˨   ĶĴŁ
                                                                      ŃŅłŉļķĸ ļŁĹłŅŀĴŇļłŁ łŁ ĻłŊ Ňł ňņĸ ļŇ˫
     ˻ ĻĴŅĴĶŇĸŅ  ˺ņ ĿļľĸĿŌ ĹňŇňŅĸ ĴĶŇļłŁņ˻˪
                                                                                                ˬ
     ˻ łŇĸŁŇļĴĿ ĶĻĴĿĿĸŁĺĸ ̻˻˪
                                                                          ˻ ŁŁĸ˵ņ ĿļľĸĿŌ ĹňŇňŅĸ ĴĶŇļłŁņ˻˪  ŁŁĸ ŊļĿĿ ĸŁŇĸŅ ŇĻĸ Ņłłŀ˫
     ˻ ĴŁ   ĻĸĿŃ ŊļŇĻ ļŇ ŁłŊ ĵŌ ŃŅłŉļķļŁĺ ļŁĹłŅŀĴŇļłŁ˲˻˪
                                                                          ˻ łŇĸŁŇļĴĿ ĶĻĴĿĿĸŁĺĸ ̻˻˪  ŁŁĸ ŀļĺĻŇ ŁłŇ ľŁłŊ ĻłŊ Ňł ňņĸ ŇĻĸ
     ˻ łŇĸŁŇļĴĿ ĶĻĴĿĿĸŁĺĸ ̼˻˪                                         ŀĴŅĵĿĸ˫
     ˻ ĴŁ   ĻĸĿŃ ŊļŇĻ ļŇ ŁłŊ ĵŌ ŃŅłŉļķļŁĺ ļŁĹłŅŀĴŇļłŁ˲˻˪                  ˻ ĴŁ   ĻĸĿŃ ŊļŇĻ ļŇ ŁłŊ ĵŌ ŃŅłŉļķļŁĺ ļŁĹłŅŀĴŇļłŁ˲˻˪ !ĸņ˨   ĶĴŁ ŇĸĿĿ
                       ˬ                                                 ŁŁĸ ĻłŊ Ňł ŃĿĴŌ ŀĴŅĵĿĸņ˫
     ˻ ĻĴŅĴĶŇĸŅ  ˵ņ ĿļľĸĿŌ ĹňŇňŅĸ ĴĶŇļłŁņ˻˪                                                     ˬ
     ˻ łŇĸŁŇļĴĿ ĶĻĴĿĿĸŁĺĸ ̻˻˪                                             ˻όŁĴĿ ŅĸĴņłŁļŁĺ ĶłŁņļķĸŅļŁĺ ĴĿĿ ņŇĸŃņ Ĵĵłŉĸ˻˪  ĻļĿĸ  ŁŁĸ ĶłňĿķ
     ˻ ĴŁ   ĻĸĿŃ ŊļŇĻ ļŇ ŁłŊ ĵŌ ŃŅłŉļķļŁĺ ļŁĹłŅŀĴŇļłŁ˲˻˪              ŃłŇĸŁŇļĴĿĿŌ ĵĸŁĸόŇ ĹŅłŀ ļŁĹłŅŀĴŇļłŁ łŁ ĻłŊ Ňł ňņĸ ŇĻĸ ŀĴŅĵĿĸ˨ ļŇ ļņ
                       ˬ                                               ĴĿĿŌ ŊĻł ĶłňĿķ ĵĸŁĸόŇ ŇĻĸ ŀłņŇ ĹŅłŀ ŀŌ ĴņņļņŇĴŁĶĸ˫  łŇ łŁĿŌ ĶĴŁ
                                                                      ŃŅłŉļķĸ ĻĸŅ ŊļŇĻ ļŁĹłŅŀĴŇļłŁ ĴĵłňŇ ňņļŁĺ ŀĴŅĵĿĸņ˨ ĵňŇ   ĶĴŁ ĴĿņł
     ˻όŁĴĿ ŅĸĴņłŁļŁĺ ĶłŁņļķĸŅļŁĺ ĴĿĿ ņŇĸŃņ Ĵĵłŉĸ˻˪
                                                                      ļŁĹłŅŀ ĻĸŅ łĹ ŇĻĸ ŀĴŅĵĿĸ˵ņ ĿłĶĴŇļłŁ ņļŁĶĸ Ļĸ ŀĴŌ ŁłŇ ľŁłŊ ŇĻĴŇ
     ˻όŁĴĿ ĴŁņŊĸŅ˻˪
                                                                         ŁŁĸ ŀłŉĸķ ļŇ˫
 ̓
                                                                          ˻όŁĴĿ ĴŁņŊĸŅ˻˪  Ļňņ˨ ŇĻĸ όŁĴĿ ĴŁņŊĸŅ ļņ  ˫  ĴĿĿŌ˫
    ŁņŊĸŅ˪                                                            ̓


Figure 4: Foresee and Reflect (FA R) prompt (left), a new zero-shot prompting framework that combines
future prediction and pruning by action-aware reflection. The Foresee part is highlighted in yellow, Reflect
is highlighted in blue. Example GPT-4 output shown on the right. The model follows FaR and structures
intermediate reasoning steps by copying keys and filling in the values so we only need one inference call.

serve humans in real-time contexts. As argued in Section 2, the primary contribution of FaR is not
to introduce a new prompt but to showcase the benefits of imposing a structured framework on the
LLM’s reasoning process. Figure 4 presents FaR with an example output from GPT-4.


5.1    Foresee: C ONSIDERING P OTENTIAL F UTURE E VENTS

We design FaR by first prompting models to look into the future by considering potential events that
are likely to happen. This stems from the understanding that the most valuable help often aligns
with shaping a more desireable future outcome more desirable. This is also related to a personality
trait referred as “Consideration of Future Consequences (CFC)” in psychology (Strathman et al.,
1994), which is the ability to predict future consequences to inform current action decisions. Given
the observations O, FaR guides LLMs to iterate over each character in the narrative, predicting their
likely future actions and pinpointing the potential challenges they might encounter. This approach
effectively broadens the initial observations, extrapolating inferences about potential future events.


5.2    Reflect: R EASONING ABOUT ACTIONS

After foreseeing likely future events, we prompt models to reflect on whether performing actions at
the moment could help with the potential challenges identified in the first step. This process can be
considered as pruning the generated potential future inferences based on the available action options.
Overall, FaR helps LLMs connect relevant inferences about future with the intended action choices,
completing a reasoning chain spanning Observation–Inferences–Action.

Connection to the A* Search Algorithm The FaR methodology is conceptually analogous to the
A* search algorithm (Hart et al., 1968), an algorithm for finding the optimal path in a weighted graph.
We draw the following connections: Start and Goal: FaR begins with observations and aims to arrive
at an optimal action decision. Expanding Nodes: In the Foresee phase of FaR, potential inferences
(akin to nodes in A*) are expanded by considering future events. Heuristics: The predictions made
during the Foresee step act as heuristics, guiding the reasoning process toward the most relevant
inferences. Path Pruning: The Reflect stage in FaR narrows down the inferred events based on
available actions, similar to how A* prunes paths based on the heuristic and cost so far.


                                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                         Comparing Zero-Shot Prompting for LLMs
                  70   Base
                       CoT
                  60   ToT (Basic)
                       Self-Ask-Reason
       Accuracy   50   FaR

                  40

                  30

                  20

                  10

                  0
                         PaLM2-S            PaLM2-L              GPT-3.5-Turbo      GPT-4
                                                        Models
Figure 5: Comparison of zero-shot prompts on multiple LLMs. We find FaR improves LLMs
performance the most, especially on GPT-4.
 6     FA R B OOSTS LLM D RAMATICALLY AND G ENERALIZES ROBUSTLY
 We examine the potential of various zero-shot prompting methods on improving LLM’s performance
 on T4D and conduct generalization tests. We aim to answer three research questions through our
 experiments: 1) How much can FaR improve LLM’s zero-shot performance on T4D? 2) Are both the
“foresee” and “reflect” components necessary, and what are the limitations of FaR? and 3) Does FaR
 generalize robustly across scenarios where models need to connect inferences with intents?

 6.1      BASELINES

We consider the following zero-shot prompting strategies, each offering a unique reasoning structure.
Full descriptions of the prompts are available in the Appendix D Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al.,
2022):the zero-shot variant from Kojima et al. (2022) and add “Answer this question by reasoning
step-by-step.” Tree-of-Thought (ToT) (Yao et al., 2023a) (Basic Zero-Shot): a zero-shot variant
inspired by ToT, which prompts the LLM to envision a discussion among experts. Each expert
contributes a reasoning step, and if any expert detects an error in their logic, they exit the discussion.
Self-Ask (Press et al., 2022): this method emphasizes self-inquiry. Models generate and answer
their follow-up questions, iterating until they reach a conclusive answer. A final reasoning step
solidifies the conclusion. FaR: following Section 5 and Figure 4, we design a prompt that guides
models to think about likely future events and challenges that characters might encounter, and reflect
whether they can provide help. We apply each prompt and make one inference call on all LLMs with
maximum 800 tokens with a temperature of 0 (greedy sampling).

 6.2      FA R D RAMATICALLY I MPROVES GPT-4 Z ERO -S HOT P ERFORMANCE

Figure 5 present results of 4 different zero-shot prompting methods. We find that FaR can signifi-
cantly boost LLMs’ performance on T4D-ToM while other prompting methods do not help much.
Specifically, FaR helps increase GPT-4 accuracy from base 50% to 71% as well as all other LLMs
with the improvement between 12% and 18%. We also observe that more powerful models (GPT-4
and PaLM2-L) tend to benefit more from FaR.

 6.3      A BLATION AND A NALYSIS

Both Foresight and Reflection Are Important FaR consists of two main components, one to
foresee future events and challenges and one to reflect on action decisions. To investigate the
individual impact of these components, we modified the FaR prompt, isolating each element for
ablation. Specifically, we omitted the foresight (referenced as yellow text in Figure 4) and reflection
parts (blue text in Figure 4). Table 3 presents ablation on FaR for the two components using GPT-4.
We find that the performance significantly drops 17 and 12 points, respectively, when there is no
foresee and there is no reflect, indicating that they are both crucial for T4D.


                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                   Table 3: FaR ablations.
Providing Noisy Foresight Undermines Performance
We further assessed the robustness of the FaR framework          Prompts          GPT-4 Accuracy
by introducing noisy foresight. For instance, a spurious    Base                         50.2
foresight for the example in Figure 4 might be“Sally will   FaR-NoForesee                53.2
enter the bedroom to sleep.” without any evident reason     FaR-NoReflect                59.7
from the observations. Table 3 shows that LLMs are very     FaR-NoisyForesee              42
sensitive to manually-inputted reasoning steps in FaR and   FaR                          71.4
the accuracy of GPT-4 drops from 71% to 42% (even lower     Random Guessing               26
than baseline). This highlights a limitation: while the FaR Human                         90
framework can enhance reasoning when guided correctly, it’s sensitive to the quality of the foresight
provided and can degrade performance if misled.

6.4   FA R G ENERALIZES TO D IVERSE S CENARIOS
                                                        Table 4: Results on story-structure tests.
We probe the generalizability of FA R by evaluating its FaR consistently improves the most.
efficacy on out-of-distribution scenarios.
                                                                    D1
                                                                    Model       CoT    ToT    Self-Ask   FaR
Story Structure Robustness Tests We use three chal-                 GPT-3.5      52     39       26       52
lenge sets from Sclar et al. (2023) to test if FaR can gen-         GPT-4        71     29       33       56
eralize to story structures beyond those included ToMi.             PaLM 2-S     69     85       52       87
These sets introduce complexities such as the relocation            PaLM 2-L     84     92       87       92
                                                                    D2
of two items across two rooms (D1), the involvement of              Model       CoT    ToT    Self-Ask   FaR
multiple characters with an item (D2), and a single item’s          GPT-3.5      21     36       44       70
movement among four containers (D3) 3 . We convert                  GPT-4        36     34       60       95
each set (100 stories each) to T4D-style probes using our           PaLM 2-S     36     39       15       42
                                                                    PaLM 2-L     27     15       22       90
ToMi conversion methodology. Table 4 shows results on               D3
three types of story-structure change of the ToMi stories.          Model       CoT    ToT    Self-Ask   FaR
Overall, FaR helps LLMs achieve the highest accuracy                GPT-3.5      35     48        9       50
compared to other zero-shot prompts on all three general-           GPT-4        79     76       63      100
                                                                    PaLM 2-S     12     20       20       73
ization tests, for almost all models.                               PaLM 2-L     46     37       12       82

T4D-Faux Pas Case Studies To further ascertain FA R’s
adaptability, we ventured beyond the classic Sally-Anne Test context. We explored Faux Pas
scenarios, characterized by individuals inadvertently sharing potentially distressing or unwanted
information (Baron-Cohen et al., 1999). We consider Faux Pas, a category of social stories where a
person “says something without considering if it is something that others might not want to hear or
know” (Baron-Cohen et al., 1999), and use 20 expert-curated stories from Shapira et al. (2023b). We
convert the original set to T4D by asking models to choose a character from the stories to provide
emotional support (examples Appendix E). We test GPT-4 with multiple zero-shot prompts as well
as few-shot prompting with examples from T4D converted from ToMi. Table 5 shows that FaR
outperforms other methods dramatically, showing the generalizability of the zero-shot prompt FaR.


7     C ONCLUSION
                                                                               Table 5: Faux Pas re-
We propose T4D, a task designed to challenge the capacity of LLMs in sults using GPT-4.
bridging Theory of Mind reasoning to actions. Our analyses highlighted a
key limitation in LLMs: their difficulty in grappling with implicit inferences   Prompts Accuracy
without explicit guidance. To mitigate this, we introduced FaR, a structured    Base        31%
reasoning paradigm, which not only boosts the performance of LLMs but           CoT         39%
also ensures broader generalization. As a next step, it would be valuable to    ToT         36%
delve deeper into understanding the internal representation of LLMs when        Self-Ask    43%
                                                                                Few-Shot    41%
guided by structured prompts like FaR.                                          FaR         76%

    3
      Sclar et al. (2023) propose SymbolicToM, a symbolic tracker of mental states for ToMi. We do not include
SymbolicToM for comparison in T4D because including answers from the tracker gives away that the model
should focus on inferences about item’s location, whereas other methods are not provided with such assumptions.


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Jacob Andreas. Language models as agent models. In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pp. 5769–5779, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-emnlp.
  423.

Rohan Anil, Andrew M Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, et al. Palm 2 technical report. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.10403, 2023.
Anton Bakhtin, Noam Brown, Emily Dinan, Gabriele Farina, Colin Flaherty, Daniel Fried, Andrew
  Goff, Jonathan Gray, Hengyuan Hu, Athul Paul Jacob, Mojtaba Komeili, Karthik Konath, Minae
  Kwon, Adam Lerer, Mike Lewis, Alexander H. Miller, Sasha Mitts, Adithya Renduchintala,
  Stephen Roller, Dirk Rowe, Weiyan Shi, Joe Spisak, Alexander Wei, David Wu, Hugh Zhang, and
  Markus Zijlstra. Human-level play in the game of diplomacy by combining language models with
  strategic reasoning. Science, 378(6624):1067–1074, 2022. doi: 10.1126/science.ade9097. URL
  https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.ade9097.

Cristian-Paul Bara, CH-Wang Sky, and Joyce Chai. Mindcraft: Theory of mind modeling for situated
  dialogue in collaborative tasks. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, pp. 1112–1125, 2021.
Simon Baron-Cohen, Alan M Leslie, and Uta Frith. Does the autistic child have a “theory of mind”?
  Cognition, 21(1):37–46, 1985.
Simon Baron-Cohen, Michelle O’riordan, Valerie Stone, Rosie Jones, and Kate Plaisted. Recog-
  nition of faux pas by normally developing children and children with asperger syndrome or
  high-functioning autism. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 29:407–418, 1999.
Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Lukas Gianinazzi, Joanna
 Gajda, Tomasz Lehmann, Michal Podstawski, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, et al.
 Graph of thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2308.09687, 2023.
Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.
Ishita Dasgupta, Christine Kaeser-Chen, Kenneth Marino, Arun Ahuja, Sheila Babayan, Felix Hill,
   and Rob Fergus. Collaborating with language models for embodied reasoning. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2302.00763, 2023.
Susan T Fiske. Thinking is for doing: portraits of social cognition from daguerreotype to laserphoto.
  Journal of personality and social psychology, 63(6):877, 1992.
Uta Frith and Christopher D Frith. Development and neurophysiology of mentalizing. Philosophical
  Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences, 358(1431):459–473,
  2003.
Kanishk Gandhi, Jan-Philipp Fränken, Tobias Gerstenberg, and Noah D Goodman. Understanding
  social reasoning in language models with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15448,
  2023a.
Kanishk Gandhi, Dorsa Sadigh, and Noah D Goodman. Strategic reasoning with language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19165, 2023b.
Izzeddin Gur, Hiroki Furuta, Austin Huang, Mustafa Safdari, Yutaka Matsuo, Douglas Eck, and
  Aleksandra Faust. A real-world webagent with planning, long context understanding, and program
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12856, 2023.
Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Jiahua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Zhe Wang, and Zhiting Hu.
  Reasoning with language model is planning with world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14992,
  2023.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Peter E Hart, Nils J Nilsson, and Bertram Raphael. A formal basis for the heuristic determination of
  minimum cost paths. IEEE transactions on Systems Science and Cybernetics, 4(2):100–107, 1968.
Mark K Ho, Rebecca Saxe, and Fiery Cushman. Planning with theory of mind. Trends in Cognitive
 Sciences, 26(11):959–971, 2022.
Jennifer Hu and Roger Levy. Prompt-based methods may underestimate large language models’
  linguistic generalizations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13264, 2023.
Cameron Robert Jones, Sean Trott, and Ben Bergen. Epitome: Experimental protocol inventory for
  theory of mind evaluation. In First Workshop on Theory of Mind in Communicating Agents, 2023.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
  22199–22213, 2022.
Michal Kosinski. Theory of mind may have spontaneously emerged in large language models. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2302.02083, 2023.
Matthew Le, Y-Lan Boureau, and Maximilian Nickel. Revisiting the evaluation of theory of mind
 through question answering. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in
 Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
 Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 5872–5877, 2019.
Kyle Mahowald, Anna A Ivanova, Idan A Blank, Nancy Kanwisher, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and
  Evelina Fedorenko. Dissociating language and thought in large language models: a cognitive
  perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.06627, 2023.
Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Reframing
  Instructional Prompts to GPTk’s Language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07830, 2021.
Shima Rahimi Moghaddam and Christopher J Honey. Boosting theory-of-mind performance in large
  language models via prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11490, 2023.
Aida Nematzadeh, Kaylee Burns, Erin Grant, Alison Gopnik, and Tom Griffiths. Evaluating theory
  of mind in question answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, pp. 2392–2400, 2018.
OpenAI. Chatgpt: Optimizing language models for dialogue, 2022. URL https://openai.com/blog/
  chatgpt/.

R OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv, pp. 2303–08774, 2023.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.03442, 2023.
Josef Perner, Susan R Leekam, and Heinz Wimmer. Three-year-olds’ difficulty with false belief: The
  case for a conceptual deficit. British journal of developmental psychology, 5(2):125–137, 1987.
David Premack and Guy Woodruff. Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? Behavioral and
  brain sciences, 1(4):515–526, 1978.
Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. Measuring
  and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03350,
  2022.
Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, Derek Chen, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Social IQa:
 Commonsense reasoning about social interactions. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
 on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Con-
 ference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 4463–4473, Hong Kong,
 China, 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1454. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/D19-1454.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Maarten Sap, Ronan Le Bras, Daniel Fried, and Yejin Choi. Neural theory-of-mind? on the limits of
 social intelligence in large LMs. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in
 Natural Language Processing, pp. 3762–3780, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022.
 Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.
 248.

Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
  use tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761, 2023.

Melanie Sclar, Sachin Kumar, Peter West, Alane Suhr, Yejin Choi, and Yulia Tsvetkov. Minding
 language models’(lack of) theory of mind: A plug-and-play multi-character belief tracker. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2306.00924, 2023.

Natalie Shapira, Mosh Levy, Seyed Hossein Alavi, Xuhui Zhou, Yejin Choi, Yoav Goldberg, Maarten
  Sap, and Vered Shwartz. Clever hans or neural theory of mind? stress testing social reasoning in
  large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14763, 2023a.

Natalie Shapira, Guy Zwirn, and Yoav Goldberg. How well do large language models perform on
  faux pas tests? In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pp.
 10438–10451, Toronto, Canada, July 2023b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.663. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.663.

Ori Shapira, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Mohit Bansal, Ido Dagan, and Yael Amsterdamer. Interactive
  query-assisted summarization via deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 2022
  Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Human Language Technologies, pp. 2551–2568, Seattle, United States, July 2022. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.naacl-main.184. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2022.naacl-main.184.

Alan Strathman, Faith Gleicher, David S Boninger, and C Scott Edwards. The consideration of future
  consequences: Weighing immediate and distant outcomes of behavior. Journal of personality and
  social psychology, 66(4):742, 1994.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.

Sean Trott, Cameron Jones, Tyler Chang, James Michaelov, and Benjamin Bergen. Do large language
  models know what humans know? Cognitive Science, 47(7):e13309, 2023.

Tomer Ullman. Large language models fail on trivial alterations to theory-of-mind tasks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.08399, 2023.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.

Heinz Wimmer and Josef Perner. Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining function of
  wrong beliefs in young children’s understanding of deception. Cognition, 13(1):103–128, 1983.

Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.10601, 2023a.

Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023b.

Yao Yao, Zuchao Li, and Hai Zhao. Beyond chain-of-thought, effective graph-of-thought reasoning
  in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16582, 2023c.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans,
  Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. Least-to-Most Prompting Enables Complex Reasoning in
  Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625, 2022.
Pei Zhou, Andrew Zhu, Jennifer Hu, Jay Pujara, Xiang Ren, Chris Callison-Burch, Yejin Choi, and
  Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. I cast detect thoughts: Learning to converse and guide with intents
  and theory-of-mind in dungeons and dragons. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 11136–11155, Toronto,
  Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.
  624. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.624.


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK

Here we discuss more recent work on probing LMs’ ToM capabilities. Gandhi et al. (2023a) proposes
BigToM and formalizes probes using causal templates and probes models’ forward belief, forward
action, and backward belief. T4D differs by probing models action choices by treating them as
situated agents and BigToM’s action probing is predicting other agents’ next actions, which shares
similarity to FaR’s Foresee step.
Other works have investigated ToM for strategic planning (Ho et al., 2022; Bakhtin et al., 2022;
Gandhi et al., 2023b; Dasgupta et al., 2023). T4D differs from this line of work by exposing a key
limitation of LLMs even with short-term social reasoning tasks: connecting inference to action is not
trivial; we see this insight as orthogonal to ToM for planning and in a strategic environment.
Prompting to analyze models’ ToM capabilities have also been recently studied (Moghaddam &
Honey, 2023; Trott et al., 2023; Hu & Levy, 2023; Jones et al., 2023). FaR differs by proposing
a generalizable reasoning structure focusing on determining agents’ own actions instead of direct
inference-probing questions.
B    T O M I C ONVERSION D ETAILS

ToMi (Le et al., 2019) was proposed as a question answering task based on Sally-Anne Tests and
improved upon previous benchmark from Nematzadeh et al. (2018) by removing statistical biases
making the task solvable without ToM. Specifically, ToMi defines multiple story primitives such as
“A enters the room”, “B moves the item”,“A left the room”, etc. and primitives are combined into
stories with a finite set of orderings (Sclar et al., 2023). Prior work such as Sap et al. (2022) has
found some errors in the ToMi dataset and filtered a clean version that we use to convert to T4D.
On a high-level, conversion consists of two main changes: 1) we add a sentence at the end of the
story with the intents of the two characters involved in moving the item (“Sally and Anne plan to use
the marble soon.”); 2) we propose a new question given the stories about a situated agent’s action and
provide a list of answer options from all the characters and a “None of the Above” option. Specifically,
we need to parse the original ToMi tasks to find out 3 types of characters to programmatically generate
the additional sentence and new QA options: 1) the character who holds a false belief since they left
before another character moves the item. This is also the character who is the correct answer of T4D
task, as they benefit the most from receiving helpful information; 2) the character who moves the
item after the first character left; 3) distracting characters who do not involve in moving or needing to
use the item, as they were introduced in ToMi to reduce biases.
We extract these character names from raw ToMi stories by extracting entities before verbs such
as “moves”, “enters”, “leaves”, etc. Then we find the character holding a false belif by extracting
from the original ToMi questions such as “Where will Sally look for the marble?”, since the ToMi
questions directly targets the character holding a false belief. Next we find who is the character
moving the item by extracting the name before “moves”, and the final character (if any) would be the
distracting character. Due to the templatic nature of ToMi, we extract these character names from all
stories automatically. Finally, with extracted character names of each type, we apply the changes
mentioned above by filling the names.


C    H UMAN S TUDY D ETAILS

T4D Task Setup As mentioned in Section 3.3, we conduct human studies with 20 raters who are not
trained on T4D tasks and not provided answers in examples. The annotators were selected randomly
from a large pool of in-house human annotators. Figure 6 shows a screenshot of our instructions for
human study with an example. We provide 3 of such examples without answers and raters answer
sampled T4D instances in the multi-choice QA format as well. We also leave it optional for raters to
provide their rationales of solving T4D.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Figure 6: Human study instruction screenshot with example.


Examples of Human Rationales In Section 4.2, we summarize 3 reasoning levels from collected
human rationales. Table 6 presents examples with highlighted texts corresponding to each of the 3
reasoning levels.


D    P ROMPT D ETAILS

Here we show different examples with full zero-shot prompts we use in our experiments. As discussed,
we make 1 inference/API call with each zero-shot prompt with maximum tokens of 800.

Chain-of-Thought You are a clever and helpful AI assistant. Your goal is to help
human users around you.
One day you have the following observations that follow chronological order:
Chloe loves the undershirt. Avery entered the dining room. Aiden entered the
dining room. The stockings is in the crate. Avery exited the dining room. Aiden


Table 6: Examples of human rationales we collected from human study. We highlighted parts from the rationales
to correspond to the 3 reasoning levels discussed in 4.2: question decomposition, theory-of-mind inferences
(about others’ goals and beliefs), and commonsense assumptions.

                     Who in the stories have goals that require information? We know that William and Isla
                     both need to use eggplant. They need to know the location of it to be able to use it.
       Rationale 1
                     William moved the eggplant after Isla exited the closet, thus Isla is not aware of the
                     current location. I should choose Isla.
                     William and Isla both plan to use the eggplant. But it is Isla who lacks the knowledge
       Rationale 2   of the current location of the eggplant because William moved it (assuming that both
                     the envelop and the bucket are in the closet. Thus the answer should be Isla.
                     Isla is the right answer because she plans to use the eggplant but she does not know
       Rationale 3   that it has been moved to another location. She benefits from me telling her to avoid
                     inconvenience.


                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


moved the stockings to the cupboard. Aiden exited the dining room. Avery entered
the sunroom. Aiden and Avery plan to use the stockings soon.
Answer the following multiple-choice question by reasoning step-by-step.
Based on the above information, who among the individuals would most benefit from
receiving helpful information? Answer from the following options: A. Chloe B.
Avery C. Aiden D. None of the above.
End your answer with ’Thus, the final answer is A (or B or C or D)’
Answer:

Tree-of-Thought (Basic Zero-Shot) You are a clever and helpful AI assistant. Your
goal is to help human users around you.
One day you have the following observations that follow chronological order:
Sophia entered the front yard. Jayden entered the bathroom. Logan entered the
front yard. The cabbage is in the suitcase. Jayden hates the spinach. Jayden
exited the bathroom. Logan exited the front yard. Jayden likes the grapefruit.
Sophia moved the cabbage to the basket. Sophia exited the front yard. Logan
entered the bathroom. Sophia and Logan plan to use the cabbage soon.
Imagine three different experts are answering this question.
All experts will write down 1 step of their thinking,
then share it with the group.
Then all experts will go on to the next step, etc.
If any expert realises they’re wrong at any point then they leave.
The question is...
Based on the above information, who among the individuals would most benefit from
receiving helpful information? Answer from the following options: A. Sophia B.
Jayden C. Logan D. None of the above.
End your answer with ’Thus, the final answer is A (or B or C or D)’
Answer:

Self-Ask You are a clever and helpful AI assistant. Your goal is to help human
users around you.
One day you have the following observations that follow chronological order:
Lucas entered the cellar. Elizabeth entered the cellar. Ava entered the cellar.
The pear is in the basket. Elizabeth exited the cellar. Lucas exited the cellar.
Ava moved the pear to the suitcase. Ava exited the cellar. Ava dislikes the
slippers. Elizabeth entered the study. Ava and Elizabeth plan to use the pear
soon.
Based on the above information, who among the individuals would most benefit from
receiving helpful information? Answer from the following options: A. Lucas B.
Elizabeth C. Ava D. None of the above.
I will answer by first coming up and answering useful follow up questions and
then reason slowly by considering all the follow up questions and answers, and
finally come up with a final answer.
Format answer as follows:
Are follow up questions needed here: Yes.
Follow up:


                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Intermediate answer:
Follow up:
Intermediate answer:
Follow up:
Intermediate answer:
Let’s reason to get a final answer by considering all above follow up questions
and answers:
So the final answer is:
End your answer with ’Thus, the final answer is A (or B or C or D)’
Answer:


FaR You are a clever and helpful AI assistant. Your goal is to help human users
around you.
One day you have the following observations that follow chronological order:
Jacob entered the bathroom. Emma entered the bathroom. The carrot is in the
basket. Aiden entered the back yard. Emma exited the bathroom. Jacob moved the
carrot to the pantry. Jacob and Emma plan to use the carrot soon.
Based on the above information, who among the individuals would most benefit from
receiving helpful information? Answer from the following options: A. Jacob B.
Emma C. Aiden D. None of the above.
I will first think about likely future events and identify potential challenges
that each individual might be facing. Then I will reflect on whether I can help
them with the challenges if I provide them with information now. Finally, I will
choose a final answer based on the reasoning.
Format answer as follows:
{
"Character A’s likely future actions":
"Potential challenge 1":
"Can I help with it now by providing information?":
"Potential challenge 2":
"Can I help with it now by providing information?":
"Potential challenge 3":
"Can I help with it now by providing information?":
"Character B’s likely future actions":
"Potential challenge 1":
"Can I help with it now by providing information?":
"Potential challenge 2":
"Can I help with it now by providing information?":
"Potential challenge 3":
"Can I help with it now by providing information?":
"Character C’s likely future actions":
"Potential challenge 1":


                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


"Can I help with it now by providing information?":
"Potential challenge 2":
"Can I help with it now by providing information?":
"Potential challenge 3":
"Can I help with it now by providing information?":
"final reasoning considering all steps above":
"final answer":
}
Answer:
End your answer with ’Thus, the final answer is A (or B or C or D)’
Answer:


E     G ENERALIZATION T EST D ETAILS

E.1   S TORY S TRUCTURE T ESTS

Here we show a concrete example for each of the story structure generalization test from Sclar et al.
(2023).
D1: Double Room False Belief Tests:
Lucas entered the playroom. Alexander entered the playroom. The plum is in the box.
The box is in the playroom. Alexander exited the playroom. Lucas moved the plum to the pantry.
The pantry is in the playroom. Lucas exited the playroom. Alexander entered the porch.
Lucas entered the porch. The strawberry is in the bathtub. The bathtub is in the porch.
Lucas exited the porch. Alexander moved the strawberry to the envelope. The envelope is in the
porch.
Alexander exited the porch. Lucas and Alexander plan to use the plum soon.
Based on the above information, who among the individuals would most benefit from receiving
helpful information?
Answer from the following options: A. Alexander B. Lucas C. None of the above.
D2: Three Active Characters Story:
Lucas entered the playroom. Alexander entered the playroom. Jacob entered the playroom.
The plum is in the box. The box is in the playroom. Alexander exited the playroom.
Lucas moved the plum to the pantry. The pantry is in the playroom. Lucas exited the playroom.
Jacob moved the plum to the bathtub. The bathtub is in the playroom. Jacob exited the playroom.
Lucas, Alexander, and Jacob plan to use the plum soon.
Based on the above information, who among the individuals would most benefit from receiving
helpful information?
Answer from the following options: A. Lucas B. Alexander C. Jacob D. Lucas and Alexander E.
None of the above.
D3: Four Containers with Multiple Movements:
Mia is in the patio. The slippers is in the crate. The crate is in the patio.
Mia moved the slippers to the suitcase. The suitcase is in the patio. Isla entered the patio.


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mia exited the patio. Isla moved the slippers to the bucket. The bucket is in the patio.
Isla moved the slippers to the container. The container is in the patio. Mia and Isla plan to use the
slippers soon.
Based on the above information, who among the individuals would most benefit from receiving
helpful information?
Answer from the following options: A. Mia B. Isla C. None of the above.

E.2   FAUX -PAS T ESTS

Shapira et al. (2023b) examines LLMs’ performance on Faux-Pas stories and release an expert-curated
set of Faux-Pas stories. We show an example of the story here: Kim helped her Mum make an apple
pie for her uncle when he came to visit. She carried it out of the kitchen.
Kim’s uncle is sitting on the couch in the living room. His home has many boxes of pies, most boxes
are for pineapple, no apple boxes. He is looking forward to Kim’s baking. Kim showed her uncle the
pie she made. . .
Based on the above information, who would you like to help by providing emotional support?
Answer from the following options: A. Kim B. Kim’s Mum C. Uncle Tom D. None of the above.



F     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS


F.1   C ONTROLLED E XPERIMENTS WITH T RUE B ELIEF

Following several ToM-probing work (Shapira et al., 2023a; Gandhi et al., 2023a), we also test
models on a control set where the characters hold true beliefs. Specifically, there is no moving of
the item from one container to another and thus they have updated information about the item’s
location. Notably, since we are probing the model agent’s action choices given observations, when all
characters hold true beliefs, it is unclear to whom the model agent should help provide information.
So, instead of assigning gold labels for the controlled set, we calculate the delta value between the
false belief set and the true belief set. The higher delta indicates that the model is more inclined to
help when there is a false belief, and the lower indicates that the model might not be using ToM to
decide actions space (since it is similarly likely to choose the character with or without false beliefs).
As shown in Figure 7, we found that the delta is very low (<5%) for all LLMs when tested 0-shot,
and applying FaR helps increase the delta values to around 30%. This indicates that models do not
tend to leverage mental state thinking in T4D, but FaR can help them locate relevant ToM inferences
to determine the right action options.



F.2   L LAMA -2 R ESULTS

We experiment with a competitive open-sourced LM: Llama 2-70B (Touvron et al., 2023) on T4D
and different zero-shot prompting methods. We observe similar drop from ToMi to T4D (63% to
22%). While FaR improves from base, the accuracy is still far from human-level, indicating future
direction to improve on smaller open-sourced models.


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                     Comparing Prompting on Difference with Control (no moving) Group
                                     GPT-3.5-Turbo
                                     GPT-4
                               0.3   PaLM2-S
Delta (Experimental-Control)


                                     PaLM2-L
                               0.2


                               0.1


                               0.0


                               0.1



                                        Base         Chain-of-Thought      Tree-of-Thought (B)            Self-Ask      FaR
                                                                          Prompting Techniques

Figure 7: Delta values of false-belief minus true belief (control set) Most models receive very low
delta values, meaning that their action decisions might not be due to ToM reasoning. After FaR, we
observe a dramatic increase in delta, indicating it tends to use ToM reasoning to decide actions on
T4D more.


                                                                                20
