Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G HOSTBUSTER : D ETECTING T EXT G HOSTWRITTEN BY
L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                 A BSTRACT

         We introduce Ghostbuster, a state-of-the-art system for detecting AI-generated text. Our
         method works by passing documents through a series of weaker language models and
         running a structured search over possible combinations of their features, then training a
         classifier on the selected features to determine if the target document was AI-generated.
         Crucially, Ghostbuster does not require access to token probabilities from the target model,
         making it useful for detecting text generated by black-box models or unknown model
         versions. In conjunction with our model, we release three new datasets of human and
         AI-generated text as detection benchmarks that cover multiple domains (student essays,
         creative fiction, and news). Ghostbuster averages 99.0 F1 across all three datasets, outper-
         forming previous approaches such as GPTZero and DetectGPT by up to 41.6 F1.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Text generation tools such as ChatGPT are capable of producing a wide range of fluent text that closely
approximates human-authored text. However, the use of language models to generate text that readers do
not know is AI-generated introduces concerns about the authenticity and trustworthiness of text across a
range of applications. The use of LLMs for classroom assignments raises questions about the originality of
student work. Concerns that students are submitting assignments ghostwritten by language models has led
many schools to adapt by restricting the use of ChatGPT and similar models (Heaven, 2023). In addition,
because text generation models are prone to factual errors, the use of text generation to ghostwrite news
articles or other informative text means that readers may desire to know if such tools have been used when
deciding whether to trust a source.
Several detection frameworks have been proposed to address this issue, such as GPTZero (Tian, 2023) and
DetectGPT (Mitchell et al., 2023). While these frameworks offer some level of detection, we find that
their performance falters on datasets that they were not originally evaluated on (Section 6). In addition, the
high false positive rates of these models raise potential ethical concerns because they jeopardize students
whose genuine work is misclassified as AI-generated; in particular, text by non-native speakers of English is
disproportionately flagged as AI-generated Liang et al. (2023).
We also introduce three new datasets for benchmarking detection of AI-generated text across different do-
mains. Our creative writing dataset includes human-authored stories from the r/WritingPrompts subreddit.
Our news dataset includes human-authored articles from the Reuters 50-50 dataset (Houvardas & Stamatatos,
2006), which consists of 50 train and 50 test articles for each of 50 authors. Finally, our student essay dataset
includes student essays from the IvyPanda essay dataset (IvyPanda). For each document in each dataset, we
generate corresponding ChatGPT articles based on the same prompt, summary, or article headline.
In this paper, we present a method for detection based on structured search and linear classification. First,
we pass all documents through a series of weaker language models, ranging from a unigram model to the


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         Vector       Scalar
               It was a typical                        Functions    Functions
                                       Unigram                                        Logistic
               Friday night, and I                                                   Regression
               had decided to                                                        Classifier
               spend it at home,
               browsing the
               internet and            Trigram
               catching up on some
               of my favorite
               shows. My roommate
               had gone…                GPT-3


Figure 1: An outline of the classification algorithm. First, we generate possible combinations of features
outputted by a sequence of weaker models. Then, we run a structured search over combinations of the model
outputs and train a linear classifier on the selected features.


non-instruction-tuned GPT-3 davinci. Given the word probabilities from these models, we search over a
space of vector and scalar functions which combine these probabilities into a small set of features. We then
feed these features into a linear classifier, as described in Section 4. Averaged across all three datasets, our
model achieves 99.0 F1 on document-level identification, outperforming GPTZero and DetectGPT by an
average margin of 23.7 F1.


2   R ELATED W ORK

AI-generated text exhibits qualitative differences from human-authored text, though these are often subtle.
Guo et al. (2023) found that while volunteers often rated ChatGPT answers as more helpful than human
ones, ChatGPT answers were more formal, more strictly focused, and used more conjunctions. Jawahar
et al. (2020) found that GPT-2 responses that a model misclassified as human-authored tended to be very
short and contained issues of factuality, repetition, contradiction, and incoherence. Other work has aimed
to ensure that AI-generated text can be detected through deliberate watermarking of AI outputs (Aaronson,
2023; Kirchenbauer et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Kamaruddin et al., 2018). Watermarking has the benefit of
providing guarantees on the probability that text is successfully detected, though it relies on model designers
incorporating watermarks into models.
Several tools have recently been introduced to detect AI-generated text. Gehrmann et al. (2019) introduced
GLTR, a suite of statistical tools to aid humans in detecting AI-generated text, which include overlaying text
with the text’s top-k annotation in different colors. Uchendu et al. (2020) use a RoBERTA-based model to
identify whether two texts are generated by the same method, whether a text is AI-generated, and which
of a set of candidate methods generated a text. DetectGPT (Mitchell et al., 2023) uses the fact that unlike
human-authored text, generated text lies in regions of the probability space where nearby samples often
have lower model probability. It generates random perturbations of the text from a generic LM to detect AI-
generated text, then gets probabilities of the original text and perturbations from the model that might have
generated the text. Recent supervised methods have trained models based on logistic regression, RoBERTa,
and T5 to distinguish between human-authored and AI-generated text (Guo et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023).
Concurrent with this work, Bhattacharjee et al. (2023) uses contrastive domain adaptation for unsupervised
AI-generated text detection.
However, Sadasivan et al. (2023) argue that there is an upper bound on the performance of generated text
detectors and find that many detectors are brittle to paraphrasing attacks, including DetectGPT Mitchell
et al. (2023), GLTR Gehrmann et al. (2019), other zero-shot methods Ippolito et al. (2020); Solaiman et al.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: An example comparison between a human written text and a ChatGPT written text. All ChatGPT
generated documents are generated by the same prompts used to write the human documents.


(2019), as well as OpenAI’s generated text detectors OpenAI (2019). In this paper, we focus primarily on the
setting in which entire paragraphs or documents were generated by language models, noting that adversarial
prompting or paraphrasing-based attacks are an avenue for future work. Liang et al. (2023) found that essays
written by non-native English speakers were disproportionately misclassified as AI-generated by seven GPT-
generated text detectors.1 Section 8 discusses Ghostbuster’s performance on non-native English speaker data
and mitigation efforts to prevent disproportionate misclassification of non-native English speakers’ writing.


3       DATASETS

We collected three new datasets for benchmarking detection of AI-generated text across the domains of
creative writing, news, and student essays. For each of the three datasets, we collected ChatGPT-generated
text corresponding to the human-authored text. All datasets were generated using gpt-3.5-turbo.
Our student essay dataset is based on essays from IvyPanda, which consists of student essays across a range
of disciplines. For each essay in the dataset, we first generate a prompt corresponding to the essay (see
Appendix A), then generate a corresponding essay that responds to that prompt (see Table 1).
Our news dataset is based on the Reuters 50-50 authorship identification dataset (Houvardas & Stamatatos,
2006), which consists of 5000 news articles by 50 journalists. Because we did not have access to ground
truth headlines or summaries for these articles, we first prompted ChatGPT to generate a headline for each
article (see Appendix A), then prompted it to write an article based on each generated headline (see Table 1).
Our creative writing dataset is based on the subreddit r/WritingPrompts, a forum in which users share
creative writing prompts and craft stories in response to these prompts. In order to avoid contamination from
ChatGPT-written content, we collected data from the top 50 posters in October 2022 and scraped the last
100 posts by each of these users. For each story in the dataset, we generate a corresponding GPT example
(see Table 1).
Additional details on the prompting process and dataset sizes are in Appendix A. All our final training
datasets are evenly split between human-authored and ChatGPT-generated text. For each task, the datasets

    1
        The exact detectors were not specified.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Dataset           Student Essays                  News Articles                  Creative Writing
    Original Prompt   Write an essay in               Write a news article           Write a story in
                      {words} words to the            in {length} words              {words} words to the
                      prompt: {prompt}                with the following             prompt: {prompt}
                                                      headline {headline}.
    Sample            You are a student,              You are a news                 You are an author,
    Generalization    who is writing an               reporter, who is               who is writing a
    Prompt            essay in response to            writing an article             story in response to
                      the prompt {prompt}.            with the headline              the prompt {prompt}.
                      What would you write            {headline}. What               What would you write
                      in {words} words?               would you write in             in words words?
                                                      {words} words?
    Sample            Write a words-word              Write a {words}-word           Write a words-word
    Generalization    essay in the style of           news article in the            story in the style of
    Prompt            a high-school student           style of a New York            a beginner writer in
                      in response to the              Times article based            response to the
                      following prompt:               on the headline                prompt {prompt}.
                      {prompt}.                       {headline}.

Table 1: Sample prompts used to produce paired ChatGPT-generated data. For creative writing, we set words
equal to the number of words in the human-authored example rounded to the nearest 100, and prompt with
the prompt corresponding to each story. This approach is intended to prevent document length or content
effects from trivializing the detection task.


are divided into train, validation, and test sets. To validate task difficulty and ensure no artifacts remain in the
datasets, we asked human reviewers to label subsets of the essays as human- or AI-generated (see Section 5).

Evaluation Datasets To evaluate generalization to different models, we collected Claude-generated text
corresponding to the same prompts for each of the three datasets (see Table 1). Because reducing the false
positive rate is particularly important for applications such as detecting student use of AI-generated text, we
evaluate accuracy on some datasets of human text alone (i.e., a precision-only evaluation), including several
datasets of text by non-native English speakers (details in Section 8).

4     M ODEL
Our model uses a three-stage training process: computing probabilities, selecting features, and classifier
training. First, Ghostbuster passes each document through a series of language models that are weaker than
the target model to compute token log probabilities for each document. Our approach uses a unigram model,
a Kneser-Ney trigram model, and two early GPT-3 models (ada and davinci, without instruction tuning)
to obtain these probabilities. Then, Ghostbuster selects features by running a structured search procedure
over a space of vector and scalar functions that combine these probabilities. To do so, we define a set of
operations that combine these features and run forward feature selection on them. Finally, we train a simple
classifier on the best probability-based features and some additional manually-selected features.

4.1     F EATURE S ELECTION

Feature selection proceeds in two stages: we first generate a set of features (Table 2), then combine them
using Algorithm 1. To generate features, we first outline the 13 scalar and vector functions in Table 2.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Vector Functions     Scalar Functions                  Algorithm 1 Subroutine FIND - ALL - FEATURES
                                                             Require: The previously picked feature p,
      faddi = p1i + p2i     fmax = max p
                                                               depth d ≤ max depth, vectors V of log
      fsubi = p1i − p2i     fmin = minPp
                                      1                        probabilities (from unigram, trigram, ada, and
      fmuli = p1i · p2i     favg = |p| i pi                    davinci models)
                                          1
                                             P
      fdivi = p1i /p2i      favg-top25 = |p|  i∈Tp pi        Ensure: A list of all possible features
      f¿i = 1{p1i >p2i }    flen = |p|                         Let S = ∅
      f¡i = 1{p1i <p2i }    fL2 = ||p||2                       for all scalar functions fs do
                                     1
                                        P
                            fvar = n i (pi − µp )  2              Add fs (p) to S
                                                               end for
                                                                                          ′
    Table 2: List of vector and scalar functions used for for all combinations of p ∈ V and functions
    feature generation. Vector functions take in two vec-      fv do
    tors of log probabilities p1 , p2 ∈ Rn and output a sin-      Add FIND - ALL - FEATS(fv (p, p′ ), d + 1) to
    gle vector f ∈ Rn , where n is the number of tokens in        S
    a document. On the other hand, scalar functions take       end  for
    in an input vector p ∈ Rn and output f ∈ R. Here,
    Tp denotes the indices that contain the top 25 lowest
    values in p and µp denotes the average value of p.


The scalar functions convert vector to scalars, and vector functions combine two vectors into one. In order
to generate all possible features, we run Algorithm 1 four times, with the log probability vectors from
each model as the starting features and a maximum depth of 3. Features thus take the form of combining
three arbitrary log probabilities with vector functions, then reducing them to a scalar function. An example
feature is var(unigram logprobs > ada logprobs - davinci logprobs). We provide more details on
the implementation and outputs of the algorithm in Appendix B. For a version of Ghostbuster trained on
each dataset, we run forward feature selection to find the best features, as listed in Appendix D. We analyze
the relative importance of different features in Section 7.

4.2    C LASSIFIER

Ghostbuster’s classifier is trained on combinations of the probability-based features chosen through struc-
tured search, and seven additional features (Appendix C) based on word length and the largest log probabili-
ties. These additional features are intended to incorporate qualitative heuristics observed about AI-generated
text. For example, AI-generated text may appear “uninformative,” exhibiting patterns of surprisal that dif-
fer from human-authored text in ways that may be evident in the frequency of outliers or differences in
log probabilities between tokens that the models rate as very likely or only moderately likely. In addition,
AI-generated text may have a tendency to generate words that are split into fewer subword tokens than
human-authored text. We analyze the relative importance of these features in Section 7.
The classifier itself is a logistic regression classifier trained with l2 regularization and setting C = 1 that
takes in these features and those chosen through structured search (Section 4.1).

5     BASELINES
We evaluate Ghostbuster’s performance relative to multiple methods, including supervised and unsupervised
machine learning methods, and conduct human evaluation to validate task difficulty.

                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Model             All Datasets   News    Creative Writing     Student Essays
                 Perplexity only       81.5        82.2          84.1               92.1
                 Zero-Shot             51.3        52.4          48.2               53.4
                 RoBERTa               90.6        93.0          82.1               96.5
                 GPTZero               93.1        91.5          93.1               83.9
                 DetectGPT             57.4        56.6          48.2               67.3
                 Ghostbuster           99.0        99.5          98.4               99.5


Table 3: Ghostbuster in-domain results of evaluating methods on each of our datasets (F1). For the
perplexity-only baseline, RoBERTa, and Ghostbuster, in-domain results are computed by training only on
the target dataset. We note that these datasets are out-of-domain for GPTZero and DetectGPT.


We compare with DetectGPT (Mitchell et al., 2023), an unsupervised method that uses generates random
perturbations of the text from a generic LM to detect AI-generated text, then gets probabilities of the original
text and perturbations from the model that might have generated the text. We note that DetectGPT differs
from our method in requiring access to log probabilities from the target model.
Our simplest supervised baseline is a linear classifier trained only on the perplexities of human-authored
and AI-generated documents. In addition, we fine-tuned a RoBERTa-based model on human-authored and
AI-generated documents, similar to the RoBERTa-based approaches in Uchendu et al. (2020), Guo et al.
(2023), and Chen et al. (2023). We employ roberta-large with a logistic regression head, and fine-tune
with early stopping. We also compared with GPTZero (Tian, 2023), a commercially available model that
uses a mixture of approaches, including supervised training, perplexity, variance in perplexity, and internet
search. Lastly, we provide a zero-shot comparison by prompting ChatGPT with Was this text written
by ChatGPT? followed by the text.

Human Evaluation. We collected human annotations to validate the difficulty of our datasets and pro-
vide a human baseline. Six undergraduate and PhD students with previous experience using text generation
models were given a random set of 50 documents, evenly sampling human-authored and AI-generated doc-
uments, and asked to label whether the documents were written by a human or AI. The average human
accuracy was 59% (maximum = 80%, minimum = 34%), suggesting that this is a difficult task for human
reviewers.


6     R ESULTS

6.1   I N - DOMAIN C LASSIFICATION

We first evaluate Ghostbuster in-domain, where we train and classify on the same domain, presenting the
results in Table 3. We find that, Ghostbuster achieves 99.0 F1 across all three datasets, outperforming De-
tectGPT by a margin of 41.6 and GPTZero by 5.9. Overall, Ghostbuster has strong in-domain performance,
performing significantly better than the baselines presented in Section 5.

6.2   G ENERALIZATION ACROSS DATASETS

While Ghostbuster outperforms previous approaches when evaluating and training on the same domain, we
note that this comparison is unfair since these datasets are out-of-domain for GPTZero and DetectGPT. As
such, we provide results in Table 4 when evaluating ghostbuster out-of-domain (evaluated on one domain,
trained on all other domains). Still, Ghostbuster achieves 97.0 F1 averaged across all conditions, outper-


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         Model              News   Creative Writing    Student Essays
                         Perplexity only    71.9          49.0               93.4
                         Zero-Shot          52.4          48.2               53.4
                         RoBERTa            83.2          97.2               69.3
                         GPTZero            91.5          93.1               83.9
                         DetectGPT          56.6          48.2               67.3
                         Ghostbuster        97.9          95.3               97.7


Table 4: Out-of-domain results of evaluating methods on each of our datasets (F1). For the out-of-domain
setting, the perplexity-only, RoBERTa, and Ghostbuster were trained on two domains and evaluated on the
third (e.g., train on news and creative writing, evaluate on essays).

                                              In-Domain                         Out-of-Domain
 Ablation                            All       News       Creative    Student       News    Creative   Student
                                                          Writing     Essays                Writing    Essays
 Perplexity only                     81.5      82.2       84.1        92.1          71.8    49.0       93.4
 Feature depth 1                     93.7      96.9       89.6        93.9          93.7    81.3       87.3
 Feature depth 2                     98.3      98.1       98.1        98.8          95.9    95.2       93.1
 Feature depth 3, only handcrafted   80.5      79.6       78.2        83.6          75.8    77.2       77.2
 Feature depth 3, no handcrafted     98.9      99.0       98.9        99.5          97.8    93.4       97.4
 Feature depth 3, N-gram only        88.2      91.8       93.7        96.5          70.1    78.5       75.5
 Feature depth 3, N-gram + Ada       98.8      99.3       99.5        99.8          97.3    90.3       91.9
 Ghostbuster (full model)            99.0      99.5       98.4        99.5          97.9    95.3       97.7


                Table 5: Ablation results of evaluating methods on each of our datasets (F1).


forming DetectGPT and GPTZero. These results suggest that Ghostbuster’s performance gains are robust
with respect to the similarity of the training and testing datasets.

6.3   G ENERALIZATION ACROSS M ODELS

In addition to providing out-of-domain results when generalizing across domains, we also provide results
for Ghostbuster when generalizing across the target model. In Table 6, we provide results when evaluating
on a Claude-generated dataset. While Ghostbuster outperforms other approaches with 92.2 F1, the lower
score suggests that generalization across models requires some additional training data.


7     A NALYSIS

7.1   A BLATIONS

We conduct multiple ablations to understand the role of the depth of structured search over features, proba-
bilities from different models, and types of features used (from structured search vs. handcrafted) on model
performance. As per the results in Table 5, we observe that depths lower than 3 tend to underfit the data,
whereas depths greater than 3 tend to overfit the data. In addition, we notice that omitting the usage of
davinci results in decreased performance. Lastly, we observe that while in-domain performance remains
similar when removing the handcrafted features, the generalization performance goes down, suggesting its
importance in preventing overfitting.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Ablation          Claude     GPT prompt variants
                                Perplexity only     84.1              85.3
                                RoBERTa             87.8              97.4
                                GPTZero             75.6              96.1
                                DetectGPT           64.2              70.8
                                Ghostbuster         92.2              99.5


               Table 6: Results on robustness to different generation models and prompts (F1).


7.2     ROBUSTNESS

We also evaluate Ghostbuster’s robustness to changes in prompting strategies, outlined in Table 6. Ghost-
buster achieves over 99% accuracy across prompt variants, compared to 95.6% achieved by RoBERTa and
96.1% achieved by GPTZero. In addition to demonstrating that Ghostbuster performs well across multiple
variations of a prompt, this suggests that Ghostbuster’s performance is not deterred by stylistic or semantic
suggestions within the prompt.


8       E THICS AND L IMITATIONS

We train and evaluate Ghostbuster on three datasets that represent a range of domains, but note that these
datasets are not representative of all writing styles or topics and contain predominantly British and American
English text. Thus, incorrect predictions by Ghostbuster are particularly likely for text that represents a
distributional shift from Ghostbuster’s training. Issues relating to improving model performance on shorter
text, a broader range of domains, varieties of English besides American and British English, and robustness
to edits are important areas for future work. However, for Ghostbuster, we investigated mitigations for
improving performance on non-native English speaker data because it is a critical source of potential near-
term harms.
Liang et al. (2023) sampled 91 TOEFL2 essays and found that more than half of the essays were misclas-
sified as AI-generated by seven GPT-generated text detectors. We evaluated Ghostbuster’s performance on
two datasets of non-native English speaker data: the TOEFL 11 dataset (Blanchard et al., 2013) and the
Lang8 dataset (Mizumoto et al., 2011) The TOEFL 11 dataset contains university-level essays written on
the TOEFL exam, with an even number of essays by authors whose first languages (L1s) were Arabic, Chi-
nese, French, German, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Spanish, Telugu, and Turkish. The Lang8 dataset
contains data from an online forum used by language learners (from a range of countries, and particularly
from Japan). We divided the TOEFL data into a training set of 1,000 essays and a test set of 1,000 essays.
We evaluated Ghostbuster’s out-of-the-box performance on 1,000 examples from the Lang8 posts and the
TOEFL 11 test set essays.
More broadly, users wishing to apply Ghostbuster to real-world cases of potential off-limits usage of text
generation (e.g., identifying ChatGPT-written student essays) should be wary that incorrect predictions by
Ghostbuster are particularly likely for shorter text, domains further from those on which Ghostbuster was
trained (e.g., text messages), text in varieties of English besides Standard American or British English, or
in non-English languages, text written by non-native speakers of English, AI-generated text that has been
edited or paraphrased by a human and text that was generated by prompting an AI model to paraphrase or
adjust a human-authored input. To avoid perpetuation of algorithmic harms due to these limitations, we
    2
    Test of English as a Foreign Language, an exam taken by non-native speakers of English to attend English-speaking
universities.


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Model                     TOEFL 11      Lang8
                                Perplexity only             98.1         98.6
                                RoBERTa                     98.1         98.6
                                GPTZero                     100.0        99.2
                                DetectGPT                   100.0        98.6
                                Ghostbuster                  99.9        95.5
                                Ghostbuster + TOEFL         100.0        98.6


Table 7: Results on non-native English speaker data (accuracy, which equals precision here since all docu-
ments are human-authored).


strongly discourage incorporation of Ghostbuster into any systems that automatically penalize students or
other writers for alleged usage of text generation without human supervision.


9   C ONCLUSION

We introduced Ghostbuster, a model for detecting AI-generated language that uses structured search on token
probabilities from weaker models to identify whether a given document was AI-generated. We validated
Ghostbuster by evaluating its performance on datasets from three domains (news, student essays, and creative
fiction writing), as well as through generalization experiments on text generated by different models and
using different prompts. We also release our three datasets as benchmarks for evaluating performance on
detecting AI-generated text. Ghostbuster achieves over 98 F1 across all datasets on in-domain detection
of AI-generated text, representing substantial progress over currently available models for detection of AI-
generated text.
Ghostbuster shines when generalizing across domains, achieving over 97 F1 for all generalizations generated
by the same model. Furthermore, because Ghostbuster does not require access to target model probabilities,
it is well-designed to identify text generated from black-box or unknown models, which is especially an ad-
vantageous for the most commonly used commercial models (e.g., ChatGPT or Claude). Further work could
improve performance on model generalization by extending the proposed structured search to incorporate
different potential features could help to make further progress at identification of AI-generated text.
Future work could examine tradeoffs between lowering the false positive and false negative rates of AI-
generated text detectors for different applications. For detection of AI-generated student essays, lowering
the risk of false positives is a key priority to avoid false accusations of AI ghostwriting. In other settings,
however, false positives are less concerning relative to false negatives. For example, if detectors are used
to prevent AI-generated text from being used in training data or to help people decide whether online news
might be AI-generated, the ideal model calibration may differ. Other avenues for future work include im-
proving robustness to perturbations of AI-generated outputs, such as lightly editing to avoid detection, and
different task formulations, including detection at the paragraph level for documents that combine human-
authored and AI-generated text.


R EFERENCES
Scott Aaronson. Watermarking of large language models. Workshop on Large Language Models and
  Transformers, Simons Institute, UC Berkeley, 2023. URL https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
  2Kx9jbSMZqA.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Amrita Bhattacharjee, Tharindu Kumarage, Raha Moraffah, and Huan Liu. Conda: Contrastive domain
 adaptation for ai-generated text detection, 2023.
Daniel Blanchard, Joel Tetreault, Derrick Higgins, Aoife Cahill, and Martin Chodorow. TOEFL11: A COR-
  PUS OF NON-NATIVE ENGLISH. ETS Research Report Series, 2013(2):i–15, December 2013. doi: 10.
  1002/j.2333-8504.2013.tb02331.x. URL https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2333-8504.2013.tb02331.x.
Yutian Chen, Hao Kang, Vivian Zhai, Liangze Li, Rita Singh, and Bhiksha Raj. Gpt-sentinel: Distinguishing
  human and chatgpt generated content, 2023.
Sebastian Gehrmann, Hendrik Strobelt, and Alexander M. Rush. GLTR: Statistical detection and visualiza-
  tion of generated text, 2019.
Biyang Guo, Xin Zhang, Ziyuan Wang, Minqi Jiang, Jinran Nie, Yuxuan Ding, Jianwei Yue, and Yupeng
  Wu. How close is ChatGPT to human experts? comparison corpus, evaluation, and detection, 2023.
Will Heaven.   Chatgpt is going to change education, not destroy it.  MIT Technol-
 ogy Review, 2023.        URL https://www.technologyreview.com/2023/04/06/1071059/
 chatgpt-change-not-destroy-education-openai/.
John Houvardas and Efstathios Stamatatos. N-gram feature selection for authorship identification. In Artifi-
  cial Intelligence: Methodology, Systems, Applications, 2006.
Daphne Ippolito, Daniel Duckworth, Chris Callison-Burch, and Douglas Eck. Automatic detection of gen-
  erated text is easiest when humans are fooled, 2020.
IvyPanda.    IvyPanda essay dataset.             URL https://huggingface.co/datasets/qwedsacf/
  ivypanda-essays.
Ganesh Jawahar, Muhammad Abdul-Mageed, and Laks V. S. Lakshmanan. Automatic detection of machine
  generated text: A critical survey, 2020.
Nurul Shamimi Kamaruddin, Amirrudin Kamsin, Lip Yee Por, and Hameedur Rahman. A review of text
  watermarking: Theory, methods, and applications. IEEE Access, 6:8011–8028, 2018. doi: 10.1109/
  ACCESS.2018.2796585.
John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Jonathan Katz, Ian Miers, and Tom Goldstein. A watermark
  for large language models. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt,
  Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 17061–17084. PMLR, 23–29
  Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/kirchenbauer23a.html.
Weixin Liang, Mert Yuksekgonul, Yining Mao, Eric Wu, and James Zou. Gpt detectors are biased
 against non-native english writers. Patterns, 4(7):100779, 2023. ISSN 2666-3899. doi: https:
 //doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2023.100779. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
 pii/S2666389923001307.
Eric Mitchell, Yoonho Lee, Alexander Khazatsky, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea Finn. DetectGPT:
  Zero-shot machine-generated text detection using probability curvature, 2023.
Tomoya Mizumoto, Mamoru Komachi, Masaaki Nagata, and Yuji Matsumoto. Mining revision log of
  language learning SNS for automated Japanese error correction of second language learners. In Pro-
  ceedings of 5th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pp. 147–155, Chi-
  ang Mai, Thailand, November 2011. Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/I11-1017.

                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


OpenAI. GPT-2: 1.5b release, 2019. URL https://openai.com/research/gpt-2-1-5b-release.
Vinu Sankar Sadasivan, Aounon Kumar, Sriram Balasubramanian, Wenxiao Wang, and Soheil Feizi. Can
  ai-generated text be reliably detected?, 2023.
Irene Solaiman, Miles Brundage, Jack Clark, Amanda Askell, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Jeff Wu, Alec Radford,
   Gretchen Krueger, Jong Wook Kim, Sarah Kreps, Miles McCain, Alex Newhouse, Jason Blazakis, Kris
   McGuffie, and Jasmine Wang. Release strategies and the social impacts of language models, 2019.
Edward Tian. GPTZero: Home, 2023. URL https://gptzero.me.
Adaku Uchendu, Thai Le, Kai Shu, and Dongwon Lee. Authorship attribution for neural text generation. In
  Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
  pp. 8384–8395, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  2020.emnlp-main.673. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.673.
Xuandong Zhao, Prabhanjan Ananth, Lei Li, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Provable robust watermarking for ai-
  generated text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.17439, 2023.


A    P ROMPTING AND DATASET D ETAILS
For the news and creative writing datasets, we first prompted the model to generate a headline or writing
prompt, respectively, before generating the documents themselves from those prompts. Table 9 gives the full
prompting strategy for the original prompts. Table 10 gives all the generalization prompts used by dataset.
Table 8 gives details on dataset sizes and splits.

 Domain               Human Text Source                # Docs             Median Words per Doc
                                                                 Human           ChatGPT         Claude
                                                                 (1,000 docs)    (5,000 docs)    (1,000 docs)
 Student Essays       IvyPanda (IvyPanda)              7,000     529             559             442
 News Articles        Reuters 50-50 (Houvardas         7,000     498             510             384
                      & Stamatatos, 2006)
 Creative Writing     r/WritingPrompts                 7,000     455             512             384

Table 8: Datasets introduced in this paper. For each domain, the 5,000 ChatGPT-generated documents are
divided into 1,000 documents from the same prompt, and a 4,000-document “generalization set” that used
different prompts to evaluate generalization. For each domain, 1,000 human-authored documents and the
1,000 ChatGPT-generated documents that used the same prompt were split into train, validation, and test sets
used by Ghostbuster. The ChatGPT-generated generalization set, the Claude-generated text, and the British
Academic Written English corpus were used only for evaluation of Ghostbuster, not training.


B    A LGORITHMIC I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
While the algorithm presented in Algorithm 1 produces equivalent results to our implementation, we make a
few additional optimizations. First, we note that all vector functions in Table 2 are commutative, or posses the
inverse operator. As such, we first create a list of possible vector combinations, avoiding double-counting.
We noticed that this pruning results in around a 2/3rd reduction in the feature space. At a depth of 3, we
have 2534 features, and at a depth of 2 we have 322 features.

                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Dataset            Prompting              Prompt
                       Strategy
    Student Essays     Generate essay         Write a story in {words} words to the prompt:
                                              {prompt}
                       (1) Generate title     Create a headline for the following news
    News Articles
                                              article: {doc}
                       (2) Generate article   Write a news article in {length} words with
                                              the following headline {headline}.
                       (1) Generate title     Given the following essay, write a prompt for
    Student Essay
                                              it: {doc}
                       (2) Generate story     Write an essay in {words} words to the
                                              prompt: {prompt}

           Table 9: Prompts used to generate documents in each of the three proposed datasets.


C    A DDITIONAL F EATURES
Ghostbuster uses the following handcrafted features in addition to those chosen through feature selection:

       • Number of outliers (pi ¿ 10), average value of top 25 and 25-50th largest log probabilities
       • Average value of the 25 largest and 25-50th largest log probabilities of the vector d − a, where d is
         a vector of Davinci log probabilities and a is a vector of Ada log probabilities.
       • Average length of the 25 longest and 25-50th longest words, measured in tokens.

D    B EST F EATURES
In this section, we present the best features chosen through validation on each of the datasets. For a list of
functions and features used, refer to Table 2.
avg(unigram + trigram < davinci)
var(unigram > ada - davinci)
avg-top-25(unigram - davinci / ada)
avg(ada > davinci / ada)
avg(trigram / ada < davinci)
max(unigram * davinci)
avg(unigram - ada * davinci)
var(unigram * trigram - ada)
max(trigram - davinci / unigram


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Dataset            Student Essays                News Articles             Creative Writing
 Original Prompt    Write an essay in             Write a news article      Write a story in
                    {words} words to the          in {length} words         {words} words to the
                    prompt: {prompt}              with the following        prompt: {prompt}
                                                  headline {headline}.
 Generalization     You are a student,            You are a news            You are an author,
 Prompt 1           who is writing an             reporter, who is          who is writing a
                    essay in response to          writing an article        story in response to
                    the prompt {prompt}.          with the headline         the prompt {prompt}.
                    What would you write          {headline}. What          What would you write
                    in {words} words?             would you write in        in words words?
                                                  {words} words?
 Generalization     Hi! I’m trying to             Hi! I’m trying to         Hi! I’m trying to
 Prompt 2           write a words-word            write a words-word        write a words-word
                    essay based on the            news article based on     story on the
                    following prompt:             the following             following prompt:
                    {prompt}. Could you           headline: {headline}.     {prompt}. Could you
                    please draft                  Could you please          please draft
                    something for me?.            draft something for       something for me?
                                                  me?.
 Generalization     Write a words-word            Write a {words}-word      Write a words-word
 Prompt 3           essay in the style of         news article in the       story in the style of
                    a high-school student         style of a New York       a beginner writer in
                    in response to the            Times article based       response to the
                    following prompt:             on the headline           prompt {prompt}.
                    {prompt}.                     {headline}.
 Generalization     Write an essay with           Write a news article      Write a story with
 Prompt 4           very short sentences          with very short           very short sentences
                    in words words to the         sentences in words        in words words to the
                    prompt {prompt}.              words based on the        prompt {prompt}.
                                                  headline {headline}.

Table 10: Full set of prompts used to produce paired ChatGPT-generated data. For creative writing, we
set words equal to the number of words in the human-authored example rounded to the nearest 50, and
prompt with the prompt corresponding to each story. This approach is intended to prevent document length
or content effects from trivializing the detection task.


                                              13
