A M ULTI -AGENT R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING F RAMEWORK
FOR E VALUATING THE U.S. ‘E NDING THE HIV E PIDEMIC ’ P LAN

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                     A BSTRACT

         Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a major public health concern in the United States, with
         about 1.2 million people living with HIV and 35,000 newly infected each year. There are consid-
         erable geographical disparities in HIV burden and care access across the U.S. The 2019 ’Ending
         the HIV Epidemic (EHE)’ initiative aims to reduce new infections by 90% by 2030, by improving
         coverage of diagnoses, treatment, and prevention interventions and prioritizing jurisdictions with
         high HIV prevalence. Identifying optimal scale-up of intervention combinations will help inform
         resource allocation. Existing HIV decision analytic models either evaluate specific cities or the
         overall national population, thus overlooking jurisdictional interactions or differences. In this paper,
         we propose a multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) model, that enables jurisdiction-specific
         decision analyses but in an environment with cross-jurisdictional epidemiological interactions. In
         experimental analyses, conducted on jurisdictions within California and Florida, optimal policies
         from MARL were significantly different than those generated from single-agent RL, highlighting
         the influence of jurisdictional variations and interactions. By using comprehensive modeling of HIV
         and formulations of state space, action space, and reward functions, this work helps demonstrate the
         strengths and applicability of MARL for informing public health policies, and provides a framework
         for expanding to the national-level to inform the EHE.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) poses a significant public health challenge in the United States (U.S.), with
more than 1.2 million individuals living with HIV. In 2019, there were 34,800 new infections reported, equating to
a rate of 12.6 infections per 100,000 people HIV.gov (d). The primary treatment for HIV is antiretroviral therapy
(ART), which involves the daily use of a combination of HIV medications, referred to as an HIV regimen, to manage
the infection. While ART cannot cure HIV, it plays a crucial role in extending the lifespan of people living with HIV
(PWH) and preventing the risk of HIV transmission. The purpose of ART is to achieve viral load suppression (VLS),
defined as having fewer than 200 copies of HIV per milliliter of blood, making it undetectable through viral load
testing HIV.gov (b). Additionally, pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) is a medication used by individuals at risk for HIV
to prevent infection through sexual contact or injection drug use. PrEP effectively prevents HIV from establishing
itself and spreading within the body HIV.gov (a).
Despite the availability of these preventive and treatment measures, reducing the incidence of new HIV infections
remains a formidable challenge nationwide. Disparities in infection rates persist across different geographical areas
and risk groups. Specifically, 57 jurisdictions, comprising counties and states, accounted for over 50% of all new
HIV diagnoses reported in 2016 and 2017 HIV.gov (c). In response to this alarming situation, the U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services launched the ’Ending the HIV Epidemic (EHE)’ initiative in 2019, with the ambitious
goal of eradicating the HIV epidemic in the U.S. by 2030. The EHE initiative aims to achieve two primary objectives:
(i) reduce new HIV incidence by 75% in these EHE-designated jurisdictions by 2025 and (ii) decrease overall HIV
incidence by 90% across all jurisdictions by 2030 HIV.gov (c). Additionally, the initiative targets achieving the 95-95-
95 care continuum benchmarks, which entail ensuring that 95% of PWH are aware of their infections, 95% of those
aware of their status are linked to care, and 95% of individuals in care attain VLS. Furthermore, the initiative aims to
attain 50% PrEP coverage among eligible individuals by 2025 in EHE jurisdictions and by 2030 nationwide AHEAD
(a).


                                                            1
To accomplish these ambitious targets, several essential actions have been identified: (i) prompt diagnosis (testing)
of all individuals with HIV, (ii) rapid and effective treatment with ART to achieve VLS, and (iii) adequate prevention
measures to reduce new HIV transmissions, including the widespread use of PrEP among high-risk groups. Given the
limited resources, finding jurisdiction-specific optimal combinations of these actions, to minimize new HIV infections,
would be key to optimal resource allocation.
There are multiple models in the HIV literature that have evaluated the EHE, and can be categorized into two types:
independent jurisdictional models, i.e., decisions for each jurisdiction are evaluated individually, or national models,
i.e., decisions are evaluated at the aggregated national level, as follows. Krebs et al. (2019) and Zang et al. (2020)
developed a framework to construct and calibrate a dynamic compartmental HIV transmission model exclusively for
these six U.S. cities (Atlanta (GA), Baltimore (MD), Los Angeles (CA), Miami (FL), New York City (NY), and Seattle
(WA), which together account for 24.1% of the total population living with HIV in the U.S.). Using this model Nosyk
et al. (2019) projected HIV incidence trajectories for a decade (2020-2030) within these cities, highlighting the need
for new strategies to achieve the EHE goal. Nosyk et al. (2020b) identified the optimal combination of strategies that
offer both health benefits and cost-effectiveness within these six cities. Focusing on specific risk groups, Krebs et al.
(2020) examined the cost-effectiveness of optimal strategies for persons who inject drugs (PWID) within the same six
cities. Furthermore, Nosyk et al. (2020a) delved into the impact of racial and ethnic disparities in healthcare access
on progress towards the EHE goal within these cities. Expanding beyond these cities, Fojo et al. (2021) employed
a combination of HIV testing and PrEP coverage as intervention strategies to project HIV incidence in 32 priority
metropolitan statistical areas. Additionally, Wheatley et al. (2022) assessed the cost-effectiveness of PrEP in reduc-
ing overall HIV incidence specifically in Atlanta, GA. Among national-level models, Khatami & Gopalappa (2021)
explored the optimal combination of HIV testing and retention-in-care strategies towards the EHE goal, examined at
the national level. Khurana et al. (2018) investigated the impact of PrEP on overall HIV incidence in the U.S. from
2016 to 2030. Recently, Khatami & Gopalappa (2021) introduced a national HIV elimination model. This model
identified an optimal sequence of HIV-testing and retention-in-care rate combinations at 5-year intervals from 2015 to
2070, employing Q-learning, a classical reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm.
The gaps in the above models are as follows. The national models evaluate aggregated national decisions, and thus
ignore heterogeneity across jurisdictions. The independent jurisdictional models, though evaluate decisions specific
to the jurisdiction, ignore epidemic interactions across jurisdictions, occurring through sexual partnership mixing.
Data from national survey and surveillance systems indicate that about 47-65% of sexual partnerships occur between
persons in the same county, and the remaining are between persons who reside in different counties. Tatapudi &
Gopalappa (2022) To address these gaps, recently, Tatapudi & Gopalappa (2022) developed a national simulation
model comprised of 96 interacting sub-jurisdictions. This is ideal to evaluate jurisdiction-specific decisions but in
a national context by considering the impact of jurisdictional interactions (from partnership mixing and decisions).
However, there does not currently exist a model that has evaluated suitable solution algorithms. Considering the
complexity of the disease dynamics and time-dependent decision-making problem, deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
offers a promising approach for deriving (near-)optimal policies. However, considering the dimensionality of the
problem, modeling this as a single-agent RL, with the state space and action space a conjunction of all jurisdictions,
would make it computationally challenging to solve.
We formulate this problem as a multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) problem. Each jurisdiction is an agent,
who makes independent decisions in an environment with interactions across jurisdictions. An agent’s objective is to
identify an optimal policy, i.e., optimal combinations of testing, retention-in-care, and prevention rates, for every year
over the period 2020 to 2030, specific to its jurisdiction, to eliminate HIV. Though the decisions are decentralized,
there is cooperation between agents, i.e., the state of the system at any time-step is known to all agents and all agents
have a common objective to eliminate HIV, which represents reality as CDC National HIV Surveillance Systems
monitor and publish the state of the epidemic for every jurisdiction. However, at each decision-making step (every
year), as each agent is evaluating its optimal policy, and all agents are simultaneously doing so, the state transitions
and rewards are influenced by the actions take by all agents, thus adding non-stationary to the state-transition, making
this suitable for the application of MARL.
To evaluate the advantage of MARL, we compare the results with two other approaches, a national aggregated single-
agent RL (A-SARL), and an independent jurisdiction single-agent RL (I-SARL). A-SARL and I-SARL are represen-
tative of the current two types of models in the HIV literature, discussed above. I-SARL representative of national
aggregated model, and the A-SARL representative of independent jurisdictional models. As demonstration, we con-
duct a numerical study on a smaller scale, focusing on the jurisdictions in two states, California and Florida.



                                                            2
The primary contribution of this work is the development of a MARL framework for evaluation of a public health
national strategic plan such as the EHE, to identify optimal jurisdiction-specific decisions in the context of jurisdic-
tional interactions. Another noteworthy contribution is the meticulous formulation of the key components modeling of
the underlying Markov decision process (MDP). Specifically, the state within the MDP formulation encapsulates all
necessary information in a concise format for decision-making in each jurisdiction. The reward signal is finely tuned
using the new infection rate and the available budget for HIV care and treatment in each jurisdiction. Through our
experimental findings, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our sequential decision-making framework for generating
intervention policies across varying jurisdictional budgets.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses related literature. Section 3 offers an overview of
our simulation model and proposed approaches. Section 4 presents computational results and associated discussions.
Lastly, Section 5 provides the paper’s conclusion.



2   L ITERATURE R EVIEW

In addition to the recent literature studies on the HIV public health challenge mentioned in Section 1, several other
relevant studies deserve attention. Kok et al. (2015) developed an optimal resource allocation model using a system
dynamics approach to the continuum of HIV care, aiming to minimize new HIV infections in Vancouver. Okosun
et al. (2013) conducted an analysis to determine the conditions for optimal control of the disease, considering factors
such as the effective use of condoms, treatment regimes, and screening of infectives. Gopalappa et al. (2012) and
Lin et al. (2016) focused on assessing the cost-effectiveness of various interventions in HIV prevention. Additionally,
several studies Lasry et al. (2011), Zaric & Brandeau (2001), Lasry et al. (2012), Yaylali et al. (2016), Juusola &
Brandeau (2016), Gromov et al. (2018), Yaylali et al. (2018) developed optimization models for allocating HIV funds
to enhance the effectiveness of HIV prevention efforts. In the context of another recent public health challenge,
COVID-19, Matrajt et al. (2021), Yu et al. (2021), Han et al. (2021) utilized optimization models to determine vaccine
prioritization strategies when vaccine supply is limited. Libotte et al. (2020) and Tsay et al. (2020) investigated optimal
control strategies for managing the COVID-19 pandemic. Tang et al. (2022) formulated a bi-objective optimization
problem for multi-period COVID-19 vaccination planning, aiming to minimize operational costs and the distance
traveled by vaccine recipients. Finally, Rawson et al. (2020) employed an optimization approach to explore efficient
strategies for ending COVID-19 lockdowns without overwhelming healthcare services.
Development and application of RL solution methodologies in the public health domain has experienced significant
growth in recent times. For instance, Kwak et al. (2021) applied a DRL approach to determine optimal intervention
strategies during the COVID-19 pandemic. This included identifying the optimal timing and intensity of lockdowns
and travel restrictions for various countries and territories. Libin et al. (2021) employed DRL to model the spread
of pandemic influenza in Great Britain, utilizing 379 patches to capture the infection process and develop mitigation
policies. Awasthi et al. (2022) proposed a DRL model with a contextual bandits approach to optimize the distribution
of COVID-19 vaccines across five different states in India. Furthermore, Allioui et al. (2022) introduced a DRL-
based method for extracting masks from COVID-19 computed tomography (CT) images, enabling accurate clinical
diagnoses by extracting visual features of COVID-19 infected areas. Jalali et al. (2021) combined RL with optimized
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to reduce ensemble classifier size and enhance model performance. Kompella
et al. (2020) developed an agent-based pandemic simulator for COVID-19, employing DRL-based methodology to
optimize mitigation policies. Kumar et al. (2021) proposed a model incorporating recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
for forecasting COVID-19 cases and integrated DRL to optimize these values based on symptoms. Lastly, Bednarski
et al. (2021) investigated the use of RL models to facilitate the redistribution of medical equipment, enhancing the
public health response in preparation for future crises.
The primary objective of an RL agent is to make decisions that assess the impact of all actions in terms of short-term
and long-term utility for stakeholders. This characteristic makes RL an ideal approach for addressing complex decision
problems within public health, such as resource allocation during a pandemic, monitoring and testing strategies, and
adaptive sampling for hidden populations Weltz et al. (2022). Several DRL algorithms, including Deep Q-Network
(DQN) Mnih et al. (2013), Dueling Double Deep Q-Network (D3QN) Wang et al. (2016), Soft Actor-Critic (SAC)
Haarnoja et al. (2018), Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) Schulman et al. (2017), have been applied to various
public health problems Kwak et al. (2021) Kompella et al. (2020) Libin et al. (2021). Notably, PPO has demonstrated
strong performance in addressing problems with high-dimensional state spaces and continuous action spaces.


                                                            3
MARL is a subfield of RL where multiple agents interact in a shared environment, and each agent’s actions not only
affect its own rewards but also impact the rewards and states of other agents. MARL focuses on the study of how
agents should learn to make decisions in such interactive and often competitive or cooperative environments. MARL
algorithms find applications across various fields, including traffic control, resource allocation, robot path planning,
production systems, and maintenance management Oroojlooy & Hajinezhad (2022).Chu et al. (2019) employed a
multi-agent advantage actor-critic approach for adaptive traffic signal control within complex urban traffic networks.
Their strategy involved forming a cooperative MARL system, with each intersection serving as a local RL agent
equipped with its own local observations and partial knowledge of the overall system. Yang et al. (2020) integrated
traffic signals and vehicle speeds to enhance urban traffic control performance. They utilized a multi-agent modified
PPO method, making adjustments to the clip hyperparameter for improved learning. In the realm of wireless networks,
Nasir & Guo (2019) developed a distributively executed dynamic power allocation model using multi-agent deep Q-
learning. For large-scale fleet management challenges, Lin et al. (2018) applied contextual deep Q-learning and
contextual multi-agent actor-critic algorithms. They treated each available vehicle as an agent and grouped vehicles
in the same region at the same time as identical agents. Furthermore, Yu et al. (2020) employed a multi-agent actor-
attention-critic mechanism to minimize heating, ventilation, and air conditioning costs in a multi-zone commercial
building under dynamic pricing conditions. Their approach took into consideration random zone occupancy, thermal
comfort, and indoor air quality comfort.
In this paper, we use a DRL approach to develop a policy-based methodology for optimizing actions in the dynamic and
stochastic HIV disease environment. We treat individual jurisdictions as independent agents in a MARL framework to
obtain a decentralized decision-making strategy to get closer to achieving the EHE targets, overcoming national model
limitations, and accommodating diverse jurisdictional needs and constraints.



3   M ETHODOLOGY

The model framework comprises a compartmental simulation model for simulating disease progression, an MDP
tailored for addressing the problem, and a DRL agent tasked with solving the resulting MDP. In this approach, we
represent each jurisdiction as an individual agent and employ MARL to facilitate interaction among these agents
within the environment. This enables each agent to learn its optimal policy while taking into account the dynamic
changes in the environment caused by other agents operating within the same context. Figure 1 provides a schematic
overview of our MARL framework where we use compartmental simulation model used in Tatapudi & Gopalappa
(2022) as the simulator.


Figure 1: Schematic of the multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) framework with compartmental simulation
from Tatapudi & Gopalappa (2022).


                                                           4
3.1     S IMULATION M ODEL

The disease progression of HIV is tracked through the compartmental simulation model developed in Tatapudi &
Gopalappa (2022). An overview of this compartmental simulation is provided in the simulator of Figure 1. The model
encompasses four stages within the care continuum: Unaware, Aware no ART, ART no VLS, and ART VLS. Each of
these care continuum stages is further divided into five disease progression stages based on CD4 count: Acute, CD4
> 500, CD4 351-500, CD4 201-350, and CD4 < 200. Additionally, the model includes compartments for individuals
who are susceptible to infection and those who have succumbed to the disease, resulting in a total of 22 compartments.
In the model, δd represents the diagnostic rate, ρd represents the dropout rate, and γd represents the rate of entry to care
in disease stage d. Furthermore, the parameter l signifies the proportion of individuals who are linked to care within
three months of diagnosis. we model three transmission risk groups, heterosexual males (HM ), heterosexual females
(HF ), and men who have sex with men (M SM ). Table A2 presents data for partnership mixing across jurisdictions
for each transmission group, and was adopted from Tatapudi & Gopalappa (2022).


3.2     M ARKOV D ECISION P ROCESS (MDP)

The MDP can be defined as a tuple N, S, a, P, R, γ. Here, N represents the number of agents, where N = 1 corre-
sponds to a single-agent MDP. S is the set of environmental states, denoted as oj for each agent j to represent their
local observations. For each agent j, aj signifies their set of possible actions. Consequently, the total collection of
actions, denoted as a, is defined as the Cartesian product: a = a1 × a2 × . . . × aN . The state transition function,
P , is a mapping from the current state s ∈ S and the joint action a to the next state s′ ∈ S at time t + 1. This is
represented as P : S × a → ∆(S), where ∆(S) denotes the probability distribution over states. The set of reward
functions, R, includes individual reward functions Rj : S × a × S → R, where Rj signifies the reward for agent j
when transitioning from state (s, a) at time t to the next state s′ at time t + 1. Lastly, the discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1] is
utilized to adjust for future rewards. It plays a crucial role in the MDP formulation by determining the weightage of
future rewards relative to immediate rewards. The key elements of the MDP formulation are further described below.

3.2.1    S TATE

State represents the information about a jurisdiction at a particular time. The state of a jurisdiction j ∈ J at time t can
be represented as,
                   sjt = [pk,j,t , µu,k,j,t , µa,k,j,t , µART,k,j,t , µprep,k,j,t ; ∀k ∈ {HM, HF, M SM }]         (1)
where, pk,j,t denotes the proportion of people living with HIV (PWH), diagnosed or undiagnosed, µu,k,j,t denotes the
proportion of PWH unaware of their infection, µa,k,j,t denotes the proportion of PWH aware of their infection but not
on ART, µART,k,j,t denotes the proportion of PWH aware of their infection and on ART or on VLS, and µprep,k,j,t
denotes the proportion of people who have been prescribed PrEP among the people with PrEP indicators, for each risk
group k ∈ {HM, HF, M SM } in jurisdiction j ∈ J at time t.

3.2.2    ACTION

The action ajt for agent j ∈ J at time t represents a combination of three sets of measures: testing, retention-in-care
and treatment, and prevention, aimed at controlling HIV infections. These actions are characterized by the changes in
the following proportions: (i) the proportion of PWH who are unaware of their infection (µu,k,j,t ), (ii) the proportion
of PWH who are aware of their condition and are on ART (µART,k,j,t ), and (iii) the proportion of individuals taking
PrEP as a preventive measure (µprep,k,j,t ). Note that, instead of directly formulating testing and retention-in-care using
corresponding rates, we formulated as above because of its attractive mathematical properties that help efficiently
constrain the number of action choices and thus improve the chance of convergence of an RL algorithm, as shown in
Khatami & Gopalappa (2021).
                          ajt = [ajunaware,k,t , ajART,k,t , ajprep,k,t ; ∀k ∈ {HM, HF, M SM }]                         (2)
where, ajunaware,k,t denotes the proportion decrease in µu,k,j,t , ajART,k,t denotes the proportion increase in µART,k,j,t ,
and ajprep,k,t denotes the proportion increase in µprep,k,j,t , for each risk group k ∈ {HM, HF, M SM } in jurisdiction
j ∈ J at time t.


                                                             5
3.2.3    S TATE T RANSITION F UNCTION
The state transition function calculates the probabilities of a system transitioning from state st to the next state st+1
when an action at is taken. For this problem, the state transition probabilities are not available, hence we use the
simulator to provide the Markov jumps from one state to another under the action taken by the agent(s).

3.2.4    R EWARD
Rewards reflect the impact of an action on the current state. Immediate rewards are computed as the negative of the
total new infections, as our objective is to minimize this value over time. Notably, each jurisdiction, j, has a budget,
B j , allocated towards reducing HIV infections RWHAP. In addition to the reward of lowering the infection count, the
reward function also contains a penalty term, which is the difference in the cost allocated by the agent and the budget
allocated for that jurisdiction. The rewards Raj j (sjt , sjt+1 ) for an agent j ∈ J transitioning from state sjt to the next
                                                  t

state sjt+1 under action ajt can be estimated as follows:
                                                            X
                                                 Rtj = −            ik,j,t − Ptj                                         (3)
                                                            k

where, ik,j,t represents the new infections for risk groups k ∈ {HM, HF, M SM } in jurisdiction j at time t. Ptj is
the penalty term, which is calculated as, Ptj = Ctj − Btj , the difference between the cost allocated by agent Ctj and
the budget Btj for jurisdiction j at time t. Notably, Ctj is obtained using HIV related cost functions in Khatami &
Gopalappa (2021) and estimation of those costs from the simulation model, and the budget Btj can be obtained from
Ryan White HIV/AIDS Funding Program HRSA.

3.3     D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING (DRL) S OLUTION M ETHODOLOGY

The optimal values for testing, treating, and PrEP can be obtained using the DRL solution methodology. In our MARL
framework, each agent samples an action and interacts with the environment, represented by the simulator. Although
each agent acts independently, their simultaneous interactions within the same environment can influence the actions
taken by all of them. Consequently, each agent receives a reward from the simulator and transitions to the next state.

3.3.1    DRL A LGORITHM
Among the various DRL algorithms, PPO Schulman et al. (2017) is known for its stability and efficiency. It is an
on-policy algorithm that can be used for environments with continuous action spaces and very large state spaces. Our
research problem has the characteristics that are well suited for such an approach. PPO adopts the concepts from trust
region policy optimization (TRPO) Schulman et al. (2015). The objective in TRPO, called surrogate advantage, is
calculated as:
                                                      πθ (at |st )
                                   LCP I (θ) = Êt                  Ât = Êt [rt (θ)Ât ]                         (4)
                                                      πθl (at |st )
The probability ratio rt (θ) of two policies give a measure of how far the new policy πθ is from the old policy πθk .
As having a large policy update at a time would destabilize the training, PPO-clip puts a limit on the extent of policy
update with the following objective.
                                              h                                             i
                             LCLIP (θ) = Êt min(rt (θ)Ât , clip(rt (θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)Ât ) ,                      (5)
where ϵ is the hyperparameter that clips the probability ratio and prevents rt from moving outside the interval [1 −
ϵ, 1 + ϵ]. The probability ratio is clipped with 1 + ϵ or 1 − ϵ depending on whether the advantage is positive or negative.
The surrogate objective for PPO-clip can be generalized with the following equation:

                                   CLIP                πθ (a|s) πθ                 π
                                 L(s,a,θl ,θ) = min              A l (s, a), g(ϵ, A l (s, a))
                                                                                     θ
                                                                                                                        (6)
                                                       πθl (a|s)
where,

                                                              (1 + ϵ)A A ≥ 0
                                                g(ϵ, A) =                                                               (7)
                                                              (1 − ϵ)A A < 0


                                                                6
Algorithm 1 MARL Framework for Optimal Interventions in the HIV Epidemic
Input: Initialize policy parameters θlj , initialize value function parameters ϕjl for j = 1, 2, ..., N agents, set episode
length T (here we used T = 12 years corresponding to year 2019 to 2030), set number of episodes M , set buffer size
B (here we used B = 10 episodes), set total timesteps X = 0, set l = 0.
                                j
 1: Initialize replay buffer Dl for each agent j.
 2: for episode m = 0, 1, 2, ..., M do
 3:     for year t = 1, 2, ..., T do
 4:          At t = 1, extract the initial state for each agent j as:
                     sjt = [pk,j,t , µu,k,j,t , µa,k,j,t , µART,k,j,t , µprep,k,j,t ; ∀k ∈ {HM, HF, M SM }].
 5:         Sample actions ajt comprising the change in proportions from each agent j by running policy πlj = πθj
                                                                                                                       l

                            ajt = [ajunaware,k,t , ajART,k,t , ajprep,k,t ; ∀k ∈ {HM, HF, M SM }].
 6:         Calculate the diagnostic and dropout rates using the change in unaware and ART proportions, respectively.
 7:         Simulate the actions in the compartmental simulation model.
 8:         Observe next state sjt+1 and reward Rt+1
                                                  j
                                                      , and collect set of trajectories {τtj }, where
                                                    τtj = (sjt , ajt , Rt+1
                                                                        j
                                                                            , done).
 9:         Add the trajectories to the replay buffers Dlj .
10:         X ←X +1
11:         if (X mod B × T ) = 0 then
12:             Compute advantage estimates, Ajt based on the current value function Vϕjj .
                                                                                              l
13:             Update the policy by maximizing objective (via stochastic gradient ascent):
                                               T
                                                                                                             !
                  j                  1   X X             πθj (ajt |sjt ) πθj j j               π j j
                                                                                                θ        j
                 θl+1 = arg max j                 min                    A l (st , at ), g(ϵ, A l (st , at )) .
                            θj    |Dl |T j j t=0         πθj (ajt |sjt )
                                           τt ∈Dl                   l

14:             Fit value function by regression on mean-squared error:
                                                                 T                    2
                                                      1    X X
                                   ϕjl+1 = arg min j                 Vϕjj (st ) − Rtj .
                                              ϕj    |Dl |T j j t=0      l
                                                                τt ∈Dl

15:           Clear replay buffer for each agent j.
16:           l ←l+1
17:        end if
18:    end for
19: end for



4     E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We adopted the initial data for HIV infection in all jurisdictions for the year 2018 from Tatapudi & Gopalappa (2022).
This data encompasses all age groups from 13 to 100 and includes all 22 care continuum stages for three risk groups.
The compartmental simulation model, used as the simulator in our study to determine transitions from time t to t + 1,
was also sourced from the same paper. In our experiments, we selected two distinct groups of jurisdictions, one from
California and the other from Florida. Each of these groups consists of eight jurisdictions corresponding to their
respective states.
MARL: The formulations were discussed for a MARL setup. In MARL, each jurisdiction within a state is an agent,
evaluating an optimal policy for its jurisdiction. At each decision-making step (every year), as each agent is evaluating
its optimal policy, and all agents are simultaneously doing so, the state transitions and rewards are influenced by the
actions take by all agents.


                                                                7
A-SARL: In the aggregated-SARL, we have one agent (California or Florida). The state, action, and reward in equa-
tions (1), (2), and (3), respectively, are created by aggregating across jurisdictions in that State (CA or FL). However,
the environment retain the mixing across jurisdictions. The agent is identifying an optimal policy for the full state.
I-SARL: In independent-SARL, each jurisdiction is an independent epidemic environment, i.e., there is no jurisdic-
tional partnership mixing. Each agent is evaluating an optimal policy for its own jurisdiction. As there is no epidemic
interactions, the actions of other agents does not impact its state transitions.
The specific jurisdictions used in each state are detailed below.
California: Alameda County (CA1), Los Angeles County (CA2), Orange County CA (CA3), Riverside County (CA4),
Sacramento County (CA5), San Bernardino County (CA6), San Diego County (CA7), (rest of) California (CA8)
Florida: Broward County (FL1), Duval County (FL2), Hillsborough County (FL3), Miami-Dade County (FL4), Or-
ange County FL (FL5), Palm Beach County (FL6), Pinellas County (FL7), (rest of) Florida (FL8)
The values of the parameters in Algorithm 1 were set as follows: T = 12, M = 100, 000 and the optimizer was Adam.
Figures A.2, A.3, A.4 and A.5 in the Appendix show the convergence in learning in MARL and SARL in California
and Florida, respectively.
The budget allocation for each jurisdiction used in the experiment was obtained from Health Resource and Service Ad-
ministration website. Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program (RWHAP) has allocated funds as EHE awards to 49 recipients
that includes 39 metropolitan areas and 8 states HRSA. The total budget allocated to two states of interest, California
and Florida was about $54.3 million and $48.4 million, respectively. While this budget from RWHAP has been used
for our numerical study, it reflects only a fraction of the overall resources spent for HIV, and nationally, about 50%
of people diagnosed with HIV have received some type of service from RWHAP. The total HIV related cost, which
includes testing cost, retention-in-care cost and PrEP cost, was estimated from the simulator. The testing cost and
retention-in-care cost were calculated using the cost functions defined in Khatami & Gopalappa (2021), whereas the
annual PrEP related costs were taken from Sansom et al. (2021).
The feasibility of implementing an action was analyzed to set a constraint on the maximum possible action choices.
Khatami & Gopalappa (2021) looked at the past trend in HIV proportion to set the feasible actions, specifically from
2010 to 2014, and found 2.3 % decrease in unaware proportion and 13.8 % increase in proportion of PWH in ART.
Looking at the similar trend from 2015 to 2019, we found 1.6 % decrease in unaware proportion (14.9 % in 2015 to 13.3
% in 2019) CDC (a) and an increase of 4.8 % in VLS proportion (59.8 % in 2015 to 64.6 % in 2019) CDC (b) during
that 5 years time interval. Thus, we set the feasible range of action choices as 0-0.5 % decrease in unaware proportion
and 0-4 % increase in ART proportion each year. Additionally, the percentage of people with PrEP indicators that
have been prescribed PrEP has gone from 13.2 % in 2017 to 30.1 % in 2021 which marks an increase of 16.9 % during
that 5 years AHEAD (b). Thus, the third action, increase in PrEP proportion, was given a range of 0-4 % each year.


4.2   R ESULTS

Figure 2 a) and b) depict the total new incidence in California and Florida from 2019 to 2030 MARL and A-SARL.
In both states, MARL significantly outperforms A-SARL. In California, there is a notable 19% reduction in incidence
when using the MARL approach, while A-SARL results in a 4.4% increase in total incidence from 2019 to 2030. A
similar trend is observed for Florida, where MARL yields a 23% decrease in new incidence, while A-SARL results
in a 0.6% increases. When comparing these incidence numbers for each jurisdiction within these states (results are
available in the Appendix), a consistent pattern emerges in which the MARL approach outperforms the A-SARL
approach across all jurisdictions. Figure 2 c) and d) display the differential costs incurred in California and Florida
between MARL and A-SARL. As larger jurisdictions have higher prevalence, the decisions are biased towards larger
jurisdictions resulting in higher intervention rates even for jurisdictions with lower prevalence as well. Thus, it adds
to the cost of the interventions, without much impact in incidence in the lower prevalence jurisdictions. Although
the bias in policies here is towards larger jurisdictions, this may not always be true such as when larger jurisdictions
don’t have a higher prevalence. Nonetheless, the results highlight the advantage of multi-jurisdictional modeling
compared to a single agent national model. Results from MARL and I-SARL generate different optimal policies for
the same jurisdiction, Figure A.1 a) shows an example for one jurisdiction. Without loss of generality we can conclude
that excluding jurisdictional interactions (I-SARL) would generate different results than in MARL, highlighting the
significance of jurisdictional mixing.


                                                            8
                                                                                                                                                            1e7                                                          1e7
                       4200                                                              3200                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                        2
                       4000                                                              3000                                                                                                                        2
Total new infections


                                                                  Total new infections
                                                                                                                                                        1


                                                                                                                                      Cost difference


                                                                                                                                                                                                   Cost difference
                       3800                                                              2800                                                           0                                                            1
                       3600                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                         2600                                                           1
                       3400                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                         2400                                                           2
                       3200        MARL                                                               MARL
                                   SARL                                                               SARL                                              3                                                            2
                       3000                                                              2200
                              20
                                    22
                                          24
                                                26
                                                        28
                                                             30


                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                       22
                                                                                                             24
                                                                                                                  26
                                                                                                                        28
                                                                                                                             30



                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                           7
                                                                                                                                                           8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FL1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FL2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FL3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FL4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FL5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FL6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FL7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FL8
                                                                                                                                                        CA
                                                                                                                                                        CA
                                                                                                                                                        CA
                                                                                                                                                        CA
                                                                                                                                                        CA
                                                                                                                                                        CA
                                                                                                                                                        CA
                                                                                                                                                        CA
                              20
                                   20
                                        20
                                              20
                                                       20
                                                            20


                                                                                                20
                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                             20
                                            Year                                                              Year                                                       Jurisdictions                                                 Jurisdictions
                                             a)                                                                b)                                                              c)                                                            d)



Figure 2: Comparing total new incidence from A-SARL and MARL in a) California and b) Florida, and cost difference
(MARL minus A-SARL) in c) California and d) Florida.


Despite the superior performance of MARL, it is still a considerable distance from achieving the EHE targets. To
move closer to the ambitious EHE initiative goal, a more aggressive policy approach is needed, involving increased
intervention measures and a greater allocation of resources. To assess the effectiveness of these approaches in reducing
HIV incidence, we modeled two different scenarios. The first scenario involves doubling the range of the action space,
giving the agent more freedom to choose actions that result in higher levels of intervention. Specifically, we increased
the action range to 1% decrease in unaware proportion, 8% increase in ART proportions and 8% increased in PrEP
proportions. Figure 3 a) and c) illustrate that expanding the action range leads to a more significant reduction in
the number of incidences by 2030, amounting to approximately a 34% reduction in California and 35% reduction
in Florida. The second scenario involves increasing the budget allocation while maintaining the expanded action
ranges. Figure 3 b) and d) illustrate the comparison of MARL in California and Florida with the initial budget and
the increased budget, which is ten times the initial allocation. The new incidence trajectory demonstrates a reduction
of approximately 58% from 2019 to 2030 in California while showing about 75% reduction in Florida in the same
time interval. Although this level of reduction still falls short of the EHE goal, these scenarios clearly outline a viable
pathway towards achieving those targets. The key takeaway is the need to allocate more resources and adopt more
aggressive intervention measures in the pursuit of HIV elimination.

                                                                                  4000                                                                                                             3000
                       4000                                                                                                           3000
                       3750                                                       3500                                                                                                             2500
Total new infections


                                                                                                                                      2800
                       3500                                                       3000                                                2600                                                         2000
                       3250
                                                                                  2500                                                2400
                       3000                                                                                                                                                                        1500
                                                                                                                                      2200
                       2750                                                       2000
                                   Initial actions                                                   Initial budget                   2000                        Initial actions                  1000                        Initial budget
                       2500        Increased actions                                                 Increased budget                                             Increased actions                                            Increased budget
                                                                                  1500
                              20
                                    22
                                           24
                                                   26
                                                        28
                                                             30



                                                                                                20
                                                                                                      22
                                                                                                             24
                                                                                                                   26
                                                                                                                        28
                                                                                                                              30



                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                   22
                                                                                                                                                                          24
                                                                                                                                                                                26
                                                                                                                                                                                         28
                                                                                                                                                                                              30



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30
                              20
                                   20
                                         20
                                               20
                                                       20
                                                             20



                                                                                                20
                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                             20



                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                           20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20

                                             Year                                                             Year                                                          Year                                                         Year           20
                                              a)                                                               b)                                                            c)                                                           d)


Figure 3: Comparing total new incidence from MARL with a) initial & increased actions and b) initial & increased
budget in California, and c) initial & increased actions and d) initial & increased budget in Florida.



5                       C ONCLUSIONS
This paper explored a MARL decision-analytic framework for evaluating optimal intervention measures, (combina-
tions of testing, treatment, and prevention) for ending the HIV epidemic. The MARL framework empowers each
jurisdiction to make independent decisions tailored to its specific context, in the context of epidemic interactions
across jurisdictions. MARL was compared with A-SARL and I-SARL, which are representative of current decision-
analytic frameworks in the HIV modeling literature. Differences in results suggest that national aggregated analyses
(A-SARL) or independent (no interactions) jurisdictional analyses (I-SARL) can lead to sub-optimal decisions.


                                                                                                                                  9
R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
The following steps help with the reproducibility of the results presented in this paper: 1) The model framework can
be implemented with Algorithm 1 proposed in Section ??. 2) The environment for RL (defined as simulation model in
3.1) is taken from Tatapudi & Gopalappa (2022) which works as the simulator for our model. 3) The hyperparameters
used in model training are given in Table A1. 4) The source code and data sets are made available for implementation
via the anonymous GitHub link.

R EFERENCES
AHEAD. EHE Goal. https://www.ahead.hiv.gov/faqs, a. (accessed: 08.25.2022).
AHEAD. PrEP Coverage. https://ahead.hiv.gov/data/prep-coverage, b. (accessed: 09.17.2023).
Hanane Allioui, Mazin Abed Mohammed, Narjes Benameur, Belal Al-Khateeb, Karrar Hameed Abdulkareem, Be-
  gonya Garcia-Zapirain, Robertas Damaševičius, and Rytis Maskeliūnas. A multi-agent deep reinforcement learning
  approach for enhancement of covid-19 ct image segmentation. Journal of personalized medicine, 12(2):309, 2022.
Raghav Awasthi, Keerat Kaur Guliani, Saif Ahmad Khan, Aniket Vashishtha, Mehrab Singh Gill, Arshita Bhatt, Aditya
  Nagori, Aniket Gupta, Ponnurangam Kumaraguru, and Tavpritesh Sethi. Vacsim: Learning effective strategies for
  covid-19 vaccine distribution using reinforcement learning. Intelligence-Based Medicine, pp. 100060, 2022.
Bryan P Bednarski, Akash Deep Singh, and William M Jones. On collaborative reinforcement learning to optimize
  the redistribution of critical medical supplies throughout the covid-19 pandemic. Journal of the American Medical
  Informatics Association, 28(4):874–878, 2021.
CDC. HIV Surveillance Report Volume 26, Number 1. https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/library/
 reports/surveillance/cdc-hiv-surveillance-supplemental-report-vol-26-1.pdf, a.
 (accessed: 09.17.2023).
CDC. HIV Surveillance Report Volume 27, Number 3. https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/library/
 reports/surveillance/cdc-hiv-surveillance-supplemental-report-vol-27-3.pdf, b.
 (accessed: 09.17.2023).
Tianshu Chu, Jie Wang, Lara Codecà, and Zhaojian Li. Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning for large-scale traffic
  signal control. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 21(3):1086–1095, 2019.
Anthony Todd Fojo, Melissa Schnure, Parastu Kasaie, David W Dowdy, and Maunank Shah. What will it take to
  end hiv in the united states? a comprehensive, local-level modeling study. Annals of internal medicine, 174(11):
  1542–1553, 2021.
Chaitra Gopalappa, Paul G Farnham, Angela B Hutchinson, and Stephanie L Sansom. Cost effectiveness of the
  national hiv/aids strategy goal of increasing linkage to care for hiv-infected persons. JAIDS Journal of Acquired
  Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 61(1):99–105, 2012.
Dmitry Gromov, Ingo Bulla, Oana Silvia Serea, and Ethan O Romero-Severson. Numerical optimal control for hiv
 prevention with dynamic budget allocation. Mathematical Medicine and Biology: A Journal of the IMA, 35(4):
 469–491, 2018.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy
  deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1861–
  1870. PMLR, 2018.
Shasha Han, Jun Cai, Juan Yang, Juanjuan Zhang, Qianhui Wu, Wen Zheng, Huilin Shi, Marco Ajelli, Xiao-Hua Zhou,
  and Hongjie Yu. Time-varying optimization of covid-19 vaccine prioritization in the context of limited vaccination
  capacity. Nature communications, 12(1):4673, 2021.
HIV.gov.     Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis. https://www.hiv.gov/hiv-basics/hiv-prevention/
  using-hiv-medication-to-reduce-risk/pre-exposure-prophylaxis, a.            (accessed:
  08.25.2022).


                                                         10
HIV.gov. Viral Suppression and an Undetectable Viral load. https://www.hiv.gov/hiv-basics/
  staying-in-hiv-care/hiv-treatment/viral-suppression#:˜:text=Viral%
  20suppression%20is%20defined%20as,having%20\an%20undetectable%20viral%
  20load., b. (accessed: 08.25.2022).
HIV.gov.   Priority Jurisdictions: Phase I. https://www.hiv.gov/federal-response/
  ending-the-hiv-epidemic/jurisdictions, c. (accessed: 06.10.2022).
HIV.gov.  U.S. Statistics.    https://www.hiv.gov/hiv-basics/overview/data-and-trend/
  statistics, d. (accessed: 06.10.2022).
HRSA. Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program FY 2023 EHE Awards. https://ryanwhite.hrsa.gov/about/
 parts-and-initiatives/fy-2023-ending-hiv-epidemic-awards. Accessed: 2023-09-17.
Seyed Mohammad Jafar Jalali, Milad Ahmadian, Sajad Ahmadian, Abbas Khosravi, Mamoun Alazab, and Saeid
  Nahavandi. An oppositional-cauchy based gsk evolutionary algorithm with a novel deep ensemble reinforcement
  learning strategy for covid-19 diagnosis. Applied Soft Computing, 111:107675, 2021.
Jessie L Juusola and Margaret L Brandeau. Hiv treatment and prevention: a simple model to determine optimal
  investment. Medical decision making, 36(3):391–409, 2016.
Seyedeh N Khatami and Chaitra Gopalappa. A reinforcement learning model to inform optimal decision paths for hiv
  elimination. Mathematical biosciences and engineering: MBE, 18(6):7666, 2021.
Nidhi Khurana, Emine Yaylali, Paul G Farnham, Katherine A Hicks, Benjamin T Allaire, Evin Jacobson, and
  Stephanie L Sansom. Impact of improved hiv care and treatment on prep effectiveness in the united states, 2016–
  2020. JAIDS Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 78(4):399–405, 2018.
Sarah Kok, Alexander R Rutherford, Reka Gustafson, Rolando Barrios, Julio SG Montaner, Krisztina Vasarhelyi, and
  Vancouver HIV Testing Program Modelling Group. Optimizing an hiv testing program using a system dynamics
  model of the continuum of care. Health care management science, 18:334–362, 2015.
Varun Kompella, Roberto Capobianco, Stacy Jong, Jonathan Browne, Spencer Fox, Lauren Meyers, Peter Wur-
  man, and Peter Stone. Reinforcement learning for optimization of covid-19 mitigation policies. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.10560, 2020.
Emanuel Krebs, Benjamin Enns, Linwei Wang, Xiao Zang, Dimitra Panagiotoglou, Carlos Del Rio, Julia Dombrowski,
  Daniel J Feaster, Matthew Golden, Reuben Granich, et al. Developing a dynamic hiv transmission model for 6 us
  cities: an evidence synthesis. PloS one, 14(5):e0217559, 2019.
Emanuel Krebs, Xiao Zang, Benjamin Enns, Jeong E Min, Czarina N Behrends, Carlos Del Rio, Julia C Dombrowski,
  Daniel J Feaster, Kelly A Gebo, Brandon DL Marshall, et al. Ending the hiv epidemic among persons who inject
  drugs: a cost-effectiveness analysis in six us cities. The Journal of infectious diseases, 222(Supplement 5):S301–
  S311, 2020.
R Lakshmana Kumar, Firoz Khan, Sadia Din, Shahab S Band, Amir Mosavi, and Ebuka Ibeke. Recurrent neural
  network and reinforcement learning model for covid-19 prediction. Frontiers in public health, 9, 2021.
Gloria Hyunjung Kwak, Lowell Ling, and Pan Hui. Deep reinforcement learning approaches for global public health
  strategies for covid-19 pandemic. PloS one, 16(5):e0251550, 2021.
Arielle Lasry, Stephanie L Sansom, Katherine A Hicks, and Vladislav Uzunangelov. A model for allocating cdc’s hiv
  prevention resources in the united states. Health care management science, 14:115–124, 2011.
Arielle Lasry, Stephanie L Sansom, Katherine A Hicks, and Vladislav Uzunangelov. Allocating hiv prevention funds
  in the united states: recommendations from an optimization model. PloS one, 7(6):e37545, 2012.
Pieter JK Libin, Arno Moonens, Timothy Verstraeten, Fabian Perez-Sanjines, Niel Hens, Philippe Lemey, and Ann
  Nowé. Deep reinforcement learning for large-scale epidemic control. In Joint European Conference on Machine
  Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 155–170. Springer, 2021.


                                                        11
Gustavo Barbosa Libotte, Fran Sérgio Lobato, Gustavo Mendes Platt, and Antônio J Silva Neto. Determination of
  an optimal control strategy for vaccine administration in covid-19 pandemic treatment. Computer methods and
  programs in biomedicine, 196:105664, 2020.
Feng Lin, Paul G Farnham, Ram K Shrestha, Jonathan Mermin, and Stephanie L Sansom. Cost effectiveness of hiv
  prevention interventions in the us. American journal of preventive medicine, 50(6):699–708, 2016.
Kaixiang Lin, Renyu Zhao, Zhe Xu, and Jiayu Zhou. Efficient large-scale fleet management via multi-agent deep
  reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery
  & data mining, pp. 1774–1783, 2018.
Laura Matrajt, Julia Eaton, Tiffany Leung, and Elizabeth R Brown. Vaccine optimization for covid-19: Who to
  vaccinate first? Science Advances, 7(6):eabf1374, 2021.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra, and Martin
  Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Yasar Sinan Nasir and Dongning Guo. Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning for dynamic power allocation in
  wireless networks. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 37(10):2239–2250, 2019.
Bohdan Nosyk, Xiao Zang, Emanuel Krebs, Jeong Eun Min, Czarina N Behrends, Carlos Del Rio, Julia C Dom-
  browski, Daniel J Feaster, Matthew Golden, Brandon DL Marshall, et al. Ending the epidemic in america will not
  happen if the status quo continues: modeled projections for human immunodeficiency virus incidence in 6 us cities.
  Clinical Infectious Diseases, 69(12):2195–2198, 2019.
Bohdan Nosyk, Emanuel Krebs, Xiao Zang, Micah Piske, Benjamin Enns, Jeong E Min, Czarina N Behrends, Carlos
  Del Rio, Daniel J Feaster, Matthew Golden, et al. “ending the epidemic” will not happen without addressing
  racial/ethnic disparities in the united states human immunodeficiency virus epidemic. Clinical Infectious Diseases,
  71(11):2968–2971, 2020a.
Bohdan Nosyk, Xiao Zang, Emanuel Krebs, Benjamin Enns, Jeong E Min, Czarina N Behrends, Carlos Del Rio,
  Julia C Dombrowski, Daniel J Feaster, Matthew Golden, et al. Ending the hiv epidemic in the usa: an economic
  modelling study in six cities. The Lancet HIV, 7(7):e491–e503, 2020b.
Kazeem Oare Okosun, OD Makinde, and I Takaidza. Impact of optimal control on the treatment of hiv/aids and
  screening of unaware infectives. Applied mathematical modelling, 37(6):3802–3820, 2013.
Afshin Oroojlooy and Davood Hajinezhad. A review of cooperative multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. Applied
  Intelligence, pp. 1–46, 2022.
Thomas Rawson, Tom Brewer, Dessislava Veltcheva, Chris Huntingford, and Michael B Bonsall. How and when to
  end the covid-19 lockdown: an optimization approach. Frontiers in Public Health, 8:262, 2020.
RWHAP. Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program, Program Parts and Initiatives. https://ryanwhite.hrsa.gov/
 about/parts-and-initiatives. Accessed: 2023-09-17.
Stephanie L Sansom, Katherine A Hicks, Justin Carrico, Evin U Jacobson, Ram K Shrestha, Timothy A Green, and
  David W Purcell. Optimal allocation of societal hiv prevention resources to reduce hiv incidence in the united states.
  American Journal of Public Health, 111(1):150–158, 2021.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region policy optimization.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1889–1897. PMLR, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
  algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Hanisha Tatapudi and Chaitra Gopalappa. Evaluating the sensitivity of jurisdictional heterogeneity and jurisdictional
  mixing in national level hiv prevention analyses: context of the us ending the hiv epidemic plan. BMC Medical
  Research Methodology, 22(1):1–20, 2022.
Calvin Tsay, Fernando Lejarza, Mark A Stadtherr, and Michael Baldea. Modeling, state estimation, and optimal
  control for the us covid-19 outbreak. Scientific reports, 10(1):10711, 2020.


                                                          12
Ziyu Wang, Tom Schaul, Matteo Hessel, Hado Hasselt, Marc Lanctot, and Nando Freitas. Dueling network architec-
  tures for deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1995–2003. PMLR,
  2016.

Justin Weltz, Alex Volfovsky, and Eric B Laber. Reinforcement learning methods in public health. Clinical therapeu-
  tics, 44(1):139–154, 2022.

Margo M Wheatley, Gregory Knowlton, Szu-Yu Kao, Samuel M Jenness, and Eva A Enns. Cost-effectiveness of
 interventions to improve hiv pre-exposure prophylaxis initiation, adherence, and persistence among men who have
 sex with men. JAIDS Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 90(1):41–49, 2022.

Jiachen Yang, Jipeng Zhang, and Huihui Wang. Urban traffic control in software defined internet of things via a
   multi-agent deep reinforcement learning approach. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 22
   (6):3742–3754, 2020.

Emine Yaylali, Paul G Farnham, Karen L Schneider, Stewart J Landers, Oskian Kouzouian, Arielle Lasry, David W
  Purcell, Timothy A Green, and Stephanie L Sansom. From theory to practice: implementation of a resource al-
  location model in health departments. Journal of public health management and practice: JPHMP, 22(6):567,
  2016.

Emine Yaylali, Paul G Farnham, Stacy Cohen, David W Purcell, Heather Hauck, and Stephanie L Sansom. Optimal
  allocation of hiv prevention funds for state health departments. Plos one, 13(5):e0197421, 2018.

Hongjie Yu, Shasha Han, Jun Cai, Juan Yang, Juanjuan Zhang, Qianhui Wu, Wen Zheng, Huilin Shi, Marco Ajelli, and
  Xiao-Hua Zhou. Dynamic optimization of covid-19 vaccine prioritization in the context of limited supply. 2021.

Liang Yu, Yi Sun, Zhanbo Xu, Chao Shen, Dong Yue, Tao Jiang, and Xiaohong Guan. Multi-agent deep reinforcement
  learning for hvac control in commercial buildings. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 12(1):407–419, 2020.

Xiao Zang, Emanuel Krebs, Jeong E Min, Ankur Pandya, Brandon DL Marshall, Bruce R Schackman, Czarina N
  Behrends, Daniel J Feaster, and Bohdan Nosyk. Development and calibration of a dynamic hiv transmission model
  for 6 us cities. Medical Decision Making, 40(1):3–16, 2020.

Gregory S Zaric and Margaret L Brandeau. Optimal investment in a portfolio of hiv prevention programs. Medical
  Decision Making, 21(5):391–408, 2001.


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   T ERMINOLOGY D EFINITION

Ending the HIV Epidemic (EHE) - Initiative by U.S. Department of Health and Health Service (HHS) to reduce new
HIV infections in U.S. by 75% by 2025 and by 90% by 2030
Jurisdiction - Counties and states that contribute significantly to total HIV infections and are used in the HIV modeling
HIV prevalence - Number of persons living with HIV at a given time regardless of their time of infection, whether
the person has received the diagnosis, or the stage of HIV disease
Antiretroviral Therapy (ART) - Treatment of HIV that involves taking a combination of HIV medicines everyday
Viral Load Suppression (VLS) - Having less than 200 copies of HIV per milliliter of blood
Pre-exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP) - Medicine taken by people at risk for HIV to prevent getting HIV from sex or
injection drug use
HIV care continuum - Steps that people with HIV take from diagnosis to achieving and maintaining viral load
suppression
Retention-in-care - Adherence to drug regimens and other clinical or lifestyle-change recommendations made by the
providers


                                                           13
Compartmental Simulation Model - Model with various compartments where each individual in a population can
be on one compartment and total population is the sum of all the b compartments
CD4 Count - Blood test that measures the number of CD4 cells in the blood
Heterosexual Male/Female - People who have heterosexual contact
Men who have sex with men (MSM) - People who have male to male sexual contact and men who have sexual
contact with both men and women
Diagnostic rate - Estimated number of new HIV diagnosis among the people unaware of their HIV infection
Dropout rate - Estimated number of people leaving the HIV treatment regime among the people in HIV care


A.2   H YPERPARAMETERS


                                   Table A1: List of hyperparameters used in PPO

                                             Hyperparameters        Value

                                            Discount factor         0.99
                                            Actor learning rate     0.0003
                                            Critic learning rate    0.0003
                                            Initial exploration     0.4
                                            Final exploration       0.05
                                            Decay rate              0.0046
                                            Decay frequency         1000
                                            PPO clip parameter      0.2
                                            K epochs                20


A.3   M IXING A SSUMPTIONS


Figure A.1 a) shows the incidence estimates considering mixing assumptions compared to the scenario without mixing
where each jurisdiction is trained on its own. As the network is trained in the single agent and tested with mixing
considered among all the jurisdictions, we can see individual jurisdictions model underestimates the total incidence
numbers. Therefore, mixing assumptions across the interacting jurisdictions should be considered to get a better
estimates of incidence in any jurisdiction. This also justifies the need of a combined modeling as a single jurisdiction
(or city) model might not be able to capture the proper estimates of new infections.



               Table A2: Sexual partnership mixing among jurisdictions Tatapudi & Gopalappa (2022)

                                  Jurisdiction interaction         HM      HF    MSM
                                      Same jurisdiction            57%    65%    47%
                               Other jurisdiction in same state    28%    23%    31%
                                         Other states              14%    12%    22%


                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                 1e8
                                          4250                                                                                             1.5
                                          4000

                   Total new infections


                                                                                                                         Cost difference
                                          3750                                                                                             1.0
                                          3500
                                                                                                                                           0.5
                                          3250                Without mixing
                                          3000                With mixing
                                                                                                                                           0.0


                                                                                                                          Riv ount nty


                                                                                                                                  oC y


                                                                                                                                             a
                                                       20

                                                                 22

                                                                         24

                                                                                        26

                                                                                                     28

                                                                                                              30


                                                                                                                         an s ty


                                                                                                                                  Ca nty
                                                                                                                    Sa cram e Co )
                                                                                                                         ern to ty
                                                                                                                         Sa dino unty
                                                                                                                       Sa ersid y (CA


                                                                                                                               ieg unt


                                                                                                                                         rni
                                                                                                                      Or ngele oun


                                                                                                                      n B en un
                                                       20

                                                               20

                                                                       20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                                20

                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                               C u


                                                                                                                                      ou
                                                                                                                                    lifo
                                                                               Year


                                                                                                                            ge Co


                                                                                                                           n D Co
                                                                                                                             ar Co
                                                                                                                                    C
                                                                                                                         sA a
                                                                                                                       Lo med
                                                                                                                          Ala
                                                                                                                                                                       Jurisdictions
                                                                                   a)                                                                                        b)


Figure A.1: Comparing a) new incidence with mixing (MARL) and without mixing (I-SARL) and b) cost difference
(without mixing - with mixing) in California.


A.4   R EWARD


Figures A.2 and A.4 show the learning curve for MARL and A-SARL approaches respectively for jurisdictions in Cali-
fornia. Figures A.3 and A.5 show the learning curve for MARL and A-SARL approaches respectively for jurisdictions
in Florida.


             1e9
                                      Rewards for Agent 1                    1e10
                                                                                        Rewards for Agent 2                        1e9
                                                                                                                                                 Rewards for Agent 3                 1e9
                                                                                                                                                                                           Rewards for Agent 4
                                                                                                                         1.0
       1.4                                                             0.6                                                                                                    1.25
                                                                                                                         1.2
                                                                       0.7                                                                                                    1.50
       1.6                                                                                                               1.4
                                                                                                                                                                              1.75
                                                                       0.8                                               1.6
       1.8                                                                                                                                                                    2.00
                                                                                                                         1.8
                                                                       0.9                                                                                                    2.25
       2.0                                                                                                               2.0
                                                                       1.0                                                                                                    2.50
                                                                                                                         2.2
       2.2                                                             1.1                                                                                                    2.75
                                                                                                                         2.4
              0                    200           400    600      800          0         200    400     600    800                      0         200    400     600     800           0    200    400     600    800
             1e9
                                      Rewards for Agent 5                    1e8
                                                                                        Rewards for Agent 6                        1e9
                                                                                                                                                 Rewards for Agent 7                 1e9
                                                                                                                                                                                           Rewards for Agent 8
                                                                                                                     1.50                                                      0.0
       0.6                                                              1                                            1.75                                                      0.5
                                                                        2                                            2.00                                                      1.0
       0.8                                                                                                           2.25
                                                                        3                                                                                                      1.5
                                                                                                                     2.50
       1.0                                                                                                                                                                     2.0
                                                                        4                                            2.75
                                                                                                                     3.00                                                      2.5
       1.2                                                              5
                                                                                                                     3.25                                                      3.0
                                                                        6
                                                                                                                     3.50
              0                    200           400    600      800          0         200    400     600    800                      0         200    400     600     800           0    200    400     600    800



                                                                  Figure A.2: Reward curve for MARL agents in California.


                                                                                                                    15
      1e9
            Rewards for Agent 1               1e8
                                                        Rewards for Agent 2                    1e8
                                                                                                     Rewards for Agent 3                     Rewards for Agent 4
1.0                                                                                                                              0.8 1e9
                                                                                           3
                                        1.0                                                                                      1.0
1.2                                                                                        4
                                        1.5
1.4                                                                                        5                                     1.2
                                        2.0
1.6                                                                                        6                                     1.4
                                        2.5
1.8                                                                                        7                                     1.6
                                        3.0
2.0                                                                                        8
                                        3.5                                                                                      1.8
                                                                                           9
2.2
                                                                                                                                 2.0
       0    200    400     600    800          0        200     400    600      800             0    200    400     600    800          0    200    400     600    800
      1e9
            Rewards for Agent 5               1e8
                                                        Rewards for Agent 6                    1e8
                                                                                                     Rewards for Agent 7               1e9
                                                                                                                                             Rewards for Agent 8
                                         2                                                 2                                     1.0
0.4
0.5                                      3                                                 3                                     1.5
0.6                                      4                                                 4                                     2.0
0.7
0.8                                      5                                                 5                                     2.5
0.9                                      6                                                 6                                     3.0
1.0
                                         7                                                 7                                     3.5
1.1
       0    200    400     600    800          0        200     400    600      800             0    200    400     600    800          0    200    400     600    800



                                    Figure A.3: Reward curve for MARL agents in Florida.


                                                                1e10
                                                        1.75
                                                        2.00
                                                        2.25
                                              Rewards


                                                        2.50
                                                        2.75
                                                        3.00
                                                                 0            200       400     600                800
                                                                                 Training episodes

                                  Figure A.4: Reward curve for A-SARL agent in California.


                                                               1e10
                                                        0.4

                                                        0.6
                                              Rewards


                                                        0.8

                                                        1.0
                                                                0         200       400     600                    800
                                                                             Training episodes

                                   Figure A.5: Reward curve for A-SARL agent in Florida.


                                                                                      16
A.5   N EW INCIDENCE

Below is the overall incidence number for all the jurisdictions in each of the states, California and Florida.

                         Alameda County                       Los Angeles County                Orange County (CA)                        Riverside County
                                                                                         340                                 380
             200                                  1400
             190                                  1300                                   320
                                                                                                                             360
             180
                                                  1200                                   300
             170                                                                                                             340
                                                  1100
             160                                                                         280
                         MARL                     1000          MARL                                 MARL                    320          MARL
             150         SARL                                   SARL                                 SARL                                 SARL
                                                                                         260
                   20
                         22
                              24
                                   26
                                        28
                                             30



                                                         20
                                                               22
                                                                    24
                                                                         26
                                                                              28
                                                                                   30



                                                                                               20
                                                                                                    22
                                                                                                         24
                                                                                                              26
                                                                                                                   28
                                                                                                                        30



                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                          22
                                                                                                                                               24
                                                                                                                                                    26
                                                                                                                                                           28
                                                                                                                                                                30
                   20
                        20
                             20
                                  20
                                       20
                                            20



                                                         20
                                                              20
                                                                   20
                                                                        20
                                                                             20
                                                                                  20



                                                                                               20
                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                        20



                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                              20
                        Sacramento County                 San Bernardino County                     San Diego County                          California
             190
                                                                                         450                                 1000
             180                                  195
                                                                                         425                                  950
                                                  190
             170                                                                                                              900
                                                                                         400
                                                  185                                                                         850
             160                                                                         375
                                                  180                                                                         800
             150         MARL                                   MARL                     350         MARL                                 MARL
                         SARL                     175           SARL                                 SARL                     750         SARL
                                                                                         325
                   20
                         22
                              24
                                   26
                                        28
                                             30



                                                         20
                                                               22
                                                                    24
                                                                         26
                                                                              28
                                                                                   30



                                                                                               20
                                                                                                    22
                                                                                                         24
                                                                                                              26
                                                                                                                   28
                                                                                                                        30



                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                          22
                                                                                                                                               24
                                                                                                                                                    26
                                                                                                                                                           28
                                                                                                                                                                30
                   20
                        20
                             20
                                  20
                                       20
                                            20



                                                         20
                                                              20
                                                                   20
                                                                        20
                                                                             20
                                                                                  20



                                                                                               20
                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                        20



                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                              20
                         Figure A.6: Comparing new incidence with A-SARL and MARL in California.


                         Broward County                         Duval County                    Hillsborough County                      Miami-Dade County
                                                  190
             475                                                                         260                                 550
                                                  180
             450
             425                                  170                                                                        500
                                                                                         240
             400                                  160
                                                                                                                             450
             375                                  150                                    220
             350         MARL                     140           MARL                                 MARL                    400          MARL
                         SARL                                   SARL                                 SARL                                 SARL
             325                                  130                                    200
                   20
                         22
                              24
                                   26
                                        28
                                             30



                                                         20
                                                               22
                                                                    24
                                                                         26
                                                                              28
                                                                                   30



                                                                                               20
                                                                                                    22
                                                                                                         24
                                                                                                              26
                                                                                                                   28
                                                                                                                        30



                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                          22
                                                                                                                                               24
                                                                                                                                                    26
                                                                                                                                                           28
                                                                                                                                                                30
                   20
                        20
                             20
                                  20
                                       20
                                            20



                                                         20
                                                              20
                                                                   20
                                                                        20
                                                                             20
                                                                                  20



                                                                                               20
                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                        20



                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                              20
                        Orange County (FL)                    Palm Beach County                      Pinellas County                           Florida
             310                                                                         170                                 1000
             300                                  200                                    160
                                                  190                                    150
             290                                                                                                             900
                                                  180                                    140
             280                                  170                                    130                                 800
             270                                  160                                    120
                         MARL                                   MARL                                 MARL                                 MARL
             260         SARL                     150           SARL                     110         SARL                    700          SARL
                   20
                         22
                              24
                                   26
                                        28
                                             30



                                                         20
                                                               22
                                                                    24
                                                                         26
                                                                              28
                                                                                   30



                                                                                               20
                                                                                                    22
                                                                                                         24
                                                                                                              26
                                                                                                                   28
                                                                                                                        30



                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                          22
                                                                                                                                               24
                                                                                                                                                    26
                                                                                                                                                           28
                                                                                                                                                                30
                   20
                        20
                             20
                                  20
                                       20
                                            20



                                                         20
                                                              20
                                                                   20
                                                                        20
                                                                             20
                                                                                  20



                                                                                               20
                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                        20



                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                              20


                           Figure A.7: Comparing new incidence with A-SARL and MARL in Florida.


                                                                                        17
