Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NTERACTIVE M ODEL C ORRECTION WITH NATURAL
L ANGUAGE
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         In supervised learning, models are trained to extract correlations from a static
         dataset. This often leads to models that rely on spurious correlations that fail to
         generalize to new data distributions, such as a bird classiﬁer that relies on the
         background of an image. Preventing models from latching on to spurious corre-
         lations necessarily requires additional information beyond labeled data. Existing
         methods incorporate forms of additional instance-level supervision, such as la-
         bels for spurious features or additional labeled data from a balanced distribution.
         Such strategies can become prohibitively costly for large-scale datasets since they
         require additional annotation at a scale close to the original training data. We hy-
         pothesize that far less supervision sufﬁces if we provide targeted feedback about
         the misconceptions of models trained on a given dataset. We introduce C LAR -
         IFY , a novel natural language interface and method for interactively correcting
         model misconceptions. Through C LARIFY, users need only provide a short text
         description to describe a model’s consistent failure patterns, such as “water back-
         ground” for a bird classiﬁer. Then, in an entirely automated way, we use such
         descriptions to improve the training process by reweighting the training data or
         gathering additional targeted data. Our empirical results show that non-expert
         users can successfully describe model misconceptions via C LARIFY, improving
         worst-group accuracy by an average of 7.3% in two datasets with spurious correla-
         tions. Finally, we use C LARIFY to ﬁnd and rectify 31 novel spurious correlations
         in ImageNet, improving minority-split accuracy from 21.1% to 28.7%.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Supervised learning fundamentally hinges on the premise of extracting correlations from labeled
data to make predictions on new inputs. While effective in controlled environments, this paradigm
often leads to models that are brittle in real-world conditions. This is because some correlations in
the training data may be spurious, i.e. they may no longer hold in conditions we would like models
to generalize to. A grand challenge in machine learning is to develop methods that can go beyond
extracting correlations present in a dataset. Methods that can incorporate additional information
to prune spurious correlations and reinforce reliable ones would have far-reaching impact on many
applications, particularly in safety-critical domains.
To steer models away from the spurious correlations in a given dataset and towards reliable pre-
diction rules, we must necessarily provide additional information beyond the original labeled data.
However, this task has traditionally been labor-intensive due to the need to gather instance-level an-
notations, such as labels for spurious features (e.g., labeling each training datapoint by background
category) or additional labeled data (e.g., gathering data where background and bird species is not
correlated). These annotations are needed at a scale comparable to that of the original training data,
making such strategies prohibitively costly for settings where the original training data is already
close to the full annotation budget. This is especially true in scenarios such as rapid model iteration,
quick hotﬁxes, or data-driven exploration. We posit that far less supervision sufﬁces if we provide
targeted concept-level feedback about misconceptions of models trained on a given dataset.
Targeted feedback serves as a cornerstone for robustness in domains outside of machine learning.
In causal inference, targeted interventions allow us to identify causal effects, going beyond the
limitations of observational studies which can only capture correlations (Rubin, 1974; Pearl, 2009;
Schölkopf et al., 2021). Similarly, psychological studies underscore the pivotal role of corrective


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

 Supervised Learning                                      Clarify: An Interface for Interactive Model Correction
     INPUT IMAGE          FEATURES           PREDICTION                                            FEATURES             PREDICTION
                                                                        Ocean

                                                                        is causing
                                                                        errors
                                              Seagull                                                                  Ring-billed
                                                                                                                          gull


    A Trained model relies on spurious correlations in      B   Non-expert describes failures   C Clarify corrects model failures by re-
       the training dataset, leading to model failures          using natural language             weighting data based on annotation

Figure 1: C LARIFY is an interface for interactively correcting model failures due to spurious correlations. (a)
Given a model trained with supervised learning, (b) a human describes consistent failure modes of the model
entirely in natural language. (c) We automatically incorporate these descriptions to improve the training process
by reweighting the training data based on image-text similarity.

feedback in enhancing learning and decision-making in humans (Ilgen et al., 1979; Bangert-Drowns
et al., 1991; Kluger & DeNisi, 1996; Hattie & Timperley, 2007). Despite these insights, existing
forms of annotation for robustness in supervised learning fall short in this regard: they lack the
speciﬁcity of targeted feedback and are provided without knowledge of the actual behavior of naively
trained models. In this paper, we introduce a speciﬁc form of targeted feedback that aligns with these
principles: natural language descriptions of model misconceptions.
We introduce Corrective Language Annotations for Robust InFerence (C LARIFY), a novel frame-
work that allows humans to interactively correct failures of image classiﬁers with natural language
alone. C LARIFY consists of a web interface for collecting human feedback and a method for au-
tomatically incorporating this feedback into the training process. During interactions with the in-
terface, users observe a trained model’s predictions on a validation dataset, and write short text
descriptions of consistent model misconceptions. For instance, for a bird classiﬁer relying on a spu-
rious correlation between bird species and their backgrounds, a human user can succinctly write that
the model is mistakenly focusing on the “water background”. We then use such textual feedback to
improve the training process by reweighting the training data.
We highlight two advantageous ways in which the C LARIFY framework diverges substantially from
standard supervised learning. First, in C LARIFY, annotations are collected after initial training,
allowing the model’s inductive biases to inform the annotation process. Speciﬁcally, C LARIFY fo-
cuses on eliciting negative knowledge, i.e., directing the model on what not to focus on; this is a core
design decision since it is easier for humans to identify errors than to fully articulate complex rules.
This negative knowledge serves as a complementary form of guidance to the positive knowledge in
the original labeled dataset. Second, annotations from C LARIFY have a substantially higher den-
sity of information than conventional forms of annotations. Unlike instance-speciﬁc labels, textual
feedback encapsulates concept-level “global” insights that are applicable across the entire dataset.
Therefore, they more efﬁciently use the human effort required for annotation.
We instantiate C LARIFY in a web app implementation to carry out online experiments with non-
expert users, and evaluate the gathered textual feedback in addition to the robustness of models
ﬁne-tuned based on them. We refer the reader to Figure 1 for an overview of C LARIFY in relation
to traditional supervised learning, and Figure 2 for a visualization of key interface features. We ﬁnd
that non-expert feedback through C LARIFY (N=26) almost always helps in identifying a spurious
correlation or difﬁcult subpopulation. Models ﬁne-tuned using these non-expert annotations consis-
tently outperform zero-shot methods that use oracle text annotations of spurious features, achieving
a 7.0-7.6 point improvement in worst-group accuracy on two datasets. Users are able to achieve
these performance gains with just a few minutes of interaction, averaging 2.7 minutes per dataset.
A key advantage of the C LARIFY framework is its scalability, which we demonstrate by using the
interface to identify 31 novel spurious correlations in the ImageNet dataset. We use these annota-
tions to improve the average accuracy across the 31 minority splits from 21.1% to 28.7% with only
a 0.21% drop in overall average accuracy, just by appropriately reweighting the ImageNet training
set.

2     R ELATED W ORK
Teaching ML models. As machine learning models require more and more resources to train,
it becomes increasingly important to optimize the training process. The machine teaching problem


                                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


setting aims to formalize what an optimal training set for a given task is and characterize the so-called
training complexity. While this setting has been well-studied (Goldman & Kearns, 1991; Druck et al.,
2008; Mintz et al., 2009; Zhu, 2015; Simard et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2018), its application to large-
scale models has been limited. Supervised learning, the dominant paradigm for training task-speciﬁc
models, requires explicit labels for each instance in the dataset, which is often large and expensive
to collect. Although active learning methods aim to reduce this annotation burden by selecting the
most informative datapoints for labeling (Lewis, 1995; Settles, 2009), they still require humans to
label individual datapoints. Our work proposes a form of supervision which can be used to ﬁnd
and rectify spurious correlations in labeled datasets: natural language descriptions of model errors.
Such textual feedback is immediately useful since it describes failure modes that the model would
otherwise fall into. Compared to labels, these descriptions hold substantially more information per
annotation, as they hold global information about the model’s behavior on the entire dataset, rather
than just a single datapoint.
Human-computer interaction for ML. There is also a rich literature on the interaction between hu-
mans and machine learning models. Improving the interface between humans and models has bene-
ﬁts in many points of the machine learning pipeline, including interactive feature selection (Fails &
Olsen Jr, 2003; Dudley & Kristensson, 2018), interpretability (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Boggust et al.,
2022), and human-in-the-loop data collection (Gao et al., 2022). Perhaps the most closely related
works are those that elicit high-level concepts from humans (Stretcu et al., 2023; Lam et al., 2023).
However, a key difference between these works and ours is that we focus on negative knowledge—
teaching the model what not to learn—as opposed to these works which specify what features the
model should use. Especially for intuitive tasks like image classiﬁcation, human knowledge is often
tacit rather than explicit, making it hard to deﬁne and put into words (Polanyi, 2009); thus, it is
easier for annotators to describe the failures of an existing model rather than deﬁne its behavior up-
front. Restricting the feedback to negative knowledge is also important for scalability, as it is much
easier to identify a few failure modes in an otherwise well-performing model, than to specify the
full set of useful concepts. This scalability is crucial for our goal of correcting spurious correlations
in large-scale datasets such as ImageNet.
Robustness to spurious correlations. Models trained with standard supervised learning often ex-
hibit a bias towards shortcut features, i.e. simple features that perform well on the training distri-
bution yet fail to capture the underlying causal structure (Arpit et al., 2017; Gunasekar et al., 2018;
Shah et al., 2020; Geirhos et al., 2020; Pezeshki et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022b). Many recent works
have proposed methods to mitigate this issue, such as learning multiple functions consistent with
the training data (Fisher et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2022; Teney et al., 2022; Pagliardini et al., 2022; Lee
et al., 2022; Taghanaki et al., 2022), and reweighting training instances to render shortcut features
non-predictive (Sagawa et al., 2019; Yaghoobzadeh et al., 2019; Nam et al., 2020; Creager et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2021; Kirichenko et al., 2022; Qiu et al., 2023). However, these approaches of-
ten entail signiﬁcant overhead for additional supervision, such as group labels indicating spurious
features (Sagawa et al., 2019; Kirichenko et al., 2022), or labeled data from the target distribu-
tion (Nam et al., 2020; Creager et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021). In contrast, our method requires only
a few natural language descriptions of model errors, which are substantially easier to collect. This
lower annotation burden renders C LARIFY especially practical for addressing spurious correlations
in large datasets.
Discovering failure modes. Our work builds upon a growing body of literature aimed at iden-
tifying and correcting failure models of machine learning models. Previous works in this area
aim to discover data subsets on which models perform poorly (Chen et al., 2021; Bao & Barzi-
lay, 2022; d’Eon et al., 2022) and devise methods to rectify such speciﬁc failures (Santurkar et al.,
2021; Mitchell et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2021; Jain et al., 2022). Some works perform counterfactual
data augmentation to directly highlight model reliance on spurious features (Kaushik et al., 2019;
Wu et al., 2021; Ross et al., 2021; Veitch et al., 2021; Vendrow et al., 2023). More closely related to
our work are methods that leverage vision-language models to describe failure modes with natural
language (Eyuboglu et al., 2022; Wiles et al., 2022; Dunlap et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Kim
et al., 2023). Natural language descriptions of error slices have the advantage of being interpretable
and naturally grounded in human understanding. However, many of the descriptions generated by
these fully automated methods do not correspond to true model failures. For example, Zhang et al.
(2023) reports that DOMINO (Eyuboglu et al., 2022) can make nonsensical descriptions such as



                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


“mammoth” for a bird classiﬁcation task. By incorporating humans in the loop, our approach avoids
such errors, making it possible to discover spurious correlations in large datasets such as ImageNet.

3     P ROBLEM S ETUP
We consider a standard supervised learning setting, where we are given a dataset D = {(xi , yi )}N     i=1
of N labeled samples. Each label yi belongs to one of C different classes: yi ∈ {1, . . . , C}. A model
                                                                           ∑ N
is trained to minimize the average loss across the training set, i.e. N1 i=1 ℓ(f (xi ; θ), yi ), where ℓ
is a pointwise loss function such as cross-entropy, f is the model, and θ denotes model parameters.
However, the dataset may inadvertently contain spurious correlations that hinder the model’s ability
to generalize to new distributions. To formalize spurious correlations, we can consider an extended
dataset that includes an unknown attribute si for each instance, resulting in {(xi , yi , si )}N
                                                                                               i=1 where
si ∈ {1, . . . , S}. For example, for a task where the labels yi are bird species, the spurious attributes
si could correspond to the background of the image xi , which would be easier to infer from the
input than the true label (i.e., bird species). A model trained on D may learn to rely on si to make
predictions, thereby failing on new distributions where the previous correlation between si and yi
no longer holds. In general, we do not have annotations for these spurious attributes si or even know
in advance what they are. Our goal is to correct the model’s reliance on these spurious attributes
without knowing a priori what they are.
To describe spurious attributes given only class-labeled image data, we leverage the capabilities
of multimodal models such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), which encodes images and text into a
shared embedding space. For a given image input I and text input T , CLIP outputs representations
from seperate vision and language branches, ei = fi (I) and et = ft (T ) respectively. This model
is trained to maximize the similarity between the image and text representations for corresponding
image-text pairs and minimize it for non-corresponding pairs, through a contrastive loss function.
We can estimate the similarity between a pair of image and text inputs by computing the cosine
similarity of their respective representations:
                                                      ei · et
                                        sim(I, T ) =            .                               (1)
                                                     ∥ei ∥∥et ∥
This black-box similarity function allows us to determine the relevance of a given image and text
pair. In the next section, we describe how C LARIFY leverages this relevance function to mitigate
spurious correlations based solely on natural language feedback on a labeled validation set.

4     C LARIFY : A NATURAL L ANGUAGE I NTERFACE FOR M ODEL C ORRECTION
We now describe Corrective Language Annotations for Robust InFerence (C LARIFY), a novel frame-
work for identifying and mitigating spurious correlations in models trained with supervised learning.
The main idea behind C LARIFY is to allow humans to provide targeted natural language feedback
to a model, helping the model focus on relevant features and ignore spurious ones. We employ a
natural language interface to facilitate this process, which we describe in detail in this section. We
will ﬁrst describe a concrete example of an interaction with the interface in Section 4.1, and then
describe two methods for incorporating this feedback into the training process in Section 4.2.

4.1   I NTERACTION W ORKFLOW
User interaction. To demonstrate how C LARIFY enables non-expert users to correct model miscon-
ceptions, we will walk through a user’s experience with the system, shown in Figure 2.
Setup. C LARIFY takes as input an image classiﬁcation model trained with standard supervised
learning. Here, we use an example of a model trained to classify images of sprites as squares or
ovals.
Reviewing model behavior. First, the user is presented with a summary view of the model’s current
behavior. The goal of this interface is to scaffold the user in rapidly identifying reasons underlying
model failures. Drawing from a validation dataset, we display one class at a time (i.e., images of
squares) and divide the examples into those that the model correctly classiﬁed (i.e., images classiﬁed
as squares) on the left versus those that it incorrectly classiﬁed (i.e., images classiﬁed as ovals) on
the right (Figure 2, A1). By presenting the images in this way, C LARIFY streamlines the user’s task
to one of identifying differences between sets. In our example, all of the images on the page are
indeed squares, but the model is only making accurate predictions for the examples on the left and


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

A: Identify and describe model failures               CLARIFY Interface   B: Assess description quality
 A1 Review current model behavior on one class            A1   B1         B1 Review images split by description


                                                 A2


A2 Describe model failures                                                B2 Review error scores
                                                 B2


Figure 2: The C LARIFY interface enables users to iteratively (A) identify and describe model failures and
(B) assess the quality of these descriptions. Users can review image examples of correct and incorrect predic-
tions on one class, such as “square” (A1). Based on observed differences, they can input short, natural language
descriptions of model failures, such as “red” squares (A2). The system surfaces feedback by splitting the data
using the provided description (B1) and displaying an error score (B2). Users can repeat the process to generate
improved descriptions.



not those on the right. Comparing the images on the two sides, the user notices that the correct cases
contain blue squares while the incorrect cases contain red squares.
Describing model failures. Now that the user has an initial idea of the model’s misconception, they
are tasked with describing this failure mode. Our system accepts short, natural language descriptions
of model failures (Figure 2, A2). In particular, users are asked to complete the following ﬁll-in-the-
blank sentence: “The AI is often wrong on images that have ___ in it.” We ﬁnd that this question is
an effective question, since users may not be familiar with the general concept of spurious correla-
tions. Continuing our running example, the user enters the phrase “red” here to describe what they
observed.
Assessing descriptions. After the user submits their description, C LARIFY helps them to assess
whether the description can successfully correct model errors. First, we provide a 0 − 1 Error
Score that indicates how well the description separates the error cases from the correct predictions
(Figure 2, B2). Then, we present a summary visualization that partitions the validation dataset based
on a threshold on image-text similarity from CLIP (Figure 2, B1). Images sufﬁciently similar to
the description (“red”) are on the right while others are on the left. For our example, the user sees
an Error Score of 0.70, and they see a set of images without red on the left and a set of images
with red on the right. This high Error Score indicates that they successfully achieved a strong
level of separation, and they see in the image view that most of the red squares were captured by
their description. We note that while the interface only shows validation data using the provided
description, the user’s natural language annotation will later be incorporated to partition the training
data for model retraining.
Iterating on descriptions. However, users may not always be so successful on their ﬁrst attempt, so
C LARIFY aids users in iterating on their descriptions. Descriptions can fail for two reasons: (1) the
description may not indeed differentiate the correct and incorrect cases, or (2) the description may
be a valid differentiator, but may not be modeled accurately due to the user’s word choice and CLIP-
based similarity scoring. C LARIFY allows users to identify both of these failure modes. In our
example, the user can see if the model is not accurately identifying images with the “red” keyword
(case 2), and they can experiment with alternate rewordings to better isolate the difference (e.g.,
“red square,” “crimson”). After iterating and isolating the red examples, the user can see if the Error
Score is still low, indicating that this description is not sufﬁcient to repair model errors (case 1).
With this information, they can revisit the original view and brainstorm additional descriptions, like
phrases related to the size and orientation of sprites.
Error score. We now describe how we calculate the Error Score, a rough proxy for how well a
given text description predicts model errors. Consider input text prompt T , and let Dcorrect and
Derror be subsets of the validation dataset for a given class that the model made correct and incorrect
predictions on, respectively. We denote the cosine similarities between the T and the images in each
subset as Scorrect = {sim(I, T ) | I ∈ Dcorrect } and Serror = {sim(I, T ) | I ∈ Derror }. To quantify
how well image similarity with T can predict model errors, we compute the best class-balanced
binary classiﬁcation accuracy among similarity thresholds τ . Denoting this accuracy as Accτ , the
error score is computed as 2 × (Accτ − 0.5), so that uninformative prompts recieve a score of 0 and
prompts that perfectly predict model errors recieve a score of 1. This score is only meant to give


                                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


non-expert users a rough idea of what descriptions are useful, and is not used in the training process.

Similarity threshold. Finally, for each natural language threshold, we determine a similarity thresh-
old τ , which can be chosen by the user after inspecting the similarity scores for a representative
sample of images, or can be automatically chosen as the threshold that maximizes the Error Score.
For each class, only the textual feedback with the highest Error Score is used for retraining. Together
with this threshold, we can specify a spurious correlation using a tuple of the form (class label, text
prompt, similarity threshold), which corresponds to a binary classiﬁer that is predictive of model
errors on that class.
Additional features for large datasets. We found that a few more optional features are helpful for
annotating spurious correlations ImageNet, and expect that these features will similarly be helpful
for other datasets. We begin by narrowing down the 1000 classes to 100 classes that are most likely
to have identiﬁable spurious correlations. To do so, we ﬁrst prune out classes with too low or too
high accuracy (i.e. accuracy below 0.2 or above 0.8), to ensure a sufﬁcient number of correct and
incorrect predictions for each class. For the remaining classes, we caption each image with an image
captioning model (Li et al., 2022a, BLIP) and use a keyword extraction model (Grootendorst, 2020,
KeyBERT) to suggest a pool of up to 50 keywords for each class, a procedure inspired by Kim
et al. (2023). Through C LARIFY, we perform interactions with the top 100 classes according to
maximum error score across the candidate keywords. During interactions, the user is shown the top
10 candidate keywords as a helpful starting point.

4.2   AUTOMATIC F INE -T UNING
After collecting textual feedback from users, we incorporate this feedback into the training process
for ﬁne-tuning a foundation model. While the strategy below is applicable to any form of training,
in this paper, we consider ﬁne-tuning only the last layer on top of a frozen backbone. Given an
error annotation (c, T, τ ), we can partition the training data within class c into two subsets: D> =
{(xi , yi ) | sim(xi , T ) > τ } and D< = {(xi , yi ) | sim(xi , T ) ≤ τ }. These two subsets correspond
to images that are more and less similar to the provided text prompt, respectively, and serve as
indicators of the spurious attribute identiﬁed by the annotator. Having identiﬁed these two subsets,
we want to train a ﬁnal model to achieve low training loss while not using the feature that separates
the two subsets.
We propose to adjust the loss weights for each subset so that their total weights are balanced:
                                     {
                                           1
                                             >∥
                                                  if (xi , yi ) ∈ D>
                               wi = C∥D                              .                              (2)
                                           1
                                        C∥D< ∥    if (xi , yi ) ∈ D<

This weight balancing discourages the model from exploiting the spurious attribute for prediction by
reducing the statistical correlation between the spurious attribute and the class label in the training
data. For classes without any error annotations, we use uniform weights during training as in stan-
dard supervised learning. Given such weights over the training dataset, we train the last layer with
a weighted cross-entropy loss. In Section 5, we will measure the effectiveness of this ﬁne-tuning
approach based on language feedback. We note that this stage is fully automated, and there are no
additional hyperparameters to tune beyond what was in the original training process.

5     E XPERIMENTS
We ﬁrst note that our framework diverges substantially from assumptions in traditional supervised
learning. C LARIFY involves collecting annotations after an initial round of training, and these an-
notations consist of targeted concept-level feedback rather than model-agnostic instance-level feed-
back. We consider this deviation from the conventional setup as necessary for efﬁciently addressing
the challenge of learning robust prediction rules from observational data. We seek to empirically
answer the following questions about this framework for interactively correcting model errors:

1. How does re-training with annotations from C LARIFY compare to automated methods for ad-
   dressing spurious correlations?
2. Can non-expert users use C LARIFY to identify and describe spurious correlations in models
   trained with supervised learning?


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Table 1: Evaluation of methods for group robustness using the CLIP-ResNet50 backbone. Fine-tuning with
annotations from C LARIFY consistently outperforms methods that use only text (zero-shot) or label information.
We denote our implementation of other methods with (ours); all other results are from Zhang & Ré (2022).

                                                                  Waterbirds              CelebA
      Data Assumptions         Method                         WG     Avg    Gap    WG      Avg     Gap
                               Class Prompt                   36.6   92.2   55.6   74.0    81.9     7.9
      Zero-Shot
                               Group Prompt                   55.9   87.8   31.9   70.8    82.6    11.8
                               ERM                             7.9   93.5   85.6   11.9    94.7    82.8
                               ERM (ours)                     63.4   96.0   32.6   31.1    95.4    64.3
      Labels
                               ERM (ours, class-balanced)     48.6   95.2   46.7   65.8    93.4    27.6
                               ERM (ours, worst-class)        55.9   95.8   39.9   56.9    94.1    37.2
                               C LARIFY (slice-balanced)      68.4   93.6   25.2   89.3    92.2    2.8
      Labels, Text Feedback
                               C LARIFY (worst-slice)         75.7   83.8    8.1   89.1    92.1    3.0
                               DFR (subsample)                63.9   91.8   27.9   76.9    92.5    15.6
                               DFR (upsample)                 51.3   92.4   41.1   89.6    91.8     2.2
      Labels, Group Labels
                               DFR (ours)                     78.7   90.8   12.1   90.6    91.9     1.3
                               Group DRO (ours)               81.3   88.1    6.8   89.2    91.8     2.7



3. Can C LARIFY discover and rectify novel spurious correlations in large datasets such as Ima-
   geNet?

For detailed experimental setup including datasets, models, and human participants, see Ap-
pendix A.

5.1   C OMPARISON W ITH AUTOMATED M ETHODS
We assess how re-training a model with expert annotations from C LARIFY compares to existing
automated methods for addressing spurious correlations. We compare with representative prior
methods which similarly ﬁne-tune CLIP backbones and/or reweight training data. In addition to
C LARIFY, we evaluate zero-shot CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) with class-based and group-based
prompts, DFR (Kirichenko et al., 2022), and Group DRO (Sagawa et al., 2019). We desribe experi-
mental details for each method in Appendix A. Our results on the Waterbirds and CelebA datasets,
summarized in Table 1, demonstrate that C LARIFY consistently outperforms approaches that that
use zero-shot prompts or class labels in terms of worst-group accuracy and robustness gaps. Table 4
shows extended results with another backbone. On this experiment, C LARIFY underperforms spe-
cialized methods on Waterbirds and is competitive on CelebA, while using considerably cheaper
supervision.
We emphasize that these experiments do not aim to conduct a head-to-head comparison with the best
automated methods for addressing spurious correlations. The body of work on automated spurious
correlations is large (Sagawa et al., 2019; Yaghoobzadeh et al., 2019; Nam et al., 2020; Creager et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2021; Kirichenko et al., 2022; Qiu et al., 2023), and these methods are often de-
signed for speciﬁc benchmarks including the Waterbirds and CelebA datasets. Instead, our primary
goal is to show that C LARIFY, with minimal human supervision and no additional hyperparameter
tuning, can yield results that yield beneﬁts comparable with prior methods. We also note that prior
methods often require a substantial amount of additional supervision, such as instance-level annota-
tion for spurious attributes for either training or hyperparameter tuning, which C LARIFY does not
require.
Moreover, the key advantage of C LARIFY is in its scalability to large datasets, a feature that no
prior automated method has demonstrated. Such scalability is crucial when applying these ideas to
real-world problems, where the scale and diversity of data are ever-increasing. We will elaborate on
and provide empirical evidence for the scalability of C LARIFY in Section 5.3.

5.2   N ON -E XPERT A NNOTATORS C AN D ESCRIBE M ODEL E RRORS
Identifying and annotating spurious correlations is a more nuanced task than conventional forms of
annotation such as class labeling. This raises the question of whether non-expert annotators can
perform this task. To answer this question, we conduct a user study (N=26) to assess the ability
of non-expert users to identify and describe spurious correlations in models trained with supervised
learning (see Appendix A for study details). We ask each participant to annotate the Waterbirds and
CelebA datasets using the C LARIFY interface, and we summarize our results in Figures 3 and 5.


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                          Best-Performing Phrases per Participant: Waterbirds
                0.6


  Error Score
                0.4

                0.2

                0.0


                                     he 8)

                                     re 4)

                                     re 3)

                                      st 9)

                                                )

                          w est 0)

                                       w )
                                      st 1)

                          ou sts 6)

                          se s... 1)
                        ar ull 23)

                                       s 1)
                                     es 2)

                                     es 0)

                                     es 3)

                                     es 5)

                                                )

                                        er )
                                               )
                         G ate 19)

                                       y 5)

                                        ... )
                                       gs 2)
                          nd ird 5)

                                               )

                                                )
                                  re 16



                                              2


                                 an P17

                                 w P14

                                  at (P7


                                 bl P24


                                  ap P8

                                             26
                                             1
                                ac (P1

                                 fo (P

                                 fo (P
                               fo t (P



                                            2
                                er (P2
                               fo l (P

                     ck fore s (P


                                bi P2

                                tre (P1

                                tre (P1

                                tre (P1

                                tre (P1


                      m en (P2



                                 w (P

                                  b (P
                               nd (P
                               fo (P

                               fo (P


                              ag (P


                               w (P


                                          (P
                              sc s (
                           tic s (


                                          (

                                          (


                                          (
                                          s
                                        st

                                        s
                                       s


                                      st


                                      ts



                                      er

                                        r


                                       e
                                     ur
                                     at
                                    fo
                                   ck


                                   rd


                        ot er



                                    in
                                  re
                                  re



                                  r
    du


                               w
                              pl
                 be


                             at


                              n
                            re

                           io
            dy


                        gr


                       la
     n
  sa


                  ba
               rk
            da
                                            Best-Performing Phrases per Participant: CelebA
                0.6
  Error Score


                0.4

                0.2

                0.0                                                                                                             Figure 4:     (a) Typical im-
        ch de.. P3)

                                 )

                                )

                                )
         or er 5)

                       ... )
                      en )

                      en )

                      en )

                                )
                    en 1)

                    en 3)

                    en 6)

                    en 7)

                    en 8)

                      n 0)

           gh en ( )

                      s 3)
                   ow 6)

                      e 5)
                    es 8)

                     te 1)

                                )

                                )
                    ey 24)

                                 )
                  nd 14

       rk on 12

        an an. P7


                 hi (P2

                   m P4

                   m P1

                   m P6
                 m (P9


                               2


                 pi P10

                  hi 19



                             15
                                                                                                                                ages from the “blond” class of
                 m P1
      sh oth (P2


                 m P1

                 m P1

                 m P1

                 m P1

                 m P2

                 m P2
               lig P2

                br P2

                m (P

                             P
               w (P2
    da blo . (P

    da r bl s (P


               W (P

                         (P

                         (P
                           (


              th ... (


                           (

                           (

                           (


              m s(
                         (

                         (

                         (

                         (

                         (

                         (

                         (



                         (


                         (
  bl blon de


            t w ...


             fe n
                    en
                      ..


                    nk

                     te
                     d


                    te


                   ht



                   al
                    n


                    e
                                                                                                                                CelebA. Non-experts provided


                  hi
                 al


                 gr
                 lo
    rk r b


           y
da rke


         er
         e


        hi
       rk


                                                                                                                                textual feedback corresponding
      er
     ea
     da


      d
   on
bl
                                                                                                                                to hard subpopulations of (b)
Figure 3: Non-experts used C LARIFY to identify high-quality descriptions                                                       lighter and (c) darker hair col-
with Error Scores that matched or exceeded the authors’ expert annotations.                                                     ors.
                                                                                                                 Non-Expert Worst-Group Accuracy
                               Non-Expert Completion Times
                                                                                                                                                                Baselines
                                                                                                                                                                  Class Prompt
                                                                                                                                                                  Group Prompt
Waterbirds                                                                                                                                                        ERM (best)
                                                                               CelebA


                                                                            Waterbirds


     CelebA



                       0   2     4      6      8     10     12    14   16                        0.30   0.40     0.50    0.60    0.70     0.80    0.90   1.00
                                     Completion time (mins)                                                    Worst-Group Accuracy (Best phrase)


(a) Non-experts completed annotation tasks for                                           (b) Models retrained with non-expert annotations exceeded
each dataset within a few minutes.                                                       existing baselines.

                Figure 5: C LARIFY achieves low annotation effort and improved model performance with non-experts.

Taking the best-performing annotation from each user, the average worst-group accuracy was 63.5
(SD=4.7, max=69.5) for the Waterbirds dataset and 78.8 (SD=2.9, max=82.8) for the CelebA dataset.
These results all exceed Class Prompt, Group Prompt, and ERM (best) baselines (Figure 5b). Promis-
ingly, users were able to achieve these performance improvements with minimal annotation effort,
averaging 2.7 minutes (SD=2.5) per dataset (Figure 5a). Overall, non-experts appeared proﬁcient at
this annotation task. For the Waterbirds dataset, the authors’ expert annotation of “forest” achieved
a 0.54 Error Score. In comparison, the best-performing Error Score for non-expert users was 0.41
on average (SD=0.13), and one participant achieved as high as 0.63. For the CelebA dataset, the ex-
pert annotation of “man” achieved a 0.32 Error Score. Across non-expert users, the best-performing
Error Score averaged 0.31 (SD=0.11), and the highest Error Score was 0.58.
We additionally ﬁnd that non-expert annotators propose novel model failures that had not been pre-
viously surfaced by experts. While experts had surfaced spurious correlations with gender in the
CelebA dataset, participants also surfaced “dirty blonde” and “bleach blond” subpopulations, which
achieved higher Error Scores than the “man” subpopulation (Figure 4). Our ﬁndings suggest that
C LARIFY can enable non-expert annotators to identify and describe spurious correlations in mod-
els trained with supervised learning. This opens up the possibility of leveraging a broader work-
force for annotating and mitigating spurious correlations in web-scale datasets such as ImageNet or
LAION (Deng et al., 2009; Schuhmann et al., 2022).
5.3                   D ISCOVERING AND M ITIGATING S PURIOUS C ORRELATIONS IN I MAGE N ET
We now evaluate whether C LARIFY can be used to discover novel spurious correlations in models
trained on the ImageNet training set. For such widely used large-scale datasets, it is important to de-
velop both tools to ﬁnd spurious correlations and methods to mitigate their effect. For this evaluation,
the authors of this paper use the C LARIFY interface to identify spurious correlations in ImageNet,
and additionally evaluate whether the resulting annotations can improve model robustness.
Discovered spurious correlations in ImageNet. Using C LARIFY, we identiﬁed 31 spurious cor-
relations in ImageNet; we show a full list in Table 5. To our best knowledge, no prior works have
identiﬁed these spurious correlations, despite ImageNet being a widely studied dataset. As an exam-


                                                                                             8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                   ImageNet Accuracies
                                                                                            0.75               All
                                                                                                               Hard Splits


                                                                                 Accuracy
                                                                                            0.50
                                                                                            0.25
                                                                                            0.00
                                                                                                    ERM         Clarify

Figure 6: An example of a spurious correlation found on ImageNet. Within         Figure 7: Average accuracies
the “sliding door” class, the model successfully classiﬁes (a) images of slid-   on ImageNet data. Fine-tuning
ing doors inside buildings. However, it is wrong on all instances of (b)         with Clarify substantially im-
sliding doors on cars. This is one of the 31 spurious correlations we found;     proves accuracy on hard splits,
please refer to Figure 10 in the appendix for more visualizations.               while keeping overall accuracy
                                                                                 intact.

           0.75                                                                                                    Clarify
                                                                                                                   ERM
Accuracy


           0.50
           0.25
           0.00
                    partridge


                  breastplate


                        bakery


                    projectile
                     spotlight
                        sliding


                             cup


                           plate


                       bathtub
                           wool
                         space


                            rifle
                    academic
                        weasel

                   mushroom
                       monitor

                      minivan
                         velvet
                          letter
                          bikini
                          loupe


                  sidewinder
                         briard
                    chocolate
                       bighorn


                        mouse



                            lens


                   sunscreen
                             ear
                     flatworm
                      terrapin
Figure 8: Average minority split accuracy for each of the 31 identiﬁed spurious correlations. Fine-tuning with
textual feedback from C LARIFY improves minority split accuracy in many classes.

ple, we visualize a spurious correlation in the “sliding door” class in Figure 6. Here, sliding doors
are negatively correlated with cars in the training set, causing standard models to misclassify cars
that have sliding doors. We visualize more such spurious correlations in Figure 10. We evaluate
the performance of a standard ERM model trained on the ImageNet training set on each identiﬁed
minority and majority split. Results in Figure 11 show that the ERM model consistently underper-
forms on the minority split for each class, indicating that the trained model is relying on each of
these spurious correlations. We also note that this trend continues to hold on ImageNet-V2, which
follows a different distribution from the validation set we use during interactions.
Fine-tuning while avoiding spurious correlations. We use the collected annotations to ﬁne-tune a
model on ImageNet, and evaluate this ﬁne-tuned model on various splits of the ImageNet validation
set. Results in Figure 8 show that the retrained model achieves higher minority split performance
on many classes. Aggregate metrics in Figure 7 show that ﬁne-tuning with C LARIFY annotations
reduces the average minority-split accuracy from 21.1% to 28.7%, with only a 0.2% drop in overall
average accuracy. We emphasize that no additional data was used during ﬁne-tuning—the annota-
tions from C LARIFY were only used to ﬁnd a better reweighting of the exact same training data used
to train the original ERM model.

6           D ISCUSSION
Across our experiments, we ﬁnd that text feedback through C LARIFY is most effective when it accu-
rately describes a single concept that is sufﬁciently represented in the general distribution of internet
text. While using CLIP as the backbone allows us to leverage its broad pre-training distribution,
it also means that C LARIFY in its current form is limited in specialized domains such as medical
imaging or scientiﬁc domains. Since the framework automatically bridges from elicited descriptions
to model improvements, any future improvement in the backbone multimodal model will bring with
it, out of the box, the ability to describe more failure modes. Future work could broaden the ap-
plicability of the C LARIFY framework by incorporating domain-speciﬁc knowledge or extending to
data modalities beyond images. C LARIFY contributes to the democratization of machine learning
by allowing laypeople to correct concept-level errors stemming from spurious correlations in data.
This feature can potentially foster greater public trust, especially when users witness measurable
improvements in the model after their interventions.


                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT
In this paper, we present C LARIFY, a natural language interface designed to correct misconceptions
in image classiﬁer models. While we collect natural language feedback from users, we adhere to
data privacy and conﬁdentiality guidelines to protect user data. Our framework’s capacity to improve
model robustness should not absolve developers from the responsibility of thoroughly evaluating
models for fairness and avoiding biases. As C LARIFY allows for targeted interventions in model
behavior, there is a risk of misuse where the system could be manipulated to intentionally introduce
or reinforce biases. A system based on our proposed framework should involve monitoring by a
trusted party.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
To ensure reproducibility, we fully describe our method in Section 4. This paper also includes ex-
perimental details including datasets, backbone models, qualiﬁcations for human annotators, and
gathered annotations. Parts of the study involving human participants are inherently not fully repro-
ducible due to the variability of human responses, despite rigorous protocols for participant selection
and data collection. We have attached a video of the interface in action as supplementary material.
If the paper is accepted, we will clean up and open-source our code, including the web interface,
backend processing, and model training code.

R EFERENCES
Dyah Adila, Changho Shin, Linrong Cai, and Frederic Sala. Zero-shot robustiﬁcation of zero-shot
  models with foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.04344, 2023. [page 19, 21]

Devansh Arpit, Stanisław Jastrzebski, Nicolas Ballas, David Krueger, Emmanuel Bengio, Maxin-
  der S Kanwal, Tegan Maharaj, Asja Fischer, Aaron Courville, Yoshua Bengio, et al. A closer
  look at memorization in deep networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
  [page 3]

Robert L Bangert-Drowns, Chen-Lin C Kulik, James A Kulik, and MaryTeresa Morgan. The in-
  structional effect of feedback in test-like events. Review of educational research, 61(2):213–238,
  1991. [page 2]

Yujia Bao and Regina Barzilay. Learning to split for automatic bias detection. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.13749, 2022. [page 3]

Angie Boggust, Benjamin Hoover, Arvind Satyanarayan, and Hendrik Strobelt. Shared interest:
  Measuring human-ai alignment to identify recurring patterns in model behavior. In Proceedings
  of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–17, 2022. [page 3]

Mayee Chen, Karan Goel, Nimit S Sohoni, Fait Poms, Kayvon Fatahalian, and Christopher Ré.
 Mandoline: Model evaluation under distribution shift. In International conference on machine
 learning, pp. 1617–1629. PMLR, 2021. [page 3]

Zhongzhi Chen, Guang Liu, Bo-Wen Zhang, Fulong Ye, Qinghong Yang, and Ledell Wu. Alt-
  clip: Altering the language encoder in clip for extended language capabilities. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.06679, 2022. [page 19]

Elliot Creager, Joern-Henrik Jacobsen, and Richard Zemel. Environment inference for invariant
  learning. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  2189–2200. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. [page 3, 7]

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009. [page 8, 15]

Greg d’Eon, Jason d’Eon, James R Wright, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. The spotlight: A general
  method for discovering systematic errors in deep learning models. In Proceedings of the 2022
  ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 1962–1981, 2022. [page 3]


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gregory Druck, Gideon Mann, and Andrew McCallum. Learning from labeled features using gen-
  eralized expectation criteria. In Proceedings of the 31st annual international ACM SIGIR confer-
  ence on Research and development in information retrieval, pp. 595–602, 2008. [page 3]
John J Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson. A review of user interface design for interactive machine
  learning. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS), 8(2):1–37, 2018. [page 3]
Lisa Dunlap, Clara Mohri, Devin Guillory, Han Zhang, Trevor Darrell, Joseph E Gonzalez, Aditi
  Raghunathan, and Anna Rohrbach. Using language to extend to unseen domains. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. [page 3]
Sabri Eyuboglu, Maya Varma, Khaled Saab, Jean-Benoit Delbrouck, Christopher Lee-Messer, Jared
  Dunnmon, James Zou, and Christopher Ré. Domino: Discovering systematic errors with cross-
  modal embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.14960, 2022. [page 3, 17]
Jerry Alan Fails and Dan R Olsen Jr. Interactive machine learning. In Proceedings of the 8th
   international conference on Intelligent user interfaces, pp. 39–45, 2003. [page 3]
Aaron Fisher, Cynthia Rudin, and Francesca Dominici. All models are wrong, but many are useful:
  Learning a variable’s importance by studying an entire class of prediction models simultaneously.
  J. Mach. Learn. Res., 20(177):1–81, 2019. [page 3]
Irena Gao, Gabriel Ilharco, Scott Lundberg, and Marco Tulio Ribeiro. Adaptive testing of computer
   vision models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.02774, 2022. [page 3]
Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel,
  Matthias Bethge, and Felix A Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature
  Machine Intelligence, 2(11):665–673, 2020. [page 3]
Sally A. Goldman and Michael J. Kearns. On the complexity of teaching. In Proceedings of the
  Fourth Annual Workshop on Computational Learning Theory, COLT ’91, pp. 303314, San Fran-
  cisco, CA, USA, 1991. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. ISBN 1558602135. [page 3]
Maarten Grootendorst. Keybert: Minimal keyword extraction with bert., 2020. [page 6]
Suriya Gunasekar, Jason D Lee, Daniel Soudry, and Nati Srebro. Implicit bias of gradient de-
  scent on linear convolutional networks. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman,
  N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2018. [page 3]
John Hattie and Helen Timperley. The power of feedback. Review of educational research, 77(1):
  81–112, 2007. [page 2]
Daniel R Ilgen, Cynthia D Fisher, and M Susan Taylor. Consequences of individual feedback on
  behavior in organizations. Journal of applied psychology, 64(4):349, 1979. [page 2]
Saachi Jain, Hannah Lawrence, Ankur Moitra, and Aleksander Madry. Distilling model failures as
  directions in latent space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14754, 2022. [page 3, 17]
Chao Jia, Yinfei Yang, Ye Xia, Yi-Ting Chen, Zarana Parekh, Hieu Pham, Quoc Le, Yun-Hsuan
  Sung, Zhen Li, and Tom Duerig. Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning
  with noisy text supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4904–4916.
  PMLR, 2021. [page 19]
Divyansh Kaushik, Eduard Hovy, and Zachary C Lipton. Learning the difference that makes a dif-
  ference with counterfactually-augmented data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.12434, 2019. [page 3]
Younghyun Kim, Sangwoo Mo, Minkyu Kim, Kyungmin Lee, Jaeho Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. Ex-
  plaining visual biases as words by generating captions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11104, 2023.
  [page 3, 6, 15, 16]
Polina Kirichenko, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Last layer re-training is sufﬁcient
  for robustness to spurious correlations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02937, 2022. [page 3, 7, 16]


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Avraham N Kluger and Angelo DeNisi. The effects of feedback interventions on performance: a
  historical review, a meta-analysis, and a preliminary feedback intervention theory. Psychological
  bulletin, 119(2):254, 1996. [page 2]

Michelle S Lam, Zixian Ma, Anne Li, Izequiel Freitas, Dakuo Wang, James A Landay, and
 Michael S Bernstein. Model sketching: Centering concepts in early-stage machine learning model
 design. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
 pp. 1–24, 2023. [page 3]

Yoonho Lee, Huaxiu Yao, and Chelsea Finn. Diversify and disambiguate: Learning from underspec-
  iﬁed data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03418, 2022. [page 3]

David D Lewis. A sequential algorithm for training text classiﬁers: Corrigendum and additional
  data. In Acm Sigir Forum, volume 29, pp. 13–19. ACM New York, NY, USA, 1995. [page 3]

Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for uniﬁed vision-language understanding and generation. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 12888–12900. PMLR, 2022a. [page 6]

Zhiheng Li, Ivan Evtimov, Albert Gordo, Caner Hazirbas, Tal Hassner, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Chen-
  liang Xu, and Mark Ibrahim. A whac-a-mole dilemma: Shortcuts come in multiples where miti-
  gating one ampliﬁes others. 2022b. [page 3]

Evan Z Liu, Behzad Haghgoo, Annie S Chen, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa,
  Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Just train twice: Improving group robustness without training
  group information. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6781–6792. PMLR,
  2021. [page 3, 7, 17]

Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In
  Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015. [page 15]

Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Dan Jurafsky. Distant supervision for relation extraction
 without labeled data. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the
 ACL and the 4th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing of the AFNLP,
 pp. 1003–1011, 2009. [page 3]

Eric Mitchell, Charles Lin, Antoine Bosselut, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher D Manning. Fast model
  editing at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.11309, 2021. [page 3]

Junhyun Nam, Hyuntak Cha, Sungsoo Ahn, Jaeho Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. Learning from failure:
  De-biasing classiﬁer from biased classiﬁer. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:20673–20684, 2020. [page 3, 7]

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. ArXiv, abs/2303.08774, 2023. [page 19]

Matteo Pagliardini, Martin Jaggi, François Fleuret, and Sai Praneeth Karimireddy. Agree to disagree:
 Diversity through disagreement for better transferability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.04414, 2022.
 [page 3]

Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge university press, 2009. [page 1]

Mohammad Pezeshki, Sékou-Oumar Kaba, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, Doina Precup, and
 Guillaume Lajoie. Gradient starvation: A learning proclivity in neural networks. In A. Beygelz-
 imer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2021. [page 3]

Michael Polanyi. The tacit dimension. In Knowledge in organisations, pp. 135–146. Routledge,
 2009. [page 3]

Shikai Qiu, Andres Potapczynski, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Simple and fast
  group robustness by automatic feature reweighting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11074, 2023.
  [page 3, 7]


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. [page 4, 7, 15]
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. " why should i trust you?" explaining the
 predictions of any classiﬁer. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference
 on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1135–1144, 2016. [page 3]
Alexis Ross, Tongshuang Wu, Hao Peng, Matthew E Peters, and Matt Gardner. Tailor: Generating
  and perturbing text with semantic controls. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07150, 2021. [page 3]
Donald B Rubin. Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized studies.
 Journal of educational Psychology, 66(5):688, 1974. [page 1]
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust neu-
  ral networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generalization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.08731, 2019. [page 3, 7, 15]
Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Mahalaxmi Elango, David Bau, Antonio Torralba, and Alek-
  sander Madry. Editing a classiﬁer by rewriting its prediction rules. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 34:23359–23373, 2021. [page 3]
Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Nan Rosemary Ke, Nal Kalchbrenner,
  Anirudh Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Toward causal representation learning. Proceedings of
  the IEEE, 109(5):612–634, 2021. [page 1]
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:25278–25294, 2022. [page 8]
Burr Settles. Active learning literature survey. 2009. [page 3]
Harshay Shah, Kaustav Tamuly, Aditi Raghunathan, Prateek Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli. The
  pitfalls of simplicity bias in neural networks. Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2020. [page 3]
Patrice Y Simard, Saleema Amershi, David M Chickering, Alicia Edelman Pelton, Soroush Gho-
  rashi, Christopher Meek, Gonzalo Ramos, Jina Suh, Johan Verwey, Mo Wang, et al. Ma-
  chine teaching: A new paradigm for building machine learning systems. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1707.06742, 2017. [page 3]
Otilia Stretcu, Edward Vendrow, Kenji Hata, Krishnamurthy Viswanathan, Vittorio Ferrari, Sasan
  Tavakkol, Wenlei Zhou, Aditya Avinash, Enming Luo, Neil Gordon Alldrin, et al. Agile modeling:
  Image classiﬁcation with domain experts in the loop. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12948, 2023.
  [page 3]
Saeid Asgari Taghanaki, Aliasghar Khani, Fereshte Khani, Ali Gholami, Linh Tran, Ali Mahdavi-
  Amiri, and Ghassan Hamarneh. masktune: Mitigating spurious correlations by forcing to ex-
  plore. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00055, 2022. [page 3]
Damien Teney, Ehsan Abbasnejad, Simon Lucey, and Anton van den Hengel. Evading the simplic-
  ity bias: Training a diverse set of models discovers solutions with superior ood generalization.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
 16761–16772, 2022. [page 3]
Victor Veitch, Alexander D’Amour, Steve Yadlowsky, and Jacob Eisenstein. Counterfactual invari-
  ance to spurious correlations: Why and how to pass stress tests. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.00545,
  2021. [page 3]
Joshua Vendrow, Saachi Jain, Logan Engstrom, and Aleksander Madry. Dataset interfaces: Diagnos-
  ing model failures using controllable counterfactual generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07865,
  2023. [page 3]


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Olivia Wiles, Isabela Albuquerque, and Sven Gowal. Discovering bugs in vision models using
  off-the-shelf image generation and captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.08831, 2022. [page 3]
Tongshuang Wu, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Jeffrey Heer, and Daniel S Weld. Polyjuice: Generating coun-
  terfactuals for explaining, evaluating, and improving models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00288,
  2021. [page 3]
Yilun Xu, Hao He, Tianxiao Shen, and Tommi Jaakkola. Controlling directions orthogonal to a
  classiﬁer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11259, 2022. [page 3]
Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh, Soroush Mehri, Remi Tachet, Timothy J Hazen, and Alessandro Sor-
  doni. Increasing robustness to spurious correlations using forgettable examples. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1911.03861, 2019. [page 3, 7]
Huihan Yao, Ying Chen, Qinyuan Ye, Xisen Jin, and Xiang Ren. Reﬁning language models with
  compositional explanations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8954–8967,
  2021. [page 3]
Michael Zhang and Christopher Ré. Contrastive adapters for foundation model group robustness.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:21682–21697, 2022. [page 7, 16]
Yuhui Zhang, Jeff Z HaoChen, Shih-Cheng Huang, Kuan-Chieh Wang, James Zou, and Serena Ye-
  ung. Diagnosing and rectifying vision models using language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04269,
  2023. [page 3]
Xiaojin Zhu. Machine teaching: An inverse problem to machine learning and an approach toward
  optimal education. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 29,
  2015. [page 3]
Xiaojin Zhu, Adish Singla, Sandra Zilles, and Anna N Rafferty. An overview of machine teaching.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.05927, 2018. [page 3]


                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Comparison to Bias-to-Text (Kim et al., 2023), an automated bias discovery method on ImageNet. We
show the top 10 keywords identiﬁed by Bias-to-Text, in descending order of their recommended score. We also
show the text feedback provided through C LARIFY for comparison. The keywords identiﬁed by Bias-to-Text
often include irrelevant words or correspond to very small subpopulations, indicating that current automated
methods ultimately require human oversight or intervention to discover the most relevant and biased subpopu-
lations.

         Spotlight class (ours: “shining”)                               Riﬂe class (ours: “wooden barrel”)
      Keyword CLIP Score Subgroup Acc                                    Keyword CLIP Score Subgroup Acc
    street lamp         3.32             0.0 (N=1)                         person      1.59        14.3 (N=14)
           lamp         2.50             66.7 (N=6)                        soldier     0.60        0.0 (N=8)
              top       2.46             0.0 (N=1)                 project picture     0.20        0.0 (N=3)
        kitchen         2.22             50.0 (N=2)                       soldiers     0.18        0.0 (N=5)
          street        2.07             33.3 (N=3)                    dark room       -0.47       0.0 (N=1)
            suite       1.94             0.0 (N=1)                       machine       -0.95       20.0 (N=5)
             city       1.87             0.0 (N=3)                            gun      -1.69       30.0 (N=20)
           room         1.77             0.0 (N=2)                       nice gun      -1.98       0.0 (N=2)
            light       1.51             81.8 (N=22)                machine gun        -2.00       20.0 (N=5)
           night        1.12             80.0 (N=5)                      weapons       -2.01       42.9 (N=7)


    Academic Gown class (ours: “many people in robes”)                    Bighorn class (ours: “rocky hillside”)
              Keyword CLIP Score Subgroup Acc                                Keyword CLIP Score Subgroup Acc
                  person       0.51         25.0 (N=24)                             goat   1.39     5.9 (N=17)
                   photo       0.50         27.3 (N=11)                            sheep   1.35     0.0 (N=9)
                graduate       0.23         13.3 (N=15)                  mountain goat     0.11     0.0 (N=2)
               graduates       0.21         25.0 (N=8)                        biological   0.06     28.6 (N=7)
              graduation       0.16         13.3 (N=15)               biological species   0.00     28.6 (N=7)
                    pose       0.12         20.0 (N=10)                          species   -0.03    28.6 (N=7)
                   poses       0.01         0.0 (N=4)                     bighorn sheep    -0.04    0.0 (N=4)
                students       -0.25        0.0 (N=7)              bighorn sheep stands    -0.29    0.0 (N=2)
    graduation ceremony        -0.57        16.7 (N=12)                           stands   -1.32    0.0 (N=7)
               ceremony        -1.27        23.1 (N=13)                             herd   -2.27    14.3 (N=7)


    Loupe class (ours: “person holding a magnifying glass”)                Weasel class (ours: “snow weasel”)
           Keyword CLIP Score Subgroup Acc                                   Keyword CLIP Score Subgroup Acc
               black     0.01          0.0 (N=4)                           bear cub sits   1.72     0.0 (N=1)
             camera      -0.08         28.6 (N=7)                        black bear cub    1.62     50.0 (N=2)
                book     -0.65         33.3 (N=3)                     young black bear     0.81     0.0 (N=1)
            compact      -0.72         0.0 (N=2)                     biological species    -0.17    85.7 (N=14)
    compact camera       -1.12         0.0 (N=2)                          dead squirrels   -0.19    0.0 (N=1)
               watch     -1.50         0.0 (N=1)                              ﬁle photo    -0.19    0.0 (N=2)
              pocket     -1.84         0.0 (N=1)                            undated ﬁle    -0.36    0.0 (N=2)
       pocket watch      -2.05         0.0 (N=1)                     undated ﬁle photo     -0.41    0.0 (N=2)
                glass    -2.30         57.1 (N=14)                                 grass   -0.87    85.7 (N=7)
    magnifying glass     -6.19         71.4 (N=7)                  squirrels were found    -0.87    0.0 (N=1)



A      E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
Datasets. We run experiments on three datasets: Waterbirds (Sagawa et al., 2019), CelebA (Liu
et al., 2015), and ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). Waterbirds and CelebA have a known spurious
correlation between the class label and a spurious attribute; for these datasets, we have access to
ground truth spurious attribute labels. We use these datasets to evaluate whether C LARIFY can
correct model failures due to spurious correlations. To our knowledge, ImageNet does not have any
previously known spurious correlations.
Backbone models. All experiments use pre-trained CLIP models (Radford et al., 2021) as the
feature extractor. The C LARIFY interface uses the CLIP ViT-L/14 vision and language backbones for
calculating image-text similarity. We use the CLIP ResNet-50 and ViT-L/14 models for Waterbirds
and CelebA, and only the CLIP ViT-L/14 model for ImageNet. We use frozen backbone models
without any ﬁne-tuning, and only train a ﬁnal linear layer for classiﬁcation, following related works


                                                              15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Accuracies for the ImageNet Classes (Clarify)
           1.00
           0.75                                                                                      Majority
                                                                                                     Minority
Accuracy
           0.50
           0.25
           0.00


                    partridge


                  breastplate


                        bakery


                    projectile
                     spotlight
                        sliding


                             cup
                           wool

                         space
                        weasel


                   mushroom



                      minivan
                         velvet

                          letter


                          loupe


                   sunscreen
                             ear
                           plate



                       bathtub

                    academic
                  sidewinder
                         briard
                    chocolate

                            rifle
                       bighorn


                        mouse

                       monitor


                            lens
                     flatworm
                      terrapin
                         Accuracies for the ImageNet Classes (Bias-to-Text)
           1.00
           0.75                                                                                      Majority
                                                                                                     Minority
Accuracy


           0.50
           0.25
           0.00
                    partridge


                  breastplate


                        bakery
                   mushroom

                         space


                             ear

                    projectile
                        weasel



                           wool



                   sunscreen


                            rifle


                           plate
                    academic


                       bathtub
                       monitor
                            lens

                         velvet

                  sidewinder

                          loupe
                      minivan
                          letter
                         briard



                    chocolate

                     spotlight
                        sliding
                       bighorn


                        mouse


                      terrapin



                     flatworm

Figure 9: Comparison of annotations discovered by Clarify and Bias-to-Text. We show the accuracy of an
ImageNet-trained model on the validation set For each class with an identiﬁed spurious correlation, we show
majority split and minority split accuracy. The annotations for Bias-to-Text show substantially higher minority
split accuracy (Clarify: 21.1%, Bias-to-Text 45.2%), with a smaller gap with the majority split. This indicates
that Clarify was substantially more accurate in identifying hard subpopulations.


for addressing spurious correlations (Kirichenko et al., 2022; Zhang & Ré, 2022). We use no data
augmentation, and normalize all embeddings before computing similarity or training.
Methods. Table 1 and Table 4 show results for C LARIFY and several representative prior methods
for addressing spurious correlations. We experiment with several variants of standard ERM training
with a labeled training set: uniform weighting, class-balanced weighting, and “worst-class”, a DRO-
like weighting scheme which adaptively trains on only the class with the highest loss. We experiment
with two variants of training a model with C LARIFY annotations: reweighting data so that each of
the two slices has equal weight (slice-balanced), and a DRO-like weighting scheme which adaptively
trains on only the slice with the highest loss (worst-slice).
Human annotators. We recruit 26 non-expert users through Proliﬁc (https://www.proliﬁc.co/).
These participants had no qualiﬁcations beyond being native English speakers and having some
programming experience, and did not necessarily have any prior knowledge about machine learning.
We provide a brief tutorial on how to use the interface, and ask each participant to annotate the class
with highest error rate for each dataset. After the completion of the user study, we then retrained
the models for both datasets using each user-provided annotation. Authors of this paper collected
another set of annotations for Waterbirds and CelebA, which we use as a baseline for comparison.
Additionally, annotations for the ImageNet dataset were collected by paper authors.

B            C OMPARISON WITH AUTOMATED B IAS D ISCOVERY
In this experiment we compare C LARIFY with Bias-to-Text (Kim et al., 2023), a prior automated
method for discovering model biases, since human annotation is a key cost of our method. The auto-
mated pipeline of Bias-to-Text consists of two steps: (1) extracting keywords from image captions
of incorrect examples, and (2) ranking these potential keywords based on how well they separate cor-
rect and incorrect examples. More speciﬁcally, they look for keywords that maximize CLIP score,
which is deﬁned as
                           sCLIP (a; D) := sim (a, Dwrong ) − sim (a, Dcorrect )                           (3)


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: The full set of model failure description phrases provided by non-expert annotators in our user study.
The “Best WGA” and “Best Error Score” phrases were selected by identifying the phrase that achieved the
highest Worst-Group Accuracy or Error Score, respectively, for each participant.

  Phrase        Waterbirds                                           CelebA
  Category
  Best WGA      a bird with no head or as landbirds and a            any other hair color than blonde or light hair
  (per-user)    red outline, a blurry vision and they don’t          color, backgrounds, bleach blonds, brown
                look like real birds, artic birds, beak, bird        hair, buns, curls, curly hair, dyed hair, fe-
                swims water, dark backgrounds and tall               males, glasses, light background, light col-
                trees, forest, forest, forest, forest, forest,       ors, men, men, men or short hair, older
                forests, forests, grass, greenery, landscape,        women, orange hair, pink, red, red, short
                landscapes, leaves, no water, plants, red,           hair, short hair, short haired men, smiles,
                sandy beaches, seagulls, seagulls, trees, wa-        white backgrounds, women
                ter, water
  Best Error    artic birds, birds, dark backgrounds and tall        any other hair color than blonde or light
  Score (per-   trees, ducks, forest, forest, forest, forest, for-   hair color, bleach blonds, blond highlights,
  user)         est, forests, forests, greenery, landscape, mo-      brown, darker blond hair, darker blonde,
                tion blur or can’t make out a real bird, plants,     darker blonde hair, darker than blond, fe-
                sandy beaches, seagulls, trees, trees, trees,        males, grey, males, men, men, men, men,
                trees, water, water, water, waterfowl, wings         men, men, men, men, men, men, men,
                                                                     pink, short white hair, very short hair, white,
                                                                     white, white

  All Others    a lot of dark colors and no blue water, a            bad lighting, bangs, beards, black hair, blue,
                lot of tree trunks, aqua blue water, been            blue, blue background, blue or black, brown,
                generated by ai, bird, bird wading in wa-            brown or dark hair, dark hair, darker hair,
                ter, birds, birds ﬂoating, birds ﬂoating in          dim lighting, fair hair, ﬂaxen, gold, golden
                water, birds standing in water, birds water,         hair, hair, hair, hats, hats, hats or bows, hazy,
                black, blue, blue, branches, branches, dark          letters, light hair, little visible hair, long hair,
                backgrounds, dark backgrounds and small              males, males, males, men, more dark col-
                birds, dark colors, darker backgrounds and           ors than light colors, non-blond hair. dark
                a lot of trees, extended wings, eyes, ﬂight-         hair color. not blond, nondarkened hair, not
                less birds, ﬂowers, game birds, grass, green,        blond, orange hair, people not facing the
                green, green, green, green plants, humans,           camera, red hair, red hair, redheads, short,
                land, landscapes, length of leg, lots of tree        short hair, short or curly hair, short or pulled
                trunks, more dark colors than light colors           back hair, shoulders, signs, skin color that
                and a lot of trees, mountains, no water,             is similar to their hair color, smiles, smiling
                no water, no water and dark backgrounds,             faces, sunglasses, tan skin, teenagers, teeth,
                ocean coasts, people, people, people, plants,        very tan skin, women
                reeds, seagulls, shadows, sticks, tree trunk,
                trees, trees, trees, trees, trees, trees, very
                dark backgrounds and a lot of trees, water
                plants, wings, woods


where Dwrong and Dcorrect are the sets of incorrect and correct examples, respectively. A keyword
with a high CLIP score is likely to describe something in common between the incorrect examples,
and thus may correspond to a spurious correlation. For each keyword, they also report the subgroup
accuracy, which is the accuracy of the model on the subset of examples that contain the keyword.
This method is representative of the state-of-the-art in automated bias discovery, and was shown
to outperform other recent automated bias discovery methods such as ERM conﬁdence (Liu et al.,
2021), Failure Direction (Jain et al., 2022), and Domino (Eyuboglu et al., 2022).
We evaluated the automated pipeline of Bias-to-Text on several classes in the ImageNet validation
set in which we identiﬁed spurious correlations, and found speciﬁc pitfalls that make it difﬁcult
to use alone in practice. In Table 2, we show 10 keywords identiﬁed by Bias-to-Text for 4 of the
classes that we identiﬁed spurious correlations for. We note that the top identiﬁed keywords, i.e. the
ones with the highest CLIP score, often describe something highly related to the class label, such as
“goat” for the “bighorn”. We further note that the method also identiﬁes very small subpopulations,
for example “baby shower” which only appears in 3 of the 50 examples in the “bakery” class. Text


                                                         17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Evaluation of methods for improving group robustness of CLIP models. Grouped by data and expres-
sivity, with best worst-group (WG) and robustness gaps bolded. All metrics are averaged over three seeds.

                                                                             Waterbirds                CelebA
                 Assumptions              Method                       WG       Avg   Gap       WG      Avg     Gap
                                          Class Prompt                 36.6    92.2   55.6      74.0    81.9     7.9
                 Zero-Shot
                                          Group Prompt                 55.9    87.8   31.9      70.8    82.6    11.8
                                          ERM                          7.9     93.5   85.6      11.9    94.7    82.8
                 LP, Labels               ERM (ours)                   63.4    96.0   32.6      31.1    95.4    64.3
CLIP ResNet-50


                                          ERM (ours, class-balanced)   48.6    95.2   46.7      65.8    93.4    27.6
                                          ERM (ours, worst-class)      55.9    95.8   39.9      56.9    94.1    37.2
                                          C LARIFY (group-balanced)    68.4    93.6   25.2      89.3    92.2    2.8
                 LP, Labels+Interaction
                                          C LARIFY (worst-group)       75.7    83.8   8.1       89.1    92.1    3.0
                                          DFR (subsample)              63.9    91.8   27.9      76.9    92.5    15.6
                                          DFR (upsample)               51.3    92.4   41.1      89.6    91.8     2.2
                 LP, Labels+Groups
                                          DFR                          78.7    90.8   12.1      90.6    91.9    1.3
                                          Group DRO                    81.3    88.1   6.8       89.2    91.8    2.7
                                          ERM Adapter                  60.8    96.0   35.2      36.1    94.2    58.1
                 Adapter, Labels          WiSE-FT                      49.8    91.0   41.2      85.6    88.6     3.0
                                          Contrastive Adapter          83.7    89.4   5.7       90.0    90.7     0.7
                                          Class Prompt                 25.7    87.3   61.6      62.1    71.9    9.8
                 Zero-Shot
                                          Group Prompt                 27.4    85.5   58.1      72.4    81.8    9.4
                                          ERM                          65.9    97.6   31.7      28.3    94.7    66.4
                 LP, Labels               ERM (ours)                   79.5    97.4   17.9      25.7    94.6    68.9
CLIP ViT-L/14


                                          ERM (ours, class-balanced)   71.1    97.2   26.1      63.7    92.6    28.9
                                          ERM (ours, worst-class)      74.3    97.1   22.8      56.9    93.3    36.4
                 LP, Labels+Interaction   C LARIFY (worst-group)       81.8    96.8   14.9      88.8    90.9    2.1
                                          DFR (subsample)              51.9    95.7   43.8      76.3    92.1    15.8
                                          DFR (upsample)               65.9    96.1   30.2      83.7    91.2     7.5
                 LP, Labels+Groups
                                          DFR                          85.9    93.5       7.6   89.0    90.9    1.9
                                          Group DRO                    88.5    92.7       4.1   88.1    91.1    2.9
                                          ERM Adapter                  78.4    97.8   19.4      36.7    94.2    57.5
                 Adapter, Labels          WiSE-FT                      65.9    97.6   31.7      80.0    87.4     7.4
                                          Contrastive Adapter          86.9    96.2   9.3       84.6    90.4     5.8


feedback from C LARIFY never the top keyword recommended by Bias-to-Text, and was only in the
top 10 for 5 out of 31 classes.
In its current form, automated bias discovery methods such as Bias-to-Text ultimately require human
oversight to identify the most relevant keywords. The human-in-the-loop nature of C LARIFY can
be seen as recognizing this dependency, and providing a more direct way for humans to inspect and
correct model failures. However, we note that automated discovery methods are still highly useful
in the context of C LARIFY, as they can prime human annotators with a set of candidate keywords or
help prioritize the most promising parts of the dataset. We believe that a more integrated combination
of automated discovery methods and human-in-the-loop methods such as C LARIFY will be a fruitful
direction for future work.
Finally, we compare the annotations discovered by Clarify and Bias-to-Text. We take the top key-
word identiﬁed by Bias-to-Text for each class, and compare the accuracy of the model on the ma-
jority and minority splits in Figure 9. The annotations for Bias-to-Text show substantially higher
minority split accuracy (Clarify 21.1%, Bias-to-Text 45.2%), with a smaller gap with the majority
split. Furthermore, after re-training with these annotations using our reweighting procedure, we ob-
served a slight decrease in held-out minority split accuracy (45.2% to 44.3%). This is in contrast to
re-training with Clarify annotations, which substantially improved minority split accuracy (21.1%


                                                            18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: The 31 identiﬁed spurious features in the ImageNet dataset. All annotation was performed on the
validation split.

                        Class Name         Spurious Feature
                        cup                tea cup
                        weasel             snow weasel
                        wool               yarn ball
                        space bar          computer mouse
                        letter opener      silver
                        loupe              person holding a magnifying glass
                        mouse              desk and laptop
                        bakery             store front
                        sunscreen          person with sunburns
                        minivan            black minivan
                        plate rack         machine
                        briard             shaggy dog
                        lens cap           camera equipment
                        bighorn            rocky hillside
                        mushroom           red
                        riﬂe               wooden barrel
                        spotlight          shining
                        chocolate sauce    pastries with chocolate
                        terrapin           pond
                        sidewinder         sand
                        bikini             group of people
                        ﬂatworm            coral reef
                        monitor            monitor on a desk
                        breastplate        museum display
                        projectile         rocket in a building
                        academic gown      many people in robes
                        velvet             pink velvet
                        bathtub            person
                        sliding door       car
                        partridge          tall grass
                        ear                green


to 28.7%). These results indicate that automated bias discovery methods such as Bias-to-Text fail to
identify the most relevant or consistent subpopulations, highlighting the need for human oversight.
C    C OMPARISON WITH Z ERO -S HOT M ETHODS
We additionally compare the re-trained classiﬁer using C LARIFY annotations with zero-shot classiﬁ-
cation methods in Table 6. C LARIFY shows substantially better worst-group accuracy and robustness
gap on the Waterbirds and CelebA datasets. Among these points of comparison, RoboShot (Adila
et al., 2023) is notable as it is an automated method that leverages state-of-the-art foundation models
such as ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021), AltCLIP (Chen et al., 2022), and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023). This
result demonstrates that retraining with feedback from C LARIFY is a substantially more effective
way of using natural language to guide an image classiﬁer. We note that this comparison is not a
direct head-to-head comparison due to setting differences. Re-training with C LARIFY uses labeled
data while zero-shot methods solely rely on natural language descriptions. On the other hand, Ro-
boShot (Adila et al., 2023) uses GPT-4, a powerful language model, to alter its prompt generation
process. Nevertheless, we believe that this comparison is still informative in that it shows that we
can get much more leverage out of natural language feedback by having it directly address gaps in
existing training data.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: Representative samples corresponding to nine identiﬁed spurious correlations in ImageNet. All
images shown are in the ImageNet validation set, and belong to the class shown in the ﬁrst column. Similarity
to the speciﬁed text annotation splits separates the “easy” and “hard” examples.


                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Comparison with different zero-shot CLIP prompting strategies for group robustness. Fine-tuning
with C LARIFY substantially outperforms RoboShot, a method that leverages state-of-the-art foundation models
to automatically generate text prompts. All results besides ours are from Adila et al. (2023).

                                                                       Waterbirds                   CelebA
         Model                  Method
                                                              Avg WG(↑)         Gap(↓) AVG WG(↑) Gap(↓)
                                Class Prompt                  72.0 50.3          21.7  81.8 77.2   4.6
         ALIGN                  Group Prompt                  72.5  5.8          66.7  78.3 67.4  10.9
                                RoboShot (Adila et al., 2023) 50.9 41.0           9.9  86.3 83.4   2.9
                                Class Prompt                  90.1      35.8        54.3   82.3     79.7     2.6
         AltCLIP                Group Prompt                  82.4      29.4        53.0   82.3     79.0     3.3
                                RoboShot (Adila et al., 2023) 78.5      54.8        23.7   86.0     77.2     8.8
                         Class Prompt                  88.7             27.3        61.4   80.6     74.3     6.3
                         Group Prompt                  70.7             10.4        60.3   77.9     68.9     9.0
         CLIP (ViT-L/14)
                         RoboShot (Adila et al., 2023) 79.9             45.2        34.7   85.5     82.6     2.9
                                 C LARIFY                       96.8    81.8        14.9   90.9     88.8     2.1


                        Accuracies for the ImageNet Classes with Identified Spurious Correlations
                 1.0                                                                                         Majority
Accuracy (val)


                                                                                                             Minority
                 0.5
                 0.0
                 1.0
Accuracy (v2)


                 0.5
                 0.0
                         partridge

                       breastplate


                             bakery
                          spotlight
                             sliding


                                  cup


                         projectile

                                plate


                            bathtub
                                wool
                              space
                             weasel

                        mushroom


                           minivan
                              velvet
                               letter
                               bikini
                               loupe


                                 rifle
                         academic
                            bighorn



                             mouse
                            monitor


                                 lens


                        sunscreen
                                  ear
                       sidewinder
                              briard
                         chocolate
                          flatworm
                           terrapin


Figure 11: Accuracy of a model trained on the ImageNet train set, on the ImageNet validation set (top) and
ImageNet-V2 (bottom). For each class with an identiﬁed spurious correlation, we show average, majority split,
and minority split accuracy. The model achieves lower accuracy on the minority split for all classes in the
validation set and all but 6 classes in ImageNet-V2, indicating that the model is relying on each identiﬁed
spurious feature.


                                                              21
