Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


FLD: F OURIER L ATENT DYNAMICS FOR S TRUCTURED
M OTION R EPRESENTATION AND L EARNING
 Chenhao Li, Elijah Stanger-Jones, Steve Heim, Sangbae Kim
 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 {chenhli, elijahsj, sheim, sangbae}@mit.edu



                                             A BSTRACT

         Motion trajectories offer reliable references for physics-based motion learning but
         suffer from sparsity, particularly in regions that lack sufﬁcient data coverage. To
         address this challenge, we introduce a self-supervised, structured representation
         and generation method that extracts spatial-temporal relationships in periodic or
         quasi-periodic motions. The motion dynamics in a continuously parameterized
         latent space enable our method to enhance the interpolation and generalization
         capabilities of motion learning algorithms. The motion learning controller, in-
         formed by the motion parameterization, operates online tracking of a wide range
         of motions, including targets unseen during training. With a fallback mechanism,
         the controller dynamically adapts its tracking strategy and automatically resorts
         to safe action execution when a potentially risky target is proposed. By leverag-
         ing the identiﬁed spatial-temporal structure, our work opens new possibilities for
         future advancements in general motion representation and learning algorithms.


1    I NTRODUCTION

The availability of reference trajectories, such as motion capture data, has signiﬁcantly propelled the
advancement of motion learning techniques (Peng et al., 2018; Bergamin et al., 2019; Peng et al.,
2021; 2022; Starke et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023b;a). However, it is difﬁcult to generalize policies using
these techniques to motions outside the distribution of the available data (Peng et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2023a). A core reason is that, while the trajectories in the data itself are induced by some dynamics
of the system, the learned policies are typically trained to only replicate the data, instead of under-
standing the underlying dynamics structure. In other words, the policies attempt to memorize the
trajectory instances rather than learn to predict them systematically. Consequently, the gaps between
trajectories present challenges for these models in accurately representing and learning motion in-
terpolations or transitions, resulting in limited generalizations (Wiley & Hahn, 1997; Rose et al.,
1998). Moreover, the high nonlinearity and the embedded high-level similarity hinder data-driven
methods from effectively identifying and modeling the dynamics of motion patterns (Peng et al.,
2018). Therefore, addressing these challenges requires systematic understanding and leveraging the
structured nature of the motion space.
Instead of handling raw motion trajectories in long-horizon, high-dimensional state space, struc-
tured representation methods introduce certain inductive biases during training and offer an efﬁcient
approach to managing complex movements (Min & Chai, 2012; Lee et al., 2021). These methods
focus on extracting the essential features and temporal dependencies of motions, enabling more ef-
fective and compact representations (Lee et al., 2010; Levine et al., 2012). The ability to understand
and capture the spatial-temporal structure of the motion space offers enhanced interpolation and gen-
eralization capabilities that can augment training datasets and improve the effectiveness of motion
generation algorithms (Holden et al., 2017; Iscen et al., 2018; Ibarz et al., 2021). By uncovering
and utilizing the underlying patterns and relationships within the motion space, continuous and rich
sets of motions can be produced that progress realistically in a smooth and temporally coherent
manner (Starke et al., 2020; 2022; 2023).
In this work, we present Fourier Latent Dynamics (FLD), a generative extension to Periodic Autoen-
coder (PAE) (Starke et al., 2022) that extracts spatial-temporal relationships in periodic or quasi-
periodic motions with a novel predictive structure. FLD efﬁciently represents high-dimensional


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


trajectories by featuring motion dynamics in a continuously parameterized latent space that accom-
modates essential features and temporal dependencies of natural motions. The enforcement of latent
dynamics empowers FLD to enhance the proﬁciency and generalization capabilities of motion learn-
ing algorithms with accurately described motion transitions and interpolations. The motion learning
controllers, informed by the latent parameterization space of FLD, demonstrate extended online
tracking capability. A novel fallback mechanism enables the learning agent to dynamically adapt its
tracking strategy, automatically identifying and responding to potentially risky targets by rejecting
and reverting to safe action execution. Finally, combined with adaptive learning algorithms, FLD
presents strong long-term learning capabilities in open-ended learning tasks, strategically navigating
and advancing through novel target motions while avoiding unlearnable regions.
In summary, our contributions include: (i) A self-supervised, structured representation and genera-
tion method featuring continuously parameterized latent dynamics for periodic or quasi-periodic mo-
tions. (ii) A motion learning and online tracking framework empowered by the latent dynamics with
a fallback mechanism. (iii) Supplementary analysis of long-term learning capability with adaptive
target sampling on open-ended motion learning tasks. Supplementary videos and more details for
this work are available at https://sites.google.com/view/iclr2024-fld/home.

2    R ELATED WORK
Motions are commonly described as long-horizon trajectories in high-dimensional state space. How-
ever, directly associating motions with raw trajectory instances yields highly inefﬁcient representa-
tions and poor generalization that fail to capture motion features (Watter et al., 2015; Finn et al.,
2016). In comparison, representing motions in a structured manner allows learning algorithms to
better comprehend the underlying patterns and relationships within the motion space.
While a straightforward approach is to parameterize motions from physical dynamics, determining
explicit models with correct dynamics structures solely from kinematic observations can be challeng-
ing without prior knowledge of the underlying physics (Li et al., 2023a). Structured trajectory gener-
ators address this issue by providing motion controllers with parameterized references with sufﬁcient
kinematic information. Some classical locomotion controllers parameterize the movement of each
actuated degree of freedom by relying on cyclic open-loop trajectories described by sine curves (Tan
et al., 2018) or central pattern generators (Ijspeert, 2008; Gay et al., 2013; Dörﬂer & Bullo, 2014;
Shaﬁee et al., 2023). Recent works enable dynamical adaptation of high-level motion by having
the control policy directly modulate the parameters of the trajectory generator, thus modifying the
dictated trajectories (Iscen et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2020; Miki et al., 2022). In contrast to explicitly
deﬁned trajectory parameters, self-supervised models such as autoencoders explain motion evolu-
tion in a latent space. These representation methods have shown success in controlling non-linear
dynamical systems (Watter et al., 2015), enabling complex decision-making (Ha & Schmidhuber,
2018), solving long-horizon tasks (Hafner et al., 2019), and imitating motion sequences (Berseth
et al., 2019). A recent practice attempts to identify motion dynamics in a common latent space to
foster temporal consistency between different dynamical systems (Kim et al., 2020).
Another line of structured motion representation involves extracting trajectory features in the fre-
quency domain. Frequency domain methods have been proposed for various motion-related tasks,
including synthesis (Liu et al., 1994), editing (Bruderlin & Williams, 1995), stylization (Unuma
et al., 1995; Yumer & Mitra, 2016), and compression (Beaudoin et al., 2007). To consider the
correlation between different body parts, a recent work on PAE constructs a latent space using an
autoencoder structure and applies a frequency domain conversion as an inductive bias (Starke et al.,
2022). The extracted latent parameters have been tested as effective full-body state representations
in downstream motion learning tasks (Starke et al., 2023). Despite such progress, PAE is restricted
to representing local frames and is not fully exploited to express overall motions or predict them.

3    P RELIMINARIES
Despite the success of self-supervised learning schemes in solving complex tasks, existing self-
supervised learning methods inevitably overlook the intrinsic periodicity in data (Yang et al., 2022).
Less attention has been paid to designing algorithms that capture prevalent periodic or quasi-periodic
temporal dynamics in robotic tasks. To this end, we explore representation methods with an explicit


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


account of periodicity inspired by PAE (Starke et al., 2022) and develop generative capabilities
thereon.
PAE addresses the challenges of learning the structure of the motion space, such as data sparsity and
the highly nonlinear nature of the space, by focusing on the periodicity of motions in the frequency
domain. The structure of PAE is illustrated in Fig. S7a. We denote trajectory segments of length H
in d-dimensional state space preceding time step t by st = (st−H+1 , . . . , st ) ∈ Rd×H , as the input
to PAE. The autoencoder structure decomposes the input motions into c latent channels that accom-
modate lower-dimensional embedding zt ∈ Rc×H of the motion input. A following differentiable
Fast Fourier Transform obtains the frequency ft , amplitude at , and offset bt vectors of the latent
trajectories, while the phase vector ϕt is computed with a separate fully connected layer. We denote
this parameterization process with p, we have
                                 zt = enc(st ),      ϕt , ft , at , bt = p(zt ),                        (1)
where ϕt , ft , at , bt ∈ R . Next, the reconstructed latent trajectory segments ẑt ∈ R
                          c                                                                 c×H
                                                                                                  are com-
puted using sinusoidal functions parameterized by the latent vectors with

                           ẑt = p̂(ϕt , ft , at , bt ) = at sin 2π(ft T + ϕt ) + bt ,                  (2)
where p̂ denotes the reconstruction, T is the time window corresponding to the state transition
horizon H. Finally, the network decodes the reconstructed latent trajectories ẑt to the original
motion space, and the reconstruction error is computed with respect to the original input
                                  ŝt = dec(ẑt ),    L0 = MSE(ŝt , st ),                              (3)
where ŝt ∈ Rd×H , and MSE denotes the Mean Squared Error. The network structure of PAE is
described in Table A.1.2. We refer to the original work (Starke et al., 2022) for more details.
PAE extracts a multi-dimensional latent space from full-body motion data, effectively clustering
motions and creating a manifold in which computed feature distances provide a more meaningful
similarity measure compared to the original motion space as visualized in Fig. 4.

4     A PPROACH
4.1   P ROBLEM FORMULATION

We consider the state space S and deﬁne a motion sequence τ = (s0 , s1 , . . . ) drawn from a reference
dataset M as a trajectory of consecutive states s ∈ S. Our research focuses on creating a physics-
based learning controller capable of not only replicating motions prescribed by the reference dataset
but also generating motions accordingly in response to novel target inputs, thereby enhancing its
generality across a wide range of motions beyond the reference dataset. To this end, we adopt
a two-stage training pipeline. In the ﬁrst stage, an efﬁcient representation model is trained on the
reference dataset and a continuously parameterized latent space is obtained where novel motions can
be synthesized by sampling the latent encodings. The second stage involves developing an effective
learning algorithm that tracks the diverse generated target trajectories. In both motion representation
and generation, we highlight the importance of identifying periodic or quasi-periodic changes in the
underlying temporal progression of the motions that commonly describe robotic motor skills.

4.2   F OURIER L ATENT DYNAMICS

By inspecting the parameters of the latent trajectories of periodic or quasi-periodic motions encoded
by PAE, we observe that the frequency, amplitude, and offset vectors stay nearly time-invariant along
the trajectories. We introduce the quasi-constant parameterization assumption.

Assumption 1 A latent trajectory z = (zt , zt+1 , . . . ) can be approximated by ẑ = (ẑt , ẑt+1 , . . . )
with a bounded error δ = ∥z − ẑ∥, where ẑt′ = p̂(ϕt′ , f, a, b), ∀t′ ∈ {t, t + 1, . . . }.

Assumption 1 holds with low approximation errors for periodic or quasi-periodic input motion tra-
jectories, which yield constant frequency domain features. Since these latent features are learned,
the assumption can be explicitly enforced. In the following context, we denote by ϕt the latent state
and f , a, b the latent parameterization. Here, we introduce Fourier Latent Dynamics (FLD), which


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           trajectory segment 𝐬𝑡                        𝐬𝑡+1       …         𝐬𝑡+𝑁

                              convolution 𝐞𝐧𝐜

                           latent embedding 𝐳𝑡
                  𝐿0                                        𝐿1                     𝐿𝑁
                       FC BN Atan2           FFT
                               𝜙𝑡                𝜃𝑡         LD       𝜙𝑡+1 , 𝜃𝑡+1   …     𝜙𝑡+𝑁 , 𝜃𝑡+𝑁
                                                                          ′                    ′
                        sinusoidal reconstruction 𝐳ො𝑡                   𝐳ො𝑡+1      …         𝐳ො𝑡+𝑁

                              convolution 𝐝𝐞𝐜                           𝐝𝐞𝐜        …         𝐝𝐞𝐜

                                                                          ′                    ′
                         reconstructed segment 𝐬ො𝑡                      𝐬ො𝑡+1      …         𝐬ො𝑡+𝑁


Figure 1: FLD training pipeline. During training, latent dynamics are enforced to predict proceeding
latent states and parameterizations. The prediction loss is computed in the original motion space with
respect to the ground truth future states.


enforces reconstruction of z over the complete trajectory by propagating latent dynamics parameter-
ized by a local state ϕt and a constant set of global parameterization f , a, and b.
We formalize the latent dynamics of FLD and its training process in Fig. 1. For a motion segment
st = (st−H+1 , . . . , st ) whose latent trajectory segment zt is parameterized by ϕt , ft , at , and bt , we
approximate the proceeding motion segment st+i = (st−H+1+i , . . . , st+i ) with the prediction ŝ′t+i
decoded from i-step forward propagation ẑ′t+i using the latent dynamics from time step t.
                         ẑ′t+i = p̂(ϕt + ift ∆t, ft , at , bt ), ŝ′t+i = dec(ẑ′t+i ),         (4)
where ∆t denotes the step time. The latent dynamics in Eq. 4 assumes locally constant latent param-
eterizations and propagates latent states by advancing i local phase increments. We can compute
the prediction loss at time t + i. In fact, the local reconstruction process employed by PAE can be
viewed as regression on a zero-step forward prediction using the latent dynamics. We can perform
regressions on multi-step forward prediction by propagating the latent dynamics and deﬁne the total
loss for training FLD with the maximum propagation horizon of N and a decay factor α,
                                           X
                                           N
                              LN
                               F LD =            α i Li ,        Li = MSE(ŝ′t+i , st+i ).               (5)
                                           i=0

Training with the FLD loss enforces Assump. 1 in a local range of N steps. By choosing the appro-
priate maximum propagation horizon and the decay factor, one can balance the tradeoff between the
accuracy of local reconstructions and the globalness of latent parameterizations. In comparison to
PAE (N = 0), which lacks temporal propagation structure and performs only local reconstruction
with local parameterization, FLD dramatically reduces the dimensions needed to express the entire
trajectory, which facilitates both motion representation and generation. The latent dynamics also en-
able autoregressive motion synthesis. Starting from an initial latent state and parameterization, FLD
generates future motion trajectories in a smooth and temporally coherent manner by propagating the
latent dynamics and continually decoding the predicted latent encodings following Eq. 4.
For the following discussions, we consider training FLD on the reference dataset M and deﬁne
the latent parameterization space Θ ⊆ R3c encompassing the latent frequency, amplitude, and
offset. Therefore, each motion trajectory can be exclusively represented by a time-dependent la-
tent state ϕt ∈ Rc that describes the local time indexing and a constant latent parameterization
θ = (f, a, b) ∈ R3c that describes the global high-level features of the motion. We establish this
idea with a schematic view of the latent manifold induced by ϕt and θ in Suppl. A.1.3.

4.3   M OTION LEARNING

Given reference trajectories, physics-based motion learning algorithms train a control policy that ac-
tuates the joints of the simulated character or robot and reproduces the instructed motion trajectories.
FLD is able to represent rich sets of motions efﬁciently. In contrast to discrete or handcrafted mo-
tion indicators, the feature distances in the continuously parameterized latent space of FLD provide
learning algorithms a more reasonable similarity measure between motions.


                                                                 4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  skill sampler 𝑝𝜃         𝒰


                         𝜃                 𝜙       LD
                                                             policy 𝜋
                                                                           𝑎
                  sinusoidal reconstruction 𝐳ො

                       convolution 𝐝𝐞𝐜
                                                 𝑟𝑇
                         target state 𝑠Ƹ              -                 state 𝑠

Figure 2: System overview. During training, the latent states propagate under the latent dynamics
and are reconstructed to policy tracking targets ŝ at each step. The tracking reward rT is computed
as the distance between the target ŝ and the measured states s.


4.3.1   P OLICY TRAINING
At the beginning of each episode, a set of latent parameterization θ0 ∈ R3c is sampled from a skill
sampler pθ (e.g. a buffer of ofﬂine reference motion encodings, more variants and ablation studies
are detailed in Suppl. A.2.6). The latent state ϕ0 ∈ Rc is uniformly sampled from a ﬁxed range U .
The step update of the latent vectors follows the latent dynamics in Eq. 4,
                                    θt = θt−1 , ϕt = ϕt−1 + ft−1 ∆t.                                  (6)
At each step, the latent state and the latent parameterization are used to reconstruct a motion segment
                          ŝt = (ŝt−H+1 , . . . , ŝt ) = dec(ẑt ) = dec(p̂(ϕt , θt )),             (7)
whose most recent state ŝt serves as a tracking target for the learning environment at the current time
step. The tracking reward encourages alignment with the target and is formulated in Suppl. A.2.7.
The latent state and parameterization are provided to the observation space to inform the policy
about the motion and the speciﬁc frame it should be tracking. The policy observation and action
space are described in Suppl. A.2.1. Figure 2 provides a schematic overview of the training pipeline,
and an algorithm overview is detailed in Algorithm 1.

4.3.2   O NLINE TRACKING AND FALLBACK MECHANISM
During the inference phase, the policy structure incorporates real-time motion input as tracking
targets, irrespective of their periodic or quasi-periodic nature. The latent parameterizations of the in-
tended motion are obtained online using the FLD encoder. Figure S12 provides a schematic overview
of the online tracking process. However, arbitrary reference inputs distant from the training distribu-
tion can result in limited tracking performance and potentially hazardous motor execution. Conse-
quently, an online evaluation process is essential to assess the safety of a dictated motion, along with
providing a fallback mechanism to ensure the availability of an alternative safe target when necessary.
To address this requirement, FLD naturally induces a process that leverages the central role of latent
dynamics. Consider the input sequence consisting of trajectory segments sit = (sit−H+1 , . . . , sit ) at
each time step. These segments are stored in an input buffer It = (sit−N +1 , . . . , sti ) of length N .
Given the current latent state ϕt , parameterization θt , and the input buffer It , our algorithm aims to
determine the values of ϕt+1 and θt+1 for the subsequent step.
In the absence of user input, represented by It = ∅, the latent parameters simply propagate the
latent dynamics based on Eq. 4. Conversely, when user input is present, we perform reconstruction
and forward prediction on the state segments stored in the input buffer It , based upon the earliest
recorded segment sit−N +1 . The prediction is evaluated using the same loss metric LN F LD employed
in Eq. 5 to measure the dissimilarity between predicted and actual state trajectories within It . This
loss metric provides a quantiﬁcation of the disparity in dynamics between motions, focusing on the
similarity in state transitions and system evolution. Consequently, a small value of LNF LD indicates
that the input motion adheres to comparable spatial-temporal relationships and exhibits periodicity
akin to those observed in the training dataset.
To determine the suitability of an input tracking target for acceptance or rejection, we establish a
threshold ϵF LD derived from training statistics. When an input motion is accepted, the updated


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           input buffer ℐ𝑡
                yes
                               ℐ𝑡 = ∅
                                      no
                        prediction loss 𝐿𝑁𝐹𝐿𝐷
                                                   yes
                             𝐿𝑁𝐹𝐿𝐷 ≥ 𝜖𝐹𝐿𝐷                            𝜃    𝜙𝑡
                                       no
                      𝜙𝑡+1 , 𝜃𝑡+1 = 𝑝(𝐞𝐧𝐜(𝐬𝑡𝑖 ))

                    𝜙𝑡+1 , 𝜃𝑡+1 = 𝜙𝑡 + 𝑓𝑡 Δ𝑡, 𝜃𝑡

                    (a) Target evaluation process            (b) Schematic overview

Figure 3: Online tracking and fallback mechanism. (a) The prediction loss LN   F LD is evaluated within
an input buffer of user-proposed tracking targets. The mechanism accepts the proposal only when
the prediction loss is below a threshold ϵF LD . (b) The proposed tracking targets (dashed curve) may
contain risky states (dashed red dots). The fallback mechanism identiﬁes these states and defaults
them to safe alternatives (dashed red arrows and green dots) by propagating latent dynamics. Note
that the real-time tracking trajectories are not necessarily periodic or quasi-periodic.


tracking target is encoded from the latest state trajectory segment sit within the input buffer It . This
evaluation process is formulated in Fig. 3a. Additionally, Fig. 3b presents a schematic overview of
the online tracking and fallback mechanism.

5     E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate FLD on the MIT Humanoid robot (Chignoli et al., 2021), with which we show its
applicability to state-of-the-art real-world robotic systems. We use the human locomotion clips
collected in Peng et al. (2018) retargeted to the joint space of our robot as the reference motion
dataset containing slow and fast jog, forward and backward run, slow and fast step in place, left and
right turn, and forward stride. We visualize some representative motions in Fig. S9. Note that the
motion labels are not observed during the training of the models and are only used for evaluation.
In the motion learning experiments, we use Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al.,
2017) in Isaac Gym (Rudin et al., 2022). Suppl. A.1 and Suppl. A.2 provide further training details.

5.1   S TRUCTURED MOTION REPRESENTATION

We compare the motion embeddings of the reference dataset obtained from training FLD follow-
ing Sec. 4.2 with different models, with parameters detailed in Suppl. A.1.2. The state space is
speciﬁed in Suppl. A.1.1. After the computation of the latent manifold, we project the principal
components of the phase features onto a two-dimensional plane, as outlined in (Starke et al., 2022).
We then compare the latent structure induced by FLD with that by PAE. Additionally, we adopt
a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) as a commonly employed method for representing motions in a
lower-dimensional space. Lastly, we plot the principal components of the original motion states for
comprehensive analysis. We illustrate the latent embeddings acquired by these models in Fig. 4,
where each point corresponds to a latent representation of a trajectory segment input.
We elucidate the results by highlighting the inductive biases imposed during the training of these
models. In the provided ﬁgures, samples from the same motion categories are assigned the same
color, indicating a close relationship between neighboring frames within the embedding. This spatial
relationship is implicitly enforced by the reconstruction process of all the models, promoting latent
encodings of close frames to remain proximate in the latent space. However, the degree of temporal
structure enforcement varies signiﬁcantly, owing to the differing inductive biases.
Notably, FLD demonstrates the most consistent structure akin to concentric cycles, primarily due to
the motion-predictive structure within the latent dynamics enforced by Eq. 5. The cycles depicted in
the ﬁgures represent the primary period of individual motions. The angle around the center (latent
state) signiﬁes the timing, while the distance from the center (latent parameterization) represents the


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        (a) Original               (b) VAE                   (c) PAE                  (d) FLD

Figure 4: Latent manifolds for different motions. Each color is associated with a trajectory from a
motion type. The arrows denote the state evolution direction. FLD presents the strongest spatial-
temporal relationships with explicit latent dynamics enforcement. PAE witnesses a similar but
weaker pattern with local sinusoidal reconstruction. In comparison, VAE enables only spatial close-
ness, and the trajectories of the original states are the least structured.


high-level features (e.g. velocity, direction, contact frequency, etc.) that remain consistent through-
out the trajectory. This pattern reﬂects the strong temporal regularity captured by Assump. 1, which
preserves time-invariant global information regarding the overall motion. As PAE can be viewed
as FLD with zero-step latent propagation, in contrast, we observe a weaker pattern in the latent
manifold of PAE, where the consistency of high-level features holds only locally. Finally, the re-
construction process employed in VAE training does not impose any speciﬁc constraints on the
temporal structure of system propagation. Consequently, the resulting latent representation, except
for the direct encoding, exhibits the least structured characteristics among the models.
Powered by the latent dynamics, FLD offers a compact representation of high-dimensional motions
by employing the time index vector ϕt and assuming high-level feature consistency θ throughout
each trajectory. Conversely, PAE encodes motion features only locally θt = θ(ϕt ). The numbers of
parameters of different models used to express a trajectory of length |τ | are listed in Table 1.

                             Table 1: Motion representation parameters

            Model           Original           VAE                     PAE            FLD
            # Parameters     d × |τ |   c × (|τ | − H + 1)    4c × (|τ | − H + 1)      4c



5.2   M OTION RECONSTRUCTION AND PREDICTION

We demonstrate the generality of FLD in reconstructing and predicting unseen motions during train-
ing. Figure 5 (left) illustrates a representative validation with a diagonal run motion. At time t = 65,
FLD undertakes motion reconstruction and prediction for future state transitions based on the most
recent information st , as elaborated in Sec. 4.2. For comparison, we train a PAE and a feed-forward
(FF) model with fully connected layers with the same input and output structure as FLD.
It is evident that the motion predicted by FLD aligns with the actual trajectories. Particularly in
joint position evolution which presents strong sinusoidal periodicity, it exhibits the lowest relative
error e. The superiority of FLD is especially pronounced in long-term prediction regions, where
the other models accumulate signiﬁcantly larger compounding errors. The effectiveness of FLD in
accurately predicting motion for an extended horizon is attributed to the latent dynamics enforced
with an appropriate propagation horizon N in Eq. 5. In the extreme case of N = 0 (PAE), the
relative error is larger due to the weaker temporal propagation structure. The result on the diagonal
run trajectory demonstrates the ability of FLD to accurately predict future states despite not being
exposed to this speciﬁc motion during training. This showcases the generalization capability of
FLD, as it effectively captures the underlying dynamics and temporal relationships inherent in the
training dataset, which are prevalent and can be adapted to unseen motions. In comparison, the FF
model training fails to understand the spatial-temporal structure in the motions and results in strong


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             FF             PAE                  FLD                              • step • run • stride


  [rad] [rad] [m/s]
                         1                                                                           2.5
                v
                         0                                                                           0.0
  qarm qleg              2                                                                           0.5
                         0


                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                     0.0
                       0                                                                             0.50
                      −2                                                                             0.25
                             0            50 65         100        150               200
                                                          t [step]
Figure 5: Motion reconstruction and prediction of a diagonal run trajectory (left). The solid and
dashed curves denote the ground truth and predicted state evolution. The relative prediction error
(vivid) of FF, PAE and FLD is depicted with the axis indicating e on the right. Latent offset (right)
of step in place, forward run, and forward stride. Each radius denotes a latent channel.

        •             slow jog           •      forward stride          •       spinkick         •    fast step           •   transition
                                     slow jog      forward stride        spinkick            fast step
 [rad][rad/s][m/s]


                        2.5
               v


                        0.0
                       0.0
  qleg ω


                      −2.5
                         2
                         0
                                     fast step                   transition                forward stride
 [rad][m/s]


                       2.5
  qleg v


                      −0.1
                         2
                         0
                                 0                100              200                 300
                                                                 t [step]
Figure 6: Motion tracking and fallback (top) and motion transition (bottom). The dashed curves
denote the user-speciﬁed tracking target, and the solid ones denote the measured system states. The
corresponding latent manifolds are depicted on the right side.


overﬁtting to the training dataset, thus limiting its generality. Moreover, the dedicated FF model
solely propagates the states through autoregression and does not provide any data representation.
With the embedded motion-predictive structure, the enhanced generality achieved by FLD is at-
tributed to the well-shaped latent representation space, where sensible distances between motion
patterns are established. Figure 5 (right) depicts the latent offsets of step in place, forward run, and
forward stride, where the parameterization of the intermediate motion (forward run) is distributed
in between. This high-level understanding of motion similarity is further exempliﬁed in Fig. S10 on
different motion types (illustrated in Fig. S9) and forward run velocities.

5.3          M OTION TRACKING AND FALLBACK

Following Sec. 4.3, we can learn a motion tracking controller that employs FLD parameterization
space. We perform an online tracking experiment where real-time user input of various motion types
is provided to the controller as tracking targets.
In the ﬁrst example (Fig. 6, top), we switch the input motion to a different type every 100 time
steps (indicated by vertical grey lines). Notably, one of the input motions, referred to as spinkick
(visualized in Fig. S17c), lives far from the training distribution and is considered a risky input. We


                                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


observe that the controller achieves accurate user input tracking, as evidenced by the close alignment
between the dictated (dashed) and measured (solid) states, except for the spinkick motion. At time
t = 200, when the proposed states of the spinkick motion are received, FLD evaluates the latent
dynamics loss LN F LD and rejects the proposal. This decision is based on the limited similarity cal-
culated between the proposed system evolution and the state propagation prevalent in the training
dataset. In response to the rejected motion, the fallback mechanism is triggered, providing safe alter-
native reference states that extend from the previous motion. Consequently, the controller continues
to track the forward stride motion, with the actual reference states indicated by the dashed curves
from the previous region.
Moreover, the controller demonstrates the ability to transition between different tracking targets
smoothly. By considering the tracking of an arbitrary motion as a process of wandering between
continuously parameterized periodic priors, FLD dynamically extracts essential characteristics of
local approximates. To further understand the performance of FLD and the learning agent on track-
ing motions that fall into the gaps between trajectories captured in the reference dataset, we construct
in the second example (Fig. 6, bottom) a transition phase where the target motion parameterizations
are obtained from linear interpolation between the source and target motions. In particular, the in-
terpolated movements exhibit a gradual evolution of high-level motion features, providing a clear
and structured transition from high-frequency, low-velocity stepping to low-frequency, high-velocity
striding sequences. This gradual evolution of motion features in the interpolated trajectories suggests
that FLD is capable of capturing and preserving the essential temporal and spatial relationships of
the underlying motions. It bridges the gap between different motion types and velocities, generating
coherent and natural motion sequences that smoothly transition from one to another.

5.4   E XTENDED DISCUSSION : SKILL SAMPLER DESIGN

Our experiment provides strong evidence that the motion learning policy informed by the FLD latent
parameterization space effectively achieves motion in-betweening and coherent transitions that en-
capsulate high-level behavior migrations. While this policy already shows remarkable performance
when trained using targets derived from ofﬂine reference motions, its potential can be further ampli-
ﬁed with skill samplers that can continually propose novel training targets, which lead to enhanced
tracking generality onto a wider range of motions.
To this end, we perform ablation studies with different skill sampler implementations, including
a learning-progress-based online curriculum (ALPGMM), and evaluate policy tracking general-
ity beyond the reference dataset. The policy trained with ALPGMM demonstrates the ability to
acquire knowledge of the continuously parameterized latent space through interactions with the en-
vironment and achieves enhanced performance in general motion tracking tasks as opposed to the
ﬁxed ofﬂine target sampling scheme (O FFLINE). We direct interested readers to Suppl. A.2.10 and
Suppl. A.2.11 for supplementary experiments regarding this extended discussion.

6     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we present FLD, a novel self-supervised, structured representation and generation
method that extracts spatial-temporal relationships in periodic or quasi-periodic motions. FLD ef-
ﬁciently represents high-dimensional trajectories by featuring motion dynamics in a continuously
parameterized latent space that accommodates essential features and temporal dependencies of nat-
ural motions. Compared with models without explicitly enforced temporal structures, FLD signiﬁ-
cantly reduces the number of parameters required to express non-linear trajectories and generalizes
accurate state transition prediction to unseen motions. The enhanced generality by FLD is further
conﬁrmed with the high-level understanding of motion similarity by the latent parameterization
space. The motion learning controllers, informed by the latent parameterization space, demonstrate
extended online tracking capability. Our proposed fallback mechanism equips learning agents with
the ability to dynamically adapt their tracking strategies, automatically recognizing and responding
to potentially risky targets. Finally, our supplementary experiments on skill samplers and adaptive
learning schemes reveal the long-term learning capabilities of FLD, enabling learning agents to
strategically advance novel target motions while avoiding unlearnable regions. By leveraging the
identiﬁed spatial-temporal structure, FLD opens up possibilities for future advancements in motion
representation and learning algorithms.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
The experiment results presented in this work can be reproduced with the dataset and implementation
details provided in Suppl. A.1 and Suppl. A.2. The code has been open-sourced on the project page.

E THICS STATEMENT
Our research on Fourier Latent Dynamics (FLD) involves constructing a meaningful parameteriza-
tion to encode, compare, and predict spatial-temporal relationships in data inputs. While we focus
on its applicability in robot motion learning tasks, we acknowledge the existence of concerns about
the potential misuse of the model to a broader range of data types.
From our experience, this approach is primarily constrained by the availability of rich training data,
along with accurate input data during run-time. Our reliance on data from motion-capture tech-
niques, which necessitate a lab environment or simulations with direct ground-truth access, limits
its practicality outside lab settings. However, this may change in the future with advancements in
motion reconstruction from standard video feeds.
The model could also be used to generate plausible but ﬁctitious actions for individuals, potentially
leading to misinterpretations or misjudgments about their capabilities or intentions. If integrated
into automated systems, FLD’s predictive capabilities could inﬂuence decision-making processes.
While this might enhance efﬁciency, it could pose risks if the model’s predictions are inaccurate or
based on biased data, leading to harmful decisions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the members of the Biomimetic Robotics Lab for the helpful discussions and feedback on
the paper. We are grateful to MIT SuperCloud and Lincoln Laboratory Supercomputing Center for
providing HPC resources. This research was funded by NAVER Labs and Advanced Robotics Lab
of LG Electronics Co., Ltd.

R EFERENCES
Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, Yoav Freund, and Robert E Schapire. The nonstochastic multi-
  armed bandit problem. SIAM journal on computing, 32(1):48–77, 2002.
Philippe Beaudoin, Pierre Poulin, and Michiel van de Panne. Adapting wavelet compression to
  human motion capture clips. In Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2007, pp. 313–318, 2007.
Kevin Bergamin, Simon Clavet, Daniel Holden, and James Richard Forbes. Drecon: data-driven
  responsive control of physics-based characters. ACM Transactions On Graphics (TOG), 38(6):
  1–11, 2019.
Glen Berseth, Florian Golemo, and Christopher Pal. Towards learning to imitate from a single video
  demonstration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.07186, 2019.
Armin Bruderlin and Lance Williams. Motion signal processing. In Proceedings of the 22nd annual
  conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pp. 97–104, 1995.
Matthew Chignoli, Donghyun Kim, Elijah Stanger-Jones, and Sangbae Kim. The mit humanoid
 robot: Design, motion planning, and control for acrobatic behaviors. In 2020 IEEE-RAS 20th
 International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids), pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2021.
Arthur P Dempster, Nan M Laird, and Donald B Rubin. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data
  via the em algorithm. Journal of the royal statistical society: series B (methodological), 39(1):
  1–22, 1977.
Florian Dörﬂer and Francesco Bullo. Synchronization in complex networks of phase oscillators: A
  survey. Automatica, 50(6):1539–1564, 2014.
Chelsea Finn, Xin Yu Tan, Yan Duan, Trevor Darrell, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Deep spatial
  autoencoders for visuomotor learning. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
  Automation (ICRA), pp. 512–519. IEEE, 2016.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sébastien Gay, José Santos-Victor, and Auke Ijspeert. Learning robot gait stability using neural
  networks as sensory feedback function for central pattern generators. In 2013 IEEE/RSJ interna-
  tional conference on intelligent robots and systems, pp. 194–201. Ieee, 2013.
David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122, 2018.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603, 2019.
Daniel Holden, Taku Komura, and Jun Saito. Phase-functioned neural networks for character control.
 ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 36(4):1–13, 2017.
Julian Ibarz, Jie Tan, Chelsea Finn, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Peter Pastor, and Sergey Levine. How to
  train your robot with deep reinforcement learning: lessons we have learned. The International
  Journal of Robotics Research, 40(4-5):698–721, 2021.
Auke Jan Ijspeert. Central pattern generators for locomotion control in animals and robots: a review.
 Neural networks, 21(4):642–653, 2008.
Atil Iscen, Ken Caluwaerts, Jie Tan, Tingnan Zhang, Erwin Coumans, Vikas Sindhwani, and Vincent
  Vanhoucke. Policies modulating trajectory generators. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 916–
  926. PMLR, 2018.
Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. Billion-scale similarity search with GPUs. IEEE
  Transactions on Big Data, 7(3):535–547, 2019.
Nam Hee Kim, Zhaoming Xie, and Michiel Panne. Learning to correspond dynamical systems. In
  Learning for Dynamics and Control, pp. 105–117. PMLR, 2020.
Joonho Lee, Jemin Hwangbo, Lorenz Wellhausen, Vladlen Koltun, and Marco Hutter. Learning
  quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain. Science robotics, 5(47):eabc5986, 2020.
Seyoung Lee, Sunmin Lee, Yongwoo Lee, and Jehee Lee. Learning a family of motor skills from a
  single motion clip. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 40(4):1–13, 2021.
Yongjoon Lee, Kevin Wampler, Gilbert Bernstein, Jovan Popović, and Zoran Popović. Motion ﬁelds
  for interactive character locomotion. In ACM SIGGRAPH Asia 2010 papers, pp. 1–8. 2010.
Sergey Levine, Jack M Wang, Alexis Haraux, Zoran Popović, and Vladlen Koltun. Continuous
  character control with low-dimensional embeddings. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 31
  (4):1–10, 2012.
Chenhao Li, Sebastian Blaes, Pavel Kolev, Marin Vlastelica, Jonas Frey, and Georg Martius. Ver-
  satile skill control via self-supervised adversarial imitation of unlabeled mixed motions. In
  2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 2944–2950. IEEE,
  2023a.
Chenhao Li, Marin Vlastelica, Sebastian Blaes, Jonas Frey, Felix Grimminger, and Georg Martius.
  Learning agile skills via adversarial imitation of rough partial demonstrations. In Conference on
  Robot Learning, pp. 342–352. PMLR, 2023b.
Zicheng Liu, Steven J Gortler, and Michael F Cohen. Hierarchical spacetime control. In Proceedings
  of the 21st annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pp. 35–42, 1994.
Manuel Lopes and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. The strategic student approach for life-long exploration
 and learning. In 2012 IEEE international conference on development and learning and epigenetic
 robotics (ICDL), pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2012.
Takahiro Miki, Joonho Lee, Jemin Hwangbo, Lorenz Wellhausen, Vladlen Koltun, and Marco Hutter.
  Learning robust perceptive locomotion for quadrupedal robots in the wild. Science Robotics, 7
  (62):eabk2822, 2022.
Jianyuan Min and Jinxiang Chai. Motion graphs++ a compact generative model for semantic motion
   analysis and synthesis. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 31(6):1–12, 2012.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xue Bin Peng, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and Michiel Van de Panne. Deepmimic: Example-
  guided deep reinforcement learning of physics-based character skills. ACM Transactions On
 Graphics (TOG), 37(4):1–14, 2018.
Xue Bin Peng, Erwin Coumans, Tingnan Zhang, Tsang-Wei Lee, Jie Tan, and Sergey Levine. Learn-
  ing agile robotic locomotion skills by imitating animals. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.00784, 2020.
Xue Bin Peng, Ze Ma, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Amp: Adversarial
  motion priors for stylized physics-based character control. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG),
 40(4):1–20, 2021.
Xue Bin Peng, Yunrong Guo, Lina Halper, Sergey Levine, and Sanja Fidler. Ase: Large-scale
  reusable adversarial skill embeddings for physically simulated characters. ACM Transactions On
 Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–17, 2022.
Rémy Portelas, Cédric Colas, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Teacher algorithms for
  curriculum learning of deep rl in continuously parameterized environments. In Conference on
  Robot Learning, pp. 835–853. PMLR, 2020.
Carl Rasmussen. The inﬁnite gaussian mixture model. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 12, 1999.
Charles Rose, Michael F Cohen, and Bobby Bodenheimer. Verbs and adverbs: Multidimensional
  motion interpolation. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 18(5):32–40, 1998.
Nikita Rudin, David Hoeller, Philipp Reist, and Marco Hutter. Learning to walk in minutes using
  massively parallel deep reinforcement learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 91–100.
  PMLR, 2022.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Milad Shaﬁee, Guillaume Bellegarda, and Auke Ijspeert. Deeptransition: Viability leads to the emer-
 gence of gait transitions in learning anticipatory quadrupedal locomotion skills. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2306.07419, 2023.
Paul Starke, Sebastian Starke, Taku Komura, and Frank Steinicke. Motion in-betweening with phase
  manifolds. Proceedings of the ACM on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, 6(3):1–
  17, 2023.
Sebastian Starke, Yiwei Zhao, Taku Komura, and Kazi Zaman. Local motion phases for learning
  multi-contact character movements. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 39(4):54–1, 2020.
Sebastian Starke, Ian Mason, and Taku Komura. Deepphase: Periodic autoencoders for learning
  motion phase manifolds. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–13, 2022.
Jie Tan, Tingnan Zhang, Erwin Coumans, Atil Iscen, Yunfei Bai, Danijar Hafner, Steven Bohez, and
   Vincent Vanhoucke. Sim-to-real: Learning agile locomotion for quadruped robots. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1804.10332, 2018.
Munetoshi Unuma, Ken Anjyo, and Ryozo Takeuchi. Fourier principles for emotion-based human
 ﬁgure animation. In Proceedings of the 22nd annual conference on Computer graphics and inter-
 active techniques, pp. 91–96, 1995.
Manuel Watter, Jost Springenberg, Joschka Boedecker, and Martin Riedmiller. Embed to control: A
 locally linear latent dynamics model for control from raw images. Advances in neural information
 processing systems, 28, 2015.
Douglas J Wiley and James K Hahn. Interpolation synthesis of articulated ﬁgure motion. IEEE
 Computer Graphics and Applications, 17(6):39–45, 1997.
Yuzhe Yang, Xin Liu, Jiang Wu, Silviu Borac, Dina Katabi, Ming-Zher Poh, and Daniel McDuff.
  Simper: Simple self-supervised learning of periodic targets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03115,
  2022.
M Ersin Yumer and Niloy J Mitra. Spectral style transfer for human motion between independent
 actions. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 35(4):1–8, 2016.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     M OTION REPRESENTATION DETAILS

A.1.1    S TATE SPACE
The state space is composed of base linear and angular velocities v, ω in the robot frame, measure-
ment of the gravity vector in the robot frame g, and joint positions q as in Table S2.
                                   Table S2: Policy observation space

                           Entry                    Symbol      Dimensions
                           base linear velocity         v             0:3
                           base angular velocity        ω             3:6
                           projected gravity            g             6:9
                           joint positions              q            9:27


A.1.2    R EPRESENTATION TRAINING PARAMETERS
The learning networks and algorithm are implemented in PyTorch 1.10 with CUDA 12.0. Adam
is used as the optimizer for training the representation models. The information is summarized in
Table S3.
                            Table S3: Representation training parameters

                          Parameter                         Symbol     Value
                          step time seconds                  ∆t        0.02
                          max iterations                     −         5000
                          learning rate                      −        0.0001
                          weight decay                       −        0.0005
                          learning epochs                    −           5
                          mini-batches                       −          10
                          latent channels                    c           8
                          trajectory segment length          H          51
                          FLD propagation horizon            N          50
                          propagation decay                  α          1.0
                          approximate training hours         −           1


Periodic Autoencoder
FLD shares the same network architecture as PAE, whose encoder and decoder are composed of
1D convolutional layers. The periodicity in the latent trajectories is enforced by parameterizing
each latent curve as a sinusoidal function. While the latent frequency, amplitude, and offset are
computed with a differentiable real Fast Fourier Transform layer, the latent phase is determined
using a linear layer followed by Atan2 applied on 2D signed phase shifts on each channel. The
network architecture is detailed in Table S4.

Variational Autoencoder
VAE is implemented as our baseline for representing motions in a lower-dimensional space. In our
comparison, it admits the same input, output data structure and the same latent dimension as PAE.
The network architecture is detailed in Table S5.

Other baselines
The dedicated feed-forward model shares the same input and prediction output structure as FLD,
however, it does not provide any representation of the motion it predicts. It is trained to evaluate the
motion synthesis performance of FLD.


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        0.5
               trajectory segment 𝐬𝑡
                                                        0.0


                                                   φ
                  convolution 𝐞𝐧𝐜                      −0.5
                                                          7
                                                          4


                                                   f
               latent embedding 𝐳𝑡
     𝐿0                                                   1
           FC BN Atan2           FFT                    1.6
                                                        0.8


                                                   a
                   𝜙𝑡               𝑓𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑏𝑡
            sinusoidal reconstruction 𝐳ො𝑡
                                                        0.0
                                                        1.2
                                                        0.3


                                                   b
                  convolution 𝐝𝐞𝐜
                                                       −0.6
             reconstructed segment 𝐬ො𝑡                           0          50         100        150
                                                                                   t [step]

            (a) PAE structure.                         (b) Latent parameters along a forward run trajectory.

Figure S7: Motion representation using PAE. (a) PAE utilizes frequency domain analysis to extract
the local periodicity of highly nonlinear motions. Latent features are constructed using sinusoidal
functions. (b) Each color is associated with a distinct latent channel. Despite the ﬂuctuation on two
frequency channels, the latent frequency f , amplitude a, and offset b stay nearly constant throughout
the trajectory.


                                            Table S4: PAE architecture

        Network            Layer            Output size       Kernel size    Normalization       Activation
        encoder            Conv1d            64 × 51                 51            BN               ELU
                           Conv1d            64 × 51                 51            BN               ELU
                           Conv1d             8 × 51                 51            BN               ELU
        phase encoder      Linear              8×2                   −             BN              Atan2
        decoder            Conv1d            64 × 51                 51            BN               ELU
                           Conv1d            64 × 51                 51            BN               ELU
                           Conv1d            27 × 51                 51            BN               ELU



The oracle classiﬁer is trained to predict original motion classes from their latent parameterizations
for evaluation purposes. It is trained to provide a better understanding of the adaptive curriculum
learning migration in the latent parameterization space using privileged motion type information.
The network architectures of these models are presented in Table S6.


A.1.3     L ATENT MANIFOLD

Each motion within the set M maintains a consistent latent parameterization θ throughout its tra-
jectory. Consequently, its latent representation can be visualized as a circle (solid grey curves) in
Fig. S8a, where θ represents the distance from the center. The current state at a speciﬁc time frame
is denoted by the latent state ϕt , which is depicted as the angle elapsed along the circle. The propa-
gation of latent dynamics and motion evolution can thus be described as traveling around the circle.
All motions within M correspond to a collection of circles that span a latent subspace, represented
by the shaded rings. Therefore, we can interpolate or synthesize new motions by sampling within
or around this latent subspace. It is important to note that this latent subspace may be ill-deﬁned
for policy learning, as it may contain subregions where the decoded motions describe challenging
or unlearnable movements for the real learning system.


                                                            14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     Table S5: VAE architecture

                Network                         Type         Hidden        Activation
                encoder                         MLP       512, 256, 128      ReLU
                mean encoder                    Linear          −              −
                standard deviation encoder      Linear          −           Softplus
                decoder                         MLP       128, 256, 512      ReLU

                                Table S6: Other baseline architectures

                     Network         Symbol      Type      Hidden      Activation
                     feed-forward        −       MLP      512, 512        ELU
                     classiﬁer           −       MLP     1024, 512        ELU


A.1.4    R EFERENCE MOTIONS
A.1.5    S IMILARITY EVALUATION
Both ﬁgures clearly demonstrate a well-understood similarity between high-level motion features.
In Fig. S10a, the latent representation of the intermediate motion (run, orange curves) is positioned
between their neighboring representations (step in place and forward stride, red and green curves). A
similar pattern is also identiﬁed in Fig. S10b, with a more consistent latent representation within the
same motion type (run forward), compared to a more considerable structural discrepancy between
different motion types in Fig. S10a. As a result of this well-understood spatial-temporal structure,
sampling in the latent representation space leads to realistic transitions and interpolations. This
ability to ﬁll in the gaps and generate a rich set of natural motions from sparse ofﬂine datasets
showcases the efﬁcacy of FLD in motion generation tasks. In summary, the automatically induced
latent representation space Θ in FLD plays a crucial role in capturing the underlying spatial-temporal
relationships and facilitating realistic motion generation through interpolation and transition. This
advancement enables the algorithm to learn from sparse ofﬂine data and generalize proﬁciently,
greatly enriching available training datasets that improve the efﬁciency of the downstream learning
process and the capability of learned policies.

A.2     M OTION LEARNING DETAILS

A.2.1    O BSERVATION AND ACTION SPACE
Besides the state space, the policy observes additional information such as joint velocities q̇ and last
action a′ in its observation space. Most importantly, the policy observes the instructed target motions
by admitting their latent states and parameterizations. The detailed information together with the
artiﬁcial noise added during training to increase the policy robustness is presented in Table S7.
The action space is of 18 dimensions and encodes the target joint position for each of the 18 actuators.
The PD gains are set to 30.0 and 5.0, respectively.

A.2.2    P OLICY TRAINING PARAMETERS
Adam is used as the optimizer for the policy and value function with an adaptive learning rate with a
KL divergence target of 0.01. The policy runs at 50 Hz. All training is done by collecting experiences
from 4096 uncorrelated instances of the simulator in parallel. The information is summarized in
Table S8.

A.2.3    N ETWORK ARCHITECTURE
The network structures of the learning policy π and the value function V used in PPO training are
detailed in Table S9.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                  𝜋 𝑝𝜃



                               𝜙𝑡                                          𝜙𝑡

                          𝜃                                           𝜃


                   (a) FLD latent manifold.               (b) Policy learned latent manifold.

Figure S8: Schematic view of the latent manifold induced by the latent state and latent parameter-
ization of FLD. While the latent parameterization θ determines which motion the current state is
experiencing, the latent state ϕt indicates the time index of the state frame on this motion. (a) Each
motion is represented by a solid grey circle. The shaded rings denote the collection of representa-
tions of motions in the ofﬂine dataset M. (b) The grey circle denotes an unlearnable motion and the
grey shaded ring denotes the unlearnable subspace. The green circles represent learnable motions,
with the dashed one denoting a motion outside the ofﬂine dataset M but acquired during training.
The green shaded ring denotes the motion region the policy eventually masters.


                                         (a) Slow step in place.


                                              (b) Forward run.


                                          (c) Forward stride.

Figure S9: Representative motions in the training dataset. Base linear and angular displacement is
integrated from velocity information.


A.2.4    D OMAIN RANDOMIZATION
In addition to observation noise, domain randomization is applied during training to improve policy
robustness for real-world application scenarios. On the one hand, the base mass of the parallel


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   •    step in place        •     forward run         •   forward stride
                           (a) Latent representation of different motion types.


                               • 1 m/s           • 2 m/s            • 3 m/s
                       (b) Latent representation of different forward run velocities.

Figure S10: Similarity evaluation and motion interpolation in the latent representation space. The
connected lines across the latent channels indicate the mean latent representation of trajectories
from the same motion or same velocity. The relative locations between representations of related
trajectories illustrate the well-understood similarity between high-level motion features.

                                 Table S7: Policy observation space

                  Entry                       Symbol      Dimensions       Noise level
                  base linear velocity             v           0:3              0.2
                  base angular velocity            ω           3:6             0.05
                  projected gravity                g           6:9             0.05
                  joint positions                  q          9:27             0.01
                  joint velocities                 q̇         27:45            0.75
                  last actions                     a′         45:63             0.0
                  latent phase                   sin ϕ        63:71             0.0
                  latent phase                   cos ϕ        71:79             0.0
                  latent frequency                 f          79:87             0.0
                  latent amplitude                 a          87:95             0.0
                  latent offset                    b         95:103             0.0



training instances is perturbed with an additional weight m′ ∼ U (−0.5, 1.0), where U denotes
uniform distribution. On the other hand, random pushing is also applied every 15 seconds on the
robot base by forcing its horizontal linear velocity to be set randomly within vxy ∼ U (−0.5, 0.5).

A.2.5   A LGORITHM OVERVIEW


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Table S8: Policy training parameters

                        Parameter                        Symbol         Value
                        step time seconds                   ∆t         0.02
                        skill-performance buffer size       |B|        5000
                        max episode time seconds             −          20
                        max iterations                       −        20000
                        learning rate                        −        0.001
                        steps per iteration                  −          24
                        learning epochs                      −           5
                        mini-batches                         −           4
                        KL divergence target                 −         0.01
                        discount factor                      γ         0.99
                        clip range                           ϵ          0.2
                        entropy coefﬁcient                   −         0.01
                        parallel training environments       −         4096
                        number of seeds                      −           5
                        approximate training hours           −           2

                               Table S9: Policy training architecture

                 Network            Symbol    Type       Hidden          Activation
                 policy               π       MLP     128, 128, 128         ELU
                 value function       V       MLP     128, 128, 128         ELU


Algorithm 1 provides details of policy training. More information on the skill sampler and the
skill-performance buffer B is given in Suppl. A.2.6.

A.2.6   S KILL SAMPLERS

To achieve high tracking performance for various target motions, the design of the skill sampler pθ
is critical. Our sampling strategy, which guides policy learning and enhances tracking, is shown
in Fig. S8b. Training FLD on the ofﬂine dataset M reveals latent parameterization spaces with
unlearnable subspaces (grey dashed shaded ring), posing policy learning challenges. An effective
skill sampler interacts with the environment during training to identify and avoid these subspaces,
and it should also explore novel motion targets, expanding performance boundaries. Figure S8b
shows the desired performance region (green shaded ring) covering many learnable motions (green
solid circles) in M and extending to new, effectively learned motions (green dashed circle).
We compared policy learning performance using four skill samplers: ofﬂine point sam-
pler (O FFLINE), ofﬂine Gaussian mixture model (GMM) sampler (GMM), random sampler
(R ANDOM), and absolute learning progress with GMM sampler (ALPGMM) (Portelas et al., 2020).
O FFLINE and GMM access the original ofﬂine dataset M, while R ANDOM and ALPGMM di-
rectly interact and navigate the latent space Θ during online training. Their implementation details
are presented in Suppl. A.2.6.

Ofﬂine point sampler
We can utilize the ofﬂine dataset to encode trajectories into points θ in the latent space Θ, adding
them to the buffer pθ . During online training, random latent parameterization points are drawn
from this buffer, and the ofﬂine trajectories are recovered through the generation process of FLD.
However, this sampler is limited by dataset size and memory constraints.

Ofﬂine Gaussian Mixture Model sampler
This method uses a GMM (Rasmussen, 1999) to parameterize the latent space Θ, avoiding storing all
points θ. An ofﬂine GMM pθ is ﬁtted using the Expectation-Maximization (EM) (Dempster et al.,


                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Policy training
 1: Input: FLD decoder dec
 2: initialize skill sampler pθ , skill-performance buffer B
 3: for learning iterations = 1, 2, . . . do
 4:    sample latent states ϕ and latent parameterizations θ
 5:    for environment steps = 1, 2, . . . do
 6:       generate motion tracking targets ŝ from ϕ and θ with FLD decoder dec
 7:       calculate tracking reward rT
 8:       propagate latent states ϕ according to Eq. 6
 9:       if reset then
10:          collect latent parameterizations θ and the tracking performance reT in skill-performance
            buffer B
11:        resample latent states ϕ and latent parameterizations θ
12:      end if
13:   end for
14:   update skill sampler pθ with skill-performance buffer B
15:   update policy and value function with PPO or another RL algorithm
16: end for


1977) algorithm, with random points drawn during online training. The sampler’s effectiveness
depends on the dataset’s quality, as it may struggle with unlearnable or challenging motions.

Random sampler
Without access to the original dataset, the random sampler draws samples uniformly from the latent
space conﬁdence region. However, it overlooks the data structure and may generate unlearnable
targets due to inefﬁcient understanding of large sensorimotor spaces.

Absolute Learning Progress with Gaussian Mixture Models sampler
Identifying learnable motions in the latent space without the original dataset is challenging. A self-
adaptive curriculum learning approach, essential in this context, adjusts the frequency of sampling
target motions based on their potential for improved learning. This method parallels the strategic
student problem (Lopes & Oudeyer, 2012), focusing on selecting tasks for maximal competence. We
employ the ALP-GMM strategy for this purpose. ALP-GMM ﬁts a GMM on previously sampled
latent parameterizations, linked to their ALP values. Sampling decisions are made using a non-
stochastic multi-armed bandit approach (Auer et al., 2002), with each Gaussian distribution as an
arm and ALP as its utility, steering the sampling towards high-ALP areas.
To get this per-parameterization ALP value alp(θ), we follow the implementation from earlier
work (Portelas et al., 2020). For each newly sampled latent parameterization θ and associated track-
                   T
ing performance re,new   (θ), the closest previously sampled latent parameterization with associated
tracking performance re,old (θ) is retrieved from a skill-performance buffer B using the nearest neigh-
                        T

bor algorithm. We then have


                                            T
                                 alp(θ) =| re,new (θ) − re,old
                                                         T
                                                               (θ) | .                            (S8)



We use Faiss (Johnson et al., 2019) for efﬁcient vector similarity search to ﬁnd the nearest neighbors
of the current latent parameterization in the skill-performance buffer B. At each policy learning
iteration, we update the skill sampler by reﬁtting the online GMM based on the collected latent
parameterizations and the corresponding ALP measure. We refer to the original work (Portelas
et al., 2020) for more implementation details.
The design details of different skill samplers are presented in Table S10. For ALPGMM, we
provide in Fig. S11 a schematic overview of its working pipeline.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  Table S10: Skill sampler parameters

                  Skill sampler     Parameter                                           Value
                  O FFLINE          features                                              24
                                    buffer size                                         20000
                  GMM               features                                                24
                                    components                                              8
                                    covariance type                                        full
                  R ANDOM           features                                               24
                  ALPGMM            features                                             25
                                    minimum components                                    2
                                    maximum components                                   10
                                    information criterion                              Bayesian
                                    random sample rate                                   0.2
                                    skill-performance buffer size                       5000
                                    skill-performance collection interval                 5
                                    nearest neighbors                                     1
                                    update interval                                      50


                                                                                  sample
                              env

                                                                              𝑎𝑙𝑝-weighted GMM fitting
                                               tracking performance

                                                      𝑟𝑒𝑇
                                                                       -
                   𝜃
                                                                                             𝑎𝑙𝑝

                       nearest neighbors
                                           old tracking performance

                                                      𝑇
                                                     𝑟𝑒,𝑜𝑙𝑑

Figure S11: ALPGMM algorithm overview. The ALP is calculated on the latent parameterization
of target motion samples by comparing the old and new tracking performance. A GMM is then ﬁtted
on these samples weighted by their ALP measure. New samples are drawn from the ﬁtted GMM in
the next iteration.


A.2.7   T RACKING PERFORMANCE
The tracking reward calculates the weighted sum of reward terms on each dimension bounded in
[0, 1],
                    rT = wv rv + wω rω + wg rg + wqleg rqleg + wqarm rqarm .            (S9)
The tracking performance reT ∈ [0, 1] is computed by the normalized episodic tracking reward. The
formulation of each tracking term is detailed as follows and their weights in Table S11.

                                  Table S11: Tracking reward weights

                             Weight     wv        wω          wg      wqleg    wqarm
                             Value      1.0       1.0       1.0        1.0       1.0


Linear velocity


                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            rv = e−σv ∥v̂−v∥2 ,
                                                                 2
                                                                                                  (S10)
where σv = 0.2 denotes a temperature factor, v̂ and v denote the reconstructed target and current
linear velocity.

Angular velocity

                                         rω = wω e−σω ∥ω̂−ω∥2 ,
                                                                         2
                                                                                                  (S11)
where σω = 0.2 denotes a temperature factor, ω̂ and ω denote the reconstructed target and current
angular velocity.

Projected gravity

                                            rg = e−σg ∥ĝ−g∥2 ,
                                                                 2
                                                                                                  (S12)
where σg = 1.0 denotes a temperature factor, ĝ and g denote the reconstructed target and current
projected gravity.

Leg position

                                      rqleg = e−σqleg ∥q̂leg −qleg ∥2 ,
                                                                             2
                                                                                                  (S13)
where σqleg = 1.0 denotes a temperature factor, q̂leg and qleg denote the reconstructed target and
current leg position.

Arm position

                                    rqarm = e−σqarm ∥q̂arm −qarm ∥2 ,
                                                                                 2
                                                                                                  (S14)
where σqarm = 1.0 denotes a temperature factor, q̂arm and qarm denote the reconstructed target and
current arm position.

A.2.8       R EGULARIZATION REWARDS
The regularization reward calculates the weighted sum of individual regularization reward terms.,
                                   rR = war rar + wqa rqa + wqT rqT .                             (S15)
The formulation of each regularization term is detailed as follows and their weights in Table S12.

                              Table S12: Regularization reward weights

                          Weight      war            w qa                            w qT
                          Value      −0.01      −2.5 × 10−7                  −1.0 × 10−5


Action rate

                                            rar = ∥a′ − a∥22 ,                                    (S16)
        ′
where a and a denote the previous and current actions.

Joint acceleration

                                                     q̇ ′ − q̇
                                                                 2
                                            rq a =                   ,                            (S17)
                                                         ∆t      2
where q̇ ′ and q̇ denote the previous and current joint velocity, ∆t denotes the step time interval.


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     𝜃                  𝜙            LD
                                                                policy 𝜋
                                                                              𝑎
                 latent embedding 𝐳

                   convolution 𝐞𝐧𝐜

                     user input 𝐬 𝑖                                        state 𝑠

Figure S12: Online tracking. The latent states ϕ and parameterization θ are obtained from encoding
accepted target proposals from user input sit . In cases where the user proposal is absent or rejected,
the latent dynamics step in and continuously provide fallback targets.


Joint torque

                                                          2
                                                rqT = ∥T ∥2 ,                                      (S18)
where T denotes the joint torques.

A.2.9    O NLINE TRACKING
Figure S12 provides a schematic overview of the online motion tracking pipeline.

A.2.10    A DAPTIVE CURRICULUM LEARNING
In addition to solely tracking targets in the ofﬂine dataset, we aim to address the challenge of learning
continuous interpolation and transitions between motions in the sparsely populated reference motion
space.
To this end, we train FLD on the ofﬂine reference dataset M in the ﬁrst stage and obtain the latent
parameterization space Θ. In the second stage of online motion learning, we generate tracking
targets by sampling and decoding latent parameterizations with a skill sampler pθ ,
                                      θ = (f, a, b) ∼ pθ ∈ ∆(Θ).                                   (S19)
Depending on the design of the skill sampler pθ , the training datasets with FLD motion synthesis
may describe different spaces of dictated reference motions used to train the policy. The resulting
policy trained over this dataset induced by pθ is denoted by πpθ .
We distinguish the performance evaluation spectrums on closed-ended and open-ended learning.
We deﬁne expert performance as the performance evaluation of a learned tracking policy on the
prescribed target motions. And we deﬁne general performance as the performance evaluation of a
learned tracking policy on a wide spectrum of target motions.
Therefore, the objective of motion learning can be written as
                                      max Eθ′ ∈Θ′ [V (πpθ | θ′ )] ,                                (S20)
                                      πpθ ,pθ

where V (πpθ | θ′ ) denotes the performance metric of policy πpθ on motion θ′ , and Θ′ denotes the
evaluation spectrum that differs in expert and general performances.
For expert and general tracking performances, we deﬁne the motion learning evaluation spectrum
Θ′ in Eq. S20. To evaluate the expert performance, we randomly sample test target motions from the
collected latent parameterizations of the prescribed ofﬂine dataset M. For the general performance,
the evaluation is determined by uniformly random samples from the continuous latent parameteri-
zation space bounded by the conﬁdence region induced by FLD training on M. The result on ﬁve
random seeds is presented in Table S13.
The O FFLINE sampler, with direct access to the dataset M, generates trajectories closely resem-
bling the target motion space, leading to high expert performance. However, it does not use FLD’s
capability to synthesize motions for broader tracking targets, limiting its generality to the policy


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Table S13: Tracking performance with proposed skill samplers.

                      Range        O FFLINE          GMM          R ANDOM      ALPGMM
                      Expert      0.88 ± 0.03     0.87 ± 0.03    0.83 ± 0.01   0.87 ± 0.04
                      General     0.72 ± 0.01     0.73 ± 0.02    0.80 ± 0.01   0.80 ± 0.03

                               O FFLINE         GMM             R ANDOM        ALPGMM
                                                    reT (Θ̃)      γ(Θ̃)
                                                                                        10

                      0.8
                                                                                        8

                      0.6
                                                                                        6
           reT (Θ̃)


                                                                                             γ(Θ̃)
                      0.4                                                               4


                      0.2                                                               2



                              0           5                10           15         20
                                                Training iteration ×103

       Figure S13: Tracking performance and exploration factor on running motion targets.


network’s understanding of spatial-temporal motion structures. The GMM sampler, similarly, uses
parameterized latent representations of prescribed motions, achieving performance comparable to
O FFLINE.
In contrast, the R ANDOM sampler optimizes the policy for a wide range of random motions without
speciﬁc targeting, resulting in a less focused approach. ALPGMM, however, balances generaliza-
tion with performance on prescribed targets. It does this by learning from policy-environment inter-
actions and identifying useful target motions during training. The ALP measure guides its GMM
sampling strategy, avoiding redundant targets and focusing on promising, underexplored motions
for signiﬁcant performance improvements.
To understand this adaptive learning process, we maintain an online buffer Θ̃ of the latent parame-
terization of running target motions selected by the skill samplers and evaluate the policies’ average
tracking performance on these motions. To quantify the online target search space enabled by the
skill samplers, we deﬁne an exploration factor γ(Θ̃) as a channel-averaged ratio between the stan-
dard deviation within the latent parameterizations of the online running target motion σΘ̃ and that
within the initial ofﬂine dataset.

                                                      σ
                                         γ(Θ̃) = Ec Θ̃ .                                         (S21)
                                                      σΘ c

We plot the results in Fig. S13 with the running tracking performance reT (Θ̃) in ﬁve random runs.
Note that the target motion space induced by different skill samplers and thus the spectrum the
running tracking performance is calculated over is different. O FFLINE and GMM, with access to
ofﬂine data, show strong tracking (bold curves) of prescribed motions but fail to explore beyond
this dataset, keeping their exploration factors (thin curves) constant. In contrast, R ANDOM, de-
spite lacking ofﬂine data and understanding of data structure, achieves similar performance due to


                                                           23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            O FFLINE           GMM         R ANDOM             ALPGMM
                                       0        10%        60%    unlearnable


                      0.8


           reT (Θ̃)   0.6


                      0.4


                      0.2


                      0.0
                            0              5               10             15            20
                                                Training iteration ×103

Figure S14: Tracking performance on running motion targets under different mixtures of unlearn-
able reference motions. The solid, dashed and dotted curves denote training with 0, 10% and 60%
unlearnable motions in the reference dataset, respectively.


FLD’s well-structured latent space. However, this strategy may fail if the initial training data has
unlearnable components, as further discussed in Suppl. A.2.11.
ALPGMM initially shows improved tracking performance, which gradually decreases as it ex-
plores new motion regions, including under-explored or undeﬁned areas. This expansion, evidenced
by the increasing exploration factor, results in a much larger motion coverage by training’s end. This
guided exploration ensures maintained expert performance on mastered motions in Table S13, which
would have been lost if the sampling region is grown only blindly. In our experiments, we keep
the curriculum learning open-ended. Future studies may look into practical regularization methods
to constrain such exploration to convergence. In summary, ALPGMM achieves high expert and
general performance by dynamically adapting its sampling distribution during training, resulting in
broader coverage of the target motion space and improved motion learning generality.

A.2.11    U NLEARNABLE SUBSPACES

Similar to the discussion above, we investigate the average tracking performance over the running
targets sampled by the skill samplers under datasets containing different mixtures of unlearnable
reference motions. To this end, FLD and the latent parameterization space are pre-trained on each
dataset in the ﬁrst stage. We plot the mean of ﬁve random policy training runs on each dataset of 0,
10% and 60% unlearnable motions in Fig. S14, respectively.
The solid curves indicate a similar tracking performance evolution pattern as discussed above, where
the latent parameterization space is not corrupted by the unlearnable motions. However, when the
reference dataset contains unlearnable motions, blind random sampling strategies like R ANDOM
quickly fail. The presence of unlearnable motions distorts the latent parameterization space towards
these challenging areas. Sampling strategies that rely heavily on direct access to the ofﬂine dataset
(O FFLINE, GMM) or the ill-shaped space induced by it (R ANDOM) may lead to a substantial
number of unreachable targets and signiﬁcant learning difﬁculties. Especially with 60% motions
unlearnable, policies trained with O FFLINE and GMM achieve less than half of the tracking perfor-
mance in the fully learnable case, and those with R ANDOM encounter drastic learning failure.
In contrast, ALPGMM facilitates policy learning by actively adapting its sampling distribution
towards regions with a high ALP measure, identifying promising targets and avoiding those with
limited potential for improvement. This adaptive curriculum is particularly effective in cases where


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure S15: ALPGMM sampling strategy migration. Each dot in the visualization corresponds to
the latent parameterization of a target motion, with colors representing the policy’s tracking perfor-
mance, the ALP measure, and the predicted motion type. Unlearnable components are colored grey
with the label u. The ellipsoids represent online GMM clusters used by ALPGMM, with the color
gradient indicating the mean ALP measure of samples from each cluster.


the latent parameterization space is heavily affected by unlearnable components. In our experiment
with 60% unlearnable targets, ALPGMM produces the highest tracking performance among all
skill samplers by focusing only on regions where the policy excels. The importance of this feature is
highlighted in applications that require extracting as many learnable motions as possible from large,
high-dimensional target datasets with unknown difﬁculty distributions.
To further understand the exploration and sampling strategy enabled by ALPGMM, we visualize
the migration of the sampling region in a representative run with trajectories from an unlearnable
motion type in Fig. S15. To this end, we project to 2D plane the latent parameterization samples
collected in the skill-performance buffer B, which tracks the running target motions selected by
ALPGMM, at different stages of training in Fig. S15. For evaluation purposes, an oracle classi-
ﬁer is trained to predict original motion classes y from their latent parameterizations as detailed in
Suppl. A.1.2.
Each dot represents the latent parameterization of a target motion and is colored according to the
policy’s performance reT in tracking this target, the ALP measure alp, and the motion type y pre-
dicted by the oracle classiﬁer in each column. Speciﬁcally, we color the unlearnable components
grey with the label u in the motion prediction results. In addition, we plot the online GMM clusters


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            0.5
                            0.0


                       φ
                           −0.5
                              7
                              4


                       f
                              1
                            1.6
                            0.8


                       a
                            0.0
                            1.2
                       b    0.3
                           −0.6
                                   0          50            100    150
                                                        t [step]

Figure S16: Motion representation of a transition from a periodic motion to another using PAE. The
quasi-constant motion parameterization assumption holds only locally.


employed by ALPGMM in ellipsoids with the color gradient indicating the mean ALP measure of
samples from each cluster.
At the beginning (200 iterations) of learning, motion targets are initialized randomly. The policy is
still undertrained at this early stage and thus tracks motions with generally low performance. As
the learning proceeds (1000 iterations), the policy gradually improves its capability on the learnable
motions indicated by the increased performance and ALP measure on the colored samples. In the
meantime, the policy also recognizes the unlearnable region (grey) where it fails to achieve better
tracking performance and remains a low learning process. As ALPGMM biases its sampling to-
ward Gaussian clusters with high ALP measure, the cluster on the unlearnable motions becomes
silent, indicated by an ellipsoid with complete transparency. Further training (10000 iterations) en-
larges the coverage of tracking targets indicated by the expanded sampling range centered around the
mastered region. A gradient pattern in tracking performance and ALP measure is observed where
higher values are achieved at points closer to the conﬁdence region. Finally, more extended training
time (20000 iterations) pushes ALPGMM to areas more distant from the initial target distribution,
motivating the policy to focus on speciﬁc motions where the performance may be further improved.
This demonstrates the efﬁcacy of ALPGMM in navigating the latent parameterization space to
focus on learnable regions.

A.3     L IMITATIONS

A.3.1    Q UASI - CONSTANT MOTION PARAMETERIZATION

FLD provides a solution to representing high-dimensional long-horizon motions in meaningful low
dimensions. The training of FLD explicitly enforces latent dynamics that respect spatial-temporal
relationships and identify the intrinsic transition patterns in periodic or quasi-periodic motions. How-
ever, the propagation of such latent dynamics replies on the quasi-constant motion parameterization
assumption (Assump. 1), which holds well on periodic or quasi-periodic motions. When it comes
to motions containing less periodicity, we observe time-varying latent parameterization along the
trajectory. As depicted in Fig. S16, although the quasi-constant motion parameterization assump-
tion may still hold locally in motions containing aperiodic transitions, the latent dynamics in the
transition phase can be challenging to determine. Thus, enforcing a globally constant set of latent
parameterization over the whole trajectory is likely to underparameterize the latent embeddings and
result in inaccurate reconstruction. If the reconstruction loses too much information with respect to
the original motion, additional techniques on period detection and data preprocessing that involve
extra human effort have to be applied.
We may also view aperiodic motions as periodic ones with very long periods. This way, the length
of the observation window needed to capture the transitions over a whole period is also extended.


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              (a) Jump


                                               (b) Kick


                                             (c) Spinkick

     Figure S17: Representative motions that require speciﬁc reward functions to be learned.


This increases not only the computational complexity but also the reconstruction performance as
FLD always performs a global periodic latent approximation of the original motion.

A.3.2    M OTION - DEPENDENT REWARDS
With an appropriate sampling strategy, FLD is able to continually propose novel tracking targets
online that enhance the generality of the learning policy. However, the adaptive curriculum learning
methods implemented in this work assume that all such synthesized target motions can be learned
with the same set of reward functions. This does not necessarily hold true for large complex datasets
where some motions may require speciﬁcally designed rewards to be invoked and picked up. Espe-
cially for robotic systems, motion execution is strongly constrained by critical physical properties
such as non-trivial body part inertia and actuation limits such as motor torques. We exemplify some
motions that require different sets of reward functions to be acquired in Fig. S17. Additional efforts
in designing target-dependent reward functions are needed to push further the limit of tracking ca-
pability of real systems. This may be especially challenging in low-level motor skill development,
where such reward functions are strongly correlated with the sensorimotor spaces and physical limits
of different embodiments.

A.3.3    L EARNING - PROGRESS - BASED EXPLORATION
In the adaptive curriculum learning process without privileged access to the ofﬂine data, ALPGMM
searches for motion targets that yield the most signiﬁcant ALP measure. However, these targets do
not necessarily align with the intended reference motions. The policy may end up learning some
interpolated motions that do not make sense in terms of motor skills but yield a high ALP measure
during training. In these settings, learning-progress-based exploration is allured to regions with the
fastest growth in performance, giving up tracking challenging motions where progress requires more
extended learning. Occasional random sampling mitigates this problem by reducing exploration’s
reliance on pure ALP measures. Without access to the ofﬂine data, additional careful analysis in
locating truly useful motions in the latent parameterization space is needed.


                                                 27
