Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Q UANTIFYING THE P LAUSIBILITY OF C ONTEXT
R ELIANCE IN N EURAL M ACHINE T RANSLATION
  Gabriele Sarti1 Grzegorz Chrupała2 Malvina Nissim1 Arianna Bisazza1
 1
   Center for Language and Cognition (CLCG), University of Groningen
 2
   Dept. of Cognitive Science and Artificial Intelligence (CSAI), Tilburg University
   {g.sarti, m.nissim, a.bisazza}@rug.nl, grzegorz@chrupala.me



                                            A BSTRACT
         Establishing whether language models can use contextual information in a human-
         plausible way is important to ensure their trustworthiness in real-world settings.
         However, the questions of when and which parts of the context affect model
         generations are typically tackled separately, with current plausibility evaluations
         being practically limited to a handful of artificial benchmarks. To address this, we
         introduce Plausibility Evaluation of Context Reliance (PEC O R E), an end-to-end
         interpretability framework designed to quantify context usage in language models’
         generations. Our approach leverages model internals to (i) contrastively identify
         context-sensitive target tokens in generated texts and (ii) link them to contextual
         cues justifying their prediction. We use PEC O R E to quantify the plausibility
         of context-aware machine translation models, comparing model rationales with
         human annotations across several discourse-level phenomena. Finally, we apply our
         method to unannotated model translations to identify context-mediated predictions
         and highlight instances of (im)plausible context usage throughout generation.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Research in NLP interpretability defines various desiderata for rationales of model behaviors, i.e.
the contributions of input tokens toward model predictions computed using feature attribution (Mad-
sen et al., 2022). One of such properties is plausibility, corresponding to the alignment between
model rationales and salient input words identified by human annotators (Jacovi & Goldberg, 2020).
Low-plausibility rationales usually occur alongside generalization failures or biased predictions
and can be useful to identify cases of models being “right for the wrong reasons” McCoy et al.
(2019). However, while plausibility has an intuitive interpretation for classification tasks involving a
single prediction, extending this methodology to generative language models (LMs) presents several
challenges. First, LMs have a large output space where semantically equivalent tokens (e.g. “PC” and
“computer”) are competing candidates for next-word prediction (Holtzman et al., 2021). Moreover,
LMs generations are the product of optimization pressures to ensure independent properties such as
semantic relatedness, topical coherence and grammatical correctness, which can hardly be captured
by a single attribution score (Yin & Neubig, 2022). Finally, since autoregressive generation involves
an iterative prediction process, model rationales could be extracted for every generated token. This
raises the issue of which generated tokens can have plausible contextual explanations.
Recent attribution techniques for explaining language models incorporate contrastive alternatives to
disentangle different aspects of model predictions (e.g. the choice of “meowing” over “screaming” for
“The cat is ___” is motivated by semantic appropriateness, but not by grammaticality) (Ferrando et al.,
2023; Sarti et al., 2023). However, these studies avoid the issues above by narrowing the evaluation
to a single generation step matching a phenomenon of interest. For example, given the sentence “The
pictures of the cat ___”, a plausible rationale for the prediction of the word “are” should reflect the
role of “pictures” in subject-verb agreement. While this approach can be useful to validate model
rationales, it confines plausibility assessment to a small set of handcrafted benchmarks where tokens
with plausible explanations are known in advance. Moreover, it risks overlooking important patterns
of context usage, including those that do not immediately match linguistic intuitions. In light of
this, we suggest that identifying which generated tokens were most affected by contextual input
information should be an integral part of plausibility evaluation for language generation tasks.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                              Source texts
Figure 1: Examples of sentence-level and contex-
                                                                                 to the
                                                              Sheep grazed next to   the little shepherd .
tual English→Italian MT. Sentence-level transla-
tion contain lack-of-context errors. Instead, in the          At sunset, she led them back to the stable.
                                                                             S
contextual case context-sensitive source tokens           Sentence-level
are disambiguated using source (⃝)    S or target-        & Contextual MT
based (⃝)T contextual cues to produce correct             Le pecore pascolavano accanto al pastorello        .
context-sensitive target tokens. PEC O R E enables         T                            alla pastorella
the end-to-end extraction of cue- target pairs (e.g.      Al tramonto, li    le ricondusse alla stalla.
<she, alla pastorella>, <le pecore, le>).

To achieve this goal, we propose a novel interpretability framework, which we dub Plausibility
Evaluation of Context Reliance (PEC O R E). PEC O R E enables the end-to-end extraction of cue-
target token pairs consisting of context-sensitive generated tokens and their respective influential
contextual cues from language model generations, as shown in Figure 1. These pairs can uncover
context dependence in naturally occurring generations and, for cases where human annotations are
available, help quantify context usage plausibility in language models. Importantly, our approach is
compatible with modern attribution methods using contrastive targets (Yin & Neubig, 2022), avoids
using reference translations to stay clear of problematic distributional shifts (Vamvas & Sennrich,
2021b), and can be applied on unannotated inputs to identify context usage in model generations.
After formalizing our proposed approach in Section 3, we apply PEC O R E to contextual machine
translation (MT) to study the plausibility of context reliance in bilingual and multilingual MT models.
While PEC O R E can easily be used alongside encoder-decoder and decoder-only language models
for interpreting context usage in any text generation task, we focus our evaluation on MT because
of its constrained output space facilitating automatic assessment and the availability of MT datasets
annotated with human rationales of context usage. We thoroughly test PEC O R E on well-known
discourse phenomena, benchmarking several context sensitivity metrics and attribution methods
to identify cue-target pairs. We conclude by applying PEC O R E to unannotated examples and
showcasing some reasonable and questionable cases of context reliance in MT model translations.
In sum, we make the following contributions1 :

       • We introduce PEC O R E, an interpretability framework to detect and attribute context reliance
         in language models. PEC O R E enables a quantitative evaluation of plausibility for language
         generation beyond the limited artificial settings explored in previous literature.
       • We compare the effectiveness of context sensitivity metrics and feature attribution methods
         on the context-aware MT tasks, showing the limitations of metrics currently in use.
       • We apply PEC O R E to naturally-occurring translations to identify interesting discourse-level
         phenomena and discuss issues in the context usage abilities of context-aware MT models.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Context Usage in Language Generation An appropriate2 usage of input information is fundamen-
tal in tasks such as summarization (Maynez et al., 2020) to ensure the soundness of generated texts.
While appropriateness is traditionally verified post-hoc using trained models (Durmus et al., 2020;
Kryscinski et al., 2020; Goyal & Durrett, 2021), recent interpretability works aim to gauge input
influence on model predictions using internal properties of language models, such as the mixing of
contextual information across model layers (Kobayashi et al., 2020; Ferrando et al., 2022b; Mohebbi
et al., 2023) or the layer-by-layer refinement of next token predictions (Geva et al., 2022; Belrose
et al., 2023). Recent attribution methods can disentangle factors influencing generation in language
models (Yin & Neubig, 2022) and were successfully used to detect and mitigate hallucinatory behav-
iors (Tang et al., 2022; Dale et al., 2022; 2023). Our proposed method adopts this intrinsic perspective
to identify context reliance without ad-hoc trained components.
    1
      Code: https://github.com/gsarti/pecore. The CLI command inseq attribute-context available
in the Inseq library is a generalized PEC O R E implementation: https://github.com/inseq-team/inseq
    2
      We avoid using the term faithfulness due to its ambiguous usage in interpretability research.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Context Usage in Neural Machine Translation Inter-sentential context is often fundamental for
resolving discourse-level ambiguities during translation (Müller et al., 2018; Bawden et al., 2018;
Voita et al., 2019b; Fernandes et al., 2023). However, MT systems are generally trained at the
sentence level and fare poorly in realistic translation settings (Läubli et al., 2018; Toral et al., 2018).
Despite advances in context-aware MT (Voita et al., 2018; 2019a; Lopes et al., 2020; Majumder
et al., 2022; Jin et al., 2023 inter alia, surveyed by Maruf et al., 2021), only a few works explored
whether context usage in MT models aligns with human intuition. Notably, some studies focused on
which parts of context inform model predictions, finding that supposedly context-aware MT models
are often incapable of using contextual information (Kim et al., 2019; Fernandes et al., 2021) and
tend to pay attention to irrelevant words (Voita et al., 2018), with an overall poor agreement between
human annotations and model rationales (Yin et al., 2021). Other works instead investigated which
parts of generated texts are influenced by context, proposing various contrastive methods to detect
gender biases, over/under-translations (Vamvas & Sennrich, 2021a; 2022), and to identify various
discourse-level phenomena in MT corpora (Fernandes et al., 2023). While these two directions
have generally been investigated separately, our work proposes a unified framework to enable an
end-to-end evaluation of context-reliance plausibility in language models.

Plausibility of Model Rationales Plausibility evaluation for NLP models has largely focused on
classification models (DeYoung et al., 2020; Atanasova et al., 2020; Attanasio et al., 2023). While
few works investigate plausibility in language generation (Vafa et al., 2021; Ferrando et al., 2023),
such evaluations typically involve a single generation step to complete a target sentence with a token
connected to preceding information (e.g. subject/verb agreement, as in “The pictures of the cat
[is/are]”), effectively biasing the evaluation by using a pre-selected token of interest. On the contrary,
our framework proposes a more comprehensive evaluation of generation plausibility that includes
the identification of context-sensitive generated tokens as an important prerequisite. Additional
background on rationales and plausibility evaluation is provided in Appendix A.

3       T HE PEC O R E F RAMEWORK
PEC O R E is a two-step framework for identifying context dependence in generative language models.
First, context-sensitive tokens identification (CTI) selects which tokens among those generated by
the model were influenced by the presence of the preceding context (e.g. the feminine options “alla
pastorella, le” in Figure 1). Then, contextual cues imputation (CCI) attributes the prediction of
context-sensitive tokens to specific cues in the provided context (e.g. the feminine cues “she, Le
pecore” in Figure 1). Cue-target pairs formed by influenced target tokens and their respective
influential context cues can then be compared to human rationales to assess the models’ plausibility
of context reliance for contextual phenomena of interest. Figure 2 provides an overview of the two
steps applied to the context-aware MT setting discussed by this work. A more general formalization
of the framework for language generation is proposed in the following sections.

                     i
Notation Let Xctx      be the sequence of contextual inputs containing N tokens from vocabulary V,
                                                                                  i
composed by current input x, generation prefix y<i and context C. Let Xno-ctx         be the non-contextual
                                         3   i
input in which C tokens are excluded. Pctx = P (x, y<i , C, θ) is the discrete probability distribution
                                                                                                         i
over V at generation step i of a language model with θ parameters receiving contextual inputs Xctx         .
              i
Similarly, Pno-ctx  = P (x, y<i , θ) is the distribution obtained from the same model for non-contextual
         i
input Xno-ctx  . Both distributions are equivalent to vectors in the probability simplex in R|V| , and we
                                                                i
use Pctx (yi ) to denote the probability of next token yi in Pctx , i.e. P (yi | x, y<i , C).

3.1       C ONTEXT- SENSITIVE T OKEN I DENTIFICATION

CTI adapts the contrastive conditioning paradigm by Vamvas & Sennrich (2021a) to detect input
                                                                         i    i
context influence on model predictions using the contrastive pair Pctx     , Pno-ctx . Both distributions are
relative to the contextual target sentence ŷ = {ŷ1 . . . ŷn }, corresponding to the sequence produced
by a decoding strategy of choice in the presence of input context. In Figure 2, the contextual target
sentence ŷ = “Sont-elles à l’hôtel?” is generated when x and contexts Cx , Cŷ are provided as inputs,
while non-contextual target sentence ỹ = “Ils sont à l’hôtel?” would be produced when only x is
    3
        In the context-aware MT example of Figure 2, C includes source context Cx and target context Cy .


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       : J’aime ces assiettes!         : Ils sont à l’hotel?                                                            Non-contextual
                                                                                                            preﬁx       decoding of
       : Sont-elles à l’hôtel?       Sont-elles à l’hôtel?
       1                                        2                                              1       : Sont-        ils    à   l’ hôtel   ?
                         Force decode
                                                                                 CTI
                                                                                                       : Sont-       elles   à   l’ hôtel   ?
                    NMT Decoder
                                                                                                                2            Step
                    Decoder Block N
                                                                                       Importance Propagation
                          …
                                                                                                                        Decoder Block N
                                                                                               3
                                                                     3                                                           …
                    Decoder Block 1
                                                                                                                        Decoder Block 1
                                                             Contrastive
                       Embedded                               metrics              NMT Encoder                               NMT Decoder
                        sources
                                                         4


                   NMT Encoder                               Sont-
                                                             elles
                                                                               : I love these dishes !              : J’ aime ces assiettes !
                                                             à
  : I love these dishes!                                     l’                           4
                                 Are they the hotel’s?       hôtel
  : Are they the hotel’s?                                                                     (dishes, elles), (assiettes, elles)
                                                             ?


Figure 2: The PEC O R E framework. Left: Context-sensitive token identification (CTI). ⃝:          1 A
context-aware MT model translates source context (Cx ) and current (x) sentences into target context
(Cŷ ) and current (ŷ) outputs. ⃝:
                                 2 ŷ is force-decoded in the non-contextual setting instead of natural
output ỹ. ⃝:
            3 Contrastive metrics are collected throughout the model for every ŷ token to compare
the two settings. ⃝:
                   4 Selector sCTI maps metrics to binary context-sensitive labels for every ŷi . Right:
Contextual cues imputation (CCI). ⃝:  1 Non-contextual target ỹ ∗ is generated from contextual prefix
        2 Function fTGT is selected to contrast model predictions with (ŷt ) and without (ỹt∗ ) input
ŷ<t . ⃝:
context. ⃝:3 Attribution method fATT using fTGT as target scores contextual cues driving ŷt prediction.
⃝:
 4 Selector sCCI selects relevant cues, and cue-target pairs are assembled.
provided. In the latter case, ŷ is instead force-decoded from the non-contextual setting to enable a
direct comparison of matching outputs. We define a set of contrastive metrics M = {m1 , . . . , mM },
where each m : ∆|V| × ∆|V| 7→ R maps a contrastive pair of probability vectors to a continuous
score. For example, the difference in next token probabilities for contextual and non-contextual
settings, i.e. Pdiff (ŷi ) = Pctx (ŷi ) − Pno-ctx (ŷi ), might be used for this purpose.4 . Target tokens
with high contrastive metric scores can be identified as context-sensitive, provided C is the only
added parameter in the contextual setting. Finally, a selector function sCTI : R|M| 7→ {0, 1} (e.g. a
statistical threshold selecting salient scores) is used to classify every ŷi as context-sensitive or not.

3.2        C ONTEXTUAL C UES I MPUTATION

CCI applies the contrastive attribution paradigm (Yin & Neubig, 2022) to trace the generation of
every context-sensitive token in ŷ back to context C, identifying cues driving model predictions.
Definition 3.1. Let T be the set of indices corresponding to context-sensitive tokens identified by
the CTI step, such that t ∈ ŷ and ∀t ∈ T , sCTI (mt1 , . . . , mtM ) = 1. Let also fTGT : ∆|V| × ∆|V| 7→ R
be a contrastive attribution target function having the same domain and range as metrics in M.
The contrastive attribution method fATT is a composite function quantifying the importance of
contextual inputs to determine the output of fTGT for a given model with θ parameters.
                                                                                       t      t

              fATT (ŷt ) = fATT (x, ŷ<t , C, θ, fTGT ) = fATT x, ŷ<t , C, θ, fTGT (Pctx , Pno-ctx )           (1)
                                 t
Remark 3.1. Distribution Pno-ctx in Equation (1) is from the contextual prefix ŷ<t = {ŷ1 , . . . , ŷt−1 }
                                                                      t
(e.g. ŷ<t =“Sont-” in Figure 2) and non-contextual inputs Xno-ctx         . This is conceptually equivalent to
predicting the next token of a new non-contextual sequence ỹ ∗ which, contrary to ỹ, starts from a
forced contextual prefix ŷ<t (e.g. “ils” in ỹ ∗ = “Sont-ils à l’hôtel?” in Figure 2).
                                   t           t
Remark 3.2. Provided that Pctx         and Pno-ctx   depend respectively on contextual and non-contextual
          t
inputs Xctx     t
            , Xno-ctx  despite using the same prefix ŷ<t , probabilities Pctx (ŷt ), Pno-ctx (ỹt∗ ) are likely to
   4
       We use mi to denote the result of m Pctx
                                            i      i

                                                , Pno-ctx  . Several metrics are presented in Section 4.2


                                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


differ even when ŷt = ỹt∗ , i.e. even when the next predicted token is the same, it is likely to have a
different probability in the two settings, ultimately resulting in non-zero fTGT and fATT (ŷt ) scores.
Remark 3.3. Our formalization of fATT generalizes the method proposed by (Yin & Neubig, 2022)
to support any target-dependent attribution method, such as popular gradient-based approaches (Si-
monyan et al., 2014; Sundararajan et al., 2017), and any contrastive attribution target fTGT .5

fATT produces a sequence of attribution scores At = {a1 , . . . , aN } matching contextual input length
N . From those, only the subset At CTX of scores corresponding to context input sequence C are
passed to selector function sCCI : R 7→ {0, 1}, which predicts a set Ct of indices corresponding to
contextual cues identified by CCI, such that ∀c ∈ Ct , ∀a ∈ At CTX , sCCI (ac ) = 1.
Having collected all context-sensitive generated token indices T using CTI and their contextual cues
through CCI (Ct ), PEC O R E ultimately returns a sequence Sct of all identified cue-target pairs:
                  T = CTI(C, x, ŷ, θ, M, sCTI ) = {t | sCTI (mt1 , . . . , mtM ) = 1}
         C = CCI(T , C, x, ŷ, θ, fATT , fTGT , sCCI ) = {c | sCCI (ac ) = 1 ∀ac ∈ At ctx , ∀t ∈ T }        (2)
      S = PEC O R E(C, x, θ, sCTI , sCCI , M, fATT , fTGT ) = {(Cc , ŷt ) | ∀t ∈ T , ∀c ∈ Ct , ∀Ct ∈ C}

4       C ONTEXT R ELIANCE P LAUSIBILITY IN C ONTEXT- AWARE MT
This section describes our evaluation of PEC O R E in a controlled setup. We experiment with several
contrastive metrics and attribution methods for CTI and CCI (Section 4.2, Section 4.4), evaluating
them in isolation to quantify the performance of individual components. An end-to-end evaluation is
also performed in Section 4.4 to establish the applicability of PEC O R E in a naturalistic setting.

4.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Evaluation Datasets Evaluating generation plausibility requires human annotations for context-
sensitive tokens in target sentences and disambiguating cues in their preceding context. To our knowl-
edge, the only resource matching these requirements is SCAT Yin et al. (2021), an English→French
corpus with human annotations of anaphoric pronouns and disambiguating context on OpenSubti-
tles2018 dialogue translations (Lison et al., 2018; Lopes et al., 2020). SCAT examples were extracted
automatically using lexical heuristics and thus contain only a limited set of anaphoric pronouns (it,
they → il/elle, ils/elles), with no guarantees of contextual cues being found in preceding context.
To improve our assessment, we select a subset of high-quality SCAT test examples containing con-
textual dependence, which we name SCAT+. Additionally, we manually annotate contextual cues
in D ISC E VAL -MT (Bawden et al., 2018), another English→French corpus containing handcrafted
examples for anaphora resolution (ANA) and lexical choice (LEX). Our final evaluation set contains
250 SCAT+ and 400 D ISC E VAL -MT translations across two discourse phenomena.6

Models We evaluate two bilingual OpusMT models (Tiedemann & Thottingal, 2020) using the
Transformer base architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) (Small and Large), and mBART-50 1-to-
many (Tang et al., 2021), a larger multilingual MT model supporting 50 target languages, using the
Transformers library (Wolf et al., 2020). We fine-tune models using extended translation units (Tiede-
mann & Scherrer, 2017) with contextual inputs marked by break tags such as “source context <brk>
source current” to produce translations in the format “target context <brk> target current”,
where context and current target sentences are generated7 . We perform context-aware fine-tuning on
242k IWSLT 2017 English→French examples (Cettolo et al., 2017), using a dynamic context size of
0-4 preceding sentences to ensure robustness to different context lengths and allow contextless usage.
To further improve models’ context sensitivity, we continue fine-tuning on the SCAT training split,
containing 11k examples with inter- and intra-sentential pronoun anaphora.

Model Disambiguation Accuracy We estimate contextual disambiguation accuracy by verifying
whether annotated (gold) context-sensitive words are found in model outputs. Results before and after
    5
     Additional precisions and formalization of target-dependent attribution methods are provided in Appendix B.
    6
     SCAT+: https://hf.co/datasets/inseq/scat. D ISC E VAL -MT: https://hf.co/datasets/inseq/
disc_eval_mt. Appendix E describes the annotation process and presents some examples for the two datasets.
   7
     Context-aware MT model using only source context are also evaluated in Section 4.5 and Appendix D


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           SCAT+                    D ISC E VAL -MT ( ANA )        D ISC E VAL -MT ( LEX )
       Model                      B LEU      OK     OK - CS         B LEU     OK       OK - CS     B LEU      OK     OK - CS

       OpusMT Small (default)      29.1     0.14           -        43.9     0.40          -           30.5   0.29      -
       OpusMT Small S+Tctx         39.1     0.81         0.59       48.1     0.60        0.24          33.5   0.36    0.07
       OpusMT Large (default)      29.0     0.16           -        39.2     0.41          -           31.2   0.31      -
       OpusMT Large S+Tctx         40.3     0.83         0.58       48.9     0.68        0.31          34.8   0.38    0.10
       mBART-50 (default)          23.8     0.26           -        33.4     0.42          -           24.5   0.25      -
       mBART-50 S+Tctx             37.6     0.82         0.55       49.0     0.62        0.32          29.3   0.30    0.07

Table 1: Translation quality of E N → F R MT models before (default) and after (S+Tctx ) context-aware
MT fine-tuning. OK: % of translations with correct disambiguation for discourse phenomena. OK - CS:
% of translations where the correct disambiguation is achieved only when context is provided.

context-aware fine-tuning are shown in Table 1. We find that fine-tuning improves translation quality
and disambiguation accuracy across all tested models, with larger gains for anaphora resolution
datasets closely matching fine-tuning data. To gain further insight into these results, we use context-
aware models to translate examples with and without context and identify a subset of context-sensitive
translations (OK - CS) for which the correct target word is generated only when input context is
provided to the model. Interestingly, we find a non-negligible amount of translations that are correctly
disambiguated even in the absence of input context (corresponding to OK minus OK - CS in Table 1).
For these examples, the correct prediction of ambiguous words aligns with model biases, such as
defaulting to masculine gender for anaphoric pronouns (Stanovsky et al., 2019) or using the most
frequent sense for word sense disambiguation. Provided that such examples are unlikely to exhibit
context reliance, we focus particularly on the OK - CS subset results in our following evaluation.

4.2   M ETRICS FOR C ONTEXT- SENSITIVE TARGET I DENTIFICATION

The following contrastive metrics are evaluated for detecting context-sensitive tokens in the CTI step.
Relative Context Saliency We use contrastive gradient norm attribution (Yin & Neubig, 2022) to
compute input importance towards predicting the next token ŷi with and without input context. Posi-
tive importance scores are obtained for every input token using the L2 gradient vectors norm (Bastings
et al., 2022), and relative context saliency is obtained as the proportion between the normalized
importance for context tokens c ∈ Cx , Cy and the overall input importance, following previous work
quantifying MT input contributions (Voita et al., 2021; Ferrando et al., 2022a; Edman et al., 2023).
                                           P
                           i     i          c∈Cx ,Cy ∇c Pctx (ŷi ) − Pno-ctx (ŷi )
                   ∇ctx (Pctx , Pno-ctx ) = P                                                       (3)
                                                  i
                                              t∈Xctx  ∇t Pctx (ŷi ) − Pno-ctx (ŷi )

Likelihood Ratio (LR) and Pointwise Contextual Cross-mutual Information (P-CXMI)
Proposed by Vamvas & Sennrich (2021a) and Fernandes et al. (2023) respectively, both
metrics frame context dependence as a ratio of contextual and non-contextual probabilities.

       i      i                    Pctx (ŷi )                          i      i                                  Pctx (ŷi )
   LR(Pctx , Pno-ctx )=                                     (4) P-CXMI(Pctx , Pno-ctx ) = − log                                   (5)
                          Pctx (ŷi ) + Pno-ctx (ŷi )                                                           Pno-ctx (ŷi )
                                                           i          i
KL-Divergence (Kullback & Leibler, 1951) between Pctx          and Pno-ctx is the only metric we evaluate
that considers the full distribution rather than the probability of the predicted token. We include it to
test the intuition that the impact of context inclusion might extend beyond top-1 token probabilities.

                                   i     i
                                                            X                          Pctx (ŷi )
                             DKL (Pctx ∥Pno-ctx )=                  Pctx (ŷi ) log                                               (6)
                                                                                      Pno-ctx (ŷi )
                                                           ŷi ∈V


4.3   CTI P LAUSIBILITY R ESULTS

Figure 3 presents our metrics evaluation for CTI, with results for the full test sets and the subsets of
context-sensitive sentences (OK - CS) highlighted in Table 1. To keep our evaluation simple, we use a
naive sCTI selector tagging all tokens with metric scores one standard deviation above the per-example
mean as context-sensitive. We also include a stratified random baseline matching the frequency of


                                                                6
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Random           Context Saliency        Likelihood Ratio      P-CXMI        KL-Divergence
           1.0
Macro F1   0.8
           0.6
           0.4
           0.2
                     SCAT+            DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.         SCAT+        DiscEval-MT Ana.    DiscEval-MT Lex.

  Figure 3: Macro F1 of contrastive metrics for context-sensitive target token identification (CTI) using
  OpusMT Large on the full datasets (left) or on OK - CS context-sensitive subsets (right).

  occurrence of context-sensitive tokens in each dataset. Datapoints in Figure 3 are sentence-level
  macro F1 scores computed for every dataset example. Full results are available in Appendix G.
  Pointwise metrics (LR, P-CXMI) show high plausibility for the context-sensitive subsets OK - CS
  across all datasets and models but achieve lower performances on the full test set, especially for
  lexical choice phenomena less present in MT models’ training. KL-Divergence performs on par or
  better than pointwise metrics, suggesting that distributional shifts beyond top prediction candidates
  can provide useful information to detect context sensitivity. On the contrary, the poor performance of
  context saliency indicates that context reliance in aggregate cannot reliably predict context sensitivity.
  A manual examination of misclassified examples reveals several context-sensitive tokens that were
  not annotated as such since they did not match datasets’ phenomena of interest but were still identified
  by CTI metrics (examples in Appendix G). This further underscores the importance of data-driven
  end-to-end approaches like PEC O R E to limit the influence of selection bias during evaluation.

  4.4            M ETHODS FOR C ONTEXTUAL C UES I MPUTATION

  The following attribution methods are evaluated for detecting contextual cues in the CCI step.
  Contrastive Gradient Norm (Yin & Neubig, 2022) estimates input tokens’ contributions towards
  predicting a target token instead of a contrastive alternative. We use this method to explain the
  generation of context-sensitive tokens in the presence and absence of context.
                                                     i    i

                             At ctx = { ∥∇c fTGT (Pctx , Pno-ctx ) ∥ | ∀c ∈ C}                   (7)
  For the choice of ftgt , we evaluate both probability difference Pctx (ŷi ) − Pno-ctx (ŷi ), conceptually
  similar to the original formulation, and the KL-Divergence of contextual and non-contextual distri-
                   i    i
  butions DKL (Pctx  ∥Pno-ctx ). We use ∇diff and ∇KL to identify gradient norm attribution in the two
  settings. ∇KL scores can be seen as the contribution of input tokens towards the shift in probability
  distribution caused by the presence of input context.

  Attention Weights Following previous work, we use the mean attention weight across all heads and
  layers (Attention Mean, Kim et al., 2019) and the weight for the head obtaining the highest plausibility
  per-dataset (Attention Best, Yin et al., 2021) as importance measures for CCI. Attention Best can
  be seen as a best-case estimate of attention performance but is not a viable metric in real settings,
  provided that the best attention head to capture a phenomenon of interest is unknown beforehand.
  Since attention weights are model byproducts unaffected by predicted outputs, we use only attention
                                     i
  scores for the contextual setting Pctx and ignore the contextless alternative when using these metrics.

  4.5            CCI P LAUSIBILITY R ESULTS

  We conduct a controlled CCI evaluation using gold context-sensitive tokens as a starting point
  to attribute contextual cues.8 This corresponds to the baseline plausibility evaluation described
  in Section 2, allowing us to evaluate attribution methods in isolation, assuming perfect identification
  of context-sensitive tokens. Figure 4 presents our results. Scores in the right plot are relative to the
  context-aware OpusMT Large model of Section 4.3 using both source and target context. Instead, the
           8
               To avoid using references as model generations, we align annotations to natural model outputs (Appendix F).


                                                                        7
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Random         Diff         KL         Attention Mean       Attention Best        E2E median
           1.0
Macro F1   0.8
           0.6
           0.4
           0.2
                 SCAT+       DiscEval-MT Ana.   DiscEval-MT Lex.        SCAT+          DiscEval-MT Ana.    DiscEval-MT Lex.

  Figure 4: Macro F1 of CCI methods over full datasets using OpusMT Large models trained with only
  source context (left) or with source+target context (right). Boxes and red median lines show CCI
  results based on gold context-sensitive tokens. Dotted bars show median CCI scores obtained from
  context-sensitive tokens identified by KL-Divergence during CTI (E2E settings).

  left plot presents results for an alternative version of the same model that was fine-tuned using only
  source context (i.e. translating Cx , x → y without producing target context Cy ). Source-only context
  was used in previous context-aware MT studies (Fernandes et al., 2022), and we include it in our
  analysis to assess how the presence of target context impacts model plausibility. We finally validate
  the end-to-end plausibility of PEC O R E-detected pairs using context-sensitive tokens identified by the
  best CTI metric from Section 4.3 (KL-Divergence) as the starting point for CCI, and using a simple
  statistical selector equivalent to the one used for CTI evaluation. Results for the OK - CS subset are
  omitted as they show comparable trends. Full results are available in Appendix H.
  First, contextual cues are more easily detected for the source-only model using all evaluated methods.
  This finding corroborates previous evidence highlighting how context usage issues might emerge
  when lengthy context is provided (Fernandes et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2023). When moving from gold
  CTI tags to the end-to-end setting (E2E) we observe a larger drop in plausibility for the SCAT+ and
  D ISC E VAL -MT ANA datasets that more closely match the fine-tuning data of analyzed MT models.
  This suggests that standard evaluation practices may overestimate model plausibility for in-domain
  settings and that our proposed framework can effectively mitigate this issue. Interestingly, the
  Attention Best method suffers the most from end-to-end CCI application, while other approaches are
  more mildly affected. This can result from attention heads failing to generalize to other discourse-level
  phenomena at test time, providing further evidence of the limitations of attention as an explanatory
  metric (Jain & Wallace, 2019; Bastings & Filippova, 2020). While ∇KL and ∇diff appear as the most
  robust choice across the two datasets, per-example variability remains high across the board, leaving
  space for improvement for more plausible attribution methods in future work.

  5          D ETECTING C ONTEXT R ELIANCE IN THE W ILD

  We conclude our analysis by applying the PEC O R E method to the popular Flores-101 MT bench-
  mark (Goyal et al., 2022), containing groups of 3-5 contiguous sentences from English Wikipedia.
  While in previous sections, labeled examples were used to evaluate the effectiveness of PEC O R E
  components, here we apply our framework end-to-end to unannotated MT outputs and inspect re-
  sulting cue-target pairs to identify successes and failures of context-aware MT models. Specifically,
  we apply PEC O R E to the context-aware OpusMT Large and mBART-50 models of Section 4.1,
  using KL-Divergence as CTI metric and ∇KL as CCI attribution method. We set sCTI and sCCI to two
  standard deviations above the per-example average score to focus our analysis on very salient tokens.
  Table 2 shows some examples annotated with PEC O R E outputs, with more examples available
  in Appendix I. In the first example, the acronym MS, standing for Multiple Sclerosis, is translated
  generically as la maladie (the illness) in the contextual output, but as SEP (the French acronym for
  MS, i.e. sclérose en plaques) when context is not provided. PEC O R E shows how this choice is
  mostly driven by the MS mention in source context Cx while the term sclérose en plaques in target
  context Cy is not identified as influential, possibly motivating the choice for the more generic option.
  In the second example, the prediction of pronoun elles (they, feminine) depends on the context noun
  phrase mob of market women (foule de femmes du marché in French). However, the correct pronoun
  referent is Le roi et Madame Elizabeth (the king and Madam Elizabeth), so the pronoun should be


                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    1. Acronym Translation (English → French, correct but more generic)
    Cx : Across the United States of America, there are approximately 400,000 known cases of Multiple Sclerosis (MS) [...]
    Cy : Aux États-Unis, il y a environ 400 000 cas connus de sclérose en plaques [...]
    x : MS affects the central nervous system, which is made up of the brain, the spinal cord and the optic nerve.
    ỹ : La SEP affecte le système nerveux central, composé du cerveau, de la moelle épinière et du nerf optique.
    ŷ : La maladie affecte le système nerveux central, composé du cerveau, de la moelle épinière et du nerf optique.
    2. Anaphora Resolution (English → French, incorrect)
    Cx : The terrified King and Madam Elizabeth were forced back to Paris by a mob of market women .
    Cy : Le roi et Madame Elizabeth ont été forcés à revenir à Paris par une foule de femmes du marché.
    x : In a carriage, they traveled back to Paris surrounded by a mob of people screaming and shouting threats [...]
    ỹ : Dans une carriole, ils sont retournés à Paris entourés d’une foule de gens hurlant et criant des menaces [...]
    ŷ : Dans une carriole, elles sont retournées à Paris entourées d’une foule de gens hurlant et criant des menaces [...]
    3. Numeric format cohesion (English → French, incorrect)
    Cx : The games kicked off at 10:00 am with great weather apart from mid morning drizzle [...]
    Cy : Les matchs se sont écoulés à 10:00 du matin avec un beau temps à part la nuée du matin [...]
    x : South Africa started on the right note when they had a comfortable 26-00 win against Zambia.
    ỹ : L’Afrique du Sud a commencé sur la bonne note quand ils ont eu une confortable victoire de 26 contre le Zambia.
    ŷ : L’Afrique du Sud a commencé sur la bonne note quand ils ont eu une confortable victoire de 26:00 contre le Zambia.
    4. Lexical cohesion (English → Turkish, correct)
    Cx : The activity of all stars in the system was found to be driven by their luminosity, their rotation, and nothing else.
    Cy : Sistemdeki bütün ulduzların faaliyetlerinin, parlaklıkları, rotasyonları ve başka hiçbir şeyin etkisi altında olduğunu
    ortaya çıkardılar.
    x : The luminosity and rotation are used together to determine a star’s Rossby number, which is related to plasma flow.
    ỹ : Parlaklık ve döngü , bir yıldızın plazm akışıyla ilgili Rossby sayısını belirlemek için birlikte kullanılıyor.
    ŷ : Parlaklık ve rotasyon , bir ulduzun plazma akışıyla ilgili Rossby sayısını belirlemek için birlikte kullanılıyor.

Table 2: Flores-101 examples with cue-target pairs identified by PEC O R E in OpusMT Large (1,2)
and mBART-50 (3,4) contextual translations. Context-sensitive tokens generated instead of their
non-contextual counterparts are identified by CTI, and contextual cues justifying their predictions
are retrieved by CCI. Other changes in ŷ are not considered context-sensitive by PEC O R E.

the masculine default ils commonly used for mixed gender groups in French. PEC O R E identifies
this as a context-dependent failure due to an issue with the MT model’s anaphora resolution. The
third example presents an interesting case of erroneous numeric format cohesion that not be detected
from pre-defined linguistic hypotheses. In this sentence, the score 26-00 is translated as 26 in the
contextless output and as 26:00 in the context-aware translation. The 10:00 time indications found by
PEC O R E in the contexts suggest this is a case of problematic lexical cohesion.
Finally, we include an example of context usage for English→Turkish translation to test the contextual
capabilities of the default mBART-50 model without context-aware fine-tuning. Again, PEC O R E
shows how the word rotasyon (rotation) is selected over döngü (loop) as the correct translation in the
contextual case due to the presence of the lexically similar word rotasyonları in the previous context.


6      C ONCLUSION

In this work, we introduced PEC O R E, a novel interpretability framework to detect and attribute
context usage in language models’ generations. PEC O R E extends the common plausibility evaluation
procedure adopted in interpretability research by proposing a two-step procedure to identify context-
sensitive generated tokens and match them to contextual cues contributing to their prediction. We
applied PEC O R E to context-aware MT, finding that context-sensitive tokens and their disambiguating
rationales can be detected consistently and with reasonable accuracy across several datasets, models
and discourse phenomena. Moreover, an end-to-end application of our framework without human
annotations revealed incorrect context usage, leading to problematic MT model outputs.
While our evaluation is focused on the machine translation domain, PEC O R E can easily be applied
to other context-dependent language generation tasks such as question answering and summarization.
Future applications of our methodology could investigate the usage of in-context demonstrations and
chain-of-thought reasoning in large language models (Brown et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022), explore
PEC O R E usage for different model architectures and input modalities (e.g. Appendix J), and pave
the way for trustworthy citations in retrieval-augmented generation systems (Borgeaud et al., 2022).


                                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Gabriele Sarti, Grzegorz Chrupała and Arianna Bisazza acknowledge the support of the Dutch
Research Council (NWO) as part of the project InDeep (NWA.1292.19.399). We thank the Center
for Information Technology of the University of Groningen for providing access to the Hábrók high
performance computing cluster used in fine-tuning and evaluation experiments.


R EFERENCES
Samira Abnar and Willem Zuidema. Quantifying attention flow in transformers. In Proceedings of
  the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4190–4197, Online,
  July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.385. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.385.

Pepa Atanasova, Jakob Grue Simonsen, Christina Lioma, and Isabelle Augenstein. A diagnostic
  study of explainability techniques for text classification. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 3256–3274, Online, November
  2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.263. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.263.

Giuseppe Attanasio, Eliana Pastor, Chiara Di Bonaventura, and Debora Nozza. ferret: a framework
  for benchmarking explainers on transformers. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the
  European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations,
  pp. 256–266, Dubrovnik, Croatia, May 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.eacl-demo.29.

Jasmijn Bastings and Katja Filippova. The elephant in the interpretability room: Why use attention as
  explanation when we have saliency methods? In Proceedings of the Third BlackboxNLP Workshop
  on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 149–155, Online, November 2020.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.blackboxnlp-1.14. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.blackboxnlp-1.14.

Jasmijn Bastings, Sebastian Ebert, Polina Zablotskaia, Anders Sandholm, and Katja Filippova.
  “will you find these shortcuts?” a protocol for evaluating the faithfulness of input salience
  methods for text classification. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Meth-
  ods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 976–991, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December
  2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.64. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.64.

Rachel Bawden, Rico Sennrich, Alexandra Birch, and Barry Haddow. Evaluating discourse phenom-
  ena in neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume
  1 (Long Papers), pp. 1304–1313, New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2018. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-1118. URL https://aclanthology.org/N18-1118.

Nora Belrose, Zach Furman, Logan Smith, Danny Halawi, Igor Ostrovsky, Lev McKinney, Stella
  Biderman, and Jacob Steinhardt. Eliciting latent predictions from transformers with the tuned lens.
 ArXiv, abs/2303.08112, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08112.

Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Mil-
  lican, George Bm Van Den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark,
  Diego De Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Jacob Menick, Roman Ring, Tom Hennigan, Saffron
  Huang, Loren Maggiore, Chris Jones, Albin Cassirer, Andy Brock, Michela Paganini, Ge-
  offrey Irving, Oriol Vinyals, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Jack Rae, Erich Elsen, and
  Laurent Sifre. Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In Kama-
  lika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2206–2240. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/borgeaud22a.html.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott
  Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
  Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Proceedings of the 34th
  International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’20, Red Hook, NY,
  USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713829546.
Mauro Cettolo, Marcello Federico, Luisa Bentivogli, Jan Niehues, Sebastian Stüker, Katsuhito Sudoh,
 Koichiro Yoshino, and Christian Federmann. Overview of the IWSLT 2017 evaluation campaign.
 In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Spoken Language Translation, pp. 2–14,
 Tokyo, Japan, December 14-15 2017. International Workshop on Spoken Language Translation.
 URL https://aclanthology.org/2017.iwslt-1.1.
David Dale, Elena Voita, Loïc Barrault, and Marta Ruiz Costa-jussà. Detecting and mitigating
  hallucinations in machine translation: Model internal workings alone do well, sentence similarity
  even better. ArXiv, abs/2212.08597, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.08597.
David Dale, Elena Voita, Janice Lam, Prangthip Hansanti, Christophe Ropers, Elahe Kalbassi, Cynthia
  Gao, Loïc Barrault, and Marta R. Costa-jussà. Halomi: A manually annotated benchmark for
  multilingual hallucination and omission detection in machine translation. ArXiv, abs/2303.08112,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08112.
Jay DeYoung, Sarthak Jain, Nazneen Fatema Rajani, Eric Lehman, Caiming Xiong, Richard
  Socher, and Byron C. Wallace. ERASER: A benchmark to evaluate rationalized NLP mod-
  els. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics, pp. 4443–4458, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.408. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.408.
Zi-Yi Dou and Graham Neubig. Word alignment by fine-tuning embeddings on parallel corpora. In
  Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Main Volume, pp. 2112–2128, Online, April 2021. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.eacl-main.181. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  eacl-main.181.
Esin Durmus, He He, and Mona Diab. FEQA: A question answering evaluation framework for
  faithfulness assessment in abstractive summarization. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 5055–5070, Online, July 2020. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.454. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2020.acl-main.454.
Lukas Edman, Gabriele Sarti, Antonio Toral, Gertjan van Noord, and Arianna Bisazza. Are character-
  level translations worth the wait? comparing byt5 and mt5 for machine translation. ArXiv,
  abs/2302.14220, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.14220.
Fangxiaoyu Feng, Yinfei Yang, Daniel Cer, Naveen Arivazhagan, and Wei Wang. Language-agnostic
  BERT sentence embedding. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 878–891, Dublin, Ireland, May
  2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.62. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.62.
Patrick Fernandes, Kayo Yin, Graham Neubig, and André F. T. Martins. Measuring and increasing
  context usage in context-aware machine translation. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference
  on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 6467–6478, Online, August
  2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.505. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.505.
Patrick Fernandes, António Farinhas, Ricardo Rei, José G. C. de Souza, Perez Ogayo, Graham Neubig,
  and Andre Martins. Quality-aware decoding for neural machine translation. In Proceedings
  of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 1396–1412, Seattle, United States, July 2022.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.naacl-main.100. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.100.
Patrick Fernandes, Kayo Yin, Emmy Liu, André Martins, and Graham Neubig. When does translation
  require context? a data-driven, multilingual exploration. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 606–626, Toronto,
  Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.36.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.36.
Javier Ferrando, Gerard I. Gállego, Belen Alastruey, Carlos Escolano, and Marta R. Costa-jussà.
  Towards opening the black box of neural machine translation: Source and target interpretations
  of the transformer. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 8756–8769, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022a.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.599. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.599.
Javier Ferrando, Gerard I. Gállego, and Marta R. Costa-jussà. Measuring the mixing of contextual
  information in the transformer. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, pp. 8698–8714, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December
  2022b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.595. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.595.
Javier Ferrando, Gerard I. Gállego, Ioannis Tsiamas, and Marta R. Costa-jussà. Explaining how
  transformers use context to build predictions. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 5486–5513, Toronto,
  Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.
  301. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.301.
Mor Geva, Avi Caciularu, Kevin Wang, and Yoav Goldberg. Transformer feed-forward layers build
 predictions by promoting concepts in the vocabulary space. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference
 on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 30–45, Abu Dhabi, United Arab
 Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
 emnlp-main.3. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.3.
Naman Goyal, Cynthia Gao, Vishrav Chaudhary, Peng-Jen Chen, Guillaume Wenzek, Da Ju, Sanjana
  Krishnan, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Francisco Guzmán, and Angela Fan. The Flores-101 evaluation
  benchmark for low-resource and multilingual machine translation. Transactions of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, 10:522–538, 2022. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00474. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2022.tacl-1.30.
Tanya Goyal and Greg Durrett. Annotating and modeling fine-grained factuality in summarization.
  In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 1449–1462, Online, June 2021.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.114. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.114.
Ari Holtzman, Peter West, Vered Shwartz, Yejin Choi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Surface form competi-
  tion: Why the highest probability answer isn’t always right. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7038–7051, Online and Punta Cana,
  Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2021.emnlp-main.564. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.564.
Alon Jacovi and Yoav Goldberg. Towards faithfully interpretable NLP systems: How should we
  define and evaluate faithfulness? In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4198–4205, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.386. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.
  acl-main.386.
Sarthak Jain and Byron C. Wallace. Attention is not Explanation. In Proceedings of the 2019
  Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 3543–3556, Minneapolis,


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1357.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/N19-1357.

Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier,
  Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas
  Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b, 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2310.06825.

Linghao Jin, Jacqueline He, Jonathan May, and Xuezhe Ma. Challenges in Context-Aware neural
  machine translation. ArXiv, abs/2305.13751, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13751.

Yunsu Kim, Duc Thanh Tran, and Hermann Ney. When and why is document-level context useful
  in neural machine translation? In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Discourse in Machine
  Translation (DiscoMT 2019), pp. 24–34, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-6503. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  D19-6503.

Goro Kobayashi, Tatsuki Kuribayashi, Sho Yokoi, and Kentaro Inui. Attention is not only a weight:
 Analyzing transformers with vector norms. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
 Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 7057–7075, Online, November 2020.
 Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.574. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.574.

Wojciech Kryscinski, Bryan McCann, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Evaluating the factual
 consistency of abstractive text summarization. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
 Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 9332–9346, Online, November 2020.
 Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.750. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.750.

Solomon Kullback and Richard A Leibler. On information and sufficiency. The annals of mathemati-
  cal statistics, 22(1):79–86, 1951.

Isaac Lage, Emily Chen, Jeffrey He, Menaka Narayanan, Been Kim, Sam Gershman, and Finale
   Doshi-Velez. An evaluation of the human-interpretability of explanation. ArXiv, abs/1902.00006,
   2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.00006.

Samuel Läubli, Rico Sennrich, and Martin Volk. Has machine translation achieved human parity?
  a case for document-level evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 4791–4796, Brussels, Belgium, October-November
  2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D18-1512. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/D18-1512.

Pierre Lison, Jörg Tiedemann, and Milen Kouylekov. OpenSubtitles2018: Statistical rescoring of
  sentence alignments in large, noisy parallel corpora. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International
  Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018), Miyazaki, Japan, May 2018. Eu-
  ropean Language Resources Association (ELRA). URL https://aclanthology.org/L18-1275.

António Lopes, M. Amin Farajian, Rachel Bawden, Michael Zhang, and André F. T. Mar-
  tins. Document-level neural MT: A systematic comparison. In Proceedings of the 22nd
 Annual Conference of the European Association for Machine Translation, pp. 225–234, Lis-
  boa, Portugal, November 2020. European Association for Machine Translation. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/2020.eamt-1.24.

Andreas Madsen, Siva Reddy, and Sarath Chandar. Post-hoc interpretability for neural nlp: A
  survey. ACM Comput. Surv., 55(8), dec 2022. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3546577. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/3546577.

Suvodeep Majumder, Stanislas Lauly, Maria Nadejde, Marcello Federico, and Georgiana Dinu. A
  baseline revisited: pushing the limits of multi-segment models for context-aware translation. ArXiv,
  abs/2210.10906, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.10906.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sameen Maruf, Fahimeh Saleh, and Gholamreza Haffari. A survey on document-level neural machine
  translation: Methods and evaluation. ACM Comput. Surv., 54(2), mar 2021. ISSN 0360-0300. doi:
  10.1145/3441691. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3441691.
Joshua Maynez, Shashi Narayan, Bernd Bohnet, and Ryan McDonald. On faithfulness and factuality
  in abstractive summarization. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, pp. 1906–1919, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.173. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.
  acl-main.173.
Tom McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic
  heuristics in natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3428–3448, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1334. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  P19-1334.
Hosein Mohebbi, Willem Zuidema, Grzegorz Chrupała, and Afra Alishahi. Quantifying context
  mixing in transformers. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3378–3400, Dubrovnik, Croatia, May 2023. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.eacl-main.245.
Mathias Müller, Annette Rios, Elena Voita, and Rico Sennrich. A large-scale test set for the
 evaluation of context-aware pronoun translation in neural machine translation. In Proceedings of
 the Third Conference on Machine Translation: Research Papers, pp. 61–72, Brussels, Belgium,
 October 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W18-6307. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/W18-6307.
Matt Post. A call for clarity in reporting BLEU scores. In Proceedings of the Third Con-
 ference on Machine Translation: Research Papers, pp. 186–191, Brussels, Belgium, Octo-
 ber 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W18-6319. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/W18-6319.
Ricardo Rei, José G. C. de Souza, Duarte Alves, Chrysoula Zerva, Ana C Farinha, Taisiya Glushkova,
  Alon Lavie, Luisa Coheur, and André F. T. Martins. COMET-22: Unbabel-IST 2022 submission
  for the metrics shared task. In Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on Machine Translation
  (WMT), pp. 578–585, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (Hybrid), December 2022. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.wmt-1.52.
Gabriele Sarti, Nils Feldhus, Ludwig Sickert, Oskar van der Wal, Malvina Nissim, and Arianna
  Bisazza. Inseq: An interpretability toolkit for sequence generation models. In Proceedings of
  the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 3: System
  Demonstrations), pp. 421–435, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-demo.40. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  acl-demo.40.
Freda Shi, Xinyun Chen, Kanishka Misra, Nathan Scales, David Dohan, Ed Chi, Nathanael Schärli,
  and Denny Zhou. Large language models can be easily distracted by irrelevant context. ArXiv,
  abs/2302.00093, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.00093.
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks:
  Visualising image classification models and saliency maps. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun
  (eds.), 2nd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014, Banff, AB, Canada,
 April 14-16, 2014, Workshop Track Proceedings, 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.
  6034.
Gabriel Stanovsky, Noah A. Smith, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Evaluating gender bias in machine
  translation. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, pp. 1679–1684, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1164. URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-1164.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In
 Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 70, pp.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  3319–3328. Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 2017. URL https://dl.acm.org/
  doi/10.5555/3305890.3306024.
Joel Tang, M. Fomicheva, and Lucia Specia. Reducing hallucinations in neural machine translation
  with feature attribution. ArXiv, abs/2211.09878, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.
  09878.
Yuqing Tang, Chau Tran, Xian Li, Peng-Jen Chen, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Jiatao Gu,
  and Angela Fan. Multilingual translation from denoising pre-training. In Findings of the As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021, pp. 3450–3466, Online, August
  2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.findings-acl.304. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-acl.304.
Jörg Tiedemann and Yves Scherrer. Neural machine translation with extended context. In Proceedings
  of the Third Workshop on Discourse in Machine Translation, pp. 82–92, Copenhagen, Denmark,
  September 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W17-4811. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/W17-4811.
Jörg Tiedemann and Santhosh Thottingal. OPUS-MT – building open translation services for the
  world. In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference of the European Association for Machine
  Translation, pp. 479–480, Lisboa, Portugal, November 2020. European Association for Machine
  Translation. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.eamt-1.61.
Antonio Toral, Sheila Castilho, Ke Hu, and Andy Way. Attaining the unattainable? reassessing claims
  of human parity in neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the Third Conference on Machine
 Translation: Research Papers, pp. 113–123, Brussels, Belgium, October 2018. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W18-6312. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  W18-6312.
Lewis Tunstall, Edward Beeching, Nathan Lambert, Nazneen Rajani, Kashif Rasul, Younes Belkada,
  Shengyi Huang, Leandro von Werra, Clémentine Fourrier, Nathan Habib, Nathan Sarrazin, Omar
  Sanseviero, Alexander M. Rush, and Thomas Wolf. Zephyr: Direct distillation of lm alignment.
  ArXiv, abs/2310.16944, 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.16944.
Keyon Vafa, Yuntian Deng, David Blei, and Alexander Rush. Rationales for sequential predic-
  tions. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 10314–10332, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.807. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.807.
Jannis Vamvas and Rico Sennrich. Contrastive conditioning for assessing disambiguation in MT: A
  case study of distilled bias. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 10246–10265, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November
  2021a. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.803. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.803.
Jannis Vamvas and Rico Sennrich. On the limits of minimal pairs in contrastive evaluation.
  In Proceedings of the Fourth BlackboxNLP Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural
  Networks for NLP, pp. 58–68, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021b. Associ-
  ation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.blackboxnlp-1.5. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.blackboxnlp-1.5.
Jannis Vamvas and Rico Sennrich. As little as possible, as much as necessary: Detecting over- and
  undertranslations with contrastive conditioning. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp. 490–500, Dublin, Ireland,
  May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-short.53. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-short.53.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio,
  H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.
  neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Elena Voita, Pavel Serdyukov, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov. Context-aware neural machine
  translation learns anaphora resolution. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1264–1274, Melbourne, Australia,
  July 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P18-1117. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/P18-1117.
Elena Voita, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov. Context-aware monolingual repair for neural machine
  translation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
  IJCNLP), pp. 877–886, Hong Kong, China, November 2019a. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1081. URL https://aclanthology.org/D19-1081.
Elena Voita, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov. When a good translation is wrong in context: Context-
  aware machine translation improves on deixis, ellipsis, and lexical cohesion. In Proceedings of the
  57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1198–1212, Florence,
  Italy, July 2019b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1116. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/P19-1116.
Elena Voita, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov. Analyzing the source and target contributions to
  predictions in neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural
  Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1126–1140, Online, August 2021. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.91. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2021.acl-long.91.
Alex Warstadt, Alicia Parrish, Haokun Liu, Anhad Mohananey, Wei Peng, Sheng-Fu Wang, and
  Samuel R. Bowman. BLiMP: The benchmark of linguistic minimal pairs for English. Transactions
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:377–392, 2020. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00321.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.tacl-1.25.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V.
  Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In
  S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 24824–24837. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903.
Sarah Wiegreffe and Yuval Pinter. Attention is not not explanation. In Proceedings of the 2019
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint
  Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 11–20, Hong Kong, China,
  November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1002. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/D19-1002.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gug-
  ger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art
  natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 38–45, Online, October 2020.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-demos.6. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-demos.6.
Kayo Yin and Graham Neubig. Interpreting language models with contrastive explanations. In
  Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
 184–198, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.14. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
  emnlp-main.14.
Kayo Yin, Patrick Fernandes, Danish Pruthi, Aditi Chaudhary, André F. T. Martins, and Graham
  Neubig. Do context-aware translation models pay the right attention? In Proceedings of the 59th
 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
  Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 788–801, Online,


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.65.
    URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.65.
Matthew D. Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In David
 Fleet, Tomas Pajdla, Bernt Schiele, and Tinne Tuytelaars (eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV 2014,
 pp. 818–833, Cham, 2014. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-10590-1. doi:
 10.1007/978-3-319-10590-1_53.


A     BACKGROUND : P LAUSIBILITY OF M ODEL R ATIONALES IN NLP
A.1    D EFINITIONS

In post-hoc interpretability, a rationale of model behavior is an example-specific measure of how
input features influence model predictions. When using feature attribution methods to interpret
language models, these rationales correspond to a set of scores reflecting the contribution of every
token in the input sequence towards the prediction of the next generated word (Madsen et al., 2022).
Plausibility, also referred to as “human-interpretability” (Lage et al., 2019), is a measure of “how
convincing the interpretation is to humans” (Jacovi & Goldberg, 2020). It is important to note that
plausibility does not imply faithfulness, i.e. how accurately the rationale reflects the true reasoning
process of the model (Wiegreffe & Pinter, 2019), since a good explanation of model behavior might
not align with human intuition.

A.2    E XAMPLE OF C ANONICAL P LAUSIBILITY E VALUATION FOR L ANGUAGE M ODELS

Consider the following sentence, adapted from the BLiMP corpus (Warstadt et al., 2020).
           x = A report about the Impressionists has/have won the writing competition.
For the sentence to be grammatically correct, the verb to have must be correctly inflected as has to
agree with the preceding noun report. Hence, to evaluate the plausibility of a language model for
this example, the model is provided with the prefix x′ = “A report about the Impressionists”. Then,
attribution scores are computed for every input token towards the prediction of has as the next token.
Finally, we verify whether these scores identify the token report as the most important to predict has.
We remark that the choice of the pair report-has in the canonical procedure described above is
entirely based on grammatical correctness, and other potential pairs not matching these constraints
are not considered (e.g. the usage of report to predict writing). This common procedure might also
cause reasonable behaviors to be labeled as implausible. For example, the indefinite article A might
be identified as the most important token to predict has since it is forcibly followed by a singular
noun and can co-occur with has more frequently than report in the model’s training data. These
limitations in the standard hypothesis-driven approach to plausibility evaluation motivate our proposal
for PECoRe as a data-driven alternative.

A.3    M ETRICS FOR P LAUSIBILITY E VALUATION

In practice, the attribution procedure from the example above produces a sequence Im of length
|x′ | containing continuous importance scores produced by the attribution method, and these are
compared to a sequence Ih of the same length containing binary values, where 1s correspond to the
cues identified by human annotators (in the example above, only report), while the rest of the values
are set to 0. In our experiments, we use two common plausibility metrics introduced by (DeYoung
et al., 2020):
Token-level Macro F1 is the harmonic mean of precision and recall at the token level, using Ih as the
ground truth and a discretized version of Im as the prediction. Macro-averaging is used to account
for the sparsity of cues in Ih , and the discretization is performed by means of the selector functions
sCTI , sCCI introduced in Section 3. We use this metric in the main analysis as the discretization step
will likely reflect a more realistic plausibility performance, as it matches more closely the annotation
process used to derive Ih . We note that Macro F1 can be considered a lower bound for plausibility, as
the results depend heavily on the choice of the selector used for discretization.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Area Under Precision-Recall Curve (AUPRC) is computed as the area under the curve obtained
by varying a threshold over token importance scores and computing the precision and recall for
resulting discretized Im predictions while keeping Ih as the ground truth. Contrary to Macro F1,
AUPRC is selector-independent and accounts for tokens’ relative ranking and degree of importance.
Consequently, it can be seen as an upper bound for plausibility, as if the optimal selector was used.
Since this is not likely to be the case in practice but can still prove useful, we include AUPRC results
in Figure 6 and Figure 8.

B    P RECISIONS ON TARGET- DEPENDENT ATTRIBUTION M ETHODS
Definition B.1. Let s, s′ be the resulting scores of two attribution target functions fTGT , fTGT
                                                                                               ′
                                                                                                  . An
attribution method fATT is target-dependent if importance scores A are computed in relation to the
outcome of its attribution target function, i.e. whenever the following condition is verified.
                        fATT (x, y<t , C, θ, s) ̸= fATT (x, y<t , C, θ, s′ ) ∀s ̸= s′               (8)

In practice, common gradient-based attribution approaches (Simonyan et al., 2014; Sundararajan
et al., 2017) are target-dependent as they rely on the outcome predicted by the model (typically the
logit or the probability of the predicted class) as differentiation target to backpropagate importance
to model input features. Similarly, perturbation-based approaches (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014) use the
variation in prediction probability for the predicted class when noise is added to some of the model
inputs to quantify the importance of the noised features.
On the contrary, recent approaches relying solely on model internals to define input importance
are generally target-insensitive. For example, attention weights used as model rationales, either in
their raw form or after a rollout procedure to obtain a unified score (Abnar & Zuidema, 2020), are
independent of the predicted outcome. Similarly, value zeroing scores (Mohebbi et al., 2023) reflect
only the representational dissimilarity across model layers before and after zeroing value vectors, and
as such do not explicitly account for model predictions.

C    PEC O R E I MPLEMENTATION
Algorithm 1 provides a pseudocode implementation of the PEC O R E cue-target pair extraction process
formalized in Section 3.

D    F ULL T RANSLATION P ERFORMANCE
Table 3 presents the translation quality and accuracy across all tested models.          We
compute BLEU using the SACREBLEU library (Post, 2018) with default parameters
nrefs:1|case:mixed|eff:no|tok:13a|smooth:exp|version:2.3.1 and compute COMET scores us-
ing COMET-22 (Rei et al., 2022) (v2.0.2). The models fine-tuned with source and target con-
text clearly outperform the ones trained with source only, both in terms of generic transla-
tion quality and context-sensitive disambiguation accuracy. This motivates our choice to fo-
cus primarily on those models for our main analysis. All models are available in the follow-
ing Huggingface organization: https://hf.co/context-mt. The Sctx models correspond to
those matching context-mt/scat-<MODEL_TYPE>-ctx4-cwd1-en-fr, while S + Tctx models have the
context-mt/scat-<MODEL_TYPE>-target-ctx4-cwd0-en-fr identifier.


E    DATASETS A NNOTATION P ROCEDURE
SCAT+ The original SCAT test set by Yin et al. (2021) contains 1000 examples with automatically
identified context-sensitive pronouns it/they (marked by <p>...<\p>) and human-annotated contextual
cues aiding their disambiguation (marked by <hon>...<\hoff>). Of these, we find 38 examples
containing malformed tags and several more examples where an unrelated word containing it or they
was wrongly marked as context-sensitive (e.g. the soccer ball h<p>it</p> your chest). Moreover,
due to the original extraction process adopted for SCAT, there is no guarantee that contextual cues
will be contained in the preceding context as they could also appear in the same sentence, defeating


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1: PECORE cue-target extraction process
Input: C, x – Input context and current sequences
       θ – Model parameters
       sCTI , sCCI – Selector functions
       M – Contrastive metrics
       fATT – Contrastive attribution method
       fTGT – Contrastive attribution target function
Output: Sequence Sct of cue-target token pairs
Generate sequence ŷ from inputs C, x using any decoding strategy ;
Context-sensitive Target Identification (CTI):
T – Empty set to store indices of context-sensitive target tokens of ŷ ;
for ŷi ∈ ŷ do
    for m ∈ M do
         mi = mj Pctx (ŷi ), Pno-ctx (ŷi ) ;
    if sCTI (mi1 , . . . , miM ) = 1 then
         Store i in set T ;
Contextual Cues Imputation (CCI):
S – Empty sequence to store cue-target token pairs ;
for t ∈ T do
    Generate constrained non-contextual target current sequence ỹ ∗ from ŷ<t ;
    Use attribution method fATT using fTGT as attribution target to get input importance scores At ;
    Identify the subset At CTX corresponding to tokens of context C = {C1 , . . . , CK } ;
    for ai ∈ At CTX = {a1 , . . . , aK } do
        if sCCI (ai ) = 1 then
            Store (Ci , ŷt ) in Sct
return S

                                     SCAT+                         D ISC E VAL -MT ( ANA )                 D ISC E VAL -MT ( LEX )
 Model                    B LEU   C OMET   OK     OK - CS   B LEU     C OMET      OK     OK - CS    B LEU     C OMET      OK     OK - CS

 OpusMT Small (default)   29.1     .799    0.14      -      43.9        .888     0.40          -    30.5        .763     0.29          -
 OpusMT Small Sctx        36.1     .812    0.84    0.42     47.1        .900     0.61        0.28   28.3        .764     0.31        0.05
 OpusMT Small S+Tctx      39.1     .816    0.81    0.59     48.1        .889     0.60        0.24   33.5        .774     0.36        0.07
 OpusMT Large (default)   29.0     .806    0.16      -      39.2        .891     0.41          -    31.2        .771     0.31          -
 OpusMT Large Sctx        38.4     .823    0.83    0.41     44.6        .887     0.64        0.28   32.2        .773     0.39        0.09
 OpusMT Large S+Tctx      40.3     .827    0.83    0.58     48.9        .896     0.68        0.31   34.8        .787     0.38        0.10
 mBART-50 (default)       30.9     .780    0.52      -      33.4        .871     0.42          -    24.5        .734     0.25          -
 mBART-50 Sctx            33.5     .808    0.87    0.42     36.3        .869     0.57        0.23   25.7        .760     0.29        0.06
 mBART-50 S+Tctx          37.6     .814    0.82    0.55     49.0        .895     0.64        0.29   29.3        .767     0.30        0.07


Table 3: Full model performances on E N → F R test sets before (default) and after context-aware MT
fine-tuning. Sctx and S+Tctx are context-aware model variants using source-only and source+target
context, respectively. OK: % of translations with correct disambiguation for discourse phenomena.
OK - CS: % of translations where the correct disambiguation is achieved only when context is provided.



the purpose of our context usage evaluation. Thus, we prefilter the whole corpus to preserve only
sentences with well-formed tags and inter-sentential contextual cues identified by original annotators.
Moreover, a manual inspection procedure is carried out to validate the original cue tags and discard
problematic sentences, obtaining a final set of 250 examples with inter-sentential pronoun coreference.
SCAT+ is available on the Hugging Face Hub: https://hf.co/datasets/inseq/scat.

D ISC E VAL -MT We use minimal pairs in the original dataset by Bawden et al. (2018) (e.g. the
D ISC E VAL -MT LEX examples in Table 4) to automatically mark differing tokens as context-sensitive.
Then, contextual cues are manually labeled separately by two annotators with good familiarity with
both English and French. Cue annotations are compared across the two splits, resulting in very high
agreement due the simplicity of the corpus (97% overlap for ANA, 90% for LEX). The annotated
version of D ISC E VAL -MT is available on the Hugging Face Hub: https://hf.co/datasets/
inseq/disc_eval_mt


                                                             19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 SCAT+
 Cx : I loathe that song . But why did you bite poor Birdie’s head off? Because I’ve heard it more times than I care to. It haunts
 me. Just stop, for a moment.
 Cy : Je hais cette chanson (song, FEMININE). Mais pourquoi avoir parlé ainsi à la pauvre Birdie ? Parce que j’ai entendu ce
 chant plus que de fois que je ne le peux. Elle (she) me hante. Arrêtez-vous un moment.
 x : How does it haunt you?
 y : Comment peut- elle (she) vous hanter?
 Cx : - Ah! Sven! It’s been so long. - Riley, it’s good to see you. - You, too. How’s the boat ? Uh, it creaks, it groans.
 Cy : Sven ! - Riley, contente de te voir. - Content aussi. Comment va le bateau (boat, MASCULINE)? Il (he) craque de partout.
 x : Not as fast as it used to be.
 y : Il (he) n’est pas aussi rapide qu’avant.
    D ISC E VAL -MT ANA
 Cx : But how do you know the woman isn’t going to turn out like all the others?
 Cy : Mais comment tu sais que la femme (woman, FEMININE) ne finira pas comme toutes les autres?
 x : This one ’s different.
 y : Celle-ci (This one, FEMININE) est différente.
 Cx : Can you authenticate these signatures , please?
 Cy : Pourriez-vous authentifier ces signatures (FEMININE), s’il vous plaît?
 x : Yes, they’re mines .
 y : Oui, ce sont les miennes (mines, FEMININE).
    D ISC E VAL -MT LEX
 Cx : Do you think you can shoot it from here?
 Cy : Tu penses que tu peux le tirer (shoot) dessus à partir d’ici?
 x : Hand me that bow .
 y : Passe-moi cet arc (bow, WEAPON).
 Cx : Can I help you with the wrapping ?
 Cy : Est-ce que je peux t’aider pour l’ emballage (wrapping)?
 x : Hand me that bow .
 y : Passe-moi ce ruban (bow, GIFT WRAP).


Table 4: Examples from the SCAT+ and D ISC E VAL -MT datasets used in our analysis with high-
lighted context-sensitive tokens and contextual cues used for plausibility evaluation using PEC O R E.
Glosses are added for French words of interest to facilitate understanding.


Table 4 presents some examples for the three splits. By design, SCAT+ sentences have more uniform
context-sensitive targets (it/they → il/elle/ils/elles) and more naturalistic context with multiple cues
to disambiguate the correct pronoun.

F      T ECHNICAL D ETAILS OF PEC O R E E VALUATION
Aligning annotations Provided that gold context-sensitive tokens are only available in annotated
reference translations, a simple option when applying CCI to those would involve using references as
model generations. However, this was shown to be problematic by previous research, as it would
induce a distributional discrepancy in model predictions (Vamvas & Sennrich, 2021b). For this
reason, we let the model generate a natural translation and instead try to align tags to this new sentence
using the AWESOME aligner (Dou & Neubig, 2021) with LABSE multilingual embeddings (Feng
et al., 2022). While this process is not guaranteed to always result in accurate tags, it provides a good
approximation of gold CTI annotations on model generation for the purpose of our assessment.

G       F ULL CTI R ESULTS AND CTI P ROBLEMATIC E XAMPLES
CTI Results Figure 5 and Figure 6 present the CTI plausibility of all tested models for the Macro
F1 and AUPRC metrics, similarly to Figure 3 in the main analysis.

CTI Problematic Examples Table 5 shows some examples of OpusMT Large S+Tctx translations
considered incorrect during CTI evaluation as the highlighted word do not match the gold SCAT+
labels. However, these words are correctly identified as context-sensitive by CTI metrics as they reflect
the grammatical pronoun formality adopted in preceding French contexts Cy . The reason behind such
mismatch is that SCAT+ annotations focus solely on gender disambiguation for anaphoric pronouns.
Instead, CTI metrics detect all kinds of context dependence, including the formality cohesion shown


                                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Pronoun Grammatical Formality, SCAT+
    Cx : Oh. Hi, Dr. Owens. My son posted on his Facebook page that he has a bullet in his lung. [...]
    Cy : Salut, Dr. Owens. Mon fils a posté sur sa page Facebook qu’il a une balle dans son poumon [...]
    x : And when the soccer ball hit your chest, it dislodged it. [...]
    y : Et quand la balle de football touche votre (your, 2 ND P. PLUR ., FORMAL) poitrine, elle la déplace. [...]
    Cx : [...] That demon that was in you, it wants you. But not like before. I think it loves you.
    Cy : [...] Ce démon qui était en vous, il vous veut. Mais pas comme avant. Je pense qu’il vous aime.
    x : And it’s powerless without you .
    y : Et il est impuissant sans vous (you, 2 ND P. PLUR ., FORMAL).
    Cx : You threaten my father again, I’ll kill you myself... on this road. You hear me? My quarrel was with your father.
    Cy : Tu menaces encore mon père, je te tuerai moi-même... sur cette route. Tu m’entends? Ma querelle était avec ton père.
    x : Now it is with you as well.
    y : Maintenant elle est aussi avec toi (you, 2 ND P. SING ., INFORMAL).
    Cx : She went back to Delhi. What do you think? [...] Girls, I tell you.
    Cy : Elle est revenue à Delhi. Qu’en penses-tu? [...] Les filles, je te le dis.
    x : I wish they were all like you .
    y : J’aimerais qu’elles soient toutes comme toi (you, 2 ND P. SING ., INFORMAL).


Table 5: Examples of SCAT+ sentences with context-sensitive words identified by CTI but not
originally labeled as context-dependent since they do not match the gendered pronoun rule match
used to create SCAT+. Glosses are added for French words of interest to facilitate understanding.


in Table 5 examples. This suggests our evaluation of CTI metrics plausibility can be considered a
lower bound, as it is restricted to the two phenomena available in the datasets we used (anaphora
resolution and lexical choice).


H        F ULL CCI R ESULTS

Figure 7 and Figure 8 present the CCI plausibility of all tested models for the Macro F1 and AUPRC
metrics, similarly to Figure 4 in the main analysis.


I      A DDITIONAL F LORES -101 PEC O R E E XAMPLES

Table 6 provides additional examples of end-to-end PEC O R E application highlighting interpretable
context usage phenomena in model generations. English → French examples apply PEC O R E to the
context-aware mBART-50 model fine-tuned with the procedure of Section 4.1. Examples with other
target languages instead use the base mBART-50 model without any context-aware fine-tuning.
Table 7 provides additional examples of end-to-end PEC O R E application using the English → French
examples using the OpusMT Large S+Tctx context-aware model introduced in Section 4.1.

I.1      M BART-50 E XAMPLES D ESCRIPTION

         1. goods is translated as biens rather than marchandises to maintain lexical cohesion with
            biens in the preceding context. centrale (central), which is correctly lowercased to match its
            previous occurrence using the same format. The verb taxées (taxed, feminine) is also changed
            to masculine (taxés) to reflect the change in grammatical gender between marchandises
            (feminine) and biens (masculine), but is not marked as context-dependent, as it does not
            depend directly on cues in Cx or Cy .
         2. the correct translation of reindeers (rennes) is performed in the non-contextual case, but the
            same word is instead translated as renards (foxes) in the contextual output, leading to an
            incorrect prediction due to the influence of lexical cohesion.
         3. ce (it, neutral) is translated as elle (it, feminine) to agree with the referred noun grotte (cave,
            feminine) in the context.
         4. The imperfect verb form étaient (they were) is selected instead of the passé composé ont été
            (have been) to avoid redundance with the same tense used in the expression ont été stoppées
            (they have been stopped) in the context.


                                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Random           Context Saliency         Likelihood Ratio        P-CXMI         KL-Divergence
                1.0
                0.8
     Macro F1
                0.6
                0.4
                0.2
                      SCAT+            DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.          SCAT+          DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.
                              Random           Context Saliency         Likelihood Ratio        P-CXMI         KL-Divergence
                1.0
                0.8
     Macro F1


                0.6
                0.4
                0.2
                      SCAT+            DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.          SCAT+          DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.
                              Random           Context Saliency         Likelihood Ratio        P-CXMI         KL-Divergence
                1.0
                0.8
     Macro F1


                0.6
                0.4
                0.2
                      SCAT+            DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.          SCAT+          DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.
                              Random           Context Saliency         Likelihood Ratio        P-CXMI         KL-Divergence
                1.0
                0.8
     Macro F1


                0.6
                0.4
                0.2
                      SCAT+            DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.          SCAT+          DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.
                              Random           Context Saliency         Likelihood Ratio        P-CXMI         KL-Divergence
               1.0
               0.8
    Macro F1


               0.6
               0.4
               0.2
                      SCAT+            DiscEval-MT Ana.      DiscEval-MT Lex.           SCAT+         DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.
                              Random            Context Saliency         Likelihood Ratio       P-CXMI         KL-Divergence
                1.0
                0.8
     Macro F1


                0.6
                0.4
                0.2
                      SCAT+            DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.          SCAT+          DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.


Figure 5: Macro F1 of contrastive metrics for context-sensitive target token identification (CTI) on
the full datasets (left) or on OK - CS context-sensitive subsets (right). Top to bottom: ⃝
                                                                                         1 OpusMT
Small Sctx ⃝ 2 OpusMT Large Sctx ⃝    3 mBART-50 Sctx ⃝   4 OpusMT Small S+Tctx ⃝    5 OpusMT Large
S+Tctx ⃝ 6 mBART-50 S+Tctx .



                                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Random           Context Saliency        Likelihood Ratio      P-CXMI        KL-Divergence
            1.0
            0.8
    AUPRC   0.6
            0.4
            0.2
            0.0
                  SCAT+            DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.         SCAT+        DiscEval-MT Ana.    DiscEval-MT Lex.
                          Random           Context Saliency        Likelihood Ratio      P-CXMI        KL-Divergence
            1.0
            0.8
            0.6
    AUPRC


            0.4
            0.2
            0.0
                  SCAT+            DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.         SCAT+        DiscEval-MT Ana.    DiscEval-MT Lex.
                          Random           Context Saliency        Likelihood Ratio      P-CXMI        KL-Divergence
            1.0
            0.8
            0.6
    AUPRC


            0.4
            0.2
            0.0
                  SCAT+            DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.         SCAT+        DiscEval-MT Ana.    DiscEval-MT Lex.
                          Random           Context Saliency        Likelihood Ratio      P-CXMI        KL-Divergence
            1.0
            0.8
            0.6
    AUPRC


            0.4
            0.2
            0.0
                  SCAT+            DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.         SCAT+        DiscEval-MT Ana.    DiscEval-MT Lex.
                          Random           Context Saliency        Likelihood Ratio      P-CXMI        KL-Divergence
            1.0
            0.8
            0.6
    AUPRC


            0.4
            0.2
            0.0
                  SCAT+            DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.         SCAT+        DiscEval-MT Ana.    DiscEval-MT Lex.
                          Random           Context Saliency        Likelihood Ratio      P-CXMI        KL-Divergence
            1.0
            0.8
            0.6
    AUPRC


            0.4
            0.2
            0.0
                  SCAT+            DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.         SCAT+        DiscEval-MT Ana.    DiscEval-MT Lex.


Figure 6: Area Under Precision-Recall Curve (AUPRC) of contrastive metrics for context-sensitive
target token identification (CTI) on the full datasets (left) or on OK - CS context-sensitive subsets
(right). Top to bottom: ⃝   1 OpusMT Small Sctx ⃝   2 OpusMT Large Sctx ⃝     3 mBART-50 Sctx ⃝    4
OpusMT Small S+Tctx ⃝     5 OpusMT Large S+Tctx ⃝   6 mBART-50 S+Tctx .


                                                                    23
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Random            Diff          KL         Attention Mean           E2E median
            1.0
            0.8
 Macro F1


            0.6
            0.4
            0.2
            0.0
                    SCAT+            DiscEval-MT Ana.                           SCAT+                DiscEval-MT Ana.
                     Random          Diff          KL          Attention Mean           Attention Best         E2E median
           1.0
           0.8
Macro F1


           0.6
           0.4
           0.2
                  SCAT+       DiscEval-MT Ana.      DiscEval-MT Lex.         SCAT+             DiscEval-MT Ana.     DiscEval-MT Lex.
                              Random           Diff           KL         Attention Mean           E2E median
            1.0
            0.8
 Macro F1


            0.6
            0.4
            0.2
            0.0
                    SCAT+            DiscEval-MT Ana.                           SCAT+                DiscEval-MT Ana.

  Figure 7: Macro F1 of CCI methods over full datasets using models trained with only source context
  (left) or with source+target context (right). Boxes and red median lines show CCI results based on
  gold context-sensitive tokens. Dotted bars show median CCI scores obtained from context-sensitive
  tokens identified by KL-Divergence during CTI (E2E settings). Top to bottom: ⃝  1 OpusMT Small
  Sctx and S+Tctx ⃝  2 OpusMT Large Sctx and S+Tctx ⃝    3 mBART-50 Sctx and S+Tctx .


                                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Random          Diff     KL        Attention Mean   E2E median
        1.0
        0.8
        0.6
AUPRC


        0.4
        0.2
        0.0
              SCAT+        DiscEval-MT Ana.                  SCAT+          DiscEval-MT Ana.
                      Random          Diff     KL        Attention Mean   E2E median
        1.0
        0.8
        0.6
AUPRC


        0.4
        0.2
        0.0
              SCAT+        DiscEval-MT Ana.                  SCAT+          DiscEval-MT Ana.
                      Random          Diff     KL        Attention Mean   E2E median
        1.0
        0.8
        0.6
AUPRC


        0.4
        0.2
        0.0
              SCAT+        DiscEval-MT Ana.                  SCAT+          DiscEval-MT Ana.

Figure 8: Area Under Precision-Recall Curve (AUPRC) of CCI methods over full datasets using
models trained with only source context (left) or with source+target context (right). Boxes and red
median lines show CCI results based on gold context-sensitive tokens. Dotted bars show median
CCI scores obtained from context-sensitive tokens identified by KL-Divergence during CTI (E2E
settings). Top to bottom: ⃝1 OpusMT Small Sctx and S+Tctx ⃝     2 OpusMT Large Sctx and S+Tctx
⃝3 mBART-50 Sctx and S+Tctx .


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 1. Lexical and casing cohesion (English → French, correct)
 Cx : I don’t know if you realize it, but most of the goods from Central America came into this country duty-free.
                                                              1 biens d’Amérique ⃝
 Cy : Je ne sais pas si vous le réalisez, mais la plupart des ⃝                    2 centrale sont venus ici en franchise.
 x : Yet eighty percent of our goods were taxed through tariffs in Central American countries.
 ỹ : Pourtant, 80 % de nos ⃝1 marchandises ont été taxées par des tarifs dans les pays d’Amérique ⃝ 2 Centrale .
 ŷ : Pourtant, 80 % de nos ⃝1 biens ont été taxés par des tarifs dans les pays d’Amérique ⃝
                                                                                           2 centrale .
 2. Lexical cohesion (English → French, incorrect)
 Cx :Reindeer husbandry is an important livelihood among the Sámi [...].
 Cy : L’élevage de renards est un important gagne-pain parmi les Samis [...]
 x : Even traditionally, though, not all Sámi have been involved in big scale reindeer husbandry.
 ỹ : Même traditionnellement, cependant, tous les Samis ne sont pas impliqués dans l’élevage de rennes à grande échelle.
 ŷ : Même traditionnellement, cependant, tous les Samis ne sont pas impliqués dans l’élevage de renards à grande échelle.
 3. Anaphora Resolution (English → French, correct)
 Cx : [...] Resting on the top of one of the mountains north of Mecca, the cave is completely isolated from the rest of the world.
 Cy : [...] Seul au sommet d’une des montagnes au nord de la Mecque, la grotte est complètement isolée du reste du monde.
 x : In fact, it is not easy to find at all even if one knew it existed.
 ỹ : En fait, ce n’est pas simple à trouver même si on sait que ça existe.
 ŷ : En fait, elle n’est pas facile à trouver même si on sait qu’elle existe.
 4. Verb form choice (English → French, correct)
 Cx : After the dam was built, the seasonal floods that would spread sediment throughout the river were halted .
 Cy : Après la construction du barrage, les inondations saisonnières qui répandent les sédiments dans la rivière ont été stoppées .
 x : This sediment was necessary for creating sandbars and beaches
 ỹ : Ces sédiments ont été nécessaires pour créer des barrières de sable et des plages
 ŷ : Ces sédiments étaient nécessaires pour créer des bancs de sable et des plages
 5. Word Sense Disambiguation (English → French, incorrect)
 Cx : Rip currents are the returning flow from waves breaking off the beach, often at a reef or similar.
 Cy : Les courants Rip sont les flux revenant des vagues qui se forment sur la plage, souvent sur un récif ou un point similaire.
 x : Due to underwater topology the return flow is concentrated at a few deeper sections
 ỹ : En raison de la topologie sous-marine, le flux renouvelable est concentré à quelques parties plus profondes
 ŷ : En raison de la topologie sous-marine, le flux revenant est concentré dans quelques parties plus profondes
 6. Lexical cohesion (English → French, incorrect)
 Cx : Murray lost the first set in a tie break after both men held each and every serve in the set.
 Cy : Murray a perdu le premier jeu d’une rupture de cravate après que les deux hommes aient tenu chacun des coups.
 x : Del Potro had the early advantage in the second set, but this too required a tie break after reaching 6-6.
 ỹ : Del Potro a eu l’avantage précoce dans le second jeu, mais il a fallu une rupture de crayon après avoir atteint 6-6.
 ŷ : Del Potro a eu l’avantage précoce dans le second jeu, mais il a fallu une rupture de cravate après avoir atteint 6-6.
 Word Sense Disambiguation (English → Turkish, correct)
 Cx : Every morning , people leave small country towns in cars to go their workplace and are passed by others whose work destination
 is the place they have just left.
 Cy : Her sabah insanlar işyerlerine gitmek için arabayla küçük kırsal kentleri terk ediyor ve iş noktasının henüz terk ettikleri yer
 olduğu başkaları tarafından geçtiler.
 x : In this dynamic transport shuttle everyone is somehow connected with, and supporting, a transport system based on private cars.
 ỹ : Bu dinamik taşımacılık gemisinde herkes bir şekilde özel arabalara dayalı bir taşımacılık sistemiyle bağlantılı ve destekleniyor.
 ŷ : Bu dinamik taşımacılık nakil aracında herkes özel arabalara dayalı bir taşımacılık sistemiyle bir şekilde bağlantılı ve destekli.
 Lexical Cohesion (English → Dutch, correct)
 Cx : Rip currents are the returning flow from waves breaking off the beach, often at a reef or similar.
 Cy : Ripstromen zijn de terugkerende stroom van golven die van het strand afbreken, vaak op een rif of iets dergelijks.
 x : Due to the underwater topology the return flow is concentrated at a few deeper sections
 ỹ : Door de onderwatertopologie is de terugkeerde stroom geconcentreerd op een paar diepere delen.
 ŷ : Door de onderwatertopologie is de terugkerende stroom geconcentreerd op een paar diepere delen.
 Lexical Cohesion (English → Italian, correct)
 Cx : Virtual teams are held to the same standards of excellence as conventional teams, but there are subtle differences.
 Cy : Le squadre virtuali hanno gli stessi standard di eccellenza delle squadre tradizionali, ma ci sono sottili differenze.
 x : Virtual team members often function as the point of contact for their immediate physical group.
 ỹ : I membri dell’équipe virtuale spesso funzionano come punto di contatto per il proprio gruppo fisico immediato.
 ŷ : I membri delle squadre virtuali spesso funzionano come punto di contatto del loro gruppo fisico immediato.


Table 6: Flores-101 examples with cue-target pairs identified by PEC O R E in mBART-50 contextual
translations towards French (top) and other languages (bottom). Context-sensitive tokens generated
instead of their non-contextual counterparts are identified by CTI, and contextual cues justifying
their predictions are retrieved by CCI. Other changes in ŷ are not considered context-sensitive by
PEC O R E


                                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Word Sense Disambiguation (English → French, incorrect)
 Cx : Murray lost the first set in a tie break after both men held each and every serve in the set.
 Cy : Murray a perdu le premier set dans un match nul (void match) après que les deux hommes aient tous les deux servis.
 x : Del Potro had the early advantage in the second set, but this too required a tie break after reaching 6-6.
 ỹ : Del Potro a eu l’avantage dans le second set, mais ça aussi nécessitait un serrurier (locksmith) après avoir atteint 6-6.
 ŷ : Del Potro a eu l’avantage dans le second set, mais ça aussi nécessitait un set nul (void set) après 6-6.
 Lexical Cohesion (English → French, correct)
 Cx : Giancarlo Fisichella lost control of his car and ended the race very soon after the start.
 Cy : Giancarlo Fisichella a perdu le contrôle de sa voiture et a mis (put) fin à la course très peu de temps après le départ.
 x : His teammate Fernando Alonso was in the lead for most of the race, but ended it right after his pit-stop [...]
 ỹ : Son coéquipier Fernando Alonso a été en tête pendant la majeure partie de la course, mais il a terminé (ended) juste après son
 pit-stop [...]
 ŷ : Son coéquipier Fernando Alonso a été en tête pendant la majeure partie de la course, mais il a mis (put) fin juste après son arrêt [...]
 Acronym Expansion (English → French, correct)
 Cx : Martelly swore in a new Provisional Electoral Council (CEP) of nine members yesterday.
 Cy : Martelly a juré devant un Conseil électoral (electoral) provisoire composé de neuf membres hier.
 x : It is Martelly’s fifth CEP in four years.
 ỹ : C’est le cinquième Conseil Européen (European) de Martelly en quatre ans.
 ŷ : C’est le cinquième Conseil électoral (electoral) provisoire de Martelly en quatre ans.
 Lexical cohesion (English → French, correct)
 Cx : [...] The "Land of a thousand lakes" has thousands of islands too, in the lakes and in the coastal archipelagos .
 Cy : Le pays des 1000 lacs a aussi des milliers d’îles, dans les lacs et dans les archipels côtiers.
 x : In the archipelagos and lakes you do not necessarily need a yacht.
 ỹ : Dans l ’ (the, SINGULAR) archipel et les lacs, vous n’avez pas forcément besoin d’un yacht.
 ŷ : Dans les (the, PLURAL) archipels et les lacs, on n’a pas forcément besoin d’un yacht.
 Word Sense Disambiguation (English → French, correct)
 Cx : [...] Ring’s CEO, Jamie Siminoff, remarked the company started when his doorbell wasn’t audible from his shop in his garage.
 Cy : [...] Jamie Siminoff, le PDG de Ring, avait fait remarquer que l’entreprise avait commencé quand sa sonnette n’était pas audible
 depuis son garage.
 x : He built a WiFi door bell, he said.
 ỹ : Il a construit une porte (door) WiFi, a-t-il dit.
 ŷ : Il a construit une sonnette (doorbell) WiFi, il a dit.


Table 7: Flores-101 examples with cue-target pairs identified by PEC O R E in OpusMT Large con-
textual translations. Context-sensitive tokens generated instead of their non-contextual counterparts
are identified by CTI, and contextual cues justifying their predictions are retrieved by CCI. Other
changes in ŷ are not considered context-sensitive by PEC O R E. Glosses are added for French words
of interest to facilitate understanding.


                                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      5. The present participle revenant (returning) in the context is incorrectly repeated to translate
         “return flow” as flux revenant.
      6. The expression “tie break” is incorrectly translated as rupture de cravate (literally, tie break),
         matching the incorrect translation of the same expression in the context.

J   PEC O R E FOR OTHER L ANGUAGE G ENERATION TASKS
This section complements our MT analysis and by demonstrating the applicability of PEC O R E to
other model architectures and different language generation tasks. To generate the outputs shown
in Table 8 we use Zephyr Beta (Tunstall et al., 2023), a state-of-the-art conversational decoder-only
language model with 7B parameters fine-tuned from the Mistral 7B v0.1 pre-trained model (Jiang
et al., 2023). We follow the same setup of Section 5, using KL-Divergence as CTI metric, ∇KL as
CCI method and setting both sCTI and sCCI to two standard deviations above the per-example mean.

Constrained Story Generation In the first example, the model is asked to generate a story about
Florbz, which is defined as a planet with an alien race only in context Cx . We observe a plausible
influence of several context components throughout the generation process, leading to a short story
respecting the constraint specified in the system prompt provided as context.

Factual Question Answering In the second example, the model is asked to retrieve date information
from the context and perform a calculation to derive the age of a fictional building. While the non-
contextual generation ỹ hallucinates an age and a construction date associated to a real historical
landmark, contextual generation ŷ produces a wrong age, but plausibly relies on the date provided in
Cx during generation. Interestingly, we can also identify when the system instruction of “keeping
answers concise” intervenes during generation.

Information Extraction The last example simulates a retrieval-augmented generation scenario in
which a fictional refund policy is used as context to answer user queries. In this scenario, contextual
generation ŷ correctly identifies the user query as leading to a no-refund situation due to the limited
refund timeline stated in the policy, and the corresponding timeline (within 30 days) is identified as a
contextual cue leading to the model’s negative response.


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Constrained Story Generation
 Cx : <|system|> Here is some context about planet ⃝          1⃝ 2 Florbz. It is inhabited by a race of aliens called Squortz ⃝, 3 which
 communicate ⃝   4 only by saying “Qiz!” ⃝   5 </s>
 x : <|user|> Tell me a very short story about Florbz </s> <|assistant|>
 ỹ : Florbz was a curious little creature, half flower and half buzzing bee. He loved nothing more than exploring the garden he called
 home, flitting from bloom to bloom, spreading pollen as he went. </s>
 ŷ : On the vibrant ⃝
                     1 and colorful planet ⃝  2 of Florbz lived a curious creature named Zorg. He was different from his fellow Squortz ⃝
                                                                                                                                        3
 as he longed to learn their language ⃝  4 beyond just “Qiz!” ⃝  5 </s>
 Factual Question Answering
 Cx : <|system|> Provide a concise answer containing only few words ⃝</s>      1      <|user|> In the heart of Groningen, nestled between
 quaint cobbled streets and the meandering canals, stands the Pannekoekenkerk, a structure as rich in history as it is in legend. Built in
       ⃝  ⃝,
 1877 1 2 this peculiarly named ’Pancake Church’ was once a humble bakery, famed for its delectable pannekoeken, which drew
 patrons from all corners of the Netherlands. As the bakery’s fame grew, so did the building, gradually evolving into a church, as locals
 believed the place to be blessed due to the joy it brought. Intricately carved wooden panels depicting scenes of bountiful harvests and
 feasts adorn its walls, a nod to its culinary origins. Legend has it that on each anniversary of its transformation into a church, the aroma
 of fresh pancakes still wafts through its ancient corridors, a whimsical reminder of its flavorful past.
 x : Question: How old is the Pannekoekenkerk in Groningen?</s> <|assistant|>
 ỹ : Answer: 478 (1428) Explanation: The correct answer should be "How old is the Martinitoren tower in Groningen?" instead, as it is
 actually the oldest building in the city, dating back to around 1428 AD </s>
 ŷ : The Pannekoekenkerk in Groningen is 143 ⃝      1 years old (built in 1877 ⃝).
                                                                                 2 </s>
 Information Extraction
 Cx : <|system|> Fictional Clothing Refund Policy ⃝      2
 Effective Date: November 15th, 2023
 1. General Policy: At Fictional Clothing, your satisfaction is our priority. We offer a hassle-free refund policy for our customers. If
 you’re not completely satisfied with your purchase, you can return it for a refund or exchange within 30 days ⃝      1⃝ 3 of purchase.
 2. Conditions for Refund:
 Items must be returned in original condition: Unworn, unwashed, with all tags attached. Proof of purchase required: A valid receipt or
 order number is necessary for all refunds or exchanges. Refund method: Refunds will be issued to the original method of payment.
 Final sale items can be refunded only if they are returned in-store.
 3. Non-Refundable Items:
 Ultimate sale items: Products marked as ’Ultimate Sale’ cannot be returned or exchanged Personalized items: Custom-made or
 personalized items are non-refundable. Gift cards: Purchased gift cards are not eligible for a refund.
 4. Online Purchases:
 Return shipping: Customers are responsible for return shipping costs. Processing time: Refunds will be processed within 7-10 business
 days of receiving the returned item.
 5. In-Store Purchases:
 Return to any store: Items purchased in-store can be returned to any of our retail locations. Instant refund: In-store returns will be
 processed immediately.
 6. Exchange Policy:
 Size or color exchange: Items can be exchanged for a different size or color, subject to availability. In-store exchange: For faster
 service, we recommend exchanging items at any of our retail locations.
 7. Damaged or Defective Items:
 Report immediately: Please contact our customer service if you receive a damaged or defective item. Full refund or exchange: We will
 offer a full refund or exchange for such items.
 8. Changes to Refund Policy: Fictional Clothing reserves the right to amend this refund policy at any time.
 Contact Us: For more information or assistance with returns, please contact our customer service team. </s>
 x : <|user|> I have an unworn item that I bought two months ago and that I would like to return at one of your locations. Is it
 possible for me to get reimbursed? </s> <|assistant|>
 ỹ : The availability of returns and refunds may vary by the specific store or retailer you purchased from, so it’s best to check their
 return policy. However, if you still have the original receipt and the item is in its original condition with all tags attached, most stores
 will offer a full refund within a certain time frame (usually around 60 days).
 ŷ : Since your purchase was made two months ago, unfortunately ⃝,    1 it falls outside our policy’s ⃝ 2 30 ⃝3 days timeline for returns.


Table 8: Examples of cue -target pairs (identified by indices) extracted by PECoRe for the outputs
of Zephyr 7B Beta across several language generation tasks. Model input x is provided without
context to produce non-contextual generation ỹ, or chained to preceding context Cx to generate the
contextual output ŷ used by PECoRe.


                                                                     29
