Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P RIVACY A MPLIFICATION FOR M ATRIX M ECHANISMS
 Christopher A. Choquette-ChooвҲ—             Arun GaneshвҖ           Thomas SteinkeвҖЎ
 Abhradeep ThakurtaВ§



                                                  A BSTRACT

          Privacy amplification exploits randomness in data selection to provide tighter differential
          privacy (DP) guarantees. This analysis is key to DP-SGDвҖҷs success in machine learn-
          ing (ML), but, is not readily applicable to the newer state-of-the-art (SOTA) algorithms.
          This is because these algorithms, known as DP-FTRL, use the matrix mechanism to add
          correlated noise instead of independent noise as in DP-SGD.
          In this paper, we propose вҖңMMCCвҖқ, the first algorithm to analyze privacy amplification via
          sampling for any generic matrix mechanism. MMCC is nearly tight in that it approaches a
          lower bound as Оө вҶ’ 0. To analyze correlated outputs in MMCC, we prove that they can be
          analyzed as if they were independent, by conditioning them on prior outputs. Our вҖңcon-
          ditional composition theoremвҖқ has broad utility: we use it to show that the noise added to
          binary-tree-DP-FTRL can asymptotically match the noise added to DP-SGD with amplifi-
          cation. Our algorithm also has practical empirical utility. We show that amplification leads
          to significant improvement in the privacy/utility trade-offs for DP-FTRL style algorithms
          for standard benchmark tasks.



1       I NTRODUCTION

Privacy amplification is key in differentially private (DP) machine learning (ML) as it enables tighter privacy
budgets under certain assumptions on the data processing. For example, one of the main contributions in
the DP-SGD (DP Stochastic Gradient Descent) work by Abadi et al. (2016) was the вҖңmoments accountantвҖқ,
which relies on privacy amplification (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2008; Bassily et al., 2014) for bounding the
privacy cost. Recently, privacy amplification analysis enabled Choquette-Choo et al. (2023a) to show that
a class of DP-FTRL (DP Follow-The-Regularized-Leader) algorithms (Smith & Thakurta, 2013; Kairouz
et al., 2021) was superior in privacy-utility tradeoffs to DP-SGD.1 At the heart of DP-FTRL is the construct
of matrix
        P mechanism (McKenna et al., 2021; Denisov et al., 2022) that effectively computes the prefix
sums iвүӨt xi over a sequence of adaptively chosen vectors {xi : i вҲҲ [n]} (given by A В· x, where A is
a lower triangular matrix of all ones and x = [x1 | В· В· В· |xn ]> вҲҲ RnГ—d ). Matrix mechanism corresponds to
factorizing A = B В· C to minimize the error in the estimation of the prefix sums, while ensuring C В· x + z
satisfies DP, where z is drawn from an isotropic normal distribution. Bringing privacy amplification to matrix
mechanisms is thus an important area of research to enable better privacy-utility tradeoffs. (In the rest of the
paper, we will refer to the matrix B as the decoder matrix, and C as the encoder matrix.)

    вҲ—
      Google DeepMind. cchoquette@google.com.
    вҖ 
      Google Research. arunganesh@google.com.
    вҖЎ
      Google DeepMind. steinke@google.com.
    В§
      Google DeepMind. athakurta@google.com.
     1
       Precisely, they showed DP-FTRL is never worse, and often better, than DP-SGDвҖ”it вҖңpareto-dominatesвҖқ.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Matrix mechanism poses a major challenge for privacy amplification analysis of DP-FTRL style algorithms.
Standard privacy amplification exploits randomness in the selection of minibatches2 but requires that the
noise added to each minibatch is independent. In the matrix mechanism, a minibatch (given by xi ) con-
tributes to multiple rows of C В· x + z, thus preventing direct application of amplification. This challenge
can be seen by the limitations of the amplification analysis of Choquette-Choo et al. (2023a) which only
applies to a special class of вҖҳb-bandedвҖҷ matrix mechanisms (i.e., the first b principal diagonals of C are
non-zero), that in-turn leads to multiplicatively higher sampling probabilities preventing the full benefits of
amplification. Resulting from these limitations is a large region of epsilons where banded matrix mecha-
nisms cannot simultaneously leverage the benefits of correlated noise and privacy amplification; in other
words, they perform equivalent to, but no better than, DP-SGD3 . Further, since their analysis only applies
to the special banded case, matrix mechanisms from the extant literature cannot leverage amplification and
correlated noise, e.g., Kairouz et al. (2021); Choquette-Choo et al. (2023b); Denisov et al. (2022).

In this work, we provide a generic privacy amplification machinery for adaptive matrix mechanisms for any
    lower-triangular encoder matrix C that strictly generalizes the approach in (Choquette-Choo et al.,
                                                  2023a).

1.1       O UR CONTRIBUTIONS
Our main contribution is to prove a general privacy amplification analysis for any matrix mechanism, i.e.,
arbitrary encoder matrices C for non-adaptively chosen x, and for lower-triangular CвҖҷs when x is adaptively
chosen (which is the typical situation for learning tasks). We then demonstrate that our method yields both
asymptotic improvements and experimental improvements.
Conditional composition (Sec. 3, Theorem 3.1): This is our main technical tool that gracefully handles
dependence between the queries C[i,:] В· x, and C[i+1,:] В· x that arises due to multiple participation of a single
row of the data matrix x. Standard composition theorems (Dwork & Roth, 2014) only handle this via a
pessimistic worst-case privacy guarantee that holds with certainty for each query (in our application, a query
is C[i,:] В·x+zi conditioned on C[1:iвҲ’1,:] В·x+z1:iвҲ’1 ). Theorem 3.1 relaxes this to holding with high probability
(over the randomness of the algorithm) leading to significantly better guarantees. This generalizes an idea
previously used in (Erlingsson et al., 2019; Balle et al., 2020) to analyze privacy amplification by shuffling.
We believe this theorem will be useful for analyzing correlated noise mechanisms beyond those studied
herein.
Matrix mechanism with uniform sampling via MMCC (Sec. 4): We prove amplified privacy guarantees for
the matrix mechanism with uniform sampling, using Theorem 3.1, that are nearly-tight in the low-epsilon
regime (as Оө вҶ’ 0). We improve over Choquette-Choo et al. (2023a) because we enable вҖңmore randomnessвҖқ
in samplingвҖ”instead of participating w.p. bp in n/b rounds, data records can participate w.p. p in all n
rounds.
Recall we need to analyze the privacy of outputting Cx + z, where rows of x are chosen via uniform
sampling. We use Thm. 4.3 to reduce Cx + z to a series of mixture of Gaussians (MoG) mechanisms for
which we can use privacy loss distribution (PLD) accounting (see the proof sketch of Thm. 4.3 in Sec. 4).
Our algorithm MMCC formally stating this reduction is given in Fig. 1. We plan to publicly release a library
implementing MMCC with the final manuscript. The analysis of MoG mechanisms included in this library
has other uses, such as tighter privacy guarantees for DP-SGD with group-level DP or for linear losses, see
App. F for more discussion.

      2                                      P
       E.g., for a data set D, a row x[i,:] = dвҲҲS вҲҮОё `(Оёi ; d), where S is a randomly chosen subset of D (e.g., sampled
u.a.r. from D, or a subset from a random shuffling of D), ` is a loss function, and Оёi is obtained via an SGD state update
process.
     3
       In Choquette-Choo et al. (2023a), this region surfaces empirically even for larger Оө вүҲ 1.


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Binary tree analysis (Sec. 5): Letting ПғОө,Оҙ be the noise required for вҲҡthe Gaussian mechanism to achieve
to satisfy (Оө, Оҙ)-DP, the binary tree mechanism requires noise ПғОө,Оҙ В· log n. Owing to the versatility of
conditional composition,
                  вҲҡ        we
                           p show that with shuffling, the (non-adaptive) binary tree mechanism only needs
noise ПғОө,Оҙ В· min{ log n, log log(1/Оҙ)}. This is optimal given current amplification by shuffling results,
which require n = в„Ұ(log 1/Оҙ)4 . To the best of our knowledge, this is the first amplification guarantee (of
any kind) for the binary tree mechanism.
Empirical improvements (Sec. 6): First we implement and     вҲҡ show that Оө computed via MMCC for the binary
tree mechanism matches the theoretical predictions of в„Ұ( log n) from Sec. 5. Then we apply our work to
machine learning and show we can improve the privacy-utility tradeoff for binary-tree-DP-FTRL (Kairouz
et al., 2021) entirely post-hoc. Finally, we show that the вҖңevery roundвҖқ sampling enabled by MMCC achieves
better amplification than the вҖңb-min-sepвҖқ sampling of (Choquette-Choo et al., 2023a).

1.2       P ROBLEM D EFINITION

Matrix mechanism (MM): Consider a workload matrix A вҲҲ RnГ—n , and consider a data set D =
                                                         >
{d1 , . . . , dm } вҲҲ Dm . Let x = [x1 (D)| В· В· В· |xn (D)] вҲҲ RnГ—d be a matrix s.t. each row xi : DвҲ— вҶ’ Rd is
a randomized function that first selects a subset of the data set D, and then maps it to a real valued vector.
Furthermore, each of the xi has the following two properties.  a) Decomposability: For the subset of the data
set D that xi chooses (call it Si ), we have xi (D) = dвҲҲSi gi (d) with gi : D вҶ’ Rd is a vector valued
                                                           P
function, and b) bounded sensitivity: вҲҖd вҲҲ D : kgi (d)k2 вүӨ 1. Matrix mechanism corresponds to the class
of DP algorithms that approximates Ax with low-error. Typically, one designs a pair of matrices A = BC
( which we will call the decoder and the encoder matrices respectively) s.t. Cx + z satisfies DP5 (with z
being isotropic normal noise), and Bz is minimized in appropriately chosen norm. We will assume C is
non-negative for simplicity.
Privacy amplification for MM: In this work we study the problem of amplifying the DP guarantee of MM if
we incorporate the randomness in the selection of the subsets of D by each function xi . In particular we
consider two selection strategies: i) uniform sampling: each xi selects each entry of D independently w.p.
p, ii) shuffling: First the records of D are randomly permuted, and then each xi picks a fixed disjoint subset
(of equal size) from D.
Adaptivity: In our work we allow the choice of xi вҖҷs to be adaptive, i.e., xi can be chosen based on the first
i вҲ’ 1 outputs of MM. Under adaptivity, we will only consider encoder (B) decoder matrices (C) that are lower
triangular. However, for non-adaptive choices of the xi вҖҷs we allow arbitrary choice of the matrices B and
C. Unless mentioned specifically, all our results will be for the adaptive setting.

2         BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORKS
2.1       P RIVACY L OSS D ISTRIBUTIONS (PLD)

Suppose we have a DP mechanism M that outputs a sample from the continuous distribution P = M(D)
when given database D, and outputs a sample from Q = M(D0 ) when given D0 . The Оө-hockey stick
divergence between two distributions P, Q is defined as:
                                                                           eОө
                     Z
         HОө (P, Q) =    max{P (x) вҲ’ eОө Q(x), 0}dx = ExвҲјP max 1 вҲ’ ln(P (x)/Q(x)) , 0 .
                      x                                               e
      4                                                              вҲҡ       p
     We believe this requirement is fundamental and thus ПғОө,Оҙ В· min{ log n, log log(1/Оҙ)} is optimal, but if it were
removed, our result would improve to O(1) В· ПғОө,Оҙ .
   5
     We use the zero-out adjacency (Ponomareva et al., 2023) to define DP in this paper.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A mechanism M satisfies (Оө, Оҙ)-DP if and only if for all adjacent databases D, D0 we have
HОө (M(D), M(D0 )) вүӨ Оҙ. From the definition, we see that to obtain the Оө-hockey stick divergence between
P and Q, it suffices to know their privacy loss distribution (PLD):
Definition 2.1. The privacy loss random variable for P and Q is given by sampling x вҲј P , and computing
ln(P (x)/Q(x)). The PLD of P and Q is the distribution of this random variable.

We frequently use the notion of dominating PLDs:
Definition 2.2 (Definition 7 in (Zhu et al., 2022)). The PLD of P, Q dominates the PLD of P 0 , Q0 if for any
Оө, HОө (P, Q) вүҘ HОө (P 0 , Q0 ). We will also say
                                                random
                                                      variable  L                                0
                                                                  dominates random variable L if for any
                  0                                       ОөвҲ’`
Оө, HОө (L) вүҘ HОө (L ), where HОө (L) = E`вҲјL max 1 вҲ’ e , 0 .

Informally, a PLD dominates another PLD if any privacy guarantee satisfied by mechanisms with the domi-
nating PLD is also satisfied by mechanisms with the dominated PLD. In particular, if the PLD of some pair of
distributions P, Q dominates the PLDs of all pairs M(D), M(D0 ) for adjacent D, D0 , then if HОө (P, Q) вүӨ Оҙ,
M satisfies (Оө, Оҙ)-DP.

2.2   P RIVACY A MPLIFICATION

Privacy amplification via sampling analyzes the improvement in privacy given by randomly sampling a
minibatch of examples instead of choosing it deterministically. Roughly, a (Оө, Оҙ)-DP mechanism run on a
batch where each example participates with probability p satisfies (log(1 вҲ’ p + peОө ), Оҙ)-DP. The relative
improvement from Оө to log(1 вҲ’ p + peОө ) gets better as Оө gets smaller: log(1 вҲ’ p + peОө ) вүҲ pОө for Оө < 1,
but log(1 вҲ’ p + peОө ) вүҲ Оө вҲ’ log(1/p) for large Оө. The benefits of privacy amplification via sampling in
the independent noise setting of DP-SGD, i.e., the decoder matrix C = I, are extremely well-studied (Song
et al., 2013; Bassily et al., 2014; Abadi et al., 2016; Mironov et al., 2019; Steinke, 2022; Koskela et al.,
2020) with tight analyses. In particular, one round of DP-SGD is dominated by the PLD of N (0, Пғ 2 ) and
(1 вҲ’ p) В· N (0, Пғ 2 ) + p В· N (1, Пғ 2 ) and since each round of DP-SGD has independent randomness, composing
this PLD with itself n times gives a tight dominating PLD, i.e. tight (Оө, Оҙ) curve, for DP-SGD.

3     C ONDITIONAL C OMPOSITION

We first show a conditional composition theorem, which allows us to analyze a sequence of adaptive mech-
anisms using high-probability instead of worst-case privacy guarantees for each mechanism. We state con-
ditional composition formally as Theorem C.2. This is a generalization of an idea used in (Erlingsson et al.,
2019; Balle et al., 2020) to analyze amplification by shuffling.
Theorem 3.1 (Informal version of Theorem C.2). Let M1 , M2 , . . . be a sequence of adaptive mechanisms,
where each Mi takes D and the previous mechanismsвҖҷ output as input. Suppose there is some вҖңbadвҖқ event
E that happens with probability at most Оҙbad over the randomness of M1 , M2 , . . . for any input D. If the
composition of the worst-case privacy guarantees of M1 , M2 , . . . each conditioned on E not happening
satisfies (Оө, Оҙ)-DP, then the composition of M1 , M2 , . . . satisfies (Оө, Оҙ + Оҙbad )-DP.

The proof is given in App. C. To apply Theorem 3.1 to correlated noise mechanisms, we observe that they
can be viewed as a sequence of adaptive independent-noise mechanisms:
Observation 3.2. Let M : D вҶ’ X1 Г— X2 Г— . . . Г— Xn be a mechanism that takes a dataset D and outputs
the tuple x = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) drawn from the distribution M(D). Let Mi : X1 Г— X2 Г— . . . Г— XiвҲ’1 Г—
                                            0   0          0                                 0
D вҶ’ Xi be the mechanism    that0 takes x10, x2 , . . . , 0xiвҲ’1 and a dataset  D and outputs xi with probability (or
                                                                         0
likelihood) PrxвҲјM(D) xi = xi |x1 = x1 , x2 = x2 , . . . , xiвҲ’1 = xiвҲ’1 . The output distributions of M and
the composition of M1 , M2 , . . . are the same.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Matrix Mechanism Conditional Composition algorithm, MMCC(C, p, Пғ, Оҙ1 , Оҙ2 )
 1: Input: Matrix C, sampling probability p, noise standard deviation Пғ, probabilities Оҙ1 , Оҙ2 .
 2: {e
     pi,j }i,jвҲҲ[n] вҶҗProbabilityTailBounds(C, p, Пғ, Оҙ1 ).
    . pei,j is a high-probability upper bound on the probability that an example participated in round j,
    conditioned on output in rounds 1 to i вҲ’ 1.
 3: for i вҲҲ [n] do
 4:     P LDi вҶҗ PLD of MP M oG ({e    pi,j }jвҲҲ[n] , {Ci,j }jвҲҲ[n] ).
 5: P LD вҶҗ convolution of {P LDi }iвҲҲ[n] .
 6: return min ({Оө : P LD satisfies (Оө, Оҙ2 )-DP}).

Figure 1: Algorithm MMCC for computing amplified privacy guarantees of the matrix mechanism. The
subroutine ProbabilityTailBounds is given in Fig. 5 in App. C.


4     P RIVACY A NALYSIS FOR M ATRIX M ECHANISMS
In this section, we give an algorithm for computing an upper bound on the privacy guarantees of the matrix
mechanism, and prove its correctness.

4.1   M IXTURE OF G AUSSIANS M ECHANISMS

The key tool in our privacy analysis is a mixture of Gaussians mechanism, a generalization of the Gaussian
mechanism with sampling. Here we define these mechanisms under the add adjacency, i.e. D0 contains an
example zeroed out in D.
Definition 4.1. A mixture    P of Gaussians (MoG) mechanism is defined by two lists, a list of probabilities
{p1 , p2 , . . . , pk }, with i pi = 1, pi вҲҲ [0, 1], a list of sensitivities {c1 , c2 , . . . ck } and a noise level Пғ.
For simplicity, we will assume ci вүҘ 0. Given D, the mechanism MM oG ({p1 , p2 , . . . , pk }, {c1 , c2 , . . . ck })
outputs z вҲј N (0, Пғ 2 ). Given D0 , it samples s from the distribution with support {ci }iвҲҲ[k] and associated
probabilities {pi }iвҲҲ[k] , and outputs z вҲј N (s, Пғ 2 ). In other words, it is a Gaussian mechanism where the
sensitivity s is a random variable distributed according to {pi }iвҲҲ[k] , {ci }iвҲҲ[k] .
A vector mixture of Gaussians (VMoG) mechanism MV M oG is the same as a MoG mechanism, except the
sensitivities ci are allowed to be vectors ci instead of scalars, and our output is sampled from a multivariate
Gaussian z вҲј N (0, Пғ 2 В· I) or z вҲј N (s, Пғ 2 В· I).

For our proofs, we will need to prove a few properties of MoG mechanisms. We give these properties and
their proofs in App. B. It will be easier for us to work with a special case of MoG mechanisms, where the
probabilities and sensitivities arise from a product distribution:
Definition 4.2. A product mixture of Gaussians (PMoG) mechanism is defined by two lists {p1 , . . . , pk }
and {c1 , . . . ck } and Q         Q Пғ. The mechanism MP M
                         a noise level                      PoG ({p1 , . . . , pk }, {c1 , . . . , ck }) is defined equiv-
alently as MM oG ({ iвҲҲS pi В· i6вҲҲS (1 вҲ’ pi )|S вҲҲ 2[k] }, { iвҲҲS ci |S вҲҲ 2[k] }).

4.2   M ATRIX M ECHANISM C ONDITIONAL C OMPOSITION

The high-level idea of our algorithm, MMCC (short for matrix mechanism conditional composition), for
analyzing the matrix mechanism with amplification is the following: The output of each round conditioned
on the previous roundsвҖҷ output is a MoG mechanism. For each round, we specify a MoG mechanism that
dominates this MoG mechanism with high probability. Then by Theorem 3.1, it suffices to compute the

                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


privacy loss distribution of each of the dominating MoGs, and then use composition to get our final privacy
guarantee. MMCC is given in Fig. 1. In App. C, we prove that MMCC computes a valid DP guarantee:
Theorem 4.3. Let Оө be the output of MMCC(C, p, Пғ, Оҙ1 , Оҙ2 ). The matrix mechanism with matrix C, uniform
sampling probability p, and noise level Пғ satisfies (Оө, Оҙ1 + Оҙ2 )-DP.

We give a high-level overview of the proof. The proof proceeds in three steps. First, we show the ma-
trix mechanism is dominated by a sequence of adaptively chosen scalar MoG mechanisms, by analyzing
the distribution for each round conditioned on previous rounds and applying a vector-to-scalar reduction
(Lem. B.4). Second, we simplify these MoG mechanisms by showing that each is dominated by a PMoG
mechanism with probabilities pi,j depending on the outputs from previous rounds. Third, we show that with
high probability pi,j вүӨ pei,j for all i, j, i.e., the upper bounds generated by ProbabilityTailBounds
hold. We then apply Theorem 3.1.

Tightness: To get a sense for how tight MMCC is, if in MMCC we instead set pei,j = p for all i, j, this is
equivalent to analyzing the matrix mechanism as if each row were independent. Since the rows are actually
correlated, we expect this analysis to give a lower bound on the true value of Оө. So we can use maxi,j pei,j /p
as roughly an upper bound on the ratio of the Оө reported by MMCC and the true Оө value. In particular, as
Пғ вҶ’ вҲһ, for pei,j computed by ProbabilityTailBounds this ratio approaches 1, i.e. MMCC gives tight
Оө guarantees in the limit as Пғ вҶ’ вҲһ.

Sampling scheme of (Choquette-Choo et al., 2023a): The techniques used in MMCC are complementary
to those in (Choquette-Choo et al., 2023a): In App. D, we give a generalization of MMCC that analyzes the
matrix mechanism under their вҖңb-min-sep sampling.вҖқ For b = 1, this is the same as i.i.d. sampling every
round so this generalization retrieves MMCC. For b-banded matrices this generalization retrieves exactly the
DP-SGD-like analysis of (Choquette-Choo et al., 2023a). In other words, this generalization subsumes all
existing amplification results for matrix mechanisms.

Benefits of i.i.d. sampling: MMCC is the first analysis that allows us to benefit from both correlated noise
and privacy amplification via i.i.d. (i.e., maximally random) sampling. In Sec. 6.3 we demonstrate that the
combination of benefits allows us to get better `22 -error for computing all prefix sums than independent-noise
mechanisms, for much smaller Оө than prior work.

5   A MPLIFICATION VIA S HUFFLING FOR N ON -A DAPTIVE B INARY T REE

In this section, we show that amplification allows us to improve the privacy guarantees of the binary tree
mechanism of (Dwork et al., 2010; Chan et al., 2011). We consider the setting where first the data set D is
randomly permuted (call it О (D)), and each function xi (in the definition of MM from Section 1.2) picks the
i-th data record in О (D). Roughly speaking,p   using privacy amplification by shuffling (see Section 1.2) we
                                     вҲҡ
improve Пғ for this mechanism by в„Ұ( log n/ log log(1/Оҙ)), while maintaining that each example partici-
pates once. For simplicity throughout the section we restrict to the case where n is a power of 2.

Binary tree mechanism: The binary tree computes sums of rows of x over the intervals [1 : 1], [2 :
2],                              o . . . , [n вҲ’ 1 : n], [1 : 4], . . . [1 : n] with noise. That is, it outputs
nP. . . , [n : n], [1 : 2], [3 : 4],
                                                                        i.i.d.
    kВ·2j +1вүӨiвүӨ(k+1)В·2j xi + zj,k                     j
                                                        , where zj,k вҲј N (0, Пғ 2 ). Equivalently, it is a (non-
                                   0вүӨjвүӨlog n,0вүӨk<n/2
square) matrix mechanism where for each j, k pair there is a row of C where the entries in the interval
[k В· 2j + 1 : (k + 1) В· 2j ] are 1 and the remaining entries are 0. We refer to all the noisy sums indexed by the
same j as level j. In the single-epoch setting (without shuffling), each row of xi is a sensitivity-1 function
computed on the ith example in D. The binary tree mechanism then satisfies the privacy guarantees of distin-
guishing z and Cei + z, where ei is an elementary vector. Since each row of x is included in log n + 1 of the


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                     вҲҡ
                           вҲҡ

                                                                                       log(n) log(1/Оҙ)
sums, we have kCei k2 =        log n + 1, i.e. the binary tree mechanism satisfies O        Пғ           ,Оҙ -
DP.
We now analyze the binary tree mechanism under shuffling. To apply Theorem 3.1, we need the following
analysis of вҖңapproximate shufflingвҖқ given in Lem. 5.1, proven in App. C.
Lemma 5.1 (Simplification of Lem. C.4 in App. C). Suppose we run n Gaussian mechanisms on n inputs,
where the order of the inputs is chosen according to a distribution such that no input appears in a certain
                                           0                вҲ’в„Ұ(n0 )
position
    вҲҡ with probability       more than  1/n . Then for Оҙ вүҘ 2        , Оҙ0 вүҘ 0, this set of mechanisms satisfies
         ln(1/Оҙ0 ) ln(1/Оҙ)         0
 O            вҲҡ
             Пғ n0
                            , Оҙ + n Оҙ0 -DP.

Theorem
     вҲҡ      5.2. The  non-adaptive
                                            binary tree mechanism run on О (D)                         satisfies
       log(1/Оҙ) log log(1/Оҙ)                    p
  O            Пғ             , Оҙ -DP for Пғ = в„Ұ( log(1/Оҙ) log log(1/Оҙ)), Оҙ вҲҲ [2вҲ’в„Ұ(n) , 1/n].

The proof of Theorem 5.2 is given in App. C. We give a summary here: For the вҖңtopвҖқ levels j вҲҲ [log n вҲ’
O(log log(1/Оҙ)), log n], the number of sums per level (i.e., n0 in Lem. 5.1) is less than log(1/Оҙ) so we cannot
apply Lem. 5.1. Instead we use the unamplified privacy analysis of the Gaussian mechanism to analyze the
privacy of the corresponding noisy sums. For the remaining levels, we combine Theorem 3.1 and Lem. 5.1 to
show level jвҖҷs privacy parameter Оө is exponentially decaying in log n вҲ’ j, i.e. the top O(log log(1/Оҙ)) levels
dominate the privacy guarantee. Note that the theorem is proven in the non-adaptive case; our argument for
adaptivity in Sec. 4 implicitly requires independence of participations across examples, which does not hold
for shuffling.

6     E MPIRICAL I MPROVEMENTS

We implement MMCC by building on methods in the open-source dp accounting Python library (DP
Team, 2022), and perform empirical studies of the amplification benefits from MMCC. PLD accounting for
MoG mechanisms is currently open-sourced as part of the dp accounting library. We plan to open-
source our implementation of MMCC which builds on dp accounting. There are some challenges in the
implementation which we discuss in App. F. For simplicity we use Оҙ1 , Оҙ2 = Оҙ/2 in MMCC.

6.1   B INARY TREE MECHANISM AMPLIFICATION

In this section, we show how the privacy guarantee of the binary tree mechanism empirically improves if
we use sampling and MMCC. In App. E we repeat this study for a different matrix mechanism proposed by
(Fichtenberger et al., 2023).

                    p a constant c, and consider the binary tree mechanism under a single-participation con-
As a baseline, we fix
straint, with Пғ = c log(n) + 1. By the analysis of the Gaussian mechanism, for all n that are powers of 2,
the binary tree mechanism with this choice of Пғ under a single-participation constraint without amplification
satisfies (Оө, Оҙ)-DP for the same Оө, Оҙ. In other words, as we increase n, the privacy guarantee of the unampli-
fied mechanism remains fixed. Then, for the same c and n that are powers of 2, we use MMCC to compute a
privacy guarantee for the binary tree mechanism with subsampling probability 1/n and the same choice  вҲҡ    of
Пғ. By the analyses in Section 5, we expect that with subsampling, the value of Оө will decrease as в„Ұ( log n).
In Fig. 2, we observe that empirical improvement in Оө due to amplification is roughly proportional to
p
  log(n) + 1. We also observe two improvements as c (i.e., Пғ) increases. First, thepmultiplicative im-
provement in Оө increases; second, empirical improvements better match a linear fit to log(n) + 1. Both

                                                   7
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            c = 5 (unamplified = 0.834)                                                                      c = 10 (unamplified = 0.397)                                                                                     c = 20 (unamplified = 0.189)
Ratio of unamplified to amplified


                                                                                                  Ratio of unamplified to amplified


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ratio of unamplified to amplified
                                    1.3    y=0.2921 (log n + 1)+0.2573                                                                1.8   y=0.4861 (log n + 1)+0.1441                                                                                      y=0.5804 (log n + 1)+0.1172
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2.0
                                    1.2                                                                                               1.6
         . Higher is better


                                                                                                           . Higher is better


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      . Higher is better
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.8
                                    1.1
                                                                                                                                      1.4                                                                                                        1.6
                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                      1.2                                                                                                        1.4
                                    0.9
                                    0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.2
                                                                                                                                      1.0
                                    0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                            2                    4        6    8       10                                                    2           4           6       8                       10                                                       2           4             6            8   10
                                                                     log(n)                                                                                    log(n)                                                                                                            log(n)
                                                                                                 p
    Figure 2: Multiplicative improvement of our amplification analysis (roughly) matches log(n) + 1.
    Aphigher ratio (> 1) indicates amplification is better. We plot n = 2i , i вҲҲ {1, 2, . . . , 10} with Пғ =
    c log(n) + 1 so Оө is fixed for unamplified single-participation. Оҙ = 10вҲ’6 .

                                                            65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Analysis Method
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MMCC, (Ours)
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.2                                                                Choquette-Choo et al. (2023)


                                                                                                                                                                                 Privacy Budet, , @ = 10 6
                                                            60
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.0
                                                Test Accuracy


                                                            55                                                                                                                                         0.8

                                                            50                                                                                                                                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                                                            45                      None (Kairouz et al. 2023)
                                                                                    MMCC (Ours)                                                                                                        0.2
                                                            40
                                                                     0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5                                                                                                     50                                        100            150             200
                                                                              Privacy Budget,                                                                                                                                  Noise Standard Deviation,

                                Figure 3: Our amplification analysis leads to sig-                                                                                        Figure 4: MMCC gives tighter Оө than the analy-
                                nificant gains over Kairouz et al. (2021) on prac-                                                                                        sis of (Choquette-Choo et al., 2023a) for a DP-
                                tical ML experiments (CIFAR-10), entirely post-                                                                                           FTRL-TreeRestart mechanism of height 4. Ran
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                hoc.                                                                                                                                      for n = 512 steps with p = 16  .


    these improvements are explained by the fact that (as discussed in Sec. 4) as Пғ вҶ’ вҲһ, MMCC reports a tighter
    Оө.

    6.2                                   L EARNING E XPERIMENTS WITH B INARY-T REE -DP-FTRL

    A motivating reason for us to study matrix mechanisms is that the analysis of Kairouz et al. (2021) has a
    suboptimal scaling in the amount of noise added, which manifests in their experiments with DP machine
    learning. We reproduce the centralized DP training on CIFAR-10 from Choquette-Choo et al. (2023b), in-
    cluding model architecture, tuning setup, hyperparameter choices, and optimizations to the tree aggregation
    mechanism for ML; we use these as our baseline results.
    In Fig. 3, we re-analyze the baseline using MMCC and show significant improvements in privacy-utility
    tradeoffs for DP-FTRL via binary trees. In particular, we observe that these benefits become larger as Оө
    becomes small. Note that these improvements are entirely вҖңpost-hoc,вҖқ i.e. the algorithm is the same, but
    with a better privacy analysis.

    6.3                                   I.I.D. SAMPLING ENABLES BETTER AMPLIFICATION THAN b- MIN - SEP SAMPLING

    The prior work of (Choquette-Choo et al., 2023a) gives an amplification result using a sampling scheme we
    call вҖңb-min-sep samplingвҖқ for b-banded matrices. In their sampling scheme, each example participates in


                                                                                                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


n/b rounds with sampling probability bp. In contrast, MMCC enables sampling each example in all n rounds
with probability p, a вҖңmore randomвҖқ form of sampling. We compare the two amplification analyses using the
DP-FTRL-TreeRestart algorithm of (Kairouz et al., 2021), which sequentially runs n/2hвҲ’1 height-h binary
tree mechanisms, each binary tree mechanism run for 2hвҲ’1 rounds. This corresponds to a matrix mechanism
that is 2hвҲ’1 -banded, so we can apply the results of (Choquette-Choo et al., 2023a). In Fig. 4, we compare the
Оө for DP-FTRL-TreeRestart computed as a function of Пғ using MMCC and the analysis of (Choquette-Choo
et al., 2023a), in the setting of n = 512, p = 1/16, h = 4, and we see that indeed the more random sampling
enabled by MMCC allows for improved privacy guarantees compared to b-min-sep sampling.

7       D ISCUSSION , F UTURE D IRECTIONS , AND C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we proposed MMCC, which gives tight amplification guarantees for sampling in the limit as
Оө вҶ’ 0. One limitation of our work is that we are not able to prove adaptivity for non-lower triangular
C, which captures important matrix mechanisms like the вҖңfully efficientвҖқ binary tree mechanism (Honaker,
2015). It is an important future direction to fully understand what combinations of privacy amplification and
correlated noise allow the same privacy for non-adaptive and adaptive inputs. In addition, there are many
potential improvements to MMCC, as well as open problems that naturally follow from our work. Another
open problem that we make progress towards is proving DP-FTRL strictly dominates DP-SGD, i.e. for any
Оө > 0 DP-FTRL achieves strictly6 better utility than DP-SGD under an appropriate definition of utility. In
particular, we conjecture that a tighter amplification analysis than that of MMCC could show that even for Оө
close to 0, DP-FTRL with a matrix mechanism where C is close to but not equal to the identity has strictly
better utility than DP-SGD.
Our interest in the matrix mechanism is primarily motivated by the works of (Denisov et al., 2022;
Choquette-Choo et al., 2023b;a) which considered the problem of choosing C that optimizes (a proxy for) the
utility of DP-FTRL. The utility of DP-FTRL can be written as a function of CвҲ’1 , and thus can be optimized
under a constraint of the form вҖңthe matrix mechanism defined by C satisfies a given privacy definitionвҖқ.
Without amplification, this constraint can usually be easily written as e.g. C вҲҲ S where S is a convex set
of matrices, which makes optimizing under this constraint easy. An interesting question is whether we can
solve the same problem, except the privacy constraint accounts for amplification. This would likely require
designing a function that takes C, p, Пғ and approximates Оө that is differentiable in C (unlike MMCC, which
is an algorithmic computation that is not easily differentiable).
In these works, DP-FTRL is always strictly better than DP-SGD without amplification, but with amplifi-
cation for small Оө the optimal choice of C with amplification is the identity, i.e. the optimal DP-FTRL is
just DP-SGD (with independent noise). If we could optimize C under an amplified privacy constraint, we
conjecture the following (perhaps surprising) statement could be proven as a corollary: As long as we are not
in the full-batch setting, even with amplification by sampling, the optimal choice of C is never the identity
for Оө > 0. In other words, despite its ubiquity, DP-SGD is never the optimal algorithm to use (ignoring
computational concerns).
Due to space constraints, we defer the discussion of other future directions to App. A.

R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang.
 Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer
 and communications security, pp. 308вҖ“318, 2016.
    6
     Note that (Choquette-Choo et al., 2023a) showed that DP-FTRL is always at least as good as DP-SGD, but in their
results for small Оө DP-SGD is just as good as DP-FTRL, i.e. DP-FTRL is not strictly better.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Borja Balle, Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Om Thakkar, and Abhradeep Thakurta. Privacy amplifi-
  cation via random check-ins. In NeurIPS, 2020.

Raef Bassily, Adam Smith, and Abhradeep Thakurta. Private empirical risk minimization: Efficient algo-
  rithms and tight error bounds. In Proc. of the 2014 IEEE 55th Annual Symp. on Foundations of Computer
  Science (FOCS), pp. 464вҖ“473, 2014.

T.-H. Hubert Chan, Elaine Shi, and Dawn Song. Private and continual release of statistics. ACM Trans. on
   Information Systems Security, 14(3):26:1вҖ“26:24, November 2011.

Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Arun Ganesh, Ryan McKenna, H Brendan McMahan, Keith Rush,
  Abhradeep Guha Thakurta, and Zheng Xu. (amplified) banded matrix factorization: A unified approach to
  private training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08153, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.
  08153.

Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Hugh Brendan McMahan, J Keith Rush, and Abhradeep Guha Thakurta.
  Multi-epoch matrix factorization mechanisms for private machine learning. In Andreas Krause, Emma
  Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 5924вҖ“5963. PMLR, 23вҖ“29 Jul 2023b. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v202/choquette-choo23a.html.

Sergey Denisov, H. Brendan McMahan, John Rush, Adam Smith, and Abhradeep Guha Thakurta.
  Improved differential privacy for sgd via optimal private linear operators on adaptive streams.
  In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 5910вҖ“5924. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022.   URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/
  271ec4d1a9ff5e6b81a6e21d38b1ba96-Paper-Conference.pdf.

DP Team.  GoogleвҖҷs differential privacy libraries., 2022.          https://github.com/google/
  differential-privacy.

Cynthia Dwork and Aaron Roth. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Foundations and
  Trends in Theoretical Computer Science, 9(3вҖ“4):211вҖ“407, 2014.

Cynthia Dwork, Moni Naor, Toniann Pitassi, and Guy N Rothblum. Differential privacy under continual
  observation. In Proceedings of the forty-second ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 715вҖ“724,
  2010.

UМҒlfar Erlingsson, Vitaly Feldman, Ilya Mironov, Ananth Raghunathan, Kunal Talwar, and Abhradeep
   Thakurta. Amplification by shuffling: From local to central differential privacy via anonymity. In ACM-
   SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.
   12469.

Vitaly Feldman, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and Abhradeep Thakurta. Privacy amplification by iteration.
  In 2018 IEEE 59th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pp. 521вҖ“532. IEEE,
  2018.

Vitaly Feldman, Audra McMillan, and Kunal Talwar. Hiding among the clones: A simple and nearly optimal
  analysis of privacy amplification by shuffling. In 2021 IEEE 62nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of
  Computer Science (FOCS), pp. 954вҖ“964, 2022. doi: 10.1109/FOCS52979.2021.00096.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hendrik Fichtenberger, Monika Henzinger, and Jalaj Upadhyay. Constant matters: Fine-grained error bound
  on differentially private continual observation. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho,
  Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 10072вҖ“10092. PMLR, 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v202/fichtenberger23a.html.

Arun Ganesh. Tight group-level dp guarantees for dp-sgd with sampling via mixture of gaussians mecha-
  nisms, 2024.

Monika Henzinger, Jalaj Upadhyay, and Sarvagya Upadhyay. A unifying framework for differentially private
 sums under continual observation, 2023.

James Honaker. Efficient use of differentially private binary trees, 2015.

Peter Kairouz, Brendan McMahan, Shuang Song, Om Thakkar, Abhradeep Thakurta, and Zheng Xu. Prac-
  tical and private (deep) learning without sampling or shuffling. In ICML, 2021.

Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan and Adam Smith. On the вҖҷsemanticsвҖҷ of differential privacy: A bayesian
  formulation. J. Priv. Confidentiality, 6(1), 2014. doi: 10.29012/jpc.v6i1.634. URL https://doi.
  org/10.29012/jpc.v6i1.634.

Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan, Homin K. Lee, Kobbi Nissim, Sofya Raskhodnikova, and Adam D. Smith.
  What can we learn privately? In 49th Annual IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
  pp. 531вҖ“540, 2008.

Antti Koskela, Joonas JaМҲlkoМҲ, and Antti Honkela. Computing tight differential privacy guarantees using fft.
  In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2560вҖ“2569. PMLR, 2020.

Ryan McKenna, Gerome Miklau, Michael Hay, and Ashwin Machanavajjhala. Hdmm: Optimizing error of
  high-dimensional statistical queries under differential privacy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.12118, 2021.

Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang. R\вҖҷenyi differential privacy of the sampled gaussian mechanism.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10530, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10530.

Natalia Ponomareva, Hussein Hazimeh, Alex Kurakin, Zheng Xu, Carson Denison, H. Brendan McMahan,
  Sergei Vassilvitskii, Steve Chien, and Abhradeep Guha Thakurta. How to DP-fy ML: A practical guide
  to machine learning with differential privacy. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 77:1113вҖ“1201,
  jul 2023. doi: 10.1613/jair.1.14649. URL https://doi.org/10.1613%2Fjair.1.14649.

Adam Smith and Abhradeep Thakurta. (nearly) optimal algorithms for private online learning in full-
  information and bandit settings. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2733вҖ“2741,
  2013.

Shuang Song, Kamalika Chaudhuri, and Anand D Sarwate. Stochastic gradient descent with differentially
  private updates. In 2013 IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing, pp. 245вҖ“248.
  IEEE, 2013.

Thomas Steinke. Composition of differential privacy & privacy amplification by subsampling. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.00597, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.00597.

Salil Vadhan. The complexity of differential privacy. In Tutorials on the Foundations of Cryptography, pp.
  347вҖ“450. Springer, 2017.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yuqing Zhu, Jinshuo Dong, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Optimal accounting of differential privacy via char-
  acteristic function. In Gustau Camps-Valls, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, and Isabel Valera (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of The 25th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 151 of Pro-
  ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4782вҖ“4817. PMLR, 28вҖ“30 Mar 2022. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v151/zhu22c.html.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     M ORE F UTURE D IRECTIONS

First, our tail bound on the conditional sampling probabilities pei,j approach p as Пғ вҶ’ вҲһ. However, for
finite Пғ, pei,j can be much larger than p, i.e. the Оө computed by MMCC can be much larger than the true Оө. We
believe the values of pei,j we compute are not tight and can be improved. In particular, in computing pei,j , we
give a tail bound on the maximum of the dot product of a Gaussian with a set of vectors, and the values of pei,j
we compute effectively correspond to the case where this tail bound is attained by every dot product. This is
overly pessimistic, and it should be possible to obtain tighter Оө via a more refined tail-bounding approach.
Second, while MMCC has a polynomial dependence on n (whereas computing HОө via e.g. numerical inte-
gration would require time exponential in n), empirically we found that even with many optimizations for
runtime, running MMCC for n вүҲ 2000 still took several hours. In practice, we would often like to run for
larger n, or do multiple sequential runs of MMCC in order to e.g. compute the smallest Пғ that gives a certain
Оө via binary search. In turn, it is practically interesting/important to make MMCC more efficient, or discover
another algorithm that gives Оө comparable to or better than MMCC, but with a smaller runtime.


B     P ROPERTIES OF M O G MECHANISMS

The following lemma informally lets us show that domination for the remove adjacency (i.e., D contains an
example zeroed out in D0 ) is equivalent to domination for the add adjacency (i.e., D0 contains an example
zeroed out in D). Thus, we usually only need to prove statements under one of the two adjacencies, and it is
implied for the other as well.
Lemma B.1 (Lemma 29 in (Zhu et al., 2022)). The PLD of P, Q dominates the PLD of P, Q0 if and only if
the PLD of Q, P dominates the PLD of Q0 , P .

B.1    M ONOTONICITY OF M O G M ECHANISMS

The following shows the privacy guarantees of a MoG mechanism are вҖңmonotonicвҖқ in the sensitivity random
variable ci :
Lemma B.2. Let {p1 , p2 , . . . pk }, {c1 , c2 , . . . , ck } and {c01 , c02 , . . . c0k } be such that (i) each ci is non-
negative and (ii) c0i is entry-wise greater than or equal to ci for all i, i.e. each c0i вҲ’ ci is non-negative.
Then the PLD of
                                    MV M oG ({p1 , p2 , . . . pk }, {c1 , c2 , . . . , ck })
is dominated by the PLD of
                                    MV M oG ({p1 , p2 , . . . pk }, {c01 , c02 , . . . c0k }).

Proof. By Lem. B.1, it suffices to only consider the remove adjacency, i.e. given D we sample ci and then
sample from N (ci , Пғ 2 I) and given D0 from N (0, Пғ 2 I). The privacy loss of outputting x is:
                                                                                              !!
                                                                                          2
                                                    X                2hci , xi вҲ’ kci k2
                                P L(x) := ln             pi exp                                    .
                                                     i
                                                                             2Пғ 2

Let S вҠҶ Rd be monotonic if for any x вҲҲ S, y such that y вҲ’ x is non-negative, y is also in S. In other words,
increasing any subset of the entries of x вҲҲ S gives another vector in S. Since all ci are non-negative, if
y вҲ’ x is non-negative, then the privacy loss of outputting y is larger than that of outputting x. So for any


                                                         13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


VMoG mechanism and any t, the set of outputs St = {x : P L(x) вүҘ t} is monotonic. By the Neyman-
Pearson lemma it suffices to consider only the sets St in the definition of (Оө, Оҙ)-DP, i.e. a mechanism satisfies
(Оө, Оҙ)-DP if and only if

                                   вҲҖt :       Pr      [x вҲҲ St ] вүӨ eОө В·           Pr        [x вҲҲ St ] + Оҙ.
                                          xвҲјM(D)                            xвҲјM(D 0 )


So, in order to show that to show the first VMoG mechanism is dominated by the second, it suffices to show
the probability that x вҲј N (ci , Пғ 2 I) is in any monotonic set S is at most the probability that x вҲј N (c0i , Пғ 2 I)
is in S. This is immediate by a coupling of the two random variables: we let the first random variable be
ci + z and the second random variable be c0i + z, where the choice of i and Gaussian noise z are the same
for both random variables. For any monotonic S, since c0i вҲ’ ci is non-negative, ci + z is in S only if c0i + z
is in S, giving that the probability x вҲј N (ci , Пғ 2 I) is in S is at most the probability x вҲј N (c0i , Пғ 2 I) is in
S.

Since the above proof holds for any ci , c0i satisfying the assumptions in the lemma, it also holds if c0i are
fixed/non-adaptive but the entries in ci are chosen adaptively (while still satisfying the assumptions in the
lemma), i.e. the jth coordinate of ci is chosen only after seeing the first j вҲ’ 1 coordinates of the output. In
the scalar case, we get the following corollary:
                                                                                  0    0         0        0   0   0
       P B.3. Let {p
Corollary            P1 , p2 , . . . pk }, {c1 , c2 , . . . , ck } and {p1 , p2 , . . . pk0 }, {c1 , c2 , . . . ck0 } be such that for
all T , i:c0 вүҘT p0i вүҘ i:ci вүҘT pi . In other words, the random variable induced by {pi }i , {ci }i is stochasti-
           i
cally dominated by the random variable induced by {p0i }i , {c0i }i . We also assume ci , c0i вүҘ 0 for all i.
Then the PLD of
                                          MM oG ({p1 , p2 , . . . pk }, {c1 , c2 , . . . , ck })
is dominated by the PLD of
                                          MM oG ({p01 , p02 , . . . p0k0 }, {c01 , c02 , . . . c0k0 }).

Cor. B.3 follows from Lem. B.2 since by allowing duplicate ci values, we can reduce to the setting where
the probabilities are the same, and ci вүӨ c0i for all ci . For example, if ci is 0 or 1 w.p. 1/2 and c0i is 0, 1, or 2
w.p. 1/3, we can use {pi } = {1/3, 1/6, 1/6, 1/3}, {ci } = {0, 0, 1, 1}, and {c0i } = {0, 1, 1, 2}.

B.2     D IMENSION R EDUCTION FOR M O G M ECHANISMS

We now give the following lemma, which lets us reduce the dimensions of a VMoG mechanism.
Lemma B.4. Let c1 , c2 , . . . , ck вҲҲ RnГ—p . Let c01 , c02 , . . . , c0k вҲҲ Rn be vectors such that k(ci )j,: k2 вүӨ c0i (j)
for all i, j, i.e. the entries of c0i upper bound the `2 -norms of the corresponding rows of ci . Then the PLD of
                                      MV M oG ({p1 , p2 , . . . , pk }, {c1 , c2 , . . . , ck })
is dominated by the PLD of
                                      MV M oG ({p1 , p2 , . . . , pk }, {c01 , c02 , . . . , c0k }).
Furthermore, this holds even if the rows of each ci are adaptively chosen and c0i are fixed, i.e. the jth row of
all ci is chosen by an adversary after seeing the first j вҲ’ 1 rows of the output of the VMoG mechanism, as
long as the assumption k(ci )j,: k2 вүӨ c0i (j) holds.

We need the following lemma, which we can apply multiple times to prove Lem. B.4:


                                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma B.5. Let w1 , w2 , . . . wk > 0 be positive scalars and let c1 , c2 , . . . ck вҲҲ Rp be arbitrary vectors.
Then for any Оө and Пғ > 0:

              "       (                                 )#                     "           (                                   )#
                       X                                                                       X
ExвҲјN (0,Пғ2 Ip ) max           wi exp(hci , xi) вҲ’ eОө , 0       вүӨ ExвҲјN (0,Пғ2 ) max                   wi exp(kci k2 x) вҲ’ eОө , 0        .
                          i                                                                    i

                                                                                               +
        P
Proof.    i wi exp(kci k2
                        Px) as a function of x isОө continuous, increasing in x, and has range R . So, there
exists some t such that i wi exp(kci k2 t) = e . For this choice of t, let ti = wi exp(kci k2 t). Then we
have for all x:
                      (                                   )
                          X                                       X
                                                    Оө
                max           wi exp(kci k2 x) вҲ’ e , 0        =       max {wi exp(kci k2 x) вҲ’ ti , 0} .
                          i                                       i
                                                       P      P           P
Now, by linearity of expectation and the fact that max{ i ai , i bi } вүӨ i max{ai , bi }:
               "     (                             )#                   "                                  #
                       X                                                 X
                                               Оө
ExвҲјN (0,Пғ2 Ip ) max       wi exp(hci , xi) вҲ’ e , 0    вүӨ ExвҲјN (0,Пғ2 Ip )     max {wi exp(hci , xi) вҲ’ ti , 0}
                          i                                                            i
                                                                  X
                                                              =       ExвҲјN (0,Пғ2 Ip ) [max {wi exp(hci , xi) вҲ’ ti , 0}]
                                                                  i
                                                                  X
                                                              =       ExвҲјN (0,Пғ2 ) [max {wi exp(kci k2 x) вҲ’ ti , 0}]
                                                                  i
                                                                               "                                            #
                                                                                   X
                                                              = ExвҲјN (0,Пғ2 )           max {wi exp(kci k2 x) вҲ’ ti , 0}
                                                                                   i
                                                                               "           (                                   )#
                                                                                            X
                                                                                                                        Оө
                                                              = ExвҲјN (0,Пғ2 ) max                   wi exp(kci k2 x) вҲ’ e , 0         .
                                                                                               i


Proof of Lem. B.4. Lem. B.2 holds for adaptively chosen ci and fixed c0i (using the notation of that lemma),
so by Lem. B.2 it suffices to prove the lemma for adaptive ci and fixed c0i such that k(ci )j,: k2 = c0i (j)
for all i, j. Further, by Lem. B.1, it suffices to show the lemma under the remove adjacency. That is,
P = N (ci , Пғ 2 InГ—p ), Q = N (0, Пғ 2 InГ—p ), P 0 = N (c0i , Пғ 2 In ), Q0 = N (0, Пғ 2 In ), and it suffices to show
HОө (P, Q) вүӨ HОө (P 0 , Q0 ) for all Оө.
We have:

                                          P (x)    Оө
              HОө (P, Q) = ExвҲјQ max              вҲ’ e ,0
                                          Q(x)
                                           "     (P                                       )#
                                                                          2    2
                                                       i pi exp(kx вҲ’ ci k2 /2Пғ )      Оө
                        = ExвҲјN (0,Пғ2 InГ—p ) max                    2               вҲ’ e ,0
                                                           exp(kxk2 /2Пғ 2 )
                                           "     (                                  !       )#
                                                                                  2
                                                   X             2hci , xi вҲ’ kci k2      Оө
                        = ExвҲјN (0,Пғ2 InГ—p ) max          pi exp                       вҲ’ e ,0
                                                     i
                                                                         2Пғ 2


                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To reflect the fact that ci can be chosen adaptively, let ci,j (x1:jвҲ’1 ) denote any adversaryвҖҷs adaptive choice
of the jth row of ci after observing the first j вҲ’ 1 rows of x. We can then write HОө (P, Q) as:

                             пЈ®       пЈұ                                                                                            !           пЈјпЈ№
                                                                                                                              2
                                     пЈІX           Y               2hci,j (x1:jвҲ’1 ), xj i вҲ’ kci,j (x1:jвҲ’1 )k2                                  пЈҪ
 Ex1 ,x2 ,...xn вҲјN (0,Пғ2 Ip ) пЈ°max           pi           exp                                                                         вҲ’ eОө , 0 пЈ» =
                                     пЈі
                                         i
                                                                                     2Пғ 2                                                     пЈҫ
                                                  jвҲҲ[n]
                              пЈ®                     пЈ®        пЈұ                                                                                          !           пЈјпЈ№пЈ№
                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                             пЈІX                 Y               2hci,j (x1:jвҲ’1 ), xj i вҲ’ kci,j (x1:jвҲ’1 )k2                          пЈҪ
Ex1 ,x2 ,...xnвҲ’1 вҲјN (0,Пғ2 Ip ) пЈ°Exn вҲјN (0,Пғ2 Ip ) пЈ°max                  pi              exp                                                                 вҲ’ eОө , 0 пЈ»пЈ» .
                                                             пЈі
                                                                    i
                                                                                                                   2Пғ 2                                             пЈҫ
                                                                                jвҲҲ[n]
                                                                                                                                                  (1)
Note that the values of all ci,j in (1) are constants with respect to the inner expectation. So for any realization
of x1 , x2 , . . . , xnвҲ’1 , choosing
                                               2
                                                 !                                                      2
                                                                                                          !
                               kci,n (x1:nвҲ’1 )k2   Y           2hci,j (x1:jвҲ’1 ), xj i вҲ’ kci,j (x1:jвҲ’1 )k2
         wi = pi exp вҲ’                                   exp
                                      2Пғ 2                                        2Пғ 2
                                                          jвҲҲ[nвҲ’1]

and observing that by assumption kci,n (x1:nвҲ’1 )k2 = c0i (n), we can apply Lem. B.5 to upper bound the
inner expectation in (1) as:
                                                                                         пЈ®          пЈұ
                                                                                                    пЈІX              Y
                          (1) вүӨ Ex1 ,x2 ,...xnвҲ’1 вҲјN (0,Пғ2 Ip ),xn вҲјN (0,Пғ2 ) пЈ°max                             pi
                                                                              пЈі
                                                                                  i   jвҲҲ[nвҲ’1]
                                                              2
                                                                !         0                           )#
                     2hci,j (x1:jвҲ’1 ), xj i вҲ’ kci,j (x1:jвҲ’1 )k2          2ci (n)xn вҲ’ c0i (n)2

                                                                                                   Оө
            В· exp                                                 В· exp                         вҲ’ e ,0   .
                                        2Пғ 2                                     2Пғ 2

We can then iteratively repeat this argument for rows n вҲ’ 1, n вҲ’ 2, . . . 1 to get:
                                                                                                     "         (
                                                                                                                    X
                          HОө (P, Q) вүӨ Ex1 ,x2 ,...xnвҲ’1 вҲјN (0,Пғ2 Ip ),xn вҲјN (0,Пғ2 ) max                                   pi
                                                                                                                    i
                                                                                  !                                                       пЈјпЈ№
                                                                   2
                          2hci,j (x1:jвҲ’1 ), xj i вҲ’ kci,j (x1:jвҲ’1 )k2                                2c0i (n)xn вҲ’ c0i (n)2
           Y                                                                                                                              пЈҪ
      В·             exp                                                                 В· exp                                     вҲ’ eОө , 0 пЈ»
                                             2Пғ 2                                                            2Пғ 2                         пЈҫ
          jвҲҲ[nвҲ’1]
                                                                                                "            (
                                                                                                              X
                             вүӨ Ex1 ,x2 ,...xnвҲ’2 вҲјN (0,Пғ2 Ip ),xnвҲ’1 ,xn вҲјN (0,Пғ2 ) max                               pi
                                                                                                                i
                                                                        !                                                                          пЈјпЈ№
                                                                    2
                    2hci,j (x1:jвҲ’1 ), xj i вҲ’ kci,j (x1:jвҲ’1 )k2                        2c0i (j)xj вҲ’ c0i (j)2
   Y                                                                                Y                                                              пЈҪ
           exp                                                     В·             exp                                                       вҲ’ eОө , 0 пЈ»
                                       2Пғ 2                                                    2Пғ 2                                                пЈҫ
 jвҲҲ[nвҲ’2]                                                             jвҲҲ[n]\[nвҲ’2]
                                                                                    "    (
                                                                                            X
                          вүӨ Ex1 ,x2 ,...xnвҲ’3 вҲјN (0,Пғ2 Ip ),xnвҲ’2 ,xnвҲ’1 ,xn вҲјN (0,Пғ2 ) max        pi
                                                                                                                    i
                                                                        !                                                                          пЈјпЈ№
                                                             2
                    2hci,j (x1:jвҲ’1 ), xj i вҲ’ kci,j (x1:jвҲ’1 )k2                                               2c0i (j)xj вҲ’ c0i (j)2
   Y                                                                                Y                                                              пЈҪ
           exp                                                              В·                   exp                                        вҲ’ eОө , 0 пЈ»
                                       2Пғ 2                                                                           2Пғ 2                         пЈҫ
 jвҲҲ[nвҲ’3]                                                                        jвҲҲ[n]\[nвҲ’3]



                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               ...
                                         пЈ®        пЈұ                                                                  пЈјпЈ№
                                                                                 2c0i (j)xj вҲ’ c0i (j)2
                                                  пЈІX           Y                                                     пЈҪ
             вүӨ Ex1 ,x2 ,...,xn вҲјN (0,Пғ2 ) пЈ°max            pi           exp                                   вҲ’ eОө , 0 пЈ»
                                                  пЈі
                                                      i
                                                                                          2Пғ 2                       пЈҫ
                                                               jвҲҲ[n]
                               "       (                                               !            )#
                                                                                   2
                                        X                  2hc0i , xi вҲ’ kc0i k2
             = ExвҲјN (0,Пғ2 In ) max               pi exp                                       Оө
                                                                                           вҲ’ e ,0        = HОө (P 0 , Q0 ).
                                             i
                                                                    2Пғ 2



As a corollary to the above вҖңmatrix-to-vector reductionвҖқ, we have a вҖңvector-to-scalar reductionвҖқ for MoG
mechanisms:
Corollary B.6. The PLD of
                                   MV M oG ({p1 , p2 , . . . , pk }, {c1 , c2 , . . . , ck })
is dominated by the PLD of
                            MM oG ({p1 , p2 , . . . , pk }, {kc1 k2 , kc2 k2 , . . . , kck k2 }).

C     D EFERRED P ROOFS
C.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM C.2

We will need the following lemma, which shows domination is preserved by composition:
Lemma C.1 (Theorem 10 in (Zhu et al., 2022)). Let M1 , . . . , Mk be an adaptive sequence of mechanisms,
i.e., each mechanism receives the output of all previous mechanism and the database. Suppose for all i and
joint outputs x of M1 , . . . MiвҲ’1 , the PLD of Mi (x, D) and Mi (x, D0 ) is dominated by the PLD of Pi , Qi .
Then letting M be the composition of these mechanisms, the PLD of M(D), M(D0 ) is dominated by the
PLD of P1 Г— P2 Г— . . . , Q1 Г— Q2 Г— . . ..
Similarly, if L1 , L2 , . . . , Lk and L01 , L02 , . . . , L0k are random variables such that Li dominates L0i for all i,
then L1 + L2 + . . . + Lk dominates L01 + L02 + . . . + L0k .

In (Zhu et al., 2022), only the first part of Lem. C.1 is stated. However, the proof allows arbitrary measures,
i.e., measures that donвҖҷt integrate to 1, which implies the second part of Lem. C.1.
Theorem C.2. Let M1 : D вҶ’ X1 , M2 : X1 Г— D вҶ’ X2 , M3 : X1 Г— X2 Г— D вҶ’ X3 , . . . Mn be a sequence
of adaptive mechanisms, where each Mi takes a dataset in D and the output of mechanisms M1 , . . . , MiвҲ’1
as input. Let M be the mechanism that outputs (x1 = M1 (D), x2 = M2 (x1 , D), . . . , xn =
Mn (x1 , . . . , xnвҲ’1 , D)). Fix any two adjacent datasets D, D0 .
Suppose there exists вҖңbad eventsвҖқ E1 вҠҶ X1 , E2 вҠҶ X1 Г— X2 , . . . ...EnвҲ’1 вҠҶ X1 Г— X2 Г— . . . Г— XnвҲ’1 such that
                                         Pr       [вҲғi : (x1 , x2 , . . . xi ) вҲҲ Ei ] вүӨ Оҙ
                                      xвҲјM(D)

and pairs of distributions (P1 , Q1 ), (P2 , Q2 ), . . . (Pn , Qn ) such that the PLD of M1 (D) and M1 (D0 ) is
dominated by the PLD of P1 , Q1 and for any i вүҘ 1 and вҖңgoodвҖқ output (x1 , x2 , . . . xi ) вҲҲ        / Ei , the PLD of
Mi+1 (x1 , . . . , xi , D) and Mi+1 (x1 , . . . , xi , D0 ) is dominated by the PLD of Pi+1 , Qi+1 . Then for all Оө:

                HОө (M(D), M(D0 )) вүӨ HОө (P1 Г— P2 Г— . . . Г— Pn , Q1 Г— Q2 Г— . . . Г— Qn ) + Оҙ.


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 ProbabilityTailBounds(C, p, Пғ, Оҙ1 )
 1: Input: Matrix C, sampling probability p, noise standard deviation Пғ, probability Оҙ1 .
                Оҙ1
 2: Оҙ 0 = 2В·(nnz(C)вҲ’n)                                                  . nnz is the number of non-zeros.
 3: z = ОҰвҲ’1 (1 вҲ’ Оҙ 0 )             . Tail bound on normal distribution; here, ОҰ is the standard normal CDF.
 4: for i, j вҲҲ [n] do
 5:     if Ci,j = 0 then
 6:          pei,j = 1
 7:     else
                                                                                             i.i.d.
             si,j = minimum s s.t. Pr[ j 0 вүӨi xj 0 hC1:iвҲ’1,j , C1:iвҲ’1,j 0 i > s] вүӨ Оҙ 0 , xj 0 вҲј Bern(p)
                                      P
 8:
      . si,j is a tail bound on the dot product of first i вҲ’ 1 entries of Cx and C1:iвҲ’1,j .
                      zkC      k
                         1:iвҲ’1,j 2   2s   вҲ’kC       k2
 9:          Оөi,j =        Пғ        + i,j 2Пғ1:iвҲ’1,j
                                             2
                                                    2

    . Оөi,j is a tail bound on the privacy loss of a participation in round j after outputting first i вҲ’ 1 rounds
                         pВ·exp(Оөi,j )
10:          pei,j = pВ·exp(Оөi,j )+(1вҲ’p)
11: return {e
            pi,j }i,jвҲҲ[n] .


Figure 5: Algorithm for computing pei,j , tail bound on conditional probability of participating in round j
given first i вҲ’ 1 outputs.


Proof. Let L1 be the privacy loss random variable of M, and let L2 be the privacy loss random variable of
P1 Г— P2 Г— . . . Г— Pn , Q1 Г— Q2 Г— . . . Г— Qn . We want to show HОө (L1 ) вүӨ HОө (L2 ) + Оҙ for all Оҙ.
Let L01 be the random variable coupled with L1 , with the coupling defined as follows: If вҲғi :
(x1 , x2 , . . . , xi ) вҲҲ Ei , then L01 = вҲ’вҲһ, otherwise L01 = L1 . Let E = {x|вҲғi : (x1 , x2 , . . . xi ) вҲҲ Ei }.
Then for all Оө:                                       h        n           oi
                                        HОө (L1 ) = Ex max 1 вҲ’ eОөвҲ’L1 (x) , 0
                          h      n                o         i               h       n               o        i
 = Pr[x вҲҲ     / E] В· Ex max 1 вҲ’ eОөвҲ’L1 (x) , 0 x вҲҲ     / E + Pr[x вҲҲ E] В· Ex max 1 вҲ’ eОөвҲ’L1 (x) , 0 x вҲҲ E
      x
                                      h     n                  o x   i
              0
 = HОө (L1 ) + Pr[x вҲҲ E] В· Ex max 1 вҲ’ e             ОөвҲ’L1 (x)
                                                            , 0 x вҲҲ E вүӨ HОө (L01 ) + Pr[x вҲҲ E] вүӨ HОө (L01 ) + Оҙ.
                  x                                                                   x

So it suffices to show L01 is dominated by L2 . We consider the following process for sampling L01 : For each
i, if for any i0 < i, (x1 , x2 , . . . , xi0 ) вҲҲ E i0 , then we let L1,i = вҲ’вҲһ deterministically. Otherwise we sample
                                                    Pryi вҲјMi (x1 ,...,xiвҲ’1 ,D) [yi =xi ]

                                                                                           0
                                                                                               P 0
xi вҲј Mi (x1 , . . . , xiвҲ’1 , D), L1,i = ln Pry вҲјM (x ,...,x ,D) [yi =xi ] . Then L1 = i L1,i . Similarly, let
                                                          i  i 1       iвҲ’1
                                                                       P
L2,i be the privacy loss random variable for Pi , Qi , and let L2 = i L2,i . By assumption, the distribution
of L01,i conditioned on x1 , x2 , . . . , xiвҲ’1 is always dominated by L2,i . So by Lem. C.1, L01 is dominated by
L2 .

C.2     P ROOF OF T HM . 4.3

Before stating the proof, in Fig. 5 we give ProbabilityTailBounds, the subroutine used to compute
the values of pei,j .

Proof of Thm. 4.3. For simplicity in the proof we only consider remove adjacency, i.e. D contains a sensitive
example zeroed out in D0 . By symmetry the proof also works for add adjacency. By quasi-convexity

                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of approximate DP, it suffices to prove the theorem assuming the participation of all examples except the
sensitive example is deterministic, i.e. we know the contribution of all examples except the sensitive example
to x, so we can assume these contributions are zero. So, let x be the matrix used in the matrix mechanism if
we were to sample the sensitive example in each round. Then,P   the matrix mechanism is a VMoG mechanism
with probabilities {p|S| (1 вҲ’ p)nвҲ’|S| }SвҠҶ[n] and sensitivities { jвҲҲS C:,j xj }SвҠҶ[n] .
Our proof proceeds in three high-level steps:
      1. We show the matrix mechanism is dominated by a sequence of adaptively chosen MoG mecha-
         nisms.
      2. We show each of the adaptively chosen MoG mechanisms is further dominated by a PMoG mech-
         anism.
      3. We show these PMoG mechanisms are with high probability dominated by the PMoG mechanisms
         in MMCC, and then apply Theorem C.2.
Step 1 (matrix mechanism dominated by sequence of MoG mechanisms): Let f be the function that
takes a matrix M and returns a vector f (M) where the ith entry of this vector is the `2 -normP    of the ith row
of M. Using triangle inequality, for any x such that each row of x has norm at most 1, f ( jвҲҲS C:,j xj )
                                   P
is entrywise less than or equal to jвҲҲS C:,j . So by Lem. B.4 the matrix mechanism is dominated by the
VMoG mechanism with probabilities {p|S| (1 вҲ’ p)nвҲ’|S| }SвҠҶ[n] and sensitivities { jвҲҲS C:,j }SвҠҶ[n] 7 . Note
                                                                                       P
that this is exactly the (non-adaptive) matrix mechanism where each xi = 1 (prior to sampling), i.e. it
suffices to prove the privacy guarantee holds for this choice of x. So, for the rest of the proof we will assume
the input of the matrix mechanism (prior to sampling) is the all ones vector.
Now, let Оё1:i denote the output of rounds 1 to i. By Observation 3.2, this random variable is the same as the
composition over i of outputting Оёi sampled from its distribution conditioned on Оё1:iвҲ’1 . Let Si denote the set
of rounds in [i] in which we sample the sensitive example. Abusing notation to let Pr denote a likelihood,
the likelihood of the matrix mechanism M(D) outputting Оёi in round i conditioned on Оё1:iвҲ’1 is:
                       X
                                  Pr [Si = T |П„1:iвҲ’1 = Оё1:iвҲ’1 ]               P Pr               [П„i = Оёi ]
                                П„ вҲјОҳ(D)                                П„i вҲјN ( jвҲҲT Ci,j ,Пғ 2 В·I)
                       T вҠҶ[i]

The likelihood of M(D0 ) outputting Оёi in round i (conditioned on Оё1:iвҲ’1 , which doesnвҖҷt affect the likelihood
since since each coordinate of Оё is independent when sampled from M(D0 )) is

                                                      Pr            [П„i = Оёi ] .
                                                 П„i вҲјN (0,Пғ 2 В·I)

In other words, the distribution of Оёi conditioned on Оё1:iвҲ’1 under M(D), M(D0 ) is exactly the same as the
pairs of output distributions given by the MoG mechanism.
                          пЈ«                                                                                  пЈ¶
                                                                                             X
                    MM oG пЈӯ  Pr [Si = T |П„1:iвҲ’1 = Оё1:iвҲ’1 ]                              ,{       Ci,j }T вҠҶ[i] пЈё .
                                    П„ вҲјОҳ(D)                                    T вҠҶ[i]    jвҲҲT

So the matrix mechanism with x being all ones is the same as the sequence of (adaptively chosen) MoG
mechanisms given by
     7
       Note that since C is lower-triangular, so the choice of the distribution of the ith row of Cx by an adaptive adversary
depends only on rows 1 to i вҲ’ 1 of Cx + z. That is, an adversary who chooses the jth row of x after seeing the j вҲ’ 1st
first rows of the matrix mechanism satisfies the adaptivity condition in Lem. B.4.


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             пЈұ         пЈ«                                                                           пЈ¶пЈј
             пЈІ                                                                  X                    пЈҪ
                 MM oG пЈӯ  Pr [Si = T |П„1:iвҲ’1 = Оё1:iвҲ’1 ]                    ,{         Ci,j }T вҠҶ[i] пЈё            .
             пЈі             П„ вҲјОҳ(D)                                T вҠҶ[i]
                                                                                                     пЈҫ
                                                                                jвҲҲT
                                                                                                      iвҲҲ[n]


Step 2 (each MoG is dominated by a PMoG): To achieve step 2, we use the following lemma:
Lemma C.3. Let

                                              2hОё1:iвҲ’1 ,C1:iвҲ’1,j iвҲ’kC1:iвҲ’1,j k22

                                     p exp                   2Пғ 2
                          pi,j =
                                         2hОё1:iвҲ’1 ,C1:iвҲ’1,j iвҲ’kC1:iвҲ’1,j k22
                                                                                       .
                                 p exp                  2Пғ 2                  +  1 вҲ’ p
                                                     nQ           Q                   o
The random variable induced by probabilities             jвҲҲT pi,j  jвҲҲ[i]\T (1 вҲ’ pi,j )        and support
 P                                                                                     T вҠҶ[i]
{ jвҲҲT Ci,j }T вҠҶ[i] stochastically dominates the random variable induced by probabilities {PrП„ вҲјОҳ(D) [Si =
T |П„1:iвҲ’1 = Оё1:iвҲ’1 ]}T вҠҶ[i] and the same support.

Proving Lem. C.3 completes the step as with this lemma and Cor. B.3, the PLD of
                        пЈ«                                                                           пЈ¶
                                                                                    X
                  MM oG пЈӯ  Pr [Si = T |П„1:iвҲ’1 = Оё1:iвҲ’1 ]                       ,{       Ci,j }T вҠҶ[i] пЈё .
                             П„ вҲјОҳ(D)                                  T вҠҶ[i]     jвҲҲT


is dominated by the PLD of


                                     MP M oG {pi,j }jвҲҲ[n] , {Ci,j }jвҲҲ[n] .

Proof of Lem. C.3. Sampling T according to probabilities {PrП„ вҲјОҳ(D) [Si = T |П„1:iвҲ’1 = Оё1:iвҲ’1 ]}T вҠҶ[i]
is equivalent to the following process: We start with T = вҲ…, and for each j вҲҲ [i], add it to T
with
nQ probability    Pr[T вҲӘ {j} oвҠҶ Si |T вҠҶ Si , П„1:iвҲ’1 = Оё1:iвҲ’1 ]. Similarly, sampling T according to
             Q
    jвҲҲT pi,j   jвҲҲ[i]\T (1 вҲ’ pi,j )   is equivalent to the same process, except we add j with probabil-
                                 T вҠҶ[i]
ity pi,j . If we show that Pr[T вҲӘ {j} вҠҶ Si |T вҠҶ Si , П„1:iвҲ’1
                                                        P = Оё1:iвҲ’1 ] вүӨ pi,j for all T, j, then we can couple
these sampling processes such that with probability 1, jвҲҲT Ci,j is at least as large for the second process
as for the first, which implies the lemma. The posterior distribution of Si satisfies:

            Pr [Si = T |П„1:iвҲ’1 = Оё1:iвҲ’1 ] вҲқ          Pr [Si = T ] В·      Pr [П„1:iвҲ’1 = Оё1:iвҲ’1 |Si = T ]
          П„ вҲјОҳ(D)                                  П„ вҲјОҳ(D)            П„ вҲјОҳ(D)
                                          пЈ«                P                        P                 2пЈ¶
                                              2hОё1:iвҲ’1 ,   jвҲҲT C1:iвҲ’1,j i вҲ’           jвҲҲT C1:iвҲ’1,j
             вҲқ p|T | (1 вҲ’ p)iвҲ’|T | В· exp пЈӯ                                                            2пЈ·
                                                                                                           пЈё.
                                         пЈ¬
                                                                    2Пғ 2

Hence:

                              Pr[T вҲӘ {j} вҠҶ Si |T вҠҶ Si , П„1:iвҲ’1 = Оё1:iвҲ’1 ] =


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                             2

                                                                          2hОё1:iвҲ’1 , jвҲҲT 0 C1:iвҲ’1,j iвҲ’k j 0 вҲҲT 0 C1:iвҲ’1,j 0 k
                                                                                    P                  P
                                 |T 0 |             iвҲ’|T 0 |
            P
                 T 0 вҠҮT вҲӘ{j} p            (1 вҲ’ p)
                                                В· exp                                            2Пғ 2
                                                                                                                             2


                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                             .
                                                      2hОё1:iвҲ’1 , jвҲҲT 0 C1:iвҲ’1,j iвҲ’k j 0 вҲҲT 0 C1:iвҲ’1,j 0 k
                                                                P                  P
                       |T 0|              0|
              P                      iвҲ’|T
               T 0 вҠҮT p      (1 вҲ’ p)         В· exp                           2Пғ 2
                                                                                                         2


Fix some T 0 вҠҮ T вҲӘ {j}. Consider the term in the numerator sum corresponding to T 0 , and the two terms in
the denominator sum corresponding to T 0 and T 0 \ {j}. The ratio of the numerator term to the sum of the
two denominator terms is:

                                                                                                    2

                                                        2hОё1:iвҲ’1 ,C1:iвҲ’1,j iвҲ’k j 0 вҲҲT 0 C1:iвҲ’1,j 0 k
                                                                               P
                                          p В· exp                           2Пғ 2
                                                                                                    2


                                                                 2
                                                                                       P                           2
                                                                                                                      .
                     2hОё1:iвҲ’1 ,C1:iвҲ’1,j iвҲ’k j 0 вҲҲT 0 C1:iвҲ’1,j 0 k                     вҲ’k j 0 вҲҲT 0 \{j} C1:iвҲ’1,j 0 k
                                            P
       p В· exp                           2Пғ 2
                                                                 2
                                                                     + (1 вҲ’ p) В· exp               2Пғ 2
                                                                                                                   2


                                                                              P                          2       P                            2
Since entries of C are non-negative, we have                                     j 0 вҲҲT 0 C1:iвҲ’1,j
                                                                                                     0       вүҘ     j 0 вҲҲT 0 \j C1:iвҲ’1,j
                                                                                                                                          0       +
                                                                           2                               2
             2
kC1:iвҲ’1,j 0 k2 , hence this ratio and thus Pr[T вҲӘ {j} вҠҶ Si |T вҠҶ Si , П„1:iвҲ’1 = Оё1:iвҲ’1 ] are at most pi,j , which
proves the lemma.


Step 3 (replacing pi,j with pei,j via conditional composition): By Theorem C.2 and Cor. B.3, it now
suffices to show that w.p. 1 вҲ’ Оҙ1 , pi,j вүӨ pei,j for all i, j simultaneously. The bound trivially holds for
entries where Ci,j = 0, so we only need the bound to hold for all nnz(C) pairs i, j such that Ci,j > 0.
Furthermore, if Ci,j is the first non-zero entry of column j, then C1:iвҲ’1,j is the all zero-vector, so we get
pi,j = pei,j = p.
So, there are only nnz(C) вҲ’ n вҖңnon-trivialвҖқ pairs we need to prove the tail bound for; by a union bound,
                                                                    Оҙ1
we can show each of these bounds individually holds w.p. nnz(C)вҲ’n          . By definition of pi,j , pei,j , this is
equivalent to showing hОё1:iвҲ’1 , C1:iвҲ’1,j i вүӨ z kC1:iвҲ’1,j k2 Пғ + si,j for each of these i, j pairs. We have:

                                                          X
                        hОё1:iвҲ’1 , C1:iвҲ’1,j i =                     hC1:iвҲ’1,j 0 , C1:iвҲ’1,j i + hz1:iвҲ’1 , C1:iвҲ’1,j i.
                                                         j 0 вҲҲSi

                                                                 Оҙ1
The first term is tail bounded by si,j with probability 1 вҲ’ 2(nnz(C)вҲ’n) by definition, the second term is
                                          2
drawn from N (0, kC1:iвҲ’1,j k2 Пғ 2 ) and thus tail bounded by z kC1:iвҲ’1,j k2 Пғ with the same probability by
definition. A union bound over these two events gives the desired tail bound on hОё1:iвҲ’1 , C1:iвҲ’1,j i.

C.3   P ROOF OF L EM . 5.1

Proof. Since each 0 вүӨ pi вүӨ 1/n0 , the mechanism is the same as the following: For each example we choose
a subset S вҠҶ [n] of size n0 according to some distribution that is a function of the pi , and then choose i
uniformly at random from the elements of S, and include the example in the ith subset. By quasi-convexity
of approximate DP, it suffices to prove the DP guarantee for a fixed choice of S. For any fixed choice of
S, the mechanism is equivalent вҲҡ to the shuffled Gaussian mechanism over n0 coordinates. Each unshuffled
                                   2 ln(1.25/Оҙ0 )
Gaussian mechanism satisfies (          Пғ         , Оҙ0 )-DP, and then the lemma follows by the amplification via
shuffling statement of Theorem 3.8 of (Feldman et al., 2022).

                                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.4    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.2

We first analyze a simplified case where xi = 0 if i 6= iвҲ— , and otherwise xi = 1 for D and xi = 0 for D0 .
We later give a proof for the general case.
                                                                                 P
Proof of Theorem 5.2 in simplified case. Let П„j,k be the value of the noisy sum kВ·2j +1вүӨiвүӨ(k+1)В·2j xi +
zj,k , П„ = {П„j,k }0вүӨjвүӨlog n,0вүӨk<n/2j and let Оҳ(D) be the distribution of these values under dataset D. We
consider a single sensitive example; let iвҲ— be the (random) coordinate of xiвҲ— that this example contributes
to.
Now, again abusing notation to let Pr denote a likelihood, we have for any j:

             h                                                                                                i
      Pr  {П„j,k }0вүӨk<n/2j = {Оёj 0 ,k }j 0 >j,0вүӨk<n/2j0 {П„j 0 ,k }j 0 >j,0вүӨk<n/2j0 = {Оёj 0 ,k }j 0 >j,0вүӨk<n/2j0 вҲқ
  П„ вҲјОҳ(D)
        X             h                                                                                      i
                 Pr    {П„j,k }0вүӨk<n/2j = {Оёj 0 ,k }j 0 >j,0вүӨk<n/2j0 k вҲ— В· 2j + 1 вүӨ iвҲ— вүӨ (k вҲ— + 1) В· 2j В·
                     П„ вҲјОҳ(D)
      0вүӨkвҲ— вүӨn/2j
                     h                                                                                           i
             Pr       k вҲ— В· 2j + 1 вүӨ iвҲ— вүӨ (k вҲ— + 1) В· 2j {П„j 0 ,k }j 0 >j,0вүӨk<n/2j0 = {Оёj 0 ,k }j 0 >j,0вүӨk<n/2j0
           П„ вҲјОҳ(D)

In other words, for any j, the distribution of the j-th level of the tree, {П„j,k }0вүӨkвүӨn/2j , conditioned on
the higher levels of the tree, {П„j 0 ,k }j 0 >j,0вүӨkвүӨn/2j0 , is the output distribution of mechanism described
in Lem. 5.1, where the probabilities are
                           h                                                                                         i
      pj,k :=      Pr          k В· 2j + 1 вүӨ iвҲ— вүӨ (k + 1) В· 2j {П„j 0 ,k }j 0 >j,0вүӨk<n/2j0 = {Оёj 0 ,k }j 0 >j,0вүӨk<n/2j0 .
                 П„ вҲјОҳ(D)

We now show a high probability bound on each of these probabilities. We have:

                     h                                                                                        i
             Pr    k В· 2j + 1 вүӨ iвҲ— вүӨ (k + 1) В· 2j {П„j 0 ,k }j 0 >j,0вүӨk<n/2j0 = {Оёj 0 ,k }j 0 >j,0вүӨk<n/2j0
           П„ вҲјОҳ(D)
                     P(k+1)В·2j               h
                                                                                                           вҲ—
                                                                                                                i
                        i=kВ·2j +1 Pr П„ вҲјОҳ(D)   {П„  0  }
                                                  j ,k j >j,0вүӨk<n/2
                                                        0                 j 0 = {Оё   0   }
                                                                                    j ,k j >j,0вүӨk<n/2
                                                                                           0          j 0 i  = i
                   = P                     h                                                                 i
                           n                                                                            вҲ—
                           i=1 PrП„ вҲјОҳ(D) {П„j ,k }j 0 >j,0вүӨk<n/2j = {Оёj ,k }j 0 >j,0вүӨk<n/2j i = i
                                                0                      0         0                  0

                                                                                  0               0
                                                                                                     2 !
                     P(k+1)В·2j Q                                 П„j 0 ,k вҲ’1(kВ·2j +1вүӨiвҲ— вүӨ(k+1)В·2j )
                        i=kВ·2j +1  j 0 >j,0вүӨk<n/2j 0 exp вҲ’                           2Пғ 2
                     =                                                                                          2

                               Pn       Q                                (П„j0 ,k вҲ’1(kВ·2j0 +1вүӨiвҲ— вүӨ(k+1)В·2j0 ))
                                  i=1    j 0 >j,0вүӨk<n/2j 0 exp       вҲ’                   2Пғ 2

                         P(k+1)В·2j Q                                        П„j 0 ,k
                          i=kВ·2j +1     j,k:kВ·2j 0 +1вүӨiвүӨ(k+1)В·2j 0 exp вҲ’ Пғ 2
                     = Pn Q                                            П„j 0 ,k
                              i=1    j,k:kВ·2j 0 +1вүӨiвүӨ(k+1)В·2j 0 exp вҲ’ Пғ 2
                                         Q                                        П„j 0 ,k
                       2j maxiвҲҲ[n] j,k:kВ·2j0 +1вүӨiвүӨ(k+1)В·2j0 exp вҲ’ Пғ2
                     вүӨ     В·
                       n miniвҲҲ[n] j,k:kВ·2j0 +1вүӨiвүӨ(k+1)В·2j0 exp вҲ’ П„jПғ02,k
                                        Q

                       2j

                                    (log n вҲ’ j) maxj 0 ,k П„j 0 ,k вҲ’ minj 0 ,k П„j 0 ,k
                     вүӨ     В· exp                                                            .
                       n                                  Пғ2


                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                         p
With probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2, by a union bound for all 2n pairs j, k we have |П„j,k | вүӨ                           2 ln(4n/Оҙ)Пғ, so the
above bound is at most:

                                                                 p           !
                                        2j           (log n вҲ’ j)2 2 ln(4n/Оҙ)
                                           В· exp                               .
                                        n                        Пғ
           вҲҡ
         4     2 ln(4n/Оҙ)
If Пғ вүҘ           ln 2     in turn this is at most:
                                                                        r
                                                 2j вҲҡ log nвҲ’j               2j
                                                   В· 2        =                .
                                                 n                          n
Now, by Theorem C.2 and Observation 3.2 it suffices
                                                 toвҲҡ show that conditioned
                                                                           on this probability

                                                                            log(1/Оҙ) log log(1/Оҙ)
1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2 event, the binary tree mechanism satisfies                O           , Оҙ/2 -DP. For log n вҲ’
                                                                                    Пғ
                                                           вҲҡ
                                                             log(1/Оҙ) log log(n/Оҙ)
16e log log(16n/Оҙ) вүӨ j вүӨ log n, releasing П„j,k satisfies O           Пғ               , Оҙ/4  -DP by the
analysis of the (unamplified) Gaussian mechanism. For levels 0 вүӨ j < log n вҲ’ 16e log log(16n/Оҙ), our
upper bound on the conditional probabilities and Lem. 5.1 with Оҙ0 = Оҙ/8n0 log n shows that, conditioned
on the high-probability
                    вҲҡ   event, the distribution
                                                        privacy loss of outputting {П„j,k }k conditioned on levels
                                                 of the
                              0
                          ln(n /Оҙ) ln(1/Оҙ)
j 0 > j satisfies O                          , Оҙ/4 log n -DP, with n0 =
                                                                            p n
                                                                                2j . By basic composition, the
                                вҲҡ
                              Пғ n0
overall privacy loss distribution conditioned on the 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2 probability event satisfies:
       пЈ«                                     !       пЈ«                                               пЈ¶      пЈ¶
                 p                                                 0
       пЈӯO            log(1/Оҙ) log log(1/Оҙ)                         X                    2j/4 ln(1/Оҙ) пЈё
                                                 +OпЈӯ                                  +                , Оҙ/2пЈё -DP.
                             Пғ                                                             Пғn1/4
                                                       j=log nвҲ’16e log log(16n/Оҙ)


Here we use the upper bound on Оҙ which is equivalent to log(n/Оҙ) = O(log(1/Оҙ)). We conclude by
bounding the sum as:

                                                     0
                                                     X                    2j/4 ln(1/Оҙ)
                                                                      +
                                                                             Пғn1/4
                                         j=log nвҲ’16e log log(16n/Оҙ)

       log nвҲ’16e log log(16n/Оҙ)                          p              log nвҲ’16e log log(16n/Оҙ)            p
                   X                     ln(1/Оҙ)              ln(1/Оҙ)              X                 1         ln(1/Оҙ)
   вүӨ                              +                  =                                                   =               .
                                                                                                           Пғ(1 вҲ’ 2вҲ’1/4 )
                                           p
                   l=0
                                    Пғ2 l/4   ln(1/Оҙ)            Пғ
                                                                                   l=0
                                                                                                    2l/4



We now discuss how to extend the proof to a more general case. In other words, we choose some y with
each row having 2-norm at most 1 for D, and then set y0 for D0 to be y with the first row zeroed out. Then,
x is chosen by shuffling the rows of y or y0 .
Lemma C.4. Under the above setup, for some k that divides n, consider the mechanism that chooses a
random size k equipartition ofP[n], P = (S1 , S2 , . . . Sk ) of [n] according to some distribution and out-
puts (Оё1 , Оё2 , . . . , Оёk ), Оёi вҲј N ( jвҲҲSi yi , Пғ 2 ). Suppose for any two equipartitions P, P 0 , the probability of
choosing P is at most c times the probability of choosing P 0 , and let n0 = bk/cc.


                                                         23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     n0                                     p
                            вҲ’ 16e
    вҲҡfor any Оҙ вүҘ  2e
Then,                             , Оҙ 0 вүҘ            0, if Пғ         =    в„Ұ( ln(1/Оҙ0 )) then this mechanism satisfies
      ln(1/Оҙ0 ) ln(1/Оҙ)
 O         вҲҡ
          Пғ n0
                        , Оҙ + n0 Оҙ0 -DP.


Proof. Recall that y1 is the example differing between D and D0 . By post-processing and quasi-convexity,
we can instead analyze the mechanism that for each Si , also publishes all but one element in Si , and specif-
ically for the Si including 1 (the sensitive element), the element of Si not published must be 1. This is
equivalent to saying: without loss of generality we can assume n = k.
Next, the assumption on the distribution over P implies that the distribution is in the convex hull of distri-
butions over P that deterministically choose k вҲ’ n0 elements of P , with 1 being one of these n0 unchosen
elements, and then uniformly shuffle the remaining n0 elements. In terms of privacy guarantees, each in-
dividual mechanism using one of these distributions is equivalent to n0 Gaussian mechanisms on shuffled
elements. Then, by quasi-convexity, the privacy guarantees of this mechanism are no worse than those of a
Gaussian mechanism over n0 shuffled elements. We conclude using the analysis of amplification by shuffling
in (Feldman et al., 2022).

Next, we use the following black-box reduction from (Оө, Оҙ)-DP guarantees to high-probability privacy loss
bounds:
Lemma C.5 ((Kasiviswanathan & Smith, 2014)). If a mechanism satisfies (Оө, Оҙ)-DP, then the probability
the privacy loss of its output exceeds 2Оө is at most ОөeОҙОө .

Now, the high-level idea is that the (Оө, Оҙ)-DP guarantee on outputting levels j 0 > j implies a high-probability
bound on the privacy loss of outputting these levels via Lem. C.5, which in turn implies a bound on c in
Lem. C.4 if we use the posterior distribution over shuffles as the distribution in that lemma. Then, we can
use Lem. C.4 to get an (Оө, Оҙ)-DP guarantee for round j conditioned on the previous rounds, and as before
the resulting Оө per level decays geometrically and we can use basic composition.

Proof of Theorem 5.2. By the upper bound on Оҙ, log(poly (n) /Оҙ) = O(log(1/Оҙ)). So, for any con-
stant c1 and another constant     c2 depending on c1 , releasing levels log n вҲ’ c1 log log 1/Оҙ to log n satisfies
    вҲҡ
  c2 log(1/Оҙ) log log(1/Оҙ)      2
            Пғ              , Оҙ/n -DP by analysis of the Gaussian mechanism.

Now, we will show by induction that releasing levels j to log n, j вүӨ log n вҲ’ c1 log log 1/Оҙ, satisfies (Оөj , Оҙj )-
DP for:

                                p                                             j
                           c2       log(1/Оҙ) log log(1/Оҙ)                     X               c3 log(1/Оҙ)
                    Оөj =                                  +                                    вҲҡ          ,
                                           Пғ                0                                 Пғ 2log nвҲ’j
                                                                     j =log nвҲ’c1 log log(1/Оҙ)
                                                   j
                                Оҙ                  X
                        Оҙj =      В·                                  (1 + 1/e)log nвҲ’c1 log log(1/Оҙ)вҲ’j .
                                n2 0
                                          j =log nвҲ’c1 log log(1/Оҙ)


In the inequality on Оөj we assume c1 is sufficiently large. The base case of j = log n вҲ’ c1 log log 1/Оҙ
holds by the aforementioned analysis of the Gaussian mechanism. Now, assuming releasing levels j + 1 to
log n satisfies (Оөj , Оҙj )-DP, we will prove releasing levels j to log n satisfies (Оөj , Оҙj )-DP. Consider the output
distribution of level j, conditioned on the event that the privacy loss of releasing levels j + 1 to log n is at
most 1. The privacy loss being at most 1 implies that conditioned on levels j + 1 to log nвҖҷs output, no shuffle
is more than e times as likely as any other shuffle, and thus the same is true for equipartitions of the data into

                                                           24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                       вҲҡ
                                                                  c3       log2 (1/Оҙ)
the sums in level j. Then by Lem. C.4, level j satisfies, say, ( вҲҡ log nвҲ’j , Оҙ/n2 )-DP for some sufficiently
                                                                pПғ 2
large constant c3 , assuming c1 is sufficiently large and Пғ вүҘ c4 log(1/Оҙ) log log(1/Оҙ) for a sufficiently large
constant c4 . We have

                                      p                             p
                                      c2 log(1/Оҙ) log log(1/Оҙ) + 4c3 log(1/Оҙ)
                             Оөj+1 вүӨ
                                                          Пғ
                                              p
So Оөj < 1/2 for all j, again assuming Пғ вүҘ c4 log(1/Оҙ) log log(1/Оҙ) for sufficiently large c4 , by Lem. C.5
this event happens with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙj+1 /e. Then assuming releasing levels j + 1 to log n
satisfies (Оөj+1 , Оҙj+1 )-DP by Thm. 4.3 and basic composition, we have proven releasing levels j to log n
satisfies (Оөj , Оҙj )-DP for

                                      c3 log(1/Оҙ)
                           Оөj = Оөj+1 + вҲҡ          , Оҙj = Оҙj+1 (1 + 1/e) + Оҙ/n2 .
                                      Пғ 2log nвҲ’j

The claimed non-recursively defined values for Оөj , Оҙj follow by unrolling the above recursive formula and
plugging in the base case j = log n вҲ’ c1 log log 1/Оҙ. Now,   the full binary tree mechanism with shuffling
                                   вҲҡ
                                     log(1/Оҙ) log log(1/Оҙ)
satisfies (Оө0 , Оҙ0 )-DP for Оө0 = O           Пғ              , Оҙ0 вүӨ Оҙ as desired. (Note that the between the
constants c1 , c2 , c3 , c4 there are no circular dependencies, i.e. there does exist a set of constants satisfying
the assumptions in the proof.)


D    E XTENDING MMCC TO вҖңb- MIN - SEP S AMPLING вҖқ

(Choquette-Choo et al., 2023a) analyzed the b-banded matrix mechanism under the following scheme, which
weвҖҷll call вҖңb-min-sep samplingвҖқ: We partition the dataset D into b equal-size subsets, D1 , D2 , . . . Db . To
compute xi , we use independently include each element of Di (mod b) (where we say i (mod b) = b if b
divides i) with probability bp; here, we write the sampling probability in these rounds as bp instead of p to
reflect the fact that the average example still participates in fraction p of rounds in expectation for any choice
of b.
We give a generalization of MMCC that analyzes the matrix mechanism under b-min-sep sampling, that
matches the analysis of (Choquette-Choo et al., 2023a) when C is b-banded but can generalize to arbitrary
lower triangular matrices. In other words, this generalization of MMCC subsumes the analysis in (Choquette-
Choo et al., 2023a).
Note that if we want to analyze the privacy guarantee for an example in Di , iвҲ’1, this is the same as analyzing
the privacy guarantee for an example in D1 , if we use C with the first i вҲ’ 1 rows/columns cut off. Then,
without loss of generality we only need to state a privacy analysis for examples in D1 - to get a privacy
guarantee that holds for all examples simultaneously, for each Di we can compute a privacy guarantee using
the above reduction, and then take the worst of these. Further, for some classes of matrices, such as Toeplitz
matrices, the examples in D1 will have the worst privacy guarantee and thus it suffices to only analyze these
examples.
We now show Generalized-MMCC, given in Fig. 6, computes a valid privacy guarantee under b-min-sep
sampling.
Theorem D.1. Let Оө be the output of Generalized-MMCC. Then the matrix mechanism with matrix C,
b-min-sep sampling, sampling probability p, noise level Пғ satisfies (Оө, Оҙ1 + Оҙ2 )-DP (for examples in D1 ).


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 3 Generalized-MMCC
 1: Input: Matrix C, sampling probability p, noise standard deviation Пғ, probabilities Оҙ1 , Оҙ2 , min-sep b.
 2: Delete all columns of C except columns 1, b + 1, 2b + 1 . . .
 3: {e
     pi,j }iвҲҲ[n],jвҲҲ[dn/be вҶҗGeneralizedProbabilityTailBounds(C, bp, Пғ, bОҙ1 ).
    . pei,j is a high-probability upper bound on the probability that an example participated in round j,
    conditioned on output in rounds 1 to i вҲ’ 1.
      (b)
 4: pei,j = pe(iвҲ’1)b+1,(jвҲ’1)b+1
        (b)
 5: Ci,j = C(iвҲ’1)b+1:ib,(jвҲ’1)b+1 2
 6: for i вҲҲ [dn/be] do
                                           (b)              (b)
 7:       P LDi вҶҗ PLD of MP M oG ({e
                                   pi,j }jвҲҲ[dn/be] , {Ci,j }jвҲҲ[dn/be] ).
 8: P LD вҶҗ convolution of {P LDi }iвҲҲ[dn/be] .
 9: return min ({Оө : P LD satisfies (Оө, Оҙ2 )-DP}).



                              Figure 6: Extension of MMCC to b-min-sep sampling.


Algorithm 4 GeneralizedProbabilityTailBounds(C, p, Пғ, Оҙ1 )
 1: Input: Matrix C вҲҲ RmГ—n , sampling probability p, noise standard deviation Пғ, probability Оҙ1 .
                Оҙ1
 2: Оҙ 0 = 2В·(nnz(C)вҲ’n)                                                . nnz is the number of non-zeros.
 3: z = ОҰвҲ’1 (1 вҲ’ Оҙ 0 )            . Tail bound on normal distribution; here, ОҰ is the standard normal CDF.
 4: for i вҲҲ [m], j вҲҲ [n] do
 5:     if Ci,j = 0 then
 6:         pei,j = 1
 7:     else
                                                                                            i.i.d.
            si,j = minimum s s.t. Pr[ j 0 вүӨi xj 0 hC1:iвҲ’1,j , C1:iвҲ’1,j 0 i > s] вүӨ Оҙ 0 , xj 0 вҲј Bern(p)
                                     P
 8:
      . si,j is a tail bound on the dot product of first i вҲ’ 1 entries of Cx and C1:iвҲ’1,j .
                     zkC       k
                         1:iвҲ’1,j 2   2s   вҲ’kC       k2
 9:          Оөi,j =        Пғ        + i,j 2Пғ1:iвҲ’1,j
                                             2
                                                    2

    . Оөi,j is a tail bound on the privacy loss of a participation in round j after outputting first i вҲ’ 1 rounds
                         pВ·exp(Оөi,j )
10:          pei,j = pВ·exp(Оөi,j )+(1вҲ’p)
11: return {e
            pi,j }iвҲҲ[m],jвҲҲ[n] .


                           Figure 7: Generalization of ProbabilityTailBounds.


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        c = 10 (unamplified epsilon = 0.397)                                                                            c = 20 (unamplified epsilon = 0.189)                                                                   c = 40 (unamplified epsilon = 0.0901)
                                                                                     y=-0.0313x+1.1625                                                               y=0.2053x+0.8877                                                                            1.7         y=0.3452x+0.7164
                                                                                                                                                        1.45
unamplified epsilon / amplified epsilon


                                                                                                              unamplified epsilon / amplified epsilon


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       unamplified epsilon / amplified epsilon
                                          1.12                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.6
                                                                                                                                                        1.40

                                          1.10                                                                                                          1.35                                                                                                     1.5
                                                                                                                                                        1.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.4
                                          1.08                                                                                                          1.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.3
                                                                                                                                                        1.20
                                          1.06
                                                                                                                                                        1.15                                                                                                     1.2

                                                 1.4   1.6   1.8    2.0      2.2     2.4   2.6    2.8                                                          1.4    1.6    1.8    2.0      2.2     2.4   2.6   2.8                                                   1.4    1.6    1.8    2.0      2.2     2.4   2.6   2.8
                                                                    sqrt(log(n)+1)                                                                                                  sqrt(log(n)+1)                                                                                          sqrt(log(n)+1)


Figure 8: Plotpof multiplicative improvement in Оө for the optimal continual counting matrix mechanism as
a function of log(n) + 1 вүҲ kCe1 k2 . We plot n = 2i , i вҲҲ {1, 2, . . . , 7}. We use Пғ = c kCei k2 , so the Оө
value in the unamplified single-participation setting is fixed. All Оө are for Оҙ = 10вҲ’6 .


Proof. The algorithm is almost the same as Thm. 4.3, so we just need to justify the key differences. In
                                                                                (b)
particular, we need to justify (1) the deletion of columns, (2) the choice of pei,j , and (3) the choice of C(b) .
(1) is justified by the proof of Theorem 4 in (Choquette-Choo et al., 2023a), which observes that the products
of columns j of C for which j (mod b) 6= 1 and the corresponding rows of x are independent of D1 , i.e.
we can treat their products as public information. So it does not affect the privacy analysis to delete these
rows/columns from C/x, and then view the resulting x as generated by i.i.d sampling every round with
probability bp.
(2) and (3) are both justified if we use conditional composition over sequential mechanisms corresponding
to b rows of Cx + z instead of a single row. Each of these sequential mechanisms is a VMoG mech-
anism, which Cor. B.6 allows us to reduce to the scalar PMoG mechanism defined in terms of C(b) in
Generalized-MMCC. The probabilities pe(b) are then valid to use in the conditional composition by the
same argument as in Thm. 4.3, up to the adjustment to use bОҙ1 instead of Оҙ1 . This adjustment is valid, since
we only use fraction 1/b of the values generated by GeneralizedProbabilityTailBounds, i.e. we
are union bounding over 1/b as many вҖңbadвҖқ events as in the original proof, so we can increase the allowed
probability for each вҖңbadвҖқ events by b (which is implicitly done by increasing Оҙ1 by b).

One can verify that (i) for b = 1, Generalized-MMCC is equivalent to MMCC, and that (ii) if C is b-
banded, Generalized-MMCC is equivalent to the privacy analysis in (Choquette-Choo et al., 2023a).

E                                                M ORE E MPIRICAL Оө C OMPUTATIONS

(Fichtenberger et al., 2023; Henzinger et al., 2023) showed that a post-processing of the matrix mechanism
using the following lower-triangular matrix achieves 1 + o(1) times the optimal `22 error for prefix sums
(without amplification): Ci,j = f (i вҲ’ j), where f is defined as
                                                                                                                пЈұ
                                                                                                                пЈІ 0,                    for k < 0
                                                                                                        f (k) =   1,                    for k = 0 .
                                                                                                                пЈі f (k вҲ’ 1) В· 1 вҲ’ 1   , for k > 0
                                                                                                                                  2k

Similarly to the binary tree mechanism, we will consider the unamplified single-participation setting as a
baseline. In this case, the sensitivity of this matrix mechanism is kCe1 k2 , i.e. the `2 -norm of the first
column of C. So again, setting Пғ = c kCe1 k2 results in a fixed Оө for a fixed Оҙ. Our comparison will be
applying the same matrix mechanism with subsampling probability 1/n and the same choice of Пғ.


                                                                                                                                                                              27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In Fig. 8, we reproduce the plots in Fig. 2 but for this matrix mechanism
                                                                      вҲҡ instead of the binary tree mechanism.
The `2 -norm of the columns of this matrix asymptotically are p     Оҳ( log n); because of this, and to make a
direct comparison to the binary tree mechanism easier, we use log(n) + 1 as the x-axis and plot the least
squares linear regression. Because the columns of this matrix are less orthogonal than those of the matrix
for the binary tree mechanism, there is less benefit from amplification in this setting than the binary tree
mechanism setting, so we use a larger range of values c вҲҲ {10, 20, 40} for the noise multiplier to better
demonstrate the behavior of the improvement in Оө.
Forpsufficiently large Пғ, the improvement in Оө due to the amplification analysis is again roughly proportional
to log(n) + 1. For the same reasons as for the binary tree mechanism, the fit of the linear regression is
better as Пғ increases: here, because the columns of this matrix are less orthogonal on average, a larger value
of c is needed for the fit to improve. Here, the constant multiplier in the improvement is smaller; this makes
sense as these matrices improve on the error of the binary tree mechanism by a constant, and thus the amount
by which we can improve the privacy analysis of this matrix mechanism without violating lower bounds is
smaller than for the binary tree mechanism.


F         I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

To implement the MMCC algorithm, we use the open-source Python library dp accounting.pld8 . We
extend the class dp accounting.pld.pld mechanism.AdditiveNoisePrivacyLoss to cre-
ate a class, MixtureGaussianPrivacyLoss that represents the privacy loss distribution of MM oG ,
which can be used along with other tools in the dp accounting.pld library to implement MMCC. We
discuss our implementation and some challenges here. The dp accounting.pld library uses the con-
vention that privacy losses are decreasing; we use the same convention in the discussions in this section for
consistency. Our implementation is currently open-sourced as part of the dp accounting library, and
PLD accounting for MoG mechanisms can be done using dp accounting.pld.PLDAccountant and
dp accounting.dp event.MixtureOfGaussiansDpEvent.

F.1       E XTENDING A D D I T I V E N O I S E P R I V A C Y L O S S

In order to perform all the necessary computations in MMCC, we need to implement the following methods
in MixtureGaussianPrivacyLoss:
          1. A method to compute the CDF of the mixture of Gaussians distribution.
          2. A method to compute the privacy loss at x.
          3. An inverse privacy loss method, i.e. a method which takes Оө and computes the smallest x achieving
             this Оө.
Given the probabilities and sensitivities {p1 , p2 , . . . , pk } and {c1 , c2 , . . . , ck }, as well as Пғ, the first two can
easily be done by just summing the PDFs/CDFs of the Gaussians in the mixture. This takes at most O(k)
times the runtime of the corresponding method for the (subsampled) Gaussian mechanism.
The third is more problematic. For the subsampled Gaussian mechanism with sampling probability p and
sensitivity 1, the privacy loss function (under the remove adjacency) is:


                                                        вҲ’2x вҲ’ 1
                                             ln p exp             + 1 вҲ’ p   .
                                                         2Пғ 2
      8
   https://github.com/google/differential-privacy/tree/main/python/dp_
accounting/dp_accounting


                                                           28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This function is easily invertible. However, if we consider MM oG ({p, 1 вҲ’ p}, {c1 , c2 }), the privacy loss at
x is:


                                       вҲ’2c1 x вҲ’ c21                           вҲ’2c2 x вҲ’ c22

                        ln p exp                          + (1 вҲ’ p) exp                           .
                                          2Пғ 2                                   2Пғ 2

Because this function includes the sum of two exponential functions of x, it is not easy to invert. We instead
use binary search to get the smallest multiple of вҲҶ1 which achieves the desired privacy loss, where вҲҶ1 is
a parameter we choose that trades off between efficiency and accuracy. That is, if L is the privacy loss
function, and we want to compute the inverse privacy loss of y, we return x = dLвҲ’1 (y)/вҲҶ1 e В· вҲҶ1 . Note that
by overestimating x, we also overestimate the privacy loss since we assume the privacy loss is decreasing.
Hence this approximation is вҖңpessimistic,вҖқ i.e. does not cause us to report an (Оө, Оҙ)-DP guarantee that is not
actually satisfied by MM oG .
Note that using binary search requires a O(log(1/вҲҶ1 )) multiplicative dependence on вҲҶ1 , that is not incurred
for e.g. the subsampled Gaussian for which we can quickly compute the exact inverse privacy loss. Indeed,
we observed that this inverse privacy loss method is the bottleneck for our implementation.


F.2   E FFICIENTLY R EPRESENTING PM O G AS M O G

As discussed in the previous section, the runtime of our implementation has a linear dependence on the
number of components in the MoG. However, in MMCC, we are actually using PMoGs, which are MoGs
with potentially 2n components. So, even just listing the components can be prohibitively expensive.
We instead choose another approximation parameter вҲҶ2 , and round each entry of C up to the nearest multi-
ple of вҲҶ2 . By Lemma B.4, this only worsens the privacy guarantee, i.e. any privacy guarantee we prove for
the rounded version of C also applies to the original C. After this rounding, the number of components in
any MoG we compute the PLD of is at most dmaxi e>                                >
                                                         i C 1 e/вҲҶ2 + n (maxi ei C 1 is the maximum row
norm of C). Furthermore, we can compute the probabilities/sensitivities efficiently since we are working
with PMoGs. In particular, for each pei,j , Ci,j pair, we can construct the probability mass function (PMF)
of the random variable that is Ci,j w.p. pei,j and 0 otherwise, and then take the convolution of all such
PMFs for a row to get the PMF of the discretized sensitivity for the PMoG. For each row, this can be done
in at most n вҲ’ 1 convolutions, each convolution between two PMFs that have support size at most 2 and
maxi d e>                                                                         >
          i C 1 /вҲҶ2 e + n. So the convolutions can be done in time O(maxi d ei C 1 /вҲҶ2 e + n), i.e. our
                        2           >                3
overall runtime is O(n maxi d ei C 1 /вҲҶ2 e + n ), i.e. polynomial instead of exponential in n if e.g. all
entries of C are bounded by a constant. By doing the convolutions in a divide-and-conquer fashion, and
using FFT for the convolutions, we can further improve the runtime to O(ne maxi d e> C /вҲҶ2 e + n2 ), i.e.
                                                                                      i    1
nearly linear in the input size and 1/вҲҶ2 if the entries of C are bounded by a constant.


F.3   C OMPUTING si,j

Similar to computing the probabilities and sensitivities for the PMoGs, any overestimate of si,j can be used
in place of si,j to get a valid privacy guarantee from MMCC by Lemma B.3. Since si,j only appears in a lower
order term in the definition of Оөi,j , a weaker tail bound will not affect the privacy guarantee as much. So, in
our implementation, we use the following P     simple and efficient approximation: We use the binomial CDF to
obtain an exact tail bound t on kx1:i k1 = j 0 вүӨi xj 0 in the definition of si,j . We then take the sum of the t
largest values of hC1:iвҲ’1,j , C1:iвҲ’1,j 0 i to be our overestimate of si,j .

                                                      29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.4   C OMPUTING A LL ROW PLD S

Putting this all together, we must compute n PLDs in MMCC, one for each row of C. Though only an
O(n) overhead in runtime over computing a single PLD, this O(n) overhead is undesirable as each PLD
computation is already quite expensive due to the aforementioned difficulties. However, this component is
embarrassingly parallel, which we leverage to massively speed up runtimes.
Note that for some special classes of matrices, we will have that multiple rows share the same PLD, which
also allows us to dramatically speed up the calculation even without parallelization. For example, this is the
case for the binary tree mechanism due to symmetry, as well for as b-banded Toeplitz C due to the fact that
rows 2b вҲ’ 1 to n of pe and C are the same (up to an offset in indices that doesnвҖҷt affect the PLD).

F.5   A PPLICATIONS B EYOND M ATRIX M ECHANISMS

We believe that MoG mechanisms/MixtureGaussianPrivacyLoss are useful analytic tools for pri-
vacy analysis of mechanisms beyond the matrix mechanism. We discuss two examples here.
Privacy amplification via iteration on linear losses: Consider running DP-SGD with sampled minibatches.
To get a (Оө, Оҙ)-DP guarantee, we can compute the PLD for the subsampled Gaussian mechanism, and then
compose this PLD with itself n times. For general non-convex losses, this accounting scheme is tight, even
if we only release the last iterate.
For linear losses, we can give a better privacy guarantee for releasing only the last iterate, similarly to (Feld-
man et al., 2018): Releasing the last iterate is equivalent in terms of privacy guarantees to a Gaussian mecha-
nism with random sensitivity Binom(n, p) and variance nПғ 2 . Using MixtureGaussianPrivacyLoss
we can get tight (Оө, Оҙ)-DP guarantees for this mechanism. Empirically, we found that these can be a lot
tighter than composition of subsampled Gaussians. For example, using n = 128, p = 1/128, Пғ = 1 we
found that composition of subsampled Gaussians gives a proof of (.806, 10вҲ’6 )-DP, whereas analyzing the
last iterate as a MoG mechanism gives a proof of (.291, 10вҲ’6 )-DP. We conjecture a similar improvement is
possible for all convex losses, rather than linear losses.
Tight group privacy guarantees for DP-SGD: Consider analyzing the privacy guarantees of DP-SGD
under group privacy. That is, we want to give a privacy guarantee for pairs of databases differing in
k > 1 examples. One way of doing this is to compute a DP guarantee for k = 1, then use an example-
to-group privacy theorem such as that of (Vadhan, 2017), which shows an (Оө, Оҙ)-DP mechanism satisfies
(kОө, k exp(kОө)Оҙ)-DP for groups of size k. This is overly pessimistic, since the black-box theorem doesnвҖҷt
account for the specific structure of the mechanism. We can instead get relatively tight guarantees via
MixtureGaussianPrivacyLoss: If each example is sampled independently, then the privacy loss of
a group of k examples in each round of DP-SGD is dominated by a Gaussian mechanism with sensitivity
Binom(k, p). Then, we can use MixtureGaussianPrivacyLoss to analyze the composition of n of
these MoG mechanisms. Further, note that e.g. in the case where we instead sample a random batch of size
B in each round (i.e. different examplesвҖҷ participations within the same round are no longer independent),
we can still use MixtureGaussianPrivacyLoss to get a tight analysis by adjusting the sensitivity
random variable used. See the follow-up note (Ganesh, 2024) for more details.


                                                   30
