Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S MOOTH ECE: P RINCIPLED R ELIABILITY D IAGRAMS
VIA K ERNEL S MOOTHING

 Jarosław Błasiok                                              Preetum Nakkiran
 Columbia University                                           Apple



                                                   A BSTRACT

             Calibration measures and reliability diagrams are two fundamental tools for mea-
             suring and interpreting the calibration of probabilistic predictors. Calibration mea-
             sures quantify the degree of miscalibration, and reliability diagrams visualize the
             structure of this miscalibration. However, the most common constructions of reli-
             ability diagrams and calibration measures — binning and ECE — both suffer from
             well-known flaws (e.g. discontinuity). We show that a simple modification fixes
             both constructions: first smooth the observations using an RBF kernel, then com-
             pute the Expected Calibration Error (ECE) of this smoothed function. We prove
             that with a careful choice of bandwidth, this method yields a calibration measure
             that is well-behaved in the sense of Błasiok, Gopalan, Hu, and Nakkiran (2023) —
             a consistent calibration measure. We call this measure the SmoothECE. Moreover,
             the reliability diagram obtained from this smoothed function visually encodes the
             SmoothECE, just as binned reliability diagrams encode the BinnedECE.
             We also release a Python package with simple, hyperparameter-free methods for
             measuring and plotting calibration: `pip install relplot`. Code at:
             https://github.com/apple/ml-calibration.



1       I NTRODUCTION

Calibration is a fundamental aspect of probabilistic predictors, capturing how well predicted prob-
abilities of events match their true frequencies (Dawid, 1982). For example, a weather forecasting
model is perfectly calibrated (also called “perfectly reliable”) if among the days it predicts a 10%
chance of rain, the observed frequency of rain is exactly 10%. There are two key questions in
studying calibration: First, for a given predictive model, how do we measure its overall amount of
miscalibration? This is useful for ranking different models by their reliability, and determining how
much to trust a given model’s predictions. Methods for quantifying miscalibration are known as
calibration measures. Second, how do we convey where the miscalibration occurs? This is useful
for better understanding an individual predictor’s behavior (where it is likely to be over- vs. under-
confident), as well as for re-calibration— modifying the predictor to make it better calibrated. The
standard way to convey this information is known as a reliability diagram. Unfortunately, in ma-
chine learning, the most common methods of constructing both calibration measures and reliability
diagrams suffer from well-known flaws, which we describe below.
The most common choice of calibration measure in machine learning is the Expected Calibration
Error (ECE), more specifically its empirical variant the Binned ECE (Naeini et al., 2015). The ECE
is known to be unsatisfactory for many reasons; for example, it is a discontinuous functional, so
changing the predictor by an infinitesimally small amount may change its ECE drastically1 (Kakade
& Foster, 2008; Foster & Hart, 2018; Błasiok et al., 2023). Moreover, the ECE is impossible to
estimate efficiently from samples (Lee et al., 2022; Arrieta-Ibarra et al., 2022), and its sample-
efficient variant, the Binned ECE, is overly sensitive to choice of bin widths (Nixon et al., 2019;
Kumar et al., 2019; Minderer et al., 2021). These shortcomings have been well-documented in the
community, which motivated proposals of new, better-behaved calibration measures (e.g. Roelofs
et al. (2022); Arrieta-Ibarra et al. (2022); Lee et al. (2022)).

    1
        See Figure 3 and Appendix E for an illustration of this discontinuity.


                                                           1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Binned Reliability                                   Smooth Reliability (ours)
           1.0                                                      1.0
                   ECE15 : 0.161                                            smECE : 0.138 ± 0.016
           0.8                                                      0.8


           0.6                                                      0.6
     E[𝑦 | 𝑓 ]


                                                              E[𝑦 | 𝑓 ]
           0.4                                                      0.4


           0.2                                                      0.2


           0.0                                                      0.0
             0.0       0.2    0.4       0.6   0.8   1.0               0.0      0.2    0.4       0.6   0.8   1.0
                                    𝑓                                                       𝑓

Figure 1: Left: Traditional reliability diagram based on binning, which is equivalent to histogram
regression. Right: Proposed reliability diagram based on kernel regression, with our theoretically-
justified choice of bandwidth. The width of the red line corresponds to the density of predictions, and
the shaded region shows bootstrapped confidence intervals. Plot generated by our Python package.


Recently, Błasiok et al. (2023) proposed a theoretical definition of what constitutes a “good” cali-
bration measure. The key principle is that good measures should provide upper and lower bounds
on the calibration distance dCE, which is the Wasserstein distance between the joint distribution of
prediction-outcome pairs, and the set of perfectly calibrated such distributions (formally defined in
Definition 5 below). Calibration measures which satisfy this property are called consistent calibra-
tion measures. In light of this line of work, one may think that the question of which calibration
measure to choose is largely resolved: simply pick a consistent calibration measure, such as Laplace
Kernel Calibration Error / MMCE (Błasiok et al., 2023; Kumar et al., 2018), as suggested by Błasiok
et al. (2023). However, this theoretical suggestion belies the practical reality: Binned ECE remains
the most popular calibration measure used in practice, even in recent studies. We believe this is
partly because Binned ECE enjoys an additional property: it can be visually represented by a spe-
cific kind of reliability diagram, namely the binned histogram. This raises the question of whether
there are calibration measures which are consistent in the sense of Błasiok et al. (2023), and can
also be represented by an appropriate reliability diagram. To be precise, we must discuss reliability
diagrams more formally.

Reliability Diagrams. We consider measuring calibration in the setting of binary outcomes, for
simplicity. Here, we have a joint distribution (f, y) ∼ D over predictions f ∈ [0, 1], and true
outcomes y ∈ {0, 1}. We interpret f as the predicted probability that y = 1. The “calibration
function” µ : [0, 1] → [0, 1] is defined as the conditional expectation:
                                            µ(f ) := E[y | f ].
                                                          D
A perfectly calibrated distribution, by definition, is one with a diagonal calibration function: µ(f ) =
f . Reliability diagrams are traditionally thought of as estimates of the calibration function µ (Naeini
et al., 2014; Bröcker, 2008). In other words, reliability diagrams are one-dimensional regression
methods, since the goal of regressing y on f is exactly to estimate the regression function E[y | f ].
The practice of “binning” to construct reliability diagrams (as in Figure 1 left) can be equivalently
thought of as using histogram regression to regress y on f .
With this perspective on reliability diagrams, one may wonder why histogram regression is still the
most popular method, when more sophisticated regressors are available. One potential answer is that
users of reliability diagrams have an additional desiderata: it should be easy to visually read off a
reasonable calibration measure from the reliability diagram. For example, it is easy to visually read
off the Binned ECE from a binned reliability diagram, because it is simply the integrated absolute
deviation from the diagonal:
                                                 Z 1
                               BinnedECEk =          µ̂k (f ) − f k dF
                                                          0


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where k is the number of bins, µ̂k is the histogram regression estimate of y given f , and f k is the
“binned” version of f — formally the histogram regression estimate of f given f . This relationship
is even more transparent for the full (non-binned) ECE, where we have
                                     Z 1
                           ECE =         |µ(f ) − f | dF = E[|µ(f ) − f |]
                                          0                       f

where µ is the true regression function as above. However, more sophisticated regression methods
do not neccesarily have such tight relationships to calibration measures. Thus we have a situation
where better calibration measures exist, but they are not accompanied by reliability diagrams, and
conversely better reliability diagrams exist (i.e. regression methods), but they are not associated
with consistent calibration measures. We address this situation here: we present a new consistent
calibration measure, SmoothECE, along with a regression method which naturally encodes this cali-
bration measure. The SmoothECE is, per its name, equivalent to the ECE of a “smoothed” version of
the original distribution, and the resulting reliability diagram can thus be interpreted as a smoothed
estimate of the calibration function.
We emphasize that the idea of smoothing is not new — Gaussian kernel smoothing has been ex-
plicitly proposed as method for constructing reliability diagrams in the past (e.g. Bröcker (2008),
as discussed in Arrieta-Ibarra et al. (2022)). Our contribution is two-fold: first, we give strong the-
oretical justification for kernel smoothing by proving it induces a consistent calibration measure.
Second, and of more practical relevance, we show how to chose the kernel bandwidth in a principled
way, which differs significantly from existing recommendations.

1.1   OVERVIEW OF M ETHOD

We start by describing the regression method, which defines our reliability diagram. We are given
i.i.d. observations {(f1 , y1 ), (f2 , y2 ) . . . (fk , yk )} where fi ∈ [0, 1] is the i-th prediction, and yi ∈
{0, 1} is the corresponding outcome. For example, if we are measuring calibration of an ML model
on a dataset of validation samples, we will have fi = F (xi ) for model F evaluated on sample xi ,
with ground-truth label yi . We would like to estimate the true calibration function µ(f ) := E[f | y].
Our estimate µ̂(f ) is given by Nadaraya-Watson kernel regression (kernel smoothing) on this dataset
(see Nadaraya (1964); Watson (1964); Simonoff (1996)):
                                                         P
                                                             Kσ (f, fi )yi
                                           µ̂(f ) := Pi                    .                                  (1)
                                                             i Kσ (f, fi )

That is, for a given f ∈ [0, 1] our estimate of y is the weighted average of all yi , where weights are
given by the kernel function Kσ (f, fi ). The choice of kernel, and in particular the choice of band-
width σ, is crucial for our method’s theoretical guarantees. We use an essentially standard kernel
(defined formally in Section 3): the Gaussian Kernel, reflected appropriately to handle boundary-
effects of the interval [0, 1]. Our choice of bandwidth σ is more subtle, but it is not a hyperparameter
– we describe the explicit algorithm for choosing σ in Section 3. It suffices to say for now that the
amount of smoothing σ will end up being proportional to the reported calibration error.

Reliability Diagram We then construct a reliability diagram in the standard way, by displaying a
plot of the estimated calibration function µ̂ along with a kernel density estimate of the predictions
fi (see Figure 1). These two estimates, compactly presented on the same diagram, provide a tool to
quickly understand and visually assess calibration properties of a given predictor. Moreover, they
can be used to define a quantiative measure of overall degree of miscalibration, as we show below.

SmoothECE A natural measure of calibration can be easily computed from data in the above
reliability  diagram. Specifically, let δ̂(f ) be the kernel density estimate of predictions: δ̂(f ) :=
 1
   P
n    i K  σ (f, fi ). Then, similar to the definition of ECE, we can integrate the deviation of µ̂ from the
diagonal to obtain:

                                                     Z
                                      ^ σ :=
                                     smECE               |µ̂(t) − t|δ̂(t)dt.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The measure of calibration we actually propose in Section 3, smECEσ , is closely related but not
identical to the above. Briefly, to define smECEσ we consider the kernel smoothing of the dif-
ference between the outcome and the prediction (yi − fi ) instead of just smoothing the outcomes
yi . As it turns out, those choices lead to a calibration measure with better mathematical proper-
ties: smECEσ is monotone decreasing as the kernel bandwidth σ is increased, and smECE, at our
specific bandwidth choice and applied to the population distribution, is 0 for perfectly calibrated
predictors.
We reiterate that the choice of the scale σ is very important: too large or too small bandwidth will
prevent the SmoothECE from being a consistent calibration measure. In Section 3, we will show
how to algorithmically define the correct scale σ ∗ . For the reliability diagram, we suggest presenting
the estimates ŷ and δ̂ with the same scale σ ∗ , and for this scale we indeed have smECE  ^ σ∗ ≈
smECEσ∗ (see Appendix A). Finally, note that we have been discussing finite-sample estimators of
all quantities; the corresponding population quantities are defined analogously in Section 3.

1.2   S UMMARY OF O UR C ONTRIBUTIONS
      1. SmoothECE. We define a new hyperparmeter-free calibration measure, which we call the
         SmoothECE (abbreviated smECE). We prove that the SmoothECE is a consistent calibra-
         tion measure, in the sense of Błasiok et al. (2023). It also corresponds to a natural notion
         of distance: if SmoothECE is ε, then the function f can be stochastically post-processed to
         make it perfectly calibrated, without perturbing f by more than ε in L1 .
      2. Smoothed Reliability Diagrams. We show how to construct principled reliability di-
         agrams which visually encode the SmoothECE. These diagrams can be thought of as
         “smoothed” versions of the usual binned reliability diagrams, where we perform Nadaraya-
         Watson kernel smoothing with the Gaussian kernel.
      3. Code. We develop a Python package which computes the SmoothECE and plots the asso-
         ciated smooth reliability diagram (link omitted for anonymity). It is hyperparameter-free,
         efficient, and includes uncertainty quantification via bootstrapping. We include several
         experiments in Section 4, for demonstration purposes.
      4. Extensions to general metrics. On the theoretical side, we investigate how far our con-
         struction of SmoothECE generalizes. We show that the notion of SmoothECE introduced
         in this paper can indeed be defined for a wider class of metrics on the space of predictions
         [0, 1], and we prove the appropriate generalization of our main theorem: that the smECE
         for a given metric is a consistent calibration measure with respect to the same metric. Fi-
         nally, perhaps surprisingly, we show that under specific conditions on the metric (which
         are satisfied, for instance, by the dlogit metric), the associated smECE is in fact a consistent
         calibration measure with respect to ℓ1 metric.

Organization. We begin by discussing the closest related works (Section 2). In Section 3 we
formally define the SmoothECE and prove its mathematical and computational properties. To aid
intuition, we discuss the justification behind our various design choices in Appendix A. We then
prove the SmoothECE can be estimated efficiently with respect to both sample-complexity and run-
time (Section 3.4). Finally, we include experimental demonstrations of our method in Section 4,
and conclude in Section 5. Extensions of our results to more general metrics are provided in Ap-
pendix B.

2     R ELATED W ORKS
Reliability Diagrams and Binning. Reliability diagrams, as far as we are aware, had their origins in
the early reliability tables constructed by the meteorological community (Hallenbeck, 1920). These
early accounts of calibration already applied the practice of binning— discretizing predictions into
bins, and estimating frequencies conditional on each bin. Plots of these tables turned into binned
reliability diagrams (Murphy & Winkler, 1977; DeGroot & Fienberg, 1983), which was recently
popularized in the machine learning community by a series of works including Zadrozny & Elkan
(2001); Niculescu-Mizil & Caruana (2005); Guo et al. (2017). Binned reliability diagrams continue
to be used in studies of calibration in deep learning, including in the GPT-4 tech report (Guo et al.,
2017; Nixon et al., 2019; Minderer et al., 2021; Desai & Durrett, 2020; OpenAI, 2023).


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Reliability Diagrams as Regression. The connection between reliability diagrams and regression
methods has been noted in the literature (e.g. Bröcker (2008); Copas (1983); Stephenson et al.
(2008)). For example, Stephenson et al. (2008) observes “one can consider binning to be a crude
form of non-parametric smoothing.” However, we remind the reader of a subtlety: our objective in
this work is not identical to the regression objective, since we want an estimator that is simultane-
ously a reasonable regression and a consistent calibration measure. Our choice of bandwidth must
thus carefully balance the two; it cannot be simply be chosen to minimize the regression test loss.
Alternate Constructions. There have been various proposals to construct reliability diagrams which
improve on binning; we mention several of them here. Many proposals can be seen as suggesting
alternate regression techniques, to replace histogram regression. For example, some works suggest
modifications to improve the binning method, such as adaptive bin widths or debiasing (Kumar
et al., 2019; Nixon et al., 2019; Roelofs et al., 2022). These are closely related to data-dependent
histogram estimators in the statistics literature (Nobel, 1996). Other works suggest using entirely
different regression methods, including spline fitting (Gupta et al.), kernel smoothing (Bröcker,
2008; Popordanoska et al., 2022), and isotonic regression (Dimitriadis et al., 2021). The above
methods for constructing regression-based reliability diagrams are closely related to methods for re-
calibration, since the ideal recalibration function is exactly the calibration function µ. For example,
isotonic regression (Barlow, 1972) has been used as both for recalibration (Zadrozny & Elkan, 2002;
Naeini et al., 2015) and for reliability diagrams (Dimitriadis et al., 2021). Finally, Tygert (2020) and
Arrieta-Ibarra et al. (2022) suggest visualizing reliability via cumulative-distribution plots, instead
of estimating conditional expectations. While all the above proposals do improve upon binning
in certain aspects, none of them ultimately induce consistent calibration measures in the sense of
Błasiok et al. (2023). See Błasiok et al. (2023) for further discussion on the shortcomings of these
measures.
Multiclass Calibration. We focus on binary calibration in this work. The multi-class setting intro-
duces several new complications— foremost, there is no consensus on how best to define calibration
measures in the multi-class setting; this is an active area of research (e.g. Vaicenavicius et al. (2019);
Kull et al. (2019); Widmann et al. (2020)). Howevever, our methods apply directly to any of the met-
rics induced by the “multiclass-to-binary” reductions of Gupta & Ramdas (2021), because these are
determined by the standard calibration of a related binary problem. This includes, for example, the
multi-class confidence calibration.
Consistent Calibration Measures. We warn the reader that the terminology of consistent calibra-
tion measure does not refer to the concept of statistical consistency. Rather, it refers to the definition
introduced in Błasiok et al. (2023), to capture calibration measures which polynomially approximate
the true (Wasserstein) distance to perfect calibration.

3    S MOOTH ECE

In this section we will define the calibration measure smECE. As it turns out, it has slightly better
                                 ^ defined in Section 1.1, and those properties will allow us to
mathematical properties than smECE
chose the proper scale σ in a more principled way — moreover, we will be able to relate smECE
       ^
with smECE.
Specifically, the measure smECEσ enjoys the following convenient mathematical properties, which
we will prove in this section.

       • The smECEσ (D) is monotone decreasing as we increase the smoothing parameter σ.
       • If D is perfectly calibrated distribution, then for any σ we have smECEσ (D) = 0. Indeed,
         for any σ we have smECEσ (D) ≤ ECE(D).
       • The smECEσ is Lipschitz with respect to the Wasserstein distance on the space of distri-
         butions over [0, 1] × {0, 1}: for any D1 , D2 we have |smECEσ (D1 ) − smECEσ (D2 )| ≤
         (1 + σ −1 )W1 (D1 , D2 ). This implies smECEσ (D) ≤ (1 + σ −1 )dCE(D).
       • For any distribution D and any σ, there is a (probabilistic) post-processing κ, such that
         if (f, y) ∼ D, then the distribution D′ of (κ(f ), y) is perfectly calibrated, and moreover
         E |f − κ(f )| ≤ smECEσ (D) + σ. In particular dCE(D) ≤ smECEσ + σ.

                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Reflected Gaussian Kernel. In all of our kernel applications, we use a “reflected” version of the
Gaussian kernel defined as follows. Let πR : R → [0, 1] be the projection function which is identity
on [0, 1], and collapses two points iff they differ by a composition of reflections around integers.
That is πR (x) := (x mod 2) if (x mod 2) ≤ 1, and (2 − (x mod 2)) otherwise. The Reflected
Gaussian kernel on [0, 1] with scale σ, is then given by
                                      X                     X
                      K̃σ (x, y) :=           ϕσ (x̃ − y) =        ϕσ (x − ỹ),                  (2)
                                        −1                       −1
                                    x̃∈πR  (x)               ỹ∈πR  (y)
                                                                                          √
where ϕ is the probability density function of N (0, 1), that is ϕσ (t) = exp(−t2 /2σ 2 )/ 2πσ 2 . We
use the Reflected Gaussian kernel in order to alleviate the bias introduced by standard Gaussian
kernel near the boundaries of the interval [0, 1].

3.1   D EFINING SM ECEσ AT SCALE σ

We now present the construction of smECEσ , at a given scale σ > 0. We will show how to pick
this σ in the subsequent section. Let D be a distribution over [0, 1] × {0, 1} of the pair of prediction
f ∈ [0, 1] and outcome y ∈ {0, 1}. For a given kernel K : R → R we define the kernel smoothing
of the residual r := y − f as
                                              E(f,y)∼D K(t, f )(y − f )
                               r̂D,K (t) :=                             .                           (3)
                                                  E(f,y)∼D K(t, f )
This differs from the definition in Section 1.1, where we applied the kernel smoothing to the out-
comes y instead. In many cases of interest, the probability distribution D is going to be an empirical
probability distribution over finite set of pairs {(fi , yi )} of observed predictions fi and associated
observed outcomes yi . In this case, the r̂D (t) is just a weighted average of residuals (fi − yi )
where the weight of a given sample is determined by the kernel K(fi , t). This is equivalent to the
Nadaraya-Watson kernel regression (a.k.a. kernel smoothing, see Nadaraya (1964); Watson (1964);
Simonoff (1996)), estimating (y − f ) with respect to the independent variable f .
We consider also the kernel density estimation δ̂D,K (t) := Ef,y∼D K(t, f ). The smECEK (D) is
now defined as                                Z
                            smECEK (D) := |r̂D,K (t)|δ̂D,K (t) dt.                        (4)

This notion is close to ECE of a smoothed distribution of (f, y), in a sense which can be formalized
(see Appendix A). For now, let us discuss the intuitive connection. For any distribution of prediction,
and outcome (f, y), we can consider an expected residual r(t) := E[f − y|f = t], then
                                                  Z
                                  ECE(f, y) := |r(t)| dµf (t),

where µf is a measure of f . We can compare this with (4), where the conditional residual r has been
replaced by its smoothed version r̂, and the measure µf has been replaced by δ̂ dt – the measure of
f + η for some noise η. Equation (4) can be simplified by using the definitions of δ̂D,K and r̂D,K ,
                                             Z
                            smECEK (D) =         E K(t, f )(y − f ) dt.                           (5)
                                                    f,y


In what follows, we will be focusing on the reflected Gaussian kernel with scale σ, K̃N,σ , and we
shall use shorthand smECEσ to denote smECEK̃N,σ . We will now show how the scale σ is chosen.

3.2   D EFINING SM ECE: P ROPER CHOICE OF SCALE

First, we observe that smECEσ satisfies a natural monotonicity property: increasing the smoothing
scale σ decreases the smECEσ . (Proof of this and subsequent lemmas can be found in Appendix D.)
Lemma 1. For a distribution D over [0, 1] × {0, 1} and σ1 ≤ σ2 , we have
                                  smECEσ1 (D) ≥ smECEσ2 (D).


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Several of our design choices were crucial to ensure this property: the choice of the reflected Gaus-
sian kernel, and the choice to smooth the residual (y − f ) as opposed to the outcome y. Note that
since smECEσ (D) ∈ [0, 1], and for a given predictor D, the function σ 7→ smECEσ (D) is a non-
increasing function of σ, there is a unique σ ∗ s.t. smECEσ∗ (D) = σ ∗ (and we can find it efficiently
using binary search). Thus we can define:
Definition 2 (SmoothECE). We define smECE(D) to be the unique σ ∗ satisfying smECEσ∗ (D) =
σ ∗ . We also write this quantity as smECE∗ (D) for clarity.

3.3   SM ECE IS A CONSISTENT CALIBRATION MEASURE

We will show that σ∗ defined in the previous subsection is a convenient scale on which the smECE
of D should be evaluated. The formal requirement that smECEσ∗ meets is captured by the notion of
consistent calibration measure, introduced in Błasiok et al. (2023). We provide the definition below,
but before we do, let us recall the definition of the Wasserstein metric.
For a metric space (X , d), let us consider ∆(X ) to be the space of all probability distributions over
X . We define the Wasserstein metric on the space ∆(X) (sometimes called earth-movers distance)
Peyré et al. (2019).
Definition 3 (Wasserstein distance). For two distributions µ, ν ∈ ∆(X ) we define the Wasserstein
distance
                                 W1 (µ, ν) := inf         E d(x, y),
                                                 γ∈Γ(µ,ν) (x,y)∼γ

where Γ(µ, ν) is the family of all couplings of distributions µ and ν.
Definition 4. A probability distribution D over [0, 1] × {0, 1} of prediction f and outcome y is
perfectly calibrated if ED [y|f ] = f . We denote the family of all perfectly calibrated distributions by
P ⊂ ∆([0, 1] × {0, 1}).
Definition 5 (Consistent calibration measure (Błasiok et al., 2023)). For a probability distribution
D over [0, 1] × {0, 1} we define the distance to calibration dCE(D) to be the Wasserstein distance
to the nearest perfectly calibrated distribution, associated with metric d on [0, 1] × {0, 1} which puts
two disjoint intervals infinitely far from each other.
Concretely
                                                             |f1 − f2 | if y1 = y2
                          d((f1 , y1 ), (f2 , y2 )) :=                             .
                                                             ∞          otherwise
and
                                     dCE(D) = inf W1 (D, D′ ).
                                                    D∈P

Finally, any function µ assigning to distributions over [0, 1] × {0, 1} a non-negative real calibration
score, is called consistent calibration measure if it is polynomially upper and lower bounded by
dCE, i.e. there are constants c1 , c2 , α1 , α2 , s.t.
                               c1 dCE(D)α1 ≤ µ(D) ≤ c2 dCE(D)α2 .

With this definition in hand, we prove the following.
Theorem 6. The measure smECE(D) is a consistent calibration measure.

This theorem is a consequence of the following two inequalities. First of all, if we add the penalty
proportional to the scale of noise σ, then smECEσ upper bounds the distance to calibration.
Lemma 7. For any σ, we have
                                    dCE(D) ≲ smECEσ (D) + σ.

On the other hand, as soon as the scale of the noise is sufficiently large compared to the distance to
calibration, the smECE of a predictor is itself upper bounded as follows.
Lemma 8. Let (f, y) be any predictor. Then for any σ we have

                                                         1
                               smECEσ (D) ≤ 1 +              dCE(D).
                                                        σ

                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                         p
In particular if σ > 2    dCE(D), then
                                                  p
                                    smECEσ (D) ≤ 2 dCE(D).

This lemma, together with pthe fact that σ 7→ smECEσ is non-increasing, directly implies that the
fixpoint satisfies σ ∗ ≤ 2 dCE(D). On the other hand, using Lemma 7, at this fixpoint we have
dCE(D) ≤ σ ∗ + smECEσ∗ (D) = 2σ ∗ . That is
                             1                        p
                               dCE(D) ≤ smECE∗ (D) ≤ 2 dCE(D),
                             2
proving the Theorem 6.

3.4   S AMPLE AND RUNTIME E FFICIENCY

Here we prove that our method is efficient with respect to both sample complexity and runtime. We
want to estimate smECE of the underlying distribution D over [0, 1] × {0, 1}, using samples from
this distribution. Specifically, let us sample independently at random m pairs (fi , yi ) ∼ D, and let
us define D̂ to be the empirical distribution over the multiset {(fi , yi )}; that is, to sample from D̂,
we pick a uniformly random i ∈ [m] and output (fi , yi ). Then, the plug-in estimator satisfies the
following generalization bound.
Theorem 9. For a given σ0 > 0 if m ≳ σ0−1 ε−2 , then with probability at least 2/3 over the choice of
independent random sample (fi , yi )m
                                    i=1 (with (fi , yi ) ∼ D), we have simultanously for all σ ≥ σ0 ,

                                |smECEσ (D) − smECEσ (D̂)| ≤ ε.

In particular if smECE∗ (D) > σ0 , then (with probability at least 2/3) we have |smECE∗ (D) −
smECE∗ (D̂)| ≤ ε.

The proof is in Appendix D.6. The success probability 2/3 can be amplified arbitrarily in the
standard way, by taking the median of independent trials. Finally, it is clear that smECE can
be computed efficiently, by using the Fast Fourier Transform for convolutions. For completeness,
in Appendix C we show that smECE can be approximated up to error ε in time O(n log ε−1 +
M log ε−1 log3/2 M ) in the RAM model, where M = ⌈ε−1 σ −1 ⌉.

4     E XPERIMENTS

We include several experiments demonstrating our method on public datasets in various domains,
from deep learning to meteorology. The sample sizes vary between several hundred to 50K, to show
how our method behaves for different data sizes. In each setting, we compare the classical binned
reliability diagram to the smooth diagram generated by our Python package. Our diagrams include
kernel density estimates of the predictions (at the same kernel bandwidth σ ∗ used to compute the
SmoothECE). For binned diagrams, the number of bins is chosen to be optimal for the regression
test MSE loss, optimized via cross-validation.

Deep Networks. Figure 2a shows the confidence calibration of ResNet32 (He et al., 2016) on
the ImageNet validation set (Deng et al., 2009). ImageNet is an image classification task with
1000 classes, and has a validation set of 50,000 samples. In this multi-class setting, the model f
outputs a distribution over k = 1000 classes, f : X → ∆k . Confidence calibration is defined as
calibration of the pairs (argmaxc∈[k] fc (x) , 1{f (x) = y}), which is a distribution over [0, 1] ×
{0, 1}. That is, confidence calibration measures the agreement between confidence and correctness
of the predictions. We use the publicly available data from Hollemans (2020), evaluating the models
trained by Wightman (2019).

Solar Flares. Figure 2b shows the calibration of a method for forecasting solar flares, over a pe-
riod of 731 days. We use the data from Leka et al. (2019), which was used to compare reliability
diagrams in Dimitriadis et al. (2021). Specifically, we consider forecasts of the event that a class


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          (a) ResNet34 on ImageNet.                                  (b) Solar flare forecasts.


         (c) Rain forecasts in Finland.                                 (d) Synthetic data.

Figure 2: Comparison of binned reliability diagrams and our proposed smooth reliability diagrams,
on several demonstration datasets.


C1.0+ solar flare occurs on a given day, made by the DAFFS forecasting model developed by North-
West Research Associates. Overall, such solar flares occur on 25.7% of the 731 recorded days.
We use the preprocesssed data from the replication code at: https://github.com/TimoDimi/
replication_DGJ20. For further details of this dataset, we refer the reader to Dimitriadis et al.
(2023, Section 6.1) and Leka et al. (2019).

Precipitation in Finland. Figure 2c shows the calibration of daily rain forecasts made by the
Finnish Meteorological Institute (FMI) in 2003, for the city of Tampere in Finland. Forecasts are
made for the probability that precipitation exceeds 0.2mm over a 24 hour period; the dataset includes
records for 346 days (Nurmi, 2003).

Synthetic Data. For demonstration purposes, we apply our method to a simple synthetic dataset
in Figure 2d. One thousand samples fi ∈ [0, 1] are drawn uniformly in the interval [0, 1], and the
conditional distribution of labels E[yi | fi ] is given by the green line in Figure 2d. Here, instead of
kernel density estimates, we show bootstrapped confidence bands around our estimated regressor.
Note that the true conditional distribution is non-monotonic in this example.

Limitations. One limitation of our method is that since it is generic, there may be better tools
to use in special cases, when we can assume more structure in the prediction distributions. For
example, if the predictor is known to only output a small finite set of possible probabilities, then it
is reasonable to simple estimate conditional probabilities by using these points as individual bins.
The rain forecasts in Figure 2c have this structure, since the forecasters only predict probabilities in
multiples of 10% – in such cases, using bins which are correctly aligned is a very reasonable option.


5   C ONCLUSION

We have presented a method of computing calibration error which is both mathematically well-
behaved (i.e. consistent in the sense of Błasiok et al. (2023)), and can be visually represented in a
reliability diagram. We also released a python package which efficiently implements our suggested
method. We hope this work aids practitioners in computing, analyzing, and visualizing the reliability
of probabilistic predictors.

                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Imanol Arrieta-Ibarra, Paman Gujral, Jonathan Tannen, Mark Tygert, and Cherie Xu. Metrics of
  calibration for probabilistic predictions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09680, 2022.
R.E. Barlow. Statistical Inference Under Order Restrictions: The Theory and Application of Isotonic
  Regression. Wiley Series in Probability and Mathematical Statistics. 1972. ISBN 9780608163352.
Jarosław Błasiok, Parikshit Gopalan, Lunjia Hu, and Preetum Nakkiran. A unifying theory of dis-
   tance from calibration. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Com-
   puting, pp. 1727–1740, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
   9781450399135.
Jochen Bröcker. Some remarks on the reliability of categorical probability forecasts. Monthly
  weather review, 136(11):4488–4502, 2008.
Jarosław Błasiok, Parikshit Gopalan, Lunjia Hu, and Preetum Nakkiran. When does optimizing a
   proper loss yield calibration?, 2023.
JB Copas. Plotting p against x. Applied statistics, pp. 25–31, 1983.
A Philip Dawid. The well-calibrated bayesian. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 77
  (379):605–610, 1982.
Morris H DeGroot and Stephen E Fienberg. The comparison and evaluation of forecasters. Journal
 of the Royal Statistical Society: Series D (The Statistician), 32(1-2):12–22, 1983.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Shrey Desai and Greg Durrett. Calibration of pre-trained transformers. In Proceedings of the
  2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 295–
  302, 2020.
F. R. Deutsch and P. H. Maserick. Applications of the hahn-banach theorem in approximation
   theory. SIAM Review, 9(3):516–530, 1967. ISSN 00361445. URL http://www.jstor.
   org/stable/2027994.
Luc Devroye, Abbas Mehrabian, and Tommy Reddad. The total variation distance between high-
  dimensional gaussians with the same mean, 2018.
Timo Dimitriadis, Tilmann Gneiting, and Alexander I Jordan. Stable reliability diagrams for proba-
  bilistic classifiers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(8):e2016191118, 2021.
Timo Dimitriadis, Tilmann Gneiting, Alexander I Jordan, and Peter Vogel. Evaluating probabilistic
  classifiers: The triptych. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10803, 2023.
Dean P. Foster and Sergiu Hart. Smooth calibration, leaky forecasts, finite recall, and nash dynam-
  ics. Games Econ. Behav., 109:271–293, 2018. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geb.
  2017.12.022.
Parikshit Gopalan, Michael P Kim, Mihir A Singhal, and Shengjia Zhao. Low-degree multicalibra-
  tion. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 3193–3234. PMLR, 2022.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
  networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1321–1330. PMLR, 2017.
Chirag Gupta and Aaditya Ramdas. Top-label calibration and multiclass-to-binary reductions. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2107.08353, 2021.
Kartik Gupta, Amir Rahimi, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, Thomas Mensink, Cristian Sminchisescu,
  and Richard Hartley. Calibration of neural networks using splines. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Cleve Hallenbeck. Forecasting precipitation in percentages of probability. Monthly Weather Review,
  48(11):645–647, 1920.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Matthijs Hollemans. Reliability diagrams.                 https://github.com/hollance/
 reliability-diagrams, 2020.
Sham Kakade and Dean Foster. Deterministic calibration and nash equilibrium. Journal of Computer
  and System Sciences, 74(1):115–130, 2008.
Meelis Kull, Miquel Perello-Nieto, Markus Kängsepp, Hao Song, Peter Flach, et al. Beyond temper-
 ature scaling: Obtaining well-calibrated multiclass probabilities with dirichlet calibration. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1910.12656, 2019.
Ananya Kumar, Percy S Liang, and Tengyu Ma. Verified uncertainty calibration. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 3792–3803, 2019.
Aviral Kumar, Sunita Sarawagi, and Ujjwal Jain. Trainable calibration measures for neural networks
  from kernel mean embeddings. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2805–
  2814. PMLR, 2018.
Donghwan Lee, Xinmeng Huang, Hamed Hassani, and Edgar Dobriban. T-cal: An optimal test for
  the calibration of predictive models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.01850, 2022.
KD Leka, Sung-Hong Park, Kanya Kusano, Jesse Andries, Graham Barnes, Suzy Bingham, D Shaun
 Bloomfield, Aoife E McCloskey, Veronique Delouille, David Falconer, et al. A comparison of
 flare forecasting methods. ii. benchmarks, metrics, and performance results for operational solar
 flare forecasting systems. The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 243(2):36, 2019.
Matthias Minderer, Josip Djolonga, Rob Romijnders, Frances Hubis, Xiaohua Zhai, Neil Houlsby,
 Dustin Tran, and Mario Lucic. Revisiting the calibration of modern neural networks. Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:15682–15694, 2021.
Allan H Murphy and Robert L Winkler. Reliability of subjective probability forecasts of precipita-
  tion and temperature. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series C: Applied Statistics, 26(1):
  41–47, 1977.
E. A. Nadaraya. On estimating regression. Theory of Probability & Its Applications, 9(1):141–142,
   1964. doi: 10.1137/1109020. URL https://doi.org/10.1137/1109020.
Mahdi Pakdaman Naeini, Gregory F Cooper, and Milos Hauskrecht. Binary classifier calibration:
 Non-parametric approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1401.3390, 2014.
Mahdi Pakdaman Naeini, Gregory F Cooper, and Milos Hauskrecht. Obtaining well calibrated
 probabilities using bayesian binning. In Proceedings of the... AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-
 ligence. AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 2015, pp. 2901. NIH Public Access,
 2015.
Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil and Rich Caruana. Predicting good probabilities with supervised learn-
  ing. In Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on Machine learning, pp. 625–632.
  ACM, 2005.
Jeremy Nixon, Michael W Dusenberry, Linchuan Zhang, Ghassen Jerfel, and Dustin Tran. Measur-
   ing calibration in deep learning. In CVPR Workshops, volume 2, 2019.
Andrew Nobel. Histogram regression estimation using data-dependent partitions. The Annals of
  Statistics, 24(3):1084–1105, 1996.
Pertti Nurmi. Verifying probability of precipitation - an example from finland. https://www.
  cawcr.gov.au/projects/verification/POP3/POP3.html, 2003.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.

Gabriel Peyré, Marco Cuturi, et al. Computational optimal transport: With applications to data
  science. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 11(5-6):355–607, 2019.

Teodora Popordanoska, Raphael Sayer, and Matthew Blaschko. A consistent and differentiable lp
  canonical calibration error estimator. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  7933–7946, 2022.

Rebecca Roelofs, Nicholas Cain, Jonathon Shlens, and Michael C Mozer. Mitigating bias in cali-
  bration error estimation. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  4036–4054. PMLR, 2022.

J.S. Simonoff. Smoothing Methods in Statistics. Springer Series in Statistics. Springer, 1996. ISBN
   9780387947167. URL https://books.google.com/books?id=wFTgNXL4feIC.

David B Stephenson, Caio AS Coelho, and Ian T Jolliffe. Two extra components in the brier score
  decomposition. Weather and Forecasting, 23(4):752–757, 2008.

Mark Tygert. Plots of the cumulative differences between observed and expected values of ordered
 bernoulli variates. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.02504, 2020.

Juozas Vaicenavicius, David Widmann, Carl Andersson, Fredrik Lindsten, Jacob Roll, and Thomas
  Schön. Evaluating model calibration in classification. In The 22nd International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3459–3467. PMLR, 2019.

Geoffrey S. Watson. Smooth regression analysis. Sankhyā: The Indian Journal of Statistics, Series
  A (1961-2002), 26(4):359–372, 1964. ISSN 0581572X. URL http://www.jstor.org/
  stable/25049340.

Nik Weaver. Lipschitz Algebras. WORLD SCIENTIFIC, 2nd edition, 2018. doi: 10.1142/9911.
  URL https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/9911.

David Widmann, Fredrik Lindsten, and Dave Zachariah. Calibration tests beyond classification. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Ross Wightman.  Pytorch image models.                       https://github.com/rwightman/
  pytorch-image-models, 2019.

Bianca Zadrozny and Charles Elkan. Obtaining calibrated probability estimates from decision trees
  and naive bayesian classifiers. In Icml, volume 1, pp. 609–616. Citeseer, 2001.

Bianca Zadrozny and Charles Elkan. Transforming classifier scores into accurate multiclass proba-
  bility estimates. In Proceedings of the eighth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowl-
  edge discovery and data mining, pp. 694–699. ACM, 2002.


A    D ISCUSSION : D ESIGN C HOICES

Here we discuss the motivation behind several design choices that may a-priori seem ad-hoc. In
particular, the choice to smooth the residuals (yi − fi ) when computing the smECE, but to smooth
the outcomes yi directly when plotting the reliability diagram.
For the purpose of constructing the reliability diagram, it might be tempting to plot a function
y ′ (f ) := r̂(f ) + f (of smoothed residual as defined in (3), shifted back by the prediction f ), as well
as the smoothed density δ̂(t), as in the definition of smECE. This is a fairly reasonable approach,
unfortunately it has a particularly undesirable feature — there is no reason for y ′ (t) := r̂(t) + t to
be bounded in the interval [0, 1]. It is therefore visually quite counter-intuitive, as the plot of y(t) is
supposed to be related with our guess on the average outcome y given (slightly noisy version of) the
prediction t.


                                                    12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As discussed in Section 1.1, we instead consider the kernel regression on y, as opposed to the kernel
regression on the residual y − f , and plot exactly this, together with the density δ̂. Specifically, let
us define
                                                 Ef,y∼D K(t, f )y
                                    ŷD,K (t) :=                   .                                 (6)
                                                 Ef,y∼D K(t, f )
and chose as the reliability diagram a plot of a pair of functions t 7→ ŷD,K (t) and t 7→ δ̂D,K (t) —
the first plot is our estimation (based on the kernel regression) of the outcome y for a given prediction
t, the other is the estimation of the density of prediction t. As discussed in the Section 1.1, we will
focus specifically on the kernel K being the reflected Gaussian kernel, defined by (2).
It is now tempting to define the calibration error related with this diagram, as an ECE of this new
random variable over [0, 1] × {0, 1}, analogously to the definition of smECE, by considering
                                              Z
                            ^ σ (D) := |ŷD,K (t) − t|δ̂D,K (t) dt.
                           smECE                                                                 (7)

This definition can be readily interpreted: for a random pair (f, y) and an η ∼ N (0, σ) independent,
we can consider a pair (f + η, y). It turns out that
                                 ^ σ (D) = ECE(πR (f + η), y),
                                smECE
where πR : R → [0, 1] collapses points that differ by reflection around integers (see Section 1.1).
Unfortunately, despite being directly connected with more desirable reliability diagrams, and hav-
ing more immediate interpretation as a ECE of a noisy prediction, this newly introduced measure
 ^ has its own problems, and is generally mathematically much poorer-behaved than smECE.
smECE
In particular it is no longer the case that if we start with the perfectly calibrated distribution, and ap-
ply some smoothing with relatively large bandwidth σ, the value of the integral (7) stays small. In
fact it might be growing as we add more smoothing2 .
Nevertheless, if we chose the correct bandwidth σ ∗ , as guided by the smECE consideration, the
integral (7), which is visually encoded by the reliability diagram we propose, should still be within
constant factor from the actual smECE∗σ (D), and hence provides a consistent calibration measure
Lemma 10. For any σ we have
                                  ^ σ (D) = smECEσ (D) ± cσ,
                                 smECE
            p
where c =       2/π ≤ 0.8.
In particular, for σ ∗ s.t. smECEσ∗ (D) = σ ∗ , we have
                                    ^ σ∗ (D) ≈ smECEσ∗ (D).
                                   smECE

(The proof can be found in Appendix D.3).

B       G ENERAL M ETRICS
Our previous discussion implicitly assumed the the trivial metric on the interval d(u, v) = |u − v|.
We will now explore which aspects of our results extend to more general metrics over the interval
[0, 1]. This is relevant if, for example, our application downstream of the predictor is more sensitive
to miscalibration near the boundaries.
The study of consistency measures with respect to general metrics is also motivated by the results of
Błasiok et al. (2023). There it was shown that for any proper loss function l, there was an associated
metric dl on [0, 1] such that the predictor has small weak calibration error with respect to dl if and
only if the loss l cannot be significantly improved by post-composition with a Lipschitz function
with respect to dl . Specifically, they proved
                                                                          p
              wCEdl (D) ≲ E [l(f, y)] − inf E [l(κ(f ), y)] ≲ wCEdl (D),
                             (f,y)∼D              κ (f,y)∼D

    2
   This can be easily seen, if we consider the trivial perfectly calibrated distribution, where outcome y ∼
                                                            ^ σ (D) = Cσ for some constant C ≈ 0.79.
Bernoulli(1/2) and prediction f is deterministic 1/2. Then smECE


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where κ : [0, 1] → [0, 1] ranges over all functions Lipschitz with respect to the dl metric, and
wCEdl (D) is the weak calibration error (as introduced by Kakade & Foster (2008), and extended to
general metrics in Błasiok et al. (2023), see Definition 11).
The most intuitive special case of the above result is the square loss function, which corresponds
to a trivial metric on the interval d(u, v) = |u − v|. In practice, different proper loss functions are
also extensively used — the prime example being the cross entropy loss l(f, y) := −(y ln p + (1 −
y) ln(1 − p)), which is connected with the metric dlogit (u, v) := | log(u/(1 − u)) − log(v/(1 − v))|
on [0, 1]. Thus, we may want to generalize our results to also apply to non-trivial metrics.

B.1    G ENERAL D UALITY

We will prove a more general statement of the duality theorem in Błasiok et al. (2023). Specifically,
they showed that the minimization problem in the definition of the dCE, can be dualy expressed
as a maximal correlation between residual r := y − f and a bounded Lipschitz function of the
prediction f . This notion, which we will refer to as weak calibration error first appeared in Kakade
& Foster (2008), and was further explored in Gopalan et al. (2022); Błasiok et al. (2023); Błasiok
et al. (2023)3 .
Definition 11 (Weak calibration error). For a distribution D over [0, 1]×{0, 1} of pairs of prediction
and outcome, and a metric d on the space [0, 1] of all possible predictions, we define
                               wCEd (D) := sup E (f − y)w(f ),                                     (8)
                                                w∈Ld f,y∼D

where the supremum is taken over all functions w : [0, 1] → [−1, 1] which are 1-Lipschitz with
respect to the metric d.4
For the trivial metric on the interval d(u, v) = |u − v|, wCE was known to be linearly related with
dCE by Błasiok et al. (2023). We show in this paper that the duality theorem connecting wCE and
dCE holds much more generally, for a broad family of metrics.
Theorem 12 (Błasiok et al. (2023)). If a metric d on the interval satisfies d(u, v) ≳ |v − u| then
wCEd ≈ dCEd .
The more general formulation provided by Theorem 12 can be shown by following closely the orig-
inal proof step by step. We provide an alternate proof (simplified and streamlined) in Appendix D.8.

B.2    T HE dCEdlogit IS A CONSISTENT CALIBRATION MEASURE WITH RESPECT TO ℓ1

As in turns out, for a relatively wide family of metrics on the space of predictions (including the
dlogit metric), the associated calibration measures are consistent calibration measures with respect
to the ℓ1 metric. The main theorem we prove in this section is the following.
Theorem 13. If a metric d : [0, 1]2 → R ∪ {±∞} satisfies d(u, v) ≳ |u − v| and moreover for some
c > 0,
                            ∀ε, ∀u, v ∈ [ε, 1 − ε], d(u, v) ≤ |u − v|ε−c ,
then dCEd is a consistent calibration measure.
The proof of this theorem (as is the case for many proofs of consistency for calibration measures)
heavily uses the duality Theorem 12 — since proving that a function is a consistent calibration
measure amounts to providing a lower and upper bound, it is often convenient to use the dCE
formulation for one bound and wCE for the other.
The lower bound in Theorem 13 is immediate — since d(u, v) ≥ ℓ1 (u, v), the induced Wasser-
stein distances on the space [0, 1] × {0, 1} satisfy the same inequality, hence dCEd ≥ dCEℓ1 , and
dCEℓ1 ≥ dCE/2 by Claim 31.
As it turns out, if the metric of interest is well-behaved except near the endpoints of the unit interval,
we can also prove the converse inequality, and lower bound wCE(D) by polynomial of wCEd (D).
   3
     Weak calibration was called smooth calibration error in Gopalan et al. (2022); Błasiok et al. (2023). We
revert back to the original terminology weak calibration error to avoid confusion with the notion of smECE
developed in this paper.
   4
     In Błasiok et al. (2023)


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 14. Let d : [0, 1]2 → R+ ∪ {∞} be any metric satisfying for some c > 0,
                           ∀ε, ∀u, v ∈ [ε, 1 − ε],         d(u, v) ≤ |u − v|ε−c ,
then wCEd (D)q ≲ wCE(D), where q := max(c + 1, 2).

(Proof in Appendix D.5.)
We are ready now to prove the main theorem here

Proof of Theorem 13. We have dCEd (D) ≥ dCE( D)/2 by our previous discussion, on the other
hand Theorem 12 and Lemma 14 imply the converse inequality:

                      dCEd (D) ≈ wCEd (D) ≤ wCE(D)1/q ≈ dCE(D)1/q .


Corollary 15. For a metric induced by cross-entropy loss function dlogit (u, v) := | ln(u/(1 − v)) −
ln(v/(1 − v))|, the wCEdlogit is a consistent calibration measure.

Proof. To verify the conditions of Theorem 13 it is enough to check that logit(v) := ln(v/(1 − v))
                           d                      d                1
satisfies min(t, 1 − t)c ≤ dt logit(t) ≤ C. Since dt logit(t) = t(1−t) , these conditions are satisfied
with c = 1 and C = 4.

B.3   G ENERALIZED S MOOTH ECE

We now generalize the definition of SmoothECE to other metrics, and show that it remains a consis-
tent calibration measure with respect to its metric. Motivated by the logit example discussed above,
a concrete way to introduce a non-trivial metric on a space of predictions [0, 1], is to consider a
continuous and increasing function h : [0, 1] → R ∪ {±∞}, and the metric obtained by pulling back
the metric from R to [0, 1] through h, i.e. dh (u, v) := |h(u) − h(v)|.
Using the isomorphism h between ([0, 1], dh ) and a subinterval of (R∪{±∞}, |·|), we can introduce
a generalization of the notion of smECE, where the kernel-smoothing is being applied in the image
of h.
More concretely, for a probability distribution D over [0, 1] × {0, 1}, a kernel K : R × R → R+ and
an increasing continuous map h : [0, 1] → R ∪ {±∞} we define
                                              E(f,y) K(t, h(f ))(f − y)
                               r̂K,h (t) :=
                                                  E(f,y) K(t, h(f ))
                                δ̂K,h (t) := E K(t, h(f )).
                                              (f,y)

Again, we define                                      Z
                              smECEK,h (D) :=              r̂K,h (t)δ̂K,h (t) dt,

which simplifies to
                                           Z
                       smECEK,h (D) =                 E     K(t, h(f ))(f − y) dt.
                                                 (f,y)∼D


As it turns out, with the duality theorem in place (Theorem 12) the entire content of Section 3 can
be carried over in this more general context without much trouble.
Specifically, if we define smECEσ,h := smECEKN,σ ,h , where KN,σ is a Gaussian kernel with
scale σ, then σ 7→ smECEσ,h (f, y) is non-increasing in σ, and therefore there is a unique fixed
point σ∗ s.t. σ∗ = smECEσ∗ ,h (f, y).
We can now define smECE∗,h (f, y) := σ∗ , and we have the following generalization of Theorem 6,
showing that SmoothECE remains a consistent calibration even under different metrics.


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 16. For any increasing and continuous function h : [0, 1] → R ∪ {±∞}, if we define
dh : [0, 1]2 → R+ to be the metric dh (u, v) = max(|h(u) − h(v)|, 2) then
                                                         q
                          dCEdh (D) ≲ smECE∗,h (D) ≲ dCEdh (D).

(Proof in Appendix D.7.)
Note that if the function h is such that the associated metric dh satisfies the conditions of Theo-
rem 13, as an additional corollary we can deduce that smECE∗,h is also a consistent calibration
measure in a standard sense.

B.4   O BTAINING PERFECTLY CALIBRATED PREDICTOR VIA POST- PROCESSING

One of the appealing properties of the notion dCE as it was introduced in Błasiok et al. (2023), was
the theorem stating that if a predictor (f, y) is close to calibrated, then in fact a nearby perfectly
calibrated predictor can be obtained simply by post-processing all the predictions by a univariate
function. Specifically, they showed that for a distribution D over [0, 1] × {0, 1}, there is κ : [0, 1] →
p 1] such that for (f, y) ∼ D the pair (κ(f ), y) is perfectly calibrated and moreover E |κ(f ) − f | ≲
[0,
   dCE(D).
As it turns out, through the notion of smECEh we can prove a similar in spirit statement regarding
the more general distances to calibration dCEdh . The only difference is that we allow the post-
processing κ to be a randomized function.
Theorem 17. For any increasing function h : [0, 1] → R∪{±∞}, and any distribution D supported
on [0, 1] × {0, 1}, there is a probabilistic function κ : [0, 1] → [0, 1] such that for (f, y) ∼ D, the
pair (κ(f ), y) is perfectly calibrated and
                                   E dh (κ(f ), f ) ≲ smECE∗,h (D),
where dh is the metric induced by h. In particular
                                                         q
                                    E dh (κ(f ), f ) ≲       dCEdh (D).

Proof. Let us consider a distribution D over [0, 1] × {0, 1} and a monotone function h, such that
smECEh,∗ = σ∗ .
First, let us define the randomized function κ1 : let π0 : R → R be a projection of R to h([0, 1]), and
let η ∼ N (0, σ∗ ). We define
                                    κ1 (f ) := h−1 (π0 (h(f ) + η)).
We claim that this κ1 satisfy the following two properties:

      1. E(f,y)∼D |d(f, κ′ (f ))| ≲ σ∗ ,

      2. ECE(κ′ (f ), y) ≲ σ∗ .

Indeed, the first inequality is immediate:
                              ′
                      E[d(f, κ (f )] = E[|h(f ) − π0 (h(f ) + η)|] ≤ E |η| ≤ σ∗ .
The proof that ECE(κ′ (f ), y) ≲ σ∗ is identical to the proof of Lemma 28, where such a statement
was shown for the standard metric (corresponding to h(x) = x).
Finally, those two properties together imply the statement of the theorem: indeed, if ECE(f ′ , y) ≤
σ∗ , we can take κ2 (t) := E[y|f ′ = t]. In this case pair (κ2 (f ′ ), y) is perfectly calibrated, and by
definition of ECE, we have E |κ2 (f ′ ) − f ′ | = ECE(f ′ , y). Composing now κ = κ2 ◦ κ1 , we have
                 E      |κ(f ) − f | ≤ E[|κ2 ◦ κ1 (f ) − κ1 (f )|] + E[|κ1 (f ) − f |] ≲ σ∗ .
              (f,y)∼D

Moreover distribution D′ of (κ(f ), y) is perfectly calibrated.



                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    A LGORITHMS
In this section we discuss how smECE can be computed efficiently: for any σ, the quantity
smECEσ can be approximated up to error ε in time O(n + M −1 log3/2 M −1 ) in the RAM model,
where M = ⌈ε−1 σ −1 ⌉. In order to find an optimal scale σ∗ , we need to perform a binary search,
involving log ε−1 evaluations of smECEσ .
The explicit procedure to compute smECE is given in Algorithm 2.
We shall first observe that the convolution with the reflected Gaussian kernel can be expressed in
terms of a convolution with a shift-invariant kernel. This is useful, since such a convolution can
be implemented in time O(M log M ) using Fast Fourier Transform, where m is the size of the
discretization.
Claim 18. For any function g : [0, 1] → R, the convolution with the reflected Gaussian kernel
g ∗ KN,σ can be equivalently computed as follows. Take an extension of g to the entire real line
g̃ : R → R defined as g̃(x) := g(πR )(x)). Then
                                    [g ∗ K̃N,σ ](t) = [g̃ ∗ KN,σ ](t),
where KN,σ√ : R × R → R is the standard Gaussian kernel Kσ (t1 , t2 ) = exp(−(t1 −
    2
t2 ) /2σ)/ 2πσ 2 .

Proof. Elementary calculation.
                                                                       p
We can now restrict g̃ to the interval [−T, T + 1] where T := ⌈ log(2ε−1 )⌉, convolve such a
restricted g̃ with a Gaussian, and restrict the convolution in turn to the interval ε. Indeed, such a
restriction introduces very small error, for every t ∈ [0, 1] we have.
       [(1[−T,T +1] · g̃) ∗ KN,σ ](t) − [g̃ ∗ KN,σ ](t) ≤ (1 − Φ(T /σ)) + (1 − Φ((T + 1)/σ))
                                                          p
                                                        ≤ 2/π(T /σ) exp(−(T /σ)2 /2).

In practice, it is enough to reflect the function g only twice, around two of the boundary points
(corresponding to the choice T = 1). For instance, when σ < 0.38, the above bound implies that
the introduced additive error is smaller than σ 2 , and the error term rapidly improves as σ is getting
smaller.
Let us now discuss computation of smECEσ for a given scale σ. To this end, we discretize the
interval [0, 1], splitting it into M equal length sub-intervals. For a sequence of observations (fi , yi )
we round each ri to the nearest integer multiple of 1/M , mapping it to a bucket bi = round(M fi ).
In eachPbucket b ∈ {0, . . . M }, we collect the residues of all observation falling in this bucket
hb := i:bi =b (fi − yi ).

In the next step, we apply the Claim 18, and produce a wrapping h̃ of the sequence h — extending
it to integer multiples of 1/M in the interval [−T, T + 1] by pulling back h through the map πR .
The method smECEσ then proceeds to compute convolution h̃ ∗ K with the discretization .P of the
                                                                2   2
Gaussian kernel probability density function, i.e. K̃t := exp(−t /2σ ), and Kt := K̃t   i K̃t .

This convolution r̃ := h ∗ K can be computed in time O(Q log Q), where Q = M T , using a Fast
Fourier Transform, and is implemented  Pin standard mathematical libraries. Finally, we report the
sum of absolute values of the residuals |r̃i | as an approximation to smECEσ as an approximation
to smECEσ .


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1: Efficient estimation of smECEσ , at fixed scale σ
Function Discretization({(fi , zi }ni=1 , M ) is
   h ← zeros(M + 1);
   for i ∈ [n] do
       b ← round(M fi );
       hb ← hb + zi ;
   end
   return h;
end
Function Wrap(h, T) is
   M ← len(h);
   for i ∈ [(2T + 1)M ] do
       j ← (i mod 2M );
       if j > M then
           j ← 2M − j;
       end
       h̃i ← hj ;
   end
   return h̃;
end
Function smECE(σ, {fi , yi }n1 ) is
   h ← Discretization({fi , fi − yi }, ⌈σ −1 ε−1 ⌉);
                  p
   h̃ ← Wrap(h, ⌈ log(2ε−1 ));
   K ← DiscreteGaussianKernel(σ, ⌈σ −1 ε−1 ⌉);
   r̃ ← h̃ ∗ K;
           P(T +1)M −1
   return i=T M         |r̃i |;
end


Algorithm 2: Efficient estimation of smECE∗ : using binary search over σ to find a root of
decreasing function smECEσ − σ.
Data: (fi , yi )n1 , ε
Result: smECE∗ ({(fi , yi )})
l ← 0;
u ← 1;
while u − l > ε do
    σ ← (u + l)/2;
    if smECEσ ({fi , yi }) < σ then
        u ← σ;
    else
        l ← σ;
    end
end
return u;


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     O MITTED P ROOFS
D.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6

In this section we will prove Lemma 21 and Lemma 23, two main steps in the proof of Theorem 6,
corresponding to respectively lower and upper bound. As it turns out, those two lemmas are true for
a much wider class of kernels. The restriction on the kernel K to be a Gaussian kernel stems from
the monotonicity property (Lemma 28), which was convenient for us to define the scale invariant
measure smECE∗ by considering a fix-point scale σ ∗ . In Appendix D.2 we will show that the
Reflected Gaussian kernel satisfies the conditions of Lemma 21 and Lemma 23.
We will first define a dual variant of dCE.
Definition 19. We define the weak calibration error to be the maximal correlation of the residual
(f − y) with a 1-Lipschitz function and [−1, 1] bounded function of a predictor, i.e.
                                wCE(D) := sup E w(f )(f − y),
                                                w∈L (f,y)∼D

where L is a family of all 1-Lipschitz functions from [0, 1] to [−1, 1].
To show that smECE∗ is a consistent calibration measure we will heavily use the duality theorem
proved in Błasiok et al. (2023) — the wCE and dCE are (up to a constant factor) equivalent. A
similar statement is proved in this paper, in a greater generality (see Theorem 12).
Theorem 20 (Błasiok et al. (2023)). For any distribution D over [0, 1] × {0, 1} we have
                                 dCE(D) ≤ wCE(D) ≤ 2dCE(D).

Intuitively, this is useful since showing that a new measure smECE is a consistent calibration mea-
sure corresponds to upper and lower bounding it by polynomials of dCE. With the duality theorem
above, we can use the minimization formulation dCE for one direction of the inequality, and the
maximization formulation wCE for the other.
Indeed, we will first show that wCE is upper bounded by smECE if we add the penalty parameter
for the “scale” of the kernel K.
Lemma 21. Let U ⊂ R be (possible infinite) interval containing R[0, 1] and K : U × U R→ R
be a non-negative symmetric kernel satisfying for every t0 ∈ [0, 1], K(t0 , t) dt = 1, and |t −
t0 |K(t, t0 ) dt ≤ γ. Then
                                 wCE(D) ≤ smECEK (D) + γ.

Proof. Let us consider an arbitrary 1-Lipschitz function w : [0,R 1] → [−1, 1], and take η ∼ K
as in the lemma statement. Since kernel K is nonnegative, and K(t, t0 ) dt = 0, we can sample
triple (f˜, f, y) s.t. (f, y) ∼ D, and f˜ is distributed according to density K(·, f ). In particular
E |f˜ − f | ≤ γ.
We can bound now
                       E      [w(f )(f − y)] ≤ E[w(f˜)(f − y)] + E |f − f˜||f − y|
                    (f,y)∼D
                                                      h            i
                                               ≤ γ + E w(f˜)(f − y) .                             (9)

We now observe that
                                            Ef,y K(t, f )(f − y)
                        E[(f − y)|f˜ = t] =                      = r̂(t),
                                                Ef,y K(t, f )
and the marginal density of f˜ is exactly
                                    µf˜(t) =     E       K(t, f ) = δ̂(t).
                                               (f,y)∼D

This leads to
            h            i Z                   Z
           E w(f˜)(f − y) = w(t)r̂(t)δ̂(t) dt ≤ |r̂(t)|δ̂(t) dt = smECEK (f, y).                (10)
Combining (11) and (12) we conclude the statement of this lemma.


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To show that smECEK (D) is upper bounded by dCE, we will first show that smECEK is zero for
perfectly calibrated distributions, and then we will show that for well-behaved kernels smECEK (D)
is Lipschitz with respect the Wasserstein distance on the space of distributions.
Claim 22. For any perfectly calibrated distribution D and for any kernel K we have
                                            smECEK (D) = 0.

Proof. Indeed, by the definition of r̂ we have
                                                 Ef,y K(f, t)(f − y)
                                       r̂(t) =                       ,
                                                     Ef,y K(f, t)
Since the distribution D is perfectly calibrated, we have E(f,y)∼D [(f − y)|f ] = 0, hence

   E [K(f, t)(f − y)] = E        E [K(f, t)(f − y)|f ] = E K(f, t) E [(f − y)|f ] = 0.
  f,y                       f   (f,y)∼D                                   f          (f,y)∼D

This means that the function r̂(t) is identically zero, and therefore
                                                   Z
                               smECEK (D) = |r̂(t)|δ̂(t) dt = 0.
                                                         t



Lemma 23. Let K be a symmetric, non-negativeR      kernel, such that for and let λ ≤ 1 be a constant
such that for any t0 , t1 ∈ [0, 1] we have |K(t0 , t) − K(t1 , t)| dt ≤ |t0 − t1 |/λ. Let D1 , D2 be a
pair of distributions over [0, 1] × {0, 1}. Then

                                                            1
                    |smECEK (D1 ) − smECEK (D2 )| ≤            + 1 W1 (D1 , D2 ).
                                                            λ

Proof. We have                                   Z
                           smECEK (D) =                E         [K(t, f )(y − f )] dt.
                                                     (f,y)∼D

If we have a coupling (f1 , f2 , y1 , y2 ) s.t. E[|f1 − f2 | + |y1 − y2 |] ≤ δ, (f1 , y1 ) ∼ D1 and (f2 , y2 ) ∼
D2 , then by triangle inequality we can decompose
                                                   Z
       |smECEK (D1 ) − smECEK (D2 )| ≤                       E         [|K(t, f1 ) − K(t, f2 )||y1 − f1 | dt
                                                      (f1 ,f2 ,y1 ,y2 )
                                                   Z
                                                +           E          [K(t, f2 )(|f1 − f2 | + |y1 − y2 |] dt.
                                                     (f1 ,f2 ,y1 ,y2 )

We can bound those two terms separately
Z                                                                     Z
                                                                                                       1
     E [|K(t, f1 )−K(t, f2 )||y1 −f1 |] dt ≤                 E            |K(t, f1 )−K(t, f2 )| dt ≤     E[|f1 −f2 |] ≤ δ/λ,
   (f1 ,f2 ,y1 )                                      (f1 ,f2 ,y1 )                                    λ
and similarly
Z                                                Z
  E [K(t, f2 )(|f1 − f2 | + |y1 − y2 |)] dt = E    K(t, f2 ) dt · (|f1 − f2 | + |y1 − y2 | = E[|f1 −f2 |+|y1 −y2 |] ≤ δ.
                                                         t



Corollary 24. Under the same assumptions on K as in Lemma 23, for any distribution D over
[0, 1] × {0, 1},
                                             1
                           smECEK (D) ≤        + 1 dCE(D).
                                             λ

Proof. By definition there is a perfectly calibrated distribution D′ , such that W1 (D, D′ ) ≤ dCE(D).
By Claim 22, smECEK (D′ ) = 0, and the corollary follows directly from Lemma 23.


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2      FACTS ABOUT REFLECTED G AUSSIAN KERNEL

We wish to now argue that Lemma 21 and Lemma 23 imply the more specialized statements
Lemma 7 and Lemma 8 respectively — the reflected Gaussian kernel KN,σ satisfies conditions
of Lemma 21 and Lemma 23 with γ and λ proportional to σ. We
Lemma 25. Reflected Gaussian kernel K̃N,σ defined by (2) satisfies
                                     R
         1. For every t0 , we have       K̃N,σ (t, t0 ) dt = 1.
                                     R                             p
         2. For every t0 , we have     |t − t0 |K̃N,σ (t, t0 ) dt ≤ 2/πσ.
                                        R
         3. For every t0 , t1 , we have |K̃N,σ (t, t0 ) − K̃N,σ (t, t0 )| dt ≤ |t0 − t1 |/(2σ).


Proof. For any given t0 , the function K̃N,σ (t0 , ·) is a probability density function of a random
variable πR (t0 + η) where η ∼ N (0, σ) and πR : R → [0, 1] is defined in Section 1.1. In particular,
we have |πR (x) − πR (y)| ≤ |x − y|.
The property 1 is satisfied, since the K̃N,σ (·, t0 ) is a probability density function.
The property 2 follows since
    Z
       |t − t0 |K̃N,σ (t, t0 ) dt =         E       |πR (t0 + η) − t0 | =             E       |πR (t0 + η) − πR (t0 )|
                                         η∼N (0,σ                                  η∼N (0,σ
                                                              p
                                     ≤      E       |η| = σ       2/π.
                                         η∼N (0,σ

Finally, the property 2 again follows from the same fact for a Gaussian random variable: the integral
|K̃N,σ (t, t0 ) − K̃N,σ (t, t0 )| is just a total variation distance between πR (t0 + η) and πR (t1 + η)
where η ∼ N (0, σ), but by data processing inequality we have
                  T V (πR (t0 + η), πR (t1 + η)) ≤ T V (t0 + η, t1 + η) ≤ |t0 − t1 |/(2σ).
Where the last bound on the total variation distance between two one-dimension Gaussians is a
special case of Theorem 1.3 in Devroye et al. (2018)5 .

Definition 26. We say that a paramterized family of kernels Kσ : U ×U → R where [0, 1] ⊂ U ⊂ R
is a proper kernel family if for any σ1 ≤ σ2 there is a non-negative kernel Hσ1 ,σ2 : U × U → R,
satisfying ∥Hσ1 ,σ2 ∥1→1 ≤ 1 and Kσ2 = Kσ1 ∗ Hσ1 ,σ2 .
Here the notation K ∗ H is denotes
                                                          Z
                                  [K ∗ H](t1 , t2 ) :=         K(t1 , t)H(t, t2 ) dt,
                                                           U

and                                                            Z
                                         ∥H∥1→1 := sup                |H(t0 , t)| dt.
                                                       t0 ∈U      U

Claim 27. The family of reflected Gaussian kernels K̃N,σ is a proper kernel family, with

                                         K̃σ1 ,N = K̃σ2 ,N ∗ K̃√σ2 −σ2 ,N .
                                                                          1    2


                     p
Proof. Let σ3 := σ12 − σ22 , we wish to show that K̃σ1 ,N = K̃σ2 ,N ∗ K̃σ3 ,N . In order to show
this, it is enough to prove that for any f , we have f ∗ K̃σ1 ,N = f ∗ K̃σ2 ,N ∗ K̃σ3 ,N . This is true by
Claim 18, since this property holds for standard Gaussian kernel Kσ2 ,N ∗ Kσ3 ,N = Kσ1 ,N (it is here
equivalent to saying that for two independent random variables Z2 ∼ N (0, σ2 ) and Z3 ∼ N (0, σ3 )
we have Z2 + Z2 ∼ N (0, σ1 )).
   5
       This special case, where the two variances are equal, is in fact an elementary calculation.


                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3   U SEFUL PROPERTIES OF SM ECE.

Lemma 28 (Monotonicity of smECE). Let Kσ be any proper kernel family parameterized by σ. If
σ1 ≤ σ2 , then
                           smECEKσ1 (D) ≥ smECEKσ2 (D).


Proof. Let us define
                         hσ (t) :=        E      Kσ (t, f )(f − y) = r̂(t)δ̂(t),
                                       (f,y)∼D

such that                                                          Z
                           smECEKσ (D) = ∥hσ ∥1 :=                     |hσ (t)| dt.

Since σ1 ≤ σ2 and Kσ is a proper kernel family, we can write Kσ2 = Kσ1 ∗ Hσ1 ,σ2 .
We have now,

             hσ1 ∗ Hσ1 ,σ2 =         E (f − y)Kσ1 (·, f ) ∗ Hσ1 ,σ2
                                 (f,y)

                          = E (f − y)[Kσ1 ∗ Hσ1 ,σ2 (·, f )] = E (f − y)Kσ2 (·, f )
                               f,y                                             f −y

                          = hσ2 .

On the other hand for any function f we have ∥f ∗ Hσ1 ,σ2 ∥1 ≤ ∥f ∥1 ∥Hσ1 ,σ2 ∥1→1 , and
∥Hσ1 ,σ2 ∥1→1 ≤ 1 by the definition of proper kernel family. Therefore


Corollary 29. In particular for σ1 ≤ σ2 we have smECEσ2 (D) ≤ smECEσ1 (D).


Proof. Reflected Gaussian kernels form a proper kernel family by Claim 27.

                                                                                      p
                              ^ σ (D) = smECEσ (D) ± σ
Lemma 30. For any σ, we have smECE                                                        2/π.


Proof. Let
                                                Ef,y K̃N,σ (t, f )f
                                       fˆ(t) :=                     .
                                                Ef,y K̃N,σ (t, f )
We have
                                                               Z
                |smECE
                  ^ σ (f, y) − smECEσ (f, y)| ≤                    |fˆ(t) − t|δ̂(t) dt
                                                               Z
                                                          ≤   E[K̃N,σ (t, f )|f − t|] dt
                                                              f
                                                             Z
                                                          = E Kσ (t, f )|f − t| dt
                                                               f

                                                          =E               E      |f − πR (Z)|
                                                               f Z∼N (f,σ)
                                                                                          p
                                                          ≤            E        |Z| =         2/π.
                                                               Z∼N (0,σ)


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.4     E QUIVALENCE BETWEEN DEFINITIONS OF dCE FOR TRIVIAL METRICS

The dCE(D) was defined in Błasiok et al. (2023) as a Wasserstein distance to the set of perfectly
calibrated distributions over X := [0, 1] × {0, 1}, where X is equipped with a metric

                                                           |f1 − f2 | if y1 = y2
                          d1 ((f1 , y1 ), (f2 , y2 )) :=                         .
                                                           ∞          otherwise

While generalizing the notion to that of dCEd , where d is a general metric on [0, 1], we chose
a different metric on X (specifically, we put a different metric on the second coordinate), that is
˜ 1 , y1 ), (f2 , y2 )) = d(f1 , f2 ) + |y1 − y2 |.
d((f
As it turns out, for the case of a trivial metric on the space of predictions, this choice is inconsequen-
tial, but the new definition has better generalization properties.
Claim 31. For the metric ℓ1 (f1 , f2 ) = |f1 − f2 |, we have dCE(D) ≲ dCEℓ1 (D) ≤ dCE(D), for
some universal constant c.

Proof. The lower bound dCEℓ1 ≤ dCE is immediate, since dCEℓ1 is a distance of D to P with
respect to a Wasserstein distance induced by the metric d1 on [0, 1] × {0, 1}, dCE is the Wasserstein
distance with respect to the metric d2 , and we have a pointwise bound d1 (u, v) ≤ d2 (u, v), implying
W1,d1 (D1 , D2 ) ≤ W1,d2 (D1 , D2 ).
The other bound follows from Theorem 12 and Theorem 20 — dCE and dCEℓ1 are within constant
factor from wCEℓ1 .

D.5     P ROOF OF L EMMA 14

Proof. Let us take w(x) : [0, 1] → [−1, 1] as in the definition of wCEd , a 1-Lipschitz function with
respect to the metric d, such that E(y − f )w(f ) = wCEd (f, y) = ε.
We wish to show that wCE(f, y) ≳ εc+1 . Indeed, let us take w̃(X) := w(πI (x)) where I :=
[γ, 1 − γ], πI : [0, 1] → I is a projection onto the interval I, and γ := ε/C for some large constant
C.
Note that w̃ is O(ε−c )-Lipschitz with respect to the standard metric on [0, 1]. If E(f − y)w̃(f ) ≥
ε/2, we immediately have wCE(f, y) ≳ εc+1 (we can use w̃/L as a test function, where L =
O(ε−c ) is a Lipcshitz constant for function w̃). Otherwise E(f − y)(w(f ) − w̃(f )) ≥ ε/2. Let us
call w2 := (w − w̃)/2, such that E(f − y)w2 (f ) ≥ ε/4, and moreover supp(w2 ) ⊂ [0, 1] \ I, where
w2 is 1-Lipschitz with respect to d.
Since [0, 1] \ I has two connected components [0, γ) and (1 − γ, 1], on one of those two connected
components correlation between the residual (y − f ) and w2 has to be at least ε/8. Since the other
case is analogous, let us assume for concreteness, that

                                        E(y − f )w3 (f ) ≥ ε/8,
where w3 (x) = w2 (x) for x ∈ [0, γ) and w3 (x) = 0 otherwise.
We will show that this implies Pr(f ≤ γ ∧ y = 1) ≳ ε, and refer to Claim 32 to finish the argument.
Indeed

E(y −f )w3 (f ) ≤ E [(1 − f )1[f ≤ γ ∧ y = 1]]+ E [f 1[f ≤ γ ∧ y = 0]] ≤ Pr(f ≤ γ ∧y = 1)+γ,
hence
                               Pr(f ≤ γ ∧ y = 1) ≥ ε/8 − γ ≥ ε/16,
where we finally specify γ := ε/32.
To finish the proof, it is enough to show the following

Claim 32. For a random pair (f, y) of prediction and outcome, if Pr(f ≤ γ ∧ y = 1) ≥ ε or
Pr(f ≥ 1 − γ ∧ y = 0) ≥ ε, where γ = ε/8, then wCE(f, y) ≳ ε2 .


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. We will only consider the case Pr(f ≤ γ ∧ y = 1) ≥ ε. The other case is identical.
Let us take w(x) := max(1 − x/2γ, 0). We have
                            1
      E(y − f )w(f ) ≥        Pr(f ≤ γ ∧ y = 1) − 2γ Pr(f ≤ γ ∧ y = 0) ≥ ε/2 − 2γ ≥ ε/4.
                            2

Since w is O(1/ε)-Lipschitz, we have wCE(f, y) ≳ ε2 .


D.6   S AMPLE COMPLEXITY — PROOF OF T HEOREM 9

Lemma 33. Let X : [0, 1] → R be a random function, satisfying with probability 1, ∥X∥1 :=
R1
 0
   |X(t)| dt ≤ 1 and sup X(t) ≤ σ. Assume moreover that for every t, we have E[X(t)] = 0.
                        t

Consider now m independent realizations X1 , X2 , . . . Xm : [0, 1] → R, each identically distributed
as X(t), and finally let
                                              1 X
                                    X(t) :=             Xi (t).
                                              m
Then
                                                2
                                                          1
                                     E ∥X(t)∥1 ≤             .
                                                         σm

Proof. By Cauchy-Schwartz inequality ∥X∥1 ≤ ∥X∥2 ∥1∥2 = ∥X∥2 , hence
                                             Z
                          2           2              2
                   E[∥X∥1 ] ≤ E[∥X∥2 ] = E       X(t) dt
                               Z
                            = E[X(t)2 ] dt
                                  Z
                                1          2
                            =        E[X(t) ] dt
                               m
                                1       2     1                   1
                            =     E[∥X∥2 ] ≤     E[∥X∥1 ∥X∥∞ ] ≤     .
                               m              m                  σm



Proof of Theorem 9. Let us first focus on the case σ = σ0 . For a pair (f, y) ∈ [0, 1] × {0, 1}, let us
         (σ )
define Xf,y0 : [0, 1] → R as
                                         (σ )
                                       Xf,y0 (t) := K̃σ0 (f, t)(f − y).
                               P     (σ0 )                                            (σ0 )
Note that smECEσ0 (D̂) = ∥        i Xfi ,yi /m∥1 , and similarly smECE(D) = ∥ Ef,y∼D Xf,y ∥1 .
          (σ )       (σ )                  (σ )
Define X̃i 0 := Xfi ,y0 i − Ef,y∼D Xf,y0 — this is a random function, since (fi , yi ) is chosen at
random from distribution D, and note that:

                                (σ )
      1. Random functions X̃i 0 for i ∈ {1, . . . , m} are independent and identically distributed.
                                                (σ 0)
      2. With probability 1, we have ∥X̃i 0 ∥1 ≤ 2 maxf ∥K̃σ0 (f, ·)∥1 = 2.
                                                         (σ )
      3. Similarly, with probability 1 we have ∥X̃i 0 ∥∞ ≤ 2 sup K̃σ0 (t1 , t2 ) ≤ 2σ0−1 .
                                                                    t1 ,t2

                                                                  (σ )
      4. For any t ∈ [0, 1] and i ∈ {1, . . . , m}, we have E[X̃i 0 (t)] = 0.


                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, we can apply Lemma 33 to deduce
                                  "              #
                                               2
                                      1 X             1
                                E          X̃i     ≤      ,
                                      m        1     σ0 m

hence, if m ≳ ε−2 σ0−1 , by Chebyshev inequality with probability at least 2/3 we can bound
 P (σ )
∥ i X̃i 0 /m∥1 ≤ ε, and if this event holds, using triangle inequality
                                                           X (σ )
                   smECEσ0 (D) − smECEσ0 (D̂)| ≤ ∥             X̃i 0 ∥/mε.
                                                                     i


Finally, for σ > σ0 , note that Xi = Xi 0 ∗ K̃N,√σ2 −σ2 (Claim 27) and therefore as soon as
                                  (σ)   (σ )
                                                       0
 P (σ )
∥ X̃i 0 ∥ ≤ ε, we also have
                                              X̃i 0 ∗ K̃N,√σ2 −σ2 ∥1
                           X (σ)             X (σ )
                         ∥     X̃i /m∥1 = ∥
                                                                                 0
                              i                    i
                                                            (σ )
                                                   X
                                             ≤∥         X̃i 0 ∥1 ∥K̃∥1→1 ≤ ε,
                                                   i
where                                              Z
                                  ∥K̃∥1→1 := sup        |K̃(t1 , t2 )| dt ≤ 1.
                                              t1   t2

This implies |smECEσ (D) − smECEσ (D̂)| < ε for all σ ≥ σ0 .
Finally, if smECE∗ (D) = σ∗ ≥ σ0 , we have smECEσ∗ (D) = σ∗ , hence smECEσ∗ (D̂) ≥ σ∗ − ε,
and by monotonicity smECEσ∗ −ε (D̂) ≥ σ∗ − ε, implying smECE∗ (D̂) ≥ σ∗ − ε. Identical
argument shows smECE∗ (D̂) ≤ σ∗ + ε.



D.7     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 16

The Lemma 21 and Lemma 23 have their correspondent versions in the more general setting where
a metric is induced on the space of predictions [0, 1] by a monotone function h : [0, 1] → R —
the proofs are almost identical to those supplied in the special case, except we need to use the
more general version of the duality theorem between wCE and dCE, with respect to a metric d
(Theorem 12).
Lemma 34. Let h be an increasing function h : [0, 1] → R ∪ {±∞} and dh (u, v) = |h(u) − h(v)|
be the induced metric on [0, 1]. Assume moreover that K(t) is a probability density function, such
that for η ∼ K we have E |η| = γ. Finally, let us abuse the notation to define the associated kernel
on R × R as K(x, y) := K(x − y). Then
                                  wCEd (f, y) ≤ smECEK,dh (f, y) + γ.

Proof. Let us consider an arbitrary 1-Lipschitz function w : [0, 1] → [−1, 1] with respect to dh , and
take η ∼ K as in the lemma statement. Let I = h([0, 1], and let us take w̃ : I → R to be given by
w̃(t) = w(h−1 (t)), and note that w̃ is Lipschitz, since w was Lipschitz with respect to dh . We can
therefore extend w̃ to a [−1, 1] valued Lipschitz function on the entire line R. Now for any f, η we
have |w̃(h(f ) + η) − w̃(h(f ))| ≤ |η|, and we can bound
                    E      [w(f )(f − y)] ≤ E[w̃(h(f ) + η)(f − y)] + E |η||f − y|
                 (f,y)∼D

                                           ≤ E |η| + E [E[w̃(h(f ) + η)(f − y)]
                                           ≤ γ + E [E[w̃(h(f ) + η)(f − y)] .                    (11)

We now observe that
                                                   Ef,y K(t, h(f ))(f − y)
                   E[(f − y)|h(f ) + η = t] =                              = r̂(t),
                                                       Ef,y K(t, h(f ))

                                                       25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and
                                     µf +η (t) = E K(t, h(f )) = δ̂(t),
                                                      f,y
where µf +η is the measure of h(f ) + η.
This leads to
                                   Z                             Z
      E [w̃(h(f ) + η)(f − y)] =          w̃(t)r̂(t)δ̂(t) dt ≤       |r̂(t)|δ̂(t) dt = smECEK,dh (f, y).   (12)

Combining (11) and (12) we conclude the statement of this lemma.
Lemma 35. Let h be an increasing function h : [0, 1] → R ∪ {±∞}, and dh (u, v) := |h(u) − h(v)|
be the induced metric on [0, 1].
Let K(t) be a probability density function of a random variable, such that for η ∼ K we have
E η = 0, and let λ ≤ 1 be a constant such that for any ε, we have TV(η, η + ε) ≤ ε/λ, finally by the
abuse of notation let us define te assocated kernel on R × R as K(x, y) := K(x − y). Then Then

                                                    1
                              smECEK,h (D) ≤          + 1 dCEdh (D).
                                                    λ

D.8     G ENERAL DUALITY THEOREM (P ROOF OF T HEOREM 12)

Let P ⊂ ∆([0, 1] × {0, 1}) be the family of perfectly calibrated distributions. This set is cut from
the full probability simplex ∆([0, 1] × {0, 1}) by a family of linear constraints, specifically µ ∈ P
if and only if
                                 ∀t, (1 − t)µ(t, 1) − tµ(t, 0) = 0.
Definition 36. Let F(H, R) be a family of all functions from H to R. For a convex set of probability
distributions Q ⊂ ∆(H), we define Q∗ ⊂ F(H, R) to be a set of all functions q, s.t. for all D ∈ Q
we have Ex∼D q(x) ≤ 0.
Claim 37. The set P ∗ ⊂ F([0, 1] × {0, 1}, R) is given by the following inequalities. A function
H ∈ P ∗ if and only if
                                      ∀t, E H(t, y) ≤ 0.
                                                 y∼Ber(t)



Lemma 38. Let W1 (D1 , D2 ) be the Wasserstein distance between two distributions D1 , D2 ∈
∆([0, 1]×, {0, 1}) with arbitrary metric d on the set [0, 1] × {0, 1}, and let Q ⊂ ∆([0, 1] × {0, 1})
be a convex set of probability distributions.
The value of the minimization problem
                                                   min W1 (D1 , D)
                                                 D1 ∈Q
is equal to
                                    max        E      H(f, y)
                                            (f,y)∼D

                                   s.t.     H is Lipschitz with respect to d,
                                            H ∈ Q∗ .

Proof. Let us consider a linear space V of all finite signed Radon measures on X := [0, 1] × {0, 1},
satisfying µ(X) = 0. We equip this space with the norm ∥µ∥V := EMD(µ+ , µ− ) for measures s.t.
µ+ (X) = 1 (and extended by ∥λµ∥V = λ∥µ∥V to entire space). The dual of this space is Lip0 (X)
— space of all Lipschitz functions on X which are 0 on some fixed base point x0 ∈ X (the choice
of base point is inconsequential). The norm on Lip0 (X) is ∥W ∥L given by the Lipschitz constant
of W (see Chapter 3 in Weaver (2018) for proofs and more extended discussion).
                                                                              R
For a function H on X and a measure µ on X, we will write H(µ) to denote W dµ.
The weak duality is clear: for any Lipschitz function H ∈ Q∗ , and any distribution D1 ∈ Q we
have H(D) ≤ H(D1 ) + W1 (D1 , D) = W1 (D1 , D).
For the strong duality, we shall now apply the following simple corollary of Hahn-Banach theorem.


                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Claim 39 (Deutsch & Maserick (1967), Theorem 2.5). Let (X, ∥ · ∥X ) be a normed linear space,
x0 ∈ X, and P ⊂ X a convex set, and let d(x, P ) := inf ∥x − p∥X . Then there is w ∈ X ∗ , such
                                                               p∈P
that ∥w∥X ∗ = 1 and inf w(p) − w(x) = d(x, P ).
                       p∈P


Take a convex set P ⊂ V given by P := {D − q : q ∈ Q}. Clearly minD1 ∈Q W1 (D, D1 ) = d(0, P )
by definition of the space V, and hence using the claim above, we deduce
                                d(0, P ) =             max        inf H̃(p).
                                                 H̃∈Lip0 :∥H̃∥L =1 p∈P

Taking H̃ which realizes this maximum, we can now consider a shift H := H̃ − sup H̃(Q), so that
                                                                                 q∈Q
H ∈ Q∗ , and verify
               min W1 (D, D1 ) = d(0, P ) = inf H̃(p) = H̃(D) − sup H̃(q) = H(D).
               D1 ∈Q                               p∈P                    q∈Q


Corollary 40. For any metric d on [0, 1]×{0, 1}, the dCEd (D) is equal to the value of the following
maximization program


                                 max         E      H(f, y)
                                        (f,y)∼D

                                s.t.    H is Lipschitz with respect to d
                                        ∀t, E H(t, y) ≤ 0.
                                             y∼Ber(t)

Lemma 41. For any metric d on [0, 1] if we define dˆ to be a metric on [0, 1] × {0, 1} given by
ˆ 1 , y1 ), (f2 , y2 )) := d(f1 , f2 ) + |y1 − y2 |, we have
d((f
                                        wCEd (D) ≥ dCEdˆ(D)/2

Proof. We shall compare the value of wCEd (D) with the optimal value of the dual as in Corol-
lary 40.
Let us assume that for a distribution D we have a function H : [0, 1] × {0, 1} → R, s.t.
E(f,y)∼D H(f, y) = OPT, which is Lipschitz with respect to d.   ˆ We wish to find a function
w : [0, 1] → [−1, 1] which is Lipschitz with respect to d, s.t.
                                        E (f − y)w(f ) ≥ OPT/2.
                                       f,y

Let us take
                                       w(f ) := H(f, 0) − H(f, 1).
We will show instead that w is 2-Lipschitz, [−1, 1] bounded and satisfies Ef,y (f − y)w(f ) ≥ OPT,
and the statement of the lemma will follow by scaling.
Let us define w(f ) := H(f, 0) − H(f, 1). The condition
                                        ∀f,        E      H(f, y) ≤ 0
                                              y∼Ber(f )

is equivalent to f w(f ) ≥ H(f, 0). Hence
              H(f, y) = yH(f, 1) + (1 − y)H(f, 0) = H(f, 0) − yw(f ) ≤ (f − y)w(f ),
which implies E(f − y)w(f ) ≥ E H(f, y).
Moreover, the function w(f ) is bounded by construction of the metric dˆ and the assumption that
                                                               ˆ
H(f, y) was Lipschitz. Indeed |w(f )| = |H(f, 0) − H(f, 1)| ≤ d((f, 0), (f, 1)) ≤ 1.


                                                         27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     C ONSISTENT C ALIBRATION M EASURES AND S MOOTH ECE
Here we elaborate on the shortcomings of ECE, and resolution offered by SmoothECE, and the
notion of a consistent calibration measure (Błasiok et al., 2023). One fundamental issue with the
ECE is: it is discontinuous in the underlying predictor, so a small change in the predictor can cause a
large change in its ECE. A simple example of this phenomenon was presented in the Introduction of
Błasiok et al. (2023) (also formalized as Lemma 4.8 in the same work). Here, we will demonstrate
this discontinuity visually, with a related example.
In Figure 3, we construct three different distributions that are each small perturbations of one an-
other. The top row shows samples (fi , yi ) ∈ [0, 1] × {0, 1} from each distribution. The first dis-
tribution (first column) is nearly perfectly calibrated. This is is evident from both the smoothECE
diagram (middle row) and the binnedECE diagram (bottom row). To construct the second and third
distributions, we shift each positive sample (y = 1) slightly to the right, and each negative sample
(y = 0) slightly to the left. No sample moves more than 0.05 from its initial position in Distribution
1, so this is a small perturbation to the predictions fi . We see that the smooth reliability diagram in
the middle row does not change much between all three distributions, and the smECE metric itself
also stays nearly constant (the smECE metric is listed in the upper-left of each plot).
However, by Distribution 3, the binned reliability diagram (bottom row) has changed drastically,
and appears to be significantly mis-calibrated. Moreover, the binned ECE metric (with 20 bins) has
changed from 0.06 in the first distribution to 0.31 in the third distribution. The binned ECE thus
incorrectly reports that Distribution 3 is far from calibrated. This essentially occurs because we
have shifted the positive and negative samples into disjoint bins by Distribution 3.
This example demonstrates how standard (binned) ECE is not robust to small perturbations in the
predictor, and can severely over-estimate the calibration error. Smooth ECE, on the other hand, does
not suffer this flaw. The formal definition of a consistent calibration measure in Błasiok et al. (2023)
enforces this robustness/continuity property, in addition to other natural theoretical properties. We
refer to the exposition in Błasiok et al. (2023) for further theoretical details.

E.1   S TATISTICAL C ONSISTENCY

Our estimator of SmoothECE also satisfies the classical criteria of statistical consistency. Specifi-
cally Theorem 9 shows that as the number of samples m → ∞, the finite-sample estimation error
ε → 0. In fact, Theorem 9 is stronger than just asymptotic consistency— it provides a quantitative
generalization bound.


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         Distribution 1               Distribution 2               Distribution 3



     Samples


SmoothECE


 BinnedECE


Figure 3: Continuity Demonstration. A demonstration of the discontinuous behavior of stan-
dard (binned) ECE, and how this is addressed by our Smooth ECE. We construct three differ-
ent distributions that are each small perturbations of one another. The top row shows samples
(fi , yi ) ∈ [0, 1] × {0, 1} from each distribution. The first distribution is nearly perfectly calibrated.
To construct the second and third distributions, we shift each positive sample (y = 1) slightly to
the right, and each negative sample (y = 0) slightly to the left. No sample moves more than 0.05
from its initial position in Distribution 1, so this is a small perturbation to the predictions fi . We
see that the smooth reliability diagram in the middle row does not change much between all three
distributions. However, the binned ECE in the bottom row changes drastically, and reports severe
miscalibration on Distribution 3 — even though all three distributions are actually close to cali-
brated. See Section E for more details.


                                                    29
