Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R ETRIEVING T EXTS BY A BSTRACT D ESCRIPTIONS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         While instruction-tuned Large Language Models (LLMs) excel at extracting in-
         formation from text, they are not suitable for locating texts conforming to a given
         description in a large document collection (semantic retrieval). Similarity search
         over embedding vectors does allow to perform retrieval by query, but the similarity
         reflected in the embedding is ill-defined and inconsistent, and is sub-optimal for
         many use cases. What, then, is a good query representation for effective retrieval?
         We identify the well defined and consistent task of retrieving sentences based on
         abstract descriptions of their content. We demonstrate the inadequacy of current
         text embeddings and propose an alternative model that significantly improves when
         used in standard nearest neighbor search. The model is trained using positive and
         negative pairs sourced through prompting a LLM. While it is easy to source the
         training material from an LLM, the retrieval task cannot be performed by the LLM
         directly. This demonstrates that data from LLMs can be used not only for distilling
         more efficient specialized models than the original LLM, but also for creating new
         capabilities not immediately possible using the original model.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Large Language Models (LLMs) excel at generating and interpreting text, but are not effective for
locating existing texts in large text collections (semantic search). Searching for texts based on their
semantics is important for knowledge seeking agents. Such agents can be human users, or artificial
ones: either LLM-based agents that are tasked with a complex goal and need to locate information as
a sub-goal, or as components in retrieval augmented generation (Khandelwal et al., 2019; Guu et al.,
2020; Parisi et al., 2022).
Current semantic search solutions are based on dense encoders (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019; Gao
et al., 2021) which learn a representation space such that “similar” documents are proximate in space.
The notion of similarity in this context, however, is not explicitly defined but rather learned from vast
datasets containing pairs of texts labeled as similar, often mixing various different kinds of similarity
(Kaster et al., 2021; Opitz & Frank, 2022). This makes them sub-optimal for information seeking
queries, as it is hard to control or predict the results of a given similarity-based query. What is a good
query representation and similarity definition for a semantic-search use case?
In this paper, we suggest a consistent and well-defined notion of similarity, which we believe to be a
useful one: the similarity between abstract descriptions of sentences, and their instantiations. While
LLMs can operate on these kinds of similarities, we find that the representation spaces that emerge
using common text-encoding techniques are sub-optimal for this similarity type, and show how to
construct better ones. Using LLMs, we create a dataset that captures this specific notion for similarity,
and use it to train an encoder whose representation space suppresses state-of-the-art text encoders
trained on orders of magnitude more data.
Our focus is in a common kind of information need which is mostly unachievable with current
search techniques: retrieving texts based on a description of the content of the text. For example,
in the domain of medical research, an agent might want to find sentences discussing the efficacy of
a specific drug in treating a particular condition, such as “the effectiveness of drug X in managing
hypertension." Or they can go more abstract, and look for “substance abuse in animals” or “a transfer
of a disease between two species”. Outside of the hard sciences, one may want to search the corpus
for sentences related to a historical event, such as “an important battle fought during World War
II” or “a significant scientific discovery in the field of physics". In international relations research


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


context, the agent may want to scour a corpus for “one country threatening the economy of another
country”, in a trading context an agent may search for “a transaction involving precious metals”, and
a pop-culture journalism an agent may search twitter for “a fight between two celebrities”.
In all these cases, the agent is not interested in a definition or a single answer, but in sentences
whose content is a specific instantiation of their query (for example, “The studies have shown that a
sub-population of primates chronically consume intoxicating amounts of alcohol” for the “substance
abuse in animals” query). In other words, we are interested in a higher-order similarity reflecting the
“instance-of” property.


Figure 1: Top retrieval results from the Wikipedia Index. Ours: the model developed in this work.
Existing: all-mpnet-base-v2, a strong sentence-similarity encoder.


Such retrieval cannot be easily achieved through keyword-based retrieval, because the retrieved
text is more specific than the description, causing very low lexical overlap. It is also not easily
achievable by current “dense retrieval” systems that rely on vector similarity: generic sentence
similarity methods (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019; Gao et al., 2021) tend to retrieve texts that are similar
to the description, rather than instantiations of it (e.g., a query like “an architect designing a building”
should return a sentence like “The Fallingwater, a remarkable architectural masterpiece located in
rural southwestern Pennsylvania, was designed by Frank Lloyd Wright”” and not “The architect
participates in developing the requirements the client wants in the building.”, although the latter is
more similar under conventional sentence similarity models). Similarly, systems that are trained to
retrieve passages that contain answers to questions (trained, for example, on SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al.,
2016; 2018)), beyond being focused on questions rather than assertions, are also focused on specifics
rather than abstract situations (questions are of the form “when did Columbus discover America” and
not “a discovery on a new land by an explorer”). Models trained on large data from search query logs
may be more diverse, but are generally not available outside of a few large technology companies.
We show that retrieval based on description is achievable: given training data consisting of
<description, text> pairs, we can train a descriptions encoder and a text encoder that learn
to represent items such that the descriptions and the texts they describe are close in embedding space
(§4). These vector encodings can then be used in a standard similarity-based retrieval setting. Figure
1 shows four queries that did not appear in the training data, and their top-4 retrieved items, over a
corpus of almost 10M wikipedia sentences.
To obtain the training data (§3), we observe that the reverse direction of the process, going from a
text to its description, is a task that can quite easily be performed either by crowd-workers, or, as
we do in this work, by large language models such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) and Codex (Chen
et al., 2021). We thus use the davinci-text-03 model to generate descriptions of sentences sampled
from Wikipedia, and use the result as our training corpus. Each sentence can accommodate many


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


different descriptions, pertaining to different aspects of the text. We therefore produce five different
descriptions for each text, in addition to incorrect descriptions, to be used as negative examples.
This work demonstrates how we can leverage the strengths of LLMs to achieve a task that is not
achievable by the text-generation capabilities of LLMs alone: retrieving texts, based on descriptions,
from large text collections. The description-based retrieval capability we demonstrate in this work
can serve as a useful component to enhance discovery ability in many data-intensive domains, and
especially in professional domains such legal, medical or scientific search, by either human users or
automatic agents.

2     D ESCRIPTION - BASED S IMILARITY
General similarity metrics in document retrieval capture a broad range of lexical, syntactic, and
semantic resemblances, offering a foundational approach to similarity assessment across various
tasks. However, their overarching nature often compromises task-specific relevance and precision. In
contrast, we propose a specific type of similarity–description-based similarity–which bridges the gap
between high-level descriptive queries and concrete instances within documents.

2.1   TASK D ESCRIPTION

We start by presenting the notion of description-based similarity. The task we define is retrieving
sentences that align with a user’s description or specification. At first glance, abstract descriptions
might resemble summaries, but they differ in several ways. While, like a summary, a description
should capture some aspects of the sentence, in contrast to a summary it does not necessarily focus
on the most important ones, and can even neglect the main event. Additionally, while summaries
condense the text, they usually do not abstract over it. To illustrate our notion of similarity, consider
the following text and the three valid description of it (taken from our dataset, § 3):

       • Text: “On July 2, concurrent with the Battle of Gettysburg in neighboring Adams County,
         Captain Ulric Dahlgren’s Federal cavalry patrol galloped into Greencastle’s town square,
         where they surprised and captured several Confederate cavalrymen carrying vital correspon-
         dence from Richmond.”
       • Description 1: Military personnel thwarting an enemy’s attempt to convey vital documents.
       • Description 2: The disruption of a communication exchange in a rural area.
       • Description 3: A dramatic, unexpected event occurring in a town square during a battle

Clearly, the descriptions are highly abstract, in contrast to conventional summary of the text; and they
omit some key details, such as the country and exact conflict being discussed, or even the fact the
event occurred during a battle (description 2); the date; and the specific units being involved.
We argue that abstract descriptions provide a natural and efficient way to express information seeking
needs. Whether it is a human user or an LLM searching through a vast corpus, they can describe
the specific results they want in natural language. Importantly, these descriptions only need to cover
some of the content, not every aspect (as some may be irrelevant to the user). A military historian
might want to find dramatic events during a battle (description 3) without specifying the time or
location. Existing text encoders struggle with this because the descriptions have little lexical overlap
with the text and they all lack concrete details mentioned in the text. However, if we could create a
representation space where the text is close to each description, retrieval would be straightforward.

2.2   D ESCRIPTION - BASED S IMILARITY VS . P REVIOUS W ORK

We compare description-based similarity with popular existing similarity-based retrieval methods.

Vs. Keyword-based Retrieval Keyword-based retrieval methods rely on exact lexical matches,
which makes them inherently weak for retrieval based on abstract descriptions. These methods
require users to construct queries using specific keywords, resulting in a laborious and potentially
suboptimal process. For example, to retrieve sentences related to "animals," a user would need
to come up with an exhaustive list of animal names, which can be impractical and may lead to


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


incomplete results. Consequently, keyword-based retrieval is ill-suited for retrieving sentences based
on abstract descriptions.
Vs. Dense Similarity Retrieval This family of methods, exemplified by SBERT (Reimers &
Gurevych, 2019) encodes sentences based on an objective that encourages sentences with “similar
meaning” to have high cosine similarity. Similar meaning, here, is determined by multiple corpora
such as Reddit comments (Henderson et al., 2019), SentEval (Conneau & Kiela, 2018) and SNLI
(Bowman et al., 2015a). As such, the type of similarity captured by sentence similarity models in
practice is not well understood, as it emerges from the training corpus (Kaster et al., 2021; Opitz &
Frank, 2022) and IR models struggle with specific semantic phenomena, such as negation (Weller
et al., 2023). Our goal is to design a model for the specific type of similarity we define, between
abstract descriptions and concrete instantiations of them. Moreover, while sentence similarity models
aim to cluster sentences with similar meaning together, a description does not have a “similar meaning”
to the text it describes, but rather to other descriptions of the same text.
Vs. QA-trained Dense Retrieval These systems are trained to retrieve paragraphs based on a
question, in an open-QA setting (Karpukhin et al., 2020) The retrieved paragraphs are then run
through a reader component, which attempts to extract the answer from each retrieved paragraph.
The training objective is to encode paragraphs to be similar to the questions to which they contain an
answer. Question could be seen as similar to descriptions (e.g. “early albums of metal bands” can be
served by retrieving for “which metal bands released an early album”), but they also differ in that:
(a) it is often cumbersome for a user to rephrase the information need as a question—in the above
example, the move to question form is not trivial; (b) questions are often focused on a single entity
that is the answer to the question, rather then on a situation involving a relation or interaction between
several entities; (c) the kinds of questions in current QA training sets tend to ask about specific, rather
than abstract, cases, e.g. asking “which metal band released album Painkiller?” or “what is the first
album by Metallica?”.
Moreover, in many cases that translation of descriptions to questions is altogether impossible. Often,
there is no single question whose answer accurately fulfills the information need that can be expressed
by a simple description. Consider a user interested in movie scripts where “A character is being
rescued by another character”. Formulating this abstract description is easy. On the other hand, while
it is possible to formulate several questions that resemble that description, such as “In what setting is
one character being rescued by another” or “What positive help does one character give to another
character?”, none of them accurately captures the intent of the original description.
Vs.      Query-trained Dense Retrieval These systems are trained on a collection of
<query,document> pairs, which are typically obtained from search engine logs. In the context
of academic research, the focus is on the MSMARCO dataset (Bajaj et al., 2016), which contains
natural language questions extracted from query logs. However, query logs include many different
query types beyond questions, and modern search systems have been reported to incorporate such
embedding based results for general queries.1 In a sense, these subsume the description-retrieval task,
but are (a) focused on documents and not on sentences; (b) not focused on this task, so may retrieve
also results which are not descriptions; and, most importantly (c) are mostly based on proprietary
data that is only available within a handful of large companies.
Vs. Entailment / NLI <description, text> pairs adhere to the entailment relation between
positive <hypothesis,text> pairs in the Textual Inference task (Dagan et al., 2005; Bowman et al.,
2015a), which is a superset of the <description,text> relation. In theory, NLI based similarity
models could perform well on this task. However, in practice they do not perform well, possibly due
to the composition of existing NLI datasets. Additionally, the do not usually encode the hypothesis
and the premise independently, making efficient indexing difficult.

3    O BTAINING T RAINING DATA
We use GPT-3 (text-davinci-003) to generate positive and misleading descriptions for sentences
from the English Wikipedia dataset.2 For each sentence, we generate 5 valid descriptions and 5
   1
     See, e.g., a report by Google of using BERT https://blog.google/products/search/
search-language-understanding-bert/
   2
     https://huggingface.co/datasets/wikipedia


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Sentence                                        Good Descriptions                       Bad Descriptions
  Intercepted by Union gunboats, over 300 of      A large group of people overcoming      A group of people being intercepted
  his men succeeded in crossing.                  a challenge.                            while crossing a desert.
  Dopamine constitutes about 80% of the cat-      A neurotransmitter found in the         A neurotransmitter found in the
  echolamine content in the brain.                brain in high concentrations.           stomach in high concentrations.
  In December 2021, Kammeraad was named           A sportsperson’s inclusion in a         A soccer player selected for a tour-
  in Philippines 23-man squad for the 2020        squad for a championship.               nament in the Philippines in 2021.
  AFF Championship held in Singapore.
  Around this time, MTV introduced a static       A visual element was implemented        MTV’s use of a dynamic graphic.
  and single color digital on-screen graphic      to enhance the viewing experience.
  to be shown during all of its programming.
  At the signing, he is quoted as having          A historical event where a signifi- A joke about the consequences of
  replied to a comment by John Hancock that       cant figure made a comment about not working together.
  they must all hang together: “Yes, we must,     unity.
  indeed, all hang together, or most assuredly
  we shall all hang separately”.
  It was said that Democritus’s father was        A description of a wealthy family’s     A description of a famous leader’s
  from a noble family and so wealthy that         involvement in a significant event.     family background.
  he received Xerxes on his march through
  Abdera.
  Heseltine favoured privatisation of state       A political party’s plan to reverse a   The effects of privatisation on the
  owned industries, a novel idea in 1979          previous government’s policy.           economy.
  as the Conservatives were initially only
  proposing to denationalise the industries na-
  tionalised by Labour in the 1970s

Table 1: Examples of generated data training data, including the original sentence, the good and bad
descriptions


misleading descriptions. In total, we generate descriptions for 165,960 Wikipedia sentences. See the
Appendix for the exact prompts we use.

Generating more abstract descriptions While the descriptions we generate do tend to be abstract,
to augment the dataset with descriptions of higher abstraction, we randomly select a subset of
instances, re-prompt GPT3 with three of the valid descriptions it generated, and ask it to generate
abstract versions of them (this prompt is an in-context learning one, the exact prompt appears in the
appendix). This results in 69,891 additional descriptions for 23,297 sentences (14.3% of the data). To
illustrate the effect of this iterative generation, for the sentence “Civil war resumed, this time between
revolutionary armies that had fought in a united cause to oust Huerta in 1913–14.”, one of the original
descriptions generated was “A conflict between opposing groups arising from the overthrowing of a
political leader”, while the iterative query resulted in the more abstract description “Conflict arose
between two sides that had previously been allied.”.

Final dataset Table 1 shows several examples of the generated data, including the original sentence
and pairs of valid and misleading descriptions. The generated data includes a wide range of both
positive and misleading descriptions that align with the original sentence and the abstract description.
The positive descriptions accurately capture the main meaning and key concepts of the sentence,
while the misleading descriptions contain inaccuracies or irrelevant information. We have randomly
divided the data into 158,000 train, 5000 development and 2960 test instances, each composed of a
sentence, 5 invalid descriptions and 5-8 valid descriptions. We found the quality of the generated
descriptions adequate for training, and for measuring progress during iterative development, which
we also confirmed through a human evaluation. We showed 229 valid descriptions and corresponding
sentences to Turkers, asking them to rate on a scale of 4, how well the sentence fits the description.
On average the instances were highly rated with a score of 3.69/4, which lies between The sentence
covers most of the main points mentioned in the description and The sentence covers everything
mentioned in the description.
However, some of the descriptions do not adequately capture our intended spirit of abstract descrip-
tions of sentences that reflect an information need. Thus, for the purpose of human-evaluation of
quality (§ 5), we manually curate a subset of 201 sentence descriptions from the test set, which we
manually verified to reflect a clear information need that would make sense to a human. These were
collected by consulting only the descriptions, without the associated sentences they were derived
from, or any model prediction based on them.


                                                               5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4    E NCODER T RAINING
In order to train our model for the task of aligning sentences with their descriptions, we utilize a
pretrained sentence embedding model and fine-tune it with contrastive learning. During the training
process, we represent each sentence and its corresponding valid descriptions using two distinct
instances of the model: one as a sentence encoder and the other as a description encoder.
Let S represent a set of sentences, Ps represent the set of valid descriptions associated with a sentence
s, and Ns represent the set of negative descriptions for that same sentence s. We encode each sentence
and description via a model, resulting in a vector representation for each token. We use mean pooling
over the token vectors of each of the sentence and description pairs to obtain vector representations in
Rd . Specifically, we denote the vector representation of a sentence s as vs , the vector representation
of a valid description of it as vp , and the vector representation of a negative description as vn .
To train the encoder, we combine two loss functions: the triplet loss (Chechik et al., 2010) and the
InfoNCE loss (van den Oord et al., 2018) .
The triplet loss, denoted as Ltriplet (s), is calculated for each sentence s as follows:
                            X
                                        max(0, m + ∥vs − vp ∥2 − ∥vs − vn ∥2 )                        (1)
                        (p,n)∼Ps ×Ns

Here, m represents the margin parameter that defines the minimum distance between the positive and
negative descriptions. We take m = 1. This loss encourages the representation of each sentence to be
closer to its valid descriptions than to its invalid descriptions.
The InfoNCE loss, denoted as LInfoNCE (s), is computed using a random collection of in-batch
negatives (i.e., valid descriptions of other sentences in the batch, as well as sentences that correspond
to those descriptions). Let Ns′ represent the set of all in-batch negatives sampled from the valid
descriptions of other sentences within the batch, including the sentences themselves. The InfoNCE
loss is given by:
                                                        v ·v
                                                                              !
                                                   exp( sτ p )
                             − log         v ·v                                                        (2)
                                      exp( sτ p ) + n′ ∈Ns′ exp( vs ·v   n′
                                                     P
                                                                       τ    )

Where · is cosine similarity and τ is the temperature (we take τ = 0.1).
The final loss used for training is a combination of the triplet loss and a scaled version of the InfoNCE
loss:
                                   Loss(s) = Ltriplet (s) + αLInfoNCE (s)                              (3)
We take α = 0.1. An ablation study revealed a modest improvement when using the combined loss
compared to using only the triplet component or only the Info-NCE component (Appendix A.5).
Gradients of the embedding vectors of the sentences and their descriptions propagate to the respective
encoders. We train for 30 epochs with a batch size of 128 and optimize using Adam (Kingma & Ba,
2015).

5    E VALUATION
Traditional information retrieval (IR) benchmarks do not align with our focus on abstract semantic
similarity, matching generalized descriptions with explicit, concrete instances. As such, we construct
a set of test queries, and quantitatively evaluate our model in two ways. We perform human evaluation
on the results retrieved from a large corpus (§ 5.1). Additionally, we perform automatic evaluation
on an adversarially-constructed set of relevant and irrelevant sentences for the test queries (§ 5.2),
to test the robustness of our model. We attach the training and test sets, alongside the code, in the
supplementary material.

Setting We sample a set of 10 million Wikipedia sentences (in addition to the set used for training
and evaluation). We filter sentences shorter than 6 words, leaving a set of 9.55 million sentences. We
encode them using the trained sentence encoder, resulting in an index called the Wikipedia Index
henceforth. This is the set from which we retrieve in evaluation. Given a query q, we represent it
with the query encoder and perform exact nearest-neighbor search under cosine distance.

                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Evaluation set We chose a random set of 201 descriptions from the test set, which we manually
verified to be reasonable description-queries a person may be interested in. We then performed
crowd-sourced evaluation of retrieval based on these descriptions, comparing our abstract-similarity
model to each of the baseline models. For the purpose of human evaluation we focused on the
relevance of the top results.
Baselines We evaluate our model against 3 strong sentence encoder models based on the MTEB
(Muennighoff et al., 2022) leaderboard in the Sentence-Transformer framework (Reimers & Gurevych,
2020),3 all-mpnet-base-v2, E5-base (Wang et al., 2022) and Instructor (Su et al., 2022). All 3
models were finetuned by their creators on diverse sentence-similarity datasets, containing orders
of magnitude more data than our dataset. Beyond the Sentence-Transformer models, our study
incorporates 3 additional baselines: BM25, HyDE and a SNLI-based model (Bowman et al., 2015b).
BM25 (Robertson et al., 1995) utilizes term frequency and document length to estimate a document’s
relevance to a specific query. BM25 has been shown to be a strong baseline for document retrieval
(Izacard et al., 2022). HyDE (Gao et al., 2022) is a zero-shot model that uses GPT-3 to generate
synthetic documents for a given query. The dense representations of these documents are then
averaged and fed as a query to a pretrained document retriever. Note that HyDE is different than our
model and the other baselines in the sense that it calls the GPT-3 API once per query at inference
time. Due to the similarity between the task of retrieving sentences based on abstract descriptions
and RTE, we also finetune a MPnet-based model for retrieval on the SNLI dataset. See Appendix A.2
for details on our baselines.
Our model denoted as Abstract-sim, is a fine-tuned version of the pretrained MPnet model (Song
et al., 2020). We do not use all-mpnet-base-v2, which was further finetuned on similarity datasets,
as it yielded worse results in preliminary experiments. Fig. 1 shows the top results of four queries,
alongside the top results from all-mpnet-base-v2 for comparison.
5.1    H UMAN E VALUATION

We perform human evaluation over naturally occurring sentences, in a natural retrieval scenario,
where abstract descriptions are likely to be used as queries. The human evaluation compares the
top sentences retrieved with our method, and to the top sentences retrieved with the state-of-the-art
semantic sentence encoding models.4
The evaluation setup is structured as follows.5 Crowdworkers are shown a query and results from
search over the Wikipedia Index. Particularly, they are shown 10 sentences, 5 of which are the top-5
retrieved sentences from abstract-sim and 5 of which are the top-5 retrieved sentences from one
of the baseline (each experiment with another baseline). The 10 sentences are randomly shuffled,
and crowdworkers are then asked to select all sentences that they deem a reasonable fit for the query.
Each task is shown to three distinct annotators. We aimed at paying crowdworkers $15 per hour on
average. Each query instance is shown to 3 annotators.

Metrics We report the average number of results from each model that were selected as relevant
(as a histogram), as well as the mean number of times a specific number of sentences from a given
model was chosen (the mean of the histogram).

Results For evaluation we only count sentences to have been selected as relevant, if they were
chosen by at least 2 out of 3 annotators. In Table 2 we show the average number of valid retrieved sen-
tences per method. The annotators have chosen significantly more sentences from our abstract-sim
model compared to all 4 baselines, with our model having close to 4 out of 5 sentences deemed as
fitting the query on average and the baseline models between 1.61-2.2 sentences. Fig. 2 shows the
complete distribution of the number of times a given number of sentences was chosen from a given
model (where the maximum is 5, that is, all the 5 results for the model were chosen). Notably, in
99/201 of the test cases, 5 sentences were chosen from abstract-sim’s results; from the baselines
all 5 sentence were only chosen between 14-28 times. That is, in many of the cases all top results
were considered as relevant for the query. Conversely, the baselines show a large number of cases
   3
     https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers
   4
     We do not compare against NLI and BM-25 due to their very low precision and recall in the automatic
evaluation (§ 5.2; Fig. 4a) and Fig. 4.
   5
     Screenshots of the annotation interface can be found in the Appendix.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         100
                             Abstract-sim (Ours)
                             MPNet                                 Model                      # chosen
          80                 E5                                    abstract-sim               3.89±0.073 / 5
                             HyDe                                  HyDE                       2.2 / 5
          60                 Instructor                            all-mpnet-base-v2
Counts

                                                                                              1.89 / 5
                                                                   Instructor-large           1.64 / 5
          40                                                       E5-base                    1.61 / 5

          20                                                     Table 2: Human evaluation results
                                                                 (§ 5.1): number of sentences that crowd-
           0
                                                                 workers deemed to be fitting the query,
                  0      1      2      3     4     5             from a set of 5 retrieved sentences:
                      Number of sentences chosen                 Our model (abstract-sim) vs. the four
                                                                 baselines. The number reported for
Figure 2: Human evaluation results (§ 5.1): num-                 abstract-sim is a mean±std over the
ber of times a given number of sentences was cho-                binary comparisons against each of the
sen per query instance: Our model (abstract-sim),                4 baselines.
averaged over all 4 baseline evaluations, vs. the
baselines.


where only 0,1, or 2 sentences where chosen, while these cases are much rarer among abstract-sim
results (below 5 vs. at least 42 for the case of 0 relevant sentences). Overall, human inspection of
top-retrieved results show a large preference for our models compared with the baselines.

 5.2           AUTOMATIC E VALUATION

We accompany the human evaluation with a manually-constructed automatic evaluation dataset,
focused on robustness to misleading results. We do not know how many relevant sentences exist in
the Wikipedia index for each query (if any). To allow for an automatic evaluation in the face of this
challenge, we use the following evaluation scheme. We once again employed GPT, this time asking it
to generate a set of valid sentences per description. To test robustness, we work under an adversarial
setting, where for each query we generate both relevant sentences and distracting sentences. We
measure the precision and recall of our model and the baselines mentioned above.
Generating sentences from descriptions We start with the 201 valid, manually-verified descrip-
tions in the test set. We use GPT for the reverse task of our main task: mapping abstract descriptions
to concrete sentences. We randomly choose one negative (invalid) description from the entry in the
test set that corresponds to each valid description. We manually verify that the chosen description is
indeed topically similar but invalid. In case the description does not contradict the valid description,
we manually change it. The process results in a complementary set of 201 invalid abstract descrip-
tions. For example, for the valid test example “The existence of a river and a town with the same
name”, we have the invalid description “The existence of a river and a county with the same name”.
For both the valid and invalid descriptions, we generate a set of 12 sentences that match the given
descriptions, ending up with 12 sentences that align with a description, and 12 sentences that align
with a contradicting description, that serves as a distractor. These 24 sentences were then combined
with the remaining 9.55 million Wikipedia sentences in the Wikipedia Index. The prompt used to
generate these sentences can be found in Appendix A.1.1. We use Mturk to verify the validity of the
resulting set of sentences.6 The process results in an average of 11.2 valid sentences and 9.3 invalid
sentences per test query. See Appendix A.3 for a sample of this data.
Setting We follow 3 metrics: valid-recall@k, invalid-recall@k and precision@k. valid-recall@k
measures the number of valid sentences captured within the first k retrieval results over the Wikipedia
index. Similarly, invalid-recall@k measures the number of invalid sentences captured. Finally,
precision@k is calculated only with respect to valid and invalid sentences (excluding the Wikipedia
   6
     For the set of valid sentences we filter out all sentences chosen as fitting the description by at least two
annotators, For the set of invalid sentences we take all sentences chosen as not to be a suitable fit for the
description by at least two annotators.


                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   1.0
                                   0.9
                                   0.8
                                   0.7


                         Precision@k
                                   0.6
                                                              MPnet
                                   0.5                        Instructor
                                                              E5
                                   0.4                        SNLI
                                                              HyDE
                                   0.3                        BM25
                                                              Abstract-sim (ours)
                                   0.2                        Contriver
                                                              GTE
                                   0.1                        BGE
                                                              Ember
                                   0.0
                                         2   4    6       8      10          12
                                                      k
Figure 3: Precision automatic evaluation results (§ 5.2): precision@k curve for abstract-sim and
the baselines. Vertical lines represents 1 standard deviation.



index, which might contain many more valid sentences): we calculate the similarity of the description
to the valid and invalid sentences, and count the number of valid sentences within the top k results.

Results The precision results are shown in Fig. 4a and the recall results are shown in Appendix A.5.
Our models improves over all baselines in terms of precision@k. The gap is largest for precision@1,
and gradually decreases. Our model achieves precision@1 = 85.4%, compared with 73.6% for
the strongest baseline, E5, corresponding to 31/201 vs. 53/201 errors in the highest ranked result,
respectively. The gap decreases with increasing k (note that we have a maximum of 12 positive
examples). As for recall, generally models that achieve high valid-recall@k also achieve high
invalid-recall@k. Our model achieves relatively low valid-recall@k, but is better than all models in
terms of invalid-recall@k (except SNLI, which has both low valid recall and low invalid recall), i.e.,
it tends to avoid returning invalid sentences, at the price of missing some valid ones.


6    D ISCUSSION

Searching based on abstract descriptions is made possible due to recent progress in latent semantic
representation learning, both pre-trained text encoders trained in a self-supervised fashion, and
instruct-tuned large language models. We envision a large range of semantic search variants which we
hope will be explored in the coming years. To train our model, we leverage a large language model to
create a training dataset of both accurate and misleading Wikipedia sentence descriptions, enabling
us to train a contrastive dual-encoder sentence embedder. Our embedder surpasses robust baselines in
a human evaluation trial, underscoring the LLM’s potential for generating tailored training datasets,
despite its limitations in direct retrieval tasks. Overall, those results suggest that the generative
abilities LLMs can find applications as sources of training data in diverse domains such as retrieval,
without having to apply the resource intensive model in inference time.


7    C ONCLUSIONS

We introduce the task of sentence retrieval based on abstract descriptions. We show that current
sentence-embedding methods are not a good fit for the task. We leverage GPT-3 to generate a set
of diverse valid and invalid abstract descriptions, and train a retrieval model on that resulting data.
We find that the model trained on the data that is tailored to this task is performing significantly
better than standard sentence-similarity models. This disparity highlights that the notion of similarity
captured by sentence transformers is vague, and that tailoring it to specific information seeking need
may result in significant practical improvements.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Payal Bajaj, Daniel Campos, Nick Craswell, Li Deng, Jianfeng Gao, Xiaodong Liu, Rangan Ma-
  jumder, Bhaskar Mitra Andrew McNamara, Mir Rosenberg Tri Nguyen, Xia Song, Alina Stoica,
  Saurabh Tiwary, and Tong Wang. MS MARCO: A Human Generated MAchine Reading COmpre-
  hension Dataset. In InCoCo@NIPS, 2016.
Samuel Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts, and Christopher D Manning. A large annotated
  corpus for learning natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 632–642, 2015a.
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts, and Christopher D. Manning. A large annotated
  corpus for learning natural language inference. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, 2015b.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Gal Chechik, Varun Sharma, Uri Shalit, and Samy Bengio. Large scale online learning of image
  similarity through ranking. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11(3), 2010.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Alexis Conneau and Douwe Kiela. Senteval: An evaluation toolkit for universal sentence represen-
  tations. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and
  Evaluation (LREC 2018), 2018.
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini. The pascal recognising textual entailment
  challenge. In Proceedings of the First international conference on Machine Learning Chal-
  lenges: evaluating Predictive Uncertainty Visual Object Classification, and Recognizing Textual
  Entailment, pp. 177–190, 2005.
Luyu Gao, Xueguang Ma, Jimmy Lin, and Jamie Callan. Precise zero-shot dense retrieval without
  relevance labels, 2022.
Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. Simcse: Simple contrastive learning of sentence
  embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 6894–6910, 2021.
Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Mingwei Chang. Retrieval augmented
  language model pre-training. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3929–3938.
  PMLR, 2020.
Matthew Henderson, Paweł Budzianowski, Iñigo Casanueva, Sam Coope, Daniela Gerz, Girish
 Kumar, Nikola Mrkšic, Georgios Spithourakis, Pei-Hao Su, Ivan Vulic, et al. A repository of
 conversational datasets. ACL 2019, pp. 1, 2019.
Gautier Izacard, Mathilde Caron, Lucas Hosseini, Sebastian Riedel, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin,
  and Edouard Grave. Unsupervised dense information retrieval with contrastive learning, 2022.
Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi
  Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In
  Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
  (EMNLP), pp. 6769–6781, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.550. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.
  550.
Marvin Kaster, Wei Zhao, and Steffen Eger. Global explainability of bert-based evaluation metrics
 by disentangling along linguistic factors. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical
 Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 8912–8925, 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, Dan Jurafsky, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Generalization
  through memorization: Nearest neighbor language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.00172,
  2019.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Yoshua
  Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, 2015. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
Niklas Muennighoff, Nouamane Tazi, Loïc Magne, and Nils Reimers. Mteb: Massive text embedding
  benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07316, 2022.
Juri Opitz and Anette Frank. Sbert studies meaning representations: Decomposing sentence embed-
  dings into explainable semantic features. In Proceedings of the 2nd Conference of the Asia-Pacific
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 12th International Joint Confer-
  ence on Natural Language Processing, pp. 625–638, 2022.
Aaron Parisi, Yao Zhao, and Noah Fiedel. Talm: Tool augmented language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.12255, 2022.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. Squad: 100,000+ questions for
  machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, pp. 2383–2392, 2016.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable questions
  for squad. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp. 784–789, 2018.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.
  In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
  and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP),
  pp. 3982–3992, 2019.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Making monolingual sentence embeddings multilingual using
  knowledge distillation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, 11 2020. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2004.09813.
Stephen Robertson, S. Walker, S. Jones, M. M. Hancock-Beaulieu, and M. Gatford. Okapi at trec-3.
  In Overview of the Third Text REtrieval Conference (TREC-3), pp. 109–126. Gaithersburg, MD:
  NIST, January 1995. URL https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/
  okapi-at-trec-3/.
Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Jianfeng Lu, and Tie-Yan Liu. Mpnet: Masked and permuted
  pre-training for language understanding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
 16857–16867, 2020.
Hongjin Su, Jungo Kasai, Yizhong Wang, Yushi Hu, Mari Ostendorf, Wen-tau Yih, Noah A Smith,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, Tao Yu, et al. One embedder, any task: Instruction-finetuned text embeddings.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09741, 2022.
Aäron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive
  coding. CoRR, abs/1807.03748, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.03748.
Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Binxing Jiao, Linjun Yang, Daxin Jiang, Rangan Majumder,
  and Furu Wei. Text embeddings by weakly-supervised contrastive pre-training. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.03533, 2022.
Orion Weller, Dawn Lawrie, and Benjamin Van Durme. Nevir: Negation in neural information
  retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07614, 2023.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

The training and test data, as well the code, are attached in the supplementary material, and will be
released upon publication, alongside the models.

L IMITATIONS

Our training data, models and experiment are all strictly English-based. More importantly, we
observed the following limitation of the resulting similarity model. While it clearly is better than
all existing models we compared against at identifying sentences given an abstract description, we
also observed the opposite tendency: for some queries, it is not faithful to the provided description.
For example, searching for the query “The debut novel of a french author” returns results such as
“Eugénie Grandet is a novel first published in 1833 by French author Honoré de Balzac” or “Lanzarote
(novel), a novel by Michel Houellebecq”, either mentioning the first time the novel was published,
instead of returning mentions of a first novel published by an author; or mentioning novels written by
French authors, regardless of whether or not they are their debut novels.

E THICS S TATEMENT

As all language technology, the models and data are inherently dual use—they can be used both for
good (e.g., to advance human knowledge) or for bad (e.g., for surveillance that is aimed at depression
of minority communities). We hope that the benefits outweighs the risks in our case.
According to the terms-of-service of the GPT API, the API output (the collected data and the models
we created based on it) should not be used to compete with OpenAI. We declare we have no such
intentions, and ask the users of the data and models to also refrain from doing so.

A.1    P ROMPTING

These are the prompts we used to generate the sentence descriptions dataset. The “main prompt”
was used to generate 5 valid descriptions and 5 invalid descriptions per sentence. For approximately
14% of the sentences, we re-feed GPT with one of its valid generations and use the “Make-more-
abstracts prompt” to generate 3 additional more abstract version of the descriptions. Finally, we
use the “Description to sentence prompt” to generate a set of sentences that align with the 201 test
descriptions, used for evaluation.

M AIN PROMPT:
Let's write abstract descriptions of sentences. Example:

Sentence: Pilate 's role in the events leading to the crucifixion lent themselves
to melodrama , even tragedy , and Pilate often has a role in medieval mystery
plays .

Description: A description of a historical religious figure's involvement in a
significant event and its later portrayal in art.

Note: Descriptions can differ in the level of abstraction, granularity and the
part of the sentence they focus on. Some descriptions neeed to be abstract, while
others should be concrete and detailed.

For the following sentence, write up 5 good and stand-alone, independent
descriptions and 5 bad descriptions (which may be related, but are clearly wrong).
Output a json file with keys 'good', 'bad'.



                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sentence: {sentence}

Start your answer with a curly bracket.

A.1.1    M AKE - MORE - ABSTRACT P ROMPT
Sentence: in spite of excellent pediatric health care , several educational
problems could be noted in this tertiary pediatric center .

Description: Despite having advanced healthcare resources, certain deficiencies
in education were identified at a medical center that serves children.

A very abstract description: The provision of care at a specialized medical
center was not optimal in one particular area, despite the presence of advanced
resources.

Sentence: {sentence}

Description:     {description}

A very abstract description:


D ESCRIPTION TO SENTENCE PROMPT
Create a JSON output with a key ‘sentences’ containing 15 Wikipedia-style different
sentences. The sentences should align with the given description, i.e., the
description must be a valid characterization of the sentences. Notice: (1) You
must avoid using words appearing in the description; (2) You MUST mention concrete
entities such as names of people, places and events to make the sentence sound
natural; (3) you MUST make sure each sentence is relevant for the description;
(4) IMPORTANT: you MUST make the sentences different from each other; they must
not mention the same topics. Description: '{description}'

Be faithful to the description. Start your answer with a curly bracket.

A.2     BASELINE M ODELS

HyDE We adapted HyDE to our scenario by: a. adding an appropriate prompt for sentence
generation matching the description in the query and b. replacing the document retriever with a
sentence retriever (all-mpnet-base-v2).

Instructor Instructor generates task-specific embedidngs by specifying the type of task in the
prompt. We use the recommended prompt “Represent the Wikipedia document for retrieval” for the
sentence encoder, and the closest prompt from Su et al. (2022)’s dataset, “Represent the Wikipedia
summary for retrieving relevant passages:”, for the description encoder; variations on the query
prompt, such as “Represent the Wikipedia description for retrieving relevant passages:”, yield similar
results.

SNLI baseline As discussed in § 2.2, the notion of description-based similarity is related to NLP
task of recognizing textual entailment (Dagan et al., 2005; Bowman et al., 2015a). As such, it is
natural to ask how do models trained on popular RTE datasets, such as SNLI (Bowman et al., 2015b),
fare on this task. We extract entailment and neutral pairs from the SNLI dataset, and finetune an
MPnet-base model for 30 epochs with the objective of minimizing the InfoNCE loss Eq. (2), where
hypothesis is the query, the negative pairs are taken from neutral premises while the positive is the
entailing premise. We then evaluate this model in the same way we evaluate the other baselines.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3     AUTOMATED EVALUATION DATA

  Description                                   Valid sentence                            Invalid sentence
  A period of difficulty and sorrow for an      The death of his beloved mother was       This individual building was a diffi-
  individual.                                   an extremely difficult and sorrowful      cult place to live in.
                                                time for Albert.
  A shift in the way people are referred to has In the current era, more and more         Alice was referred to as ’miss’ the
  occurred.                                     people are preferring to go by their      same way she used to be in the pre-
                                                given name, rather than traditional       quarantine period.
                                                titles.
  The honoring of an actor’s legacy.            On 10 April 2020, a ceremony was          Thespians from all over the nation
                                                held at the TCL Chinese Theatre           had gathered in Los Angeles to rec-
                                                in Hollywood to commemorate the           ognize the immense influence of vet-
                                                late actor Peter O’Toole, who passed      eran director Stan Li.
                                                away in 2013.
  The act of two individuals reaching a mu- The two leaders of different nations          Three high school friends, Alex,
  tual understanding.                           decided to set aside their differences    Jack, and Rachel, finally reached
                                                and reach a peaceful understanding.       a mutual agreement over which
                                                                                          dessert they’d order at the cafeteria.
  A dismissal of a concept by a renowned         Although Albert Einstein highly es-      The acclaimed academic disassoci-
  scholar.                                       teemed science, he strongly denied       ated himself from the researcher he
                                                 the possibility of perpetual motion.     had once championed.
  A federal grand jury’s investigation into a    A federal grand jury has launched        The federal grand jury is conducting
  political corruption case.                     an investigation into a political cor-   a thorough investigation into the dev-
                                                 ruption scandal involving prominent      astating floods that occurred across
                                                 figures in the government.               the nation.
  HeThe effect of a decrease in the number       The declining trend in the number        Predators have evolved over time,
  of predators.                                  of predators has caused a severe de-     playing a critical role in ecology, oc-
                                                 pletion in the prey population.          cupying different niches and com-
                                                                                          peting with each other.

Table 3: Examples of generated data training data, including the original sentence, the good and bad
descriptions

Table 3 presents a sample of descriptions from the 201 examples test set, alongside one invalid
and one invalid sentence (generated by GPT3) per description. These were used in the automatic
evaluation (§ 5.2).


                                                             14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4   R ECALL R ESULTS



                      1.0                                                              1.0                 MPnet
                      0.9                                                              0.9                 Instructor
                                                                                                           E5
                      0.8                                                              0.8                 SNLI
                                                                                                           HyDE
                      0.7                                                              0.7                 BM25


                                                                        Invalid-recall@k
                                                                                                           Abstract-sim (ours)
         Valid-recall@k

                      0.6                                                              0.6                 Contriver
                                                                                                           GTE
                                                 MPnet
                      0.5                        Instructor                            0.5                 BGE
                                                                                                           Ember
                                                 E5
                      0.4                        SNLI                                  0.4
                                                 HyDE
                      0.3                        BM25                                  0.3
                                                 Abstract-sim (ours)
                      0.2                        Contriver                             0.2
                                                 GTE
                      0.1                        BGE                                   0.1
                                                 Ember
                      0.0                                                              0.0
                            0     500   1000    1500          2000                           0       500      1000               1500        2000
                                          k                                                                      k

Figure 4: Recall automatic evaluation results (§ 5.2): valid-recall@k (left, higher is better) and
invalid-recall@k (right, lower is better) for abstract-sim and the baselines. Vertical lines represent
1 standard deviation.
Figure Fig. 4 presents valid-recall@k (higher is better) and invalid-recall@k (lower is better) for the
automatic evaluation experiment (§ 5.2).

A.5   A BLATION OF L OSS C OMPONENTS



                      1.0                            only-infonce
                                                                                       1.0                                          only-infonce
                      0.9                            only-triplet
                                                     triplet+infonce
                                                                                       0.9                                          only-triplet
                                                                                                                                    triplet+infonce
                      0.8                                                              0.8
                      0.7                                                              0.7
         Valid-recall@k


                                                                        Precision@k


                      0.6                                                              0.6
                      0.5                                                              0.5
                      0.4                                                              0.4
                      0.3                                                              0.3
                      0.2                                                              0.2
                      0.1                                                              0.1
                      0.0                                                              0.0
                            0     500   1000    1500          2000                               2    4      6           8          10         12
                                          k                                                                      k

                                Figure 5: Ablation results on the automatic evaluation (§ 5.2).

Fig. 5 presents the results of automatic evaluation when training models with the individual loss
components (only the triplet loss, or only the info-NCE loss) compared with using the combination
of the two losses.


                                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.6   H UMAN - EVALUATION I NTERFACE

This is the interface used for MTurk evaluation:


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This is the interface with an instantiated descriptions and 10 retrieved sentences (5 from baselines
and 5 from our model, presented in random order).


This is the interface we used for assessing the coverage of the GPT3 generated description and its
corresponding sentence.


                                                17
