Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


BALANCING ACT: C ONSTRAINING D ISPARATE I MPACT
IN S PARSE M ODELS

 Meraj Hashemizadeh∗ 1                      Juan Ramirez ∗ 12                Rohan Sukumaran12
  Golnoosh Farnadi134                    Simon Lacoste-Julien124            Jose Gallego-Posada12
 1            2                                     3                       4
     Mila         DIRO - Université de Montréal       McGill University       Canada CIFAR AI Chair

                                                A BSTRACT
             Model pruning is a popular approach to enable the deployment of large deep
             learning models on edge devices with restricted computational or storage capacities.
             Although sparse models achieve performance comparable to that of their dense
             counterparts at the level of the entire dataset, they exhibit high accuracy drops for
             some data sub-groups. Existing methods to mitigate this disparate impact induced
             by pruning (i) rely on surrogate metrics that address the problem indirectly and
             have limited interpretability; or (ii) scale poorly with the number of protected
             sub-groups in terms of computational cost. We propose a constrained optimization
             approach that directly addresses the disparate impact of pruning: our formulation
             bounds the accuracy change between the dense and sparse models, for each sub-
             group. This choice of constraints provides an interpretable success criterion to
             determine if a pruned model achieves acceptable disparity levels. Experimental
             results demonstrate that our technique scales reliably to problems involving large
             models and hundreds of protected sub-groups.

1        I NTRODUCTION
Current deep learning practice displays a trend towards larger architectures (Bommasani et al.,
2021), as exemplified by popular models such as GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), Llama 2 (Touvron et al.,
2023) and DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022). Model compression techniques such as pruning (Gale
et al., 2019), knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015), or quantization (Gholami et al., 2021) are
crucial towards enabling the deployment of large models across a wide range of platforms, including
resource-constrained edge devices like smartphones.
Despite achieving comparable performance at an aggregate level over the entire dataset, pruned models
often exhibit significant accuracy reduction for some data sub-groups (Hooker et al., 2019; 2020;
Paganini, 2020). In particular, under-represented groups can suffer high performance degradation
while the overall performance remains unaffected, thus exacerbating systemic biases in machine
learning models. Tran et al. (2022) refer to this phenomenon as the disparate impact of pruning.
Existing mitigation methods face challenges in terms of interpretability and scalability to a large
number of sub-groups. Tran et al. (2022) introduce constraints aiming to equalize the loss of the
sparse model across sub-groups. However, their approach does not account for the unequal group-
level performance of the dense model. Moreover, while the loss can be a useful surrogate for training,
this method addresses the disparate impact issue indirectly as it focuses on controlling the loss, rather
than group-level changes in accuracy. Alternatively, Lin et al. (2022) compute per-group importance
scores for every model parameter to determine the weights to be pruned. This approach becomes
prohibitively expensive when the model or the number of sub-groups is large.
In this work, we characterize the disparate impact of pruning in terms of the group-level accuracy gaps
between the dense and sparse models. Additionally, we propose a problem formulation that directly
addresses the disparate impact of pruning by imposing constraints on the per-group excess accuracy
gaps (CEAG). A key advantage of our proposed formulation is that it enjoys interpretable semantics:
feasible solutions of our optimization problem correspond to models with low pruning-induced
disparity. Finally, our approach introduces a negligible computational overhead (Appendix E.1)
compared to (disparity-agnostic) naive fine-tuning of the sparse model, making it applicable to
problems with large numbers of groups, such as intersectional fairness tasks.
     ∗
         Equal contribution. Contact: merajhashemi@yahoo.co.uk, juan.ramirez@mila.quebec.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                                                                                             10
                                                                            Naive Fine Tuning


                                                                                                                                  Excess Accuracy Gap √g (%)
                                                                            Equalized Loss
                                                                                                                             8
                                                                            CEAG (Ours)
                                       Naive Fine Tuning
                                                                                                                             4

                 Gradual                                                                                                     2
                Magnitude
                 Pruning          ✄                                                                                          0
                 (GMP)                  Equalized Loss
                                                                                                                             °2

                                                                          White        Black     Asian    Indian    Others

                                         CEAG (Ours)                                           Naive Fine Tuning
                                                                                                   Equalized Loss
                                                                                               CEAG (Ours)
                                                                      0           2        4        6        8      10
                                                                                      Disparate Impact ™PW (%)


Figure 1: Left: A dense model is sparsified with GMP, and then subjected to either (i) naive
fine-tuning (NFT, using ERM), (ii) equalized loss constraints (Tran et al., 2022, EL), or (iii) our
approach (CEAG). Right: Positive (resp. negative) excess accuracy gaps (EAGs, §3.1) indicate
groups whose performance degraded more (resp. less) than the model’s overall accuracy change.
Models with low disparate impact have EAGs that concentrate around zero. CEAG consistenly
yields models with lower disparity (ΨPW , §3.1) than NFT and EL. For example, NFT yields a
10% hyper-degradation (EAG, ψg ) on group Others. Results correspond to race prediction on UTKFace,
with race as group attribute at 90% sparsity. Metrics are measured on the training set and averaged over 5 seeds.


Fig. 1 illustrates the reliability of our approach at mitigating the disparate impact of pruning. We
measure disparity in terms of excess accuracy gaps (EAGs, §3.1). Naive fine-tuning yields models that
disproportionately affect group Others, and while the equalized loss formulation mitigates the issue,
our formulation consistently reduces the pruning-induced disparity. See §5 for further discussion.
The main contributions of our work1 are as follows:

          • We formulate a constrained optimization problem (CEAG, §3) that directly controls disparate
            impact by bounding group-level accuracy gaps between the dense and sparse models.
          • We propose an algorithm for solving constrained optimization problems with non-
            differentiable, stochastic constraints (§4). We use proxy constraints (Cotter et al., 2019) to
            address non-differentiablity; and introduce replay buffers (§4.2) for handling noise in the
            estimation of constraints.
          • Our replay buffers improve the training dynamics of the equalized loss formulation proposed
            by Tran et al. (2022). The improved dynamics lead to better models in terms of disparity.
          • Our experiments demonstrate that we can reliably mitigate the disparate impact of pruning
            across multiple architectures, datasets, and sparsity levels (§5). These results carry over to
            tasks with intersectional groups, and up to hundreds of constraints.

Our experimental results indicate that all methods considered in this paper (including ours) fail to
mitigate pruning-induced disparities on unseen data. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first
to document this generalization challenge. Despite this, our proposed method constitutes a step in
the right direction since our approach is the only one that reliably mitigates the disparate impact of
pruning on the training set. We hope our empirical observations will motivate further research on
improving the generalization properties of methods for mitigating the disparate impact of pruning.


2       R ELATED WORKS

Disparate Impact of Pruning. Hooker et al. (2019; 2020) and Paganini (2020) document the dis-
parate impact of pruning where some classes experience a more significant performance degradation
compared to others. Existing methods to mitigate disparity involve fairness-aware pruning (Lin et al.,
2022) or formulating constraints on a surrogate metric such as the loss (Tran et al., 2022).
    1
        Our code is available here: https://github.com/merajhashemi/balancing-act


                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lin et al. (2022) propose a pruning technique that removes weights based on a heuristic metric that
relates parameters with their importance for predicting samples from each group. This approach
scales poorly as it requires computing importance scores for each weight and group.
Tran et al. (2022) apply constraints to match the sparse model’s loss on each sub-group to the
aggregate loss. These constraints are (i) agnostic to the performance of the dense model on each
group and (ii) are based on the loss, which is a surrogate metric for assessing the accuracy-based
disparate impact. Since the disparate impact of pruning is measured with respect to a reference model,
the equalized loss formulation addresses the problem indirectly. Moreover, loss-based constraints
lack the interpretability of the per-group accuracy changes between the sparse and dense models.
Fairness and Constraints. Independent of model pruning, fairness in machine learning models is a
well studied problem (Dwork et al., 2012; Dieterich et al., 2016; Verma & Rubin, 2018; Mehrabi
et al., 2021; Zemel et al., 2013; Zhao & Gordon, 2022). Enforcing fairness with constraints has
mainly focused on imposing requirements such as demographic parity, equalized odds, equal oppor-
tunity (Hardt et al., 2016), accuracy parity (Agarwal et al., 2018; Berk et al., 2021), or combinations
of these properties (Zafar et al., 2017; Lowy et al., 2021; Bakker et al., 2020; Shui et al., 2022). The
disparate impact of pruning is a fairness notion in the context of sparsity that aims to match the
performance of a sparse model to that of a reference dense model.
Constrained Optimization. Constrained formulations have gained popularity in different sub-fields
of machine learning such as safe reinforcement learning (Stooke et al., 2020), active learning (Elenter
et al., 2022) and sparsity (Gallego-Posada et al., 2022). These constrained formulations lead to
stochastic min-max optimization problems, which can be challenging to optimize due to their non-
convexity (Lin et al., 2020). We make use of proxy constraints (Cotter et al., 2019) to solve problems
with interpretable but non-differentiable constraints.
Variance Reduction. The stochasticity in gradient estimates introduces additional optimization
challenges (Beznosikov et al., 2023). Variance reduction techniques (Gower et al., 2020) have been
employed to improve convergence on stochastic optimization (Defazio et al., 2014), and in min-max
games (Chavdarova et al., 2019). In this work, we leverage the idea of replay buffers (Mnih et al.,
2013) to reduce the noise in the estimation of stochastic constraints.

3     A DDRESSING THE D ISPARATE I MPACT OF P RUNING VIA ACCURACY G APS
In this section, we propose using accuracy gaps (AGs) to quantify the disparate impact induced by
model pruning. AGs are group-level measurements that quantify changes in accuracy between the
dense and sparse models. As we will see, large discrepancies in AGs across groups correspond to
scenarios where pruning-induced disparity is high. In §3.2, we propose a problem formulation that
yields models with low disparity by explicitly constraining deviations in the group accuracy gaps.

3.1   ACCURACY G APS
We consider a supervised learning problem on a dataset D = {(xi , yi , gi )}N
                                                                            i=1 of N i.i.d tuples, each
comprising features x ∈ X , target class y ∈ [K] and group membership g ∈ G. The dataset can be
partitioned into sub-groups Dg ≜ {(xi , yi , gi ) ∈ D | gi = g} for every g ∈ G.
Let hθ : X → RKPbe a predictor with parameters θ ∈ Θ. The accuracy of hθ on a sample set D
                     (x,y,g)∈D 1{argmax[hθ (x)] = y}. In particular, A(θ|D) denotes the model
               1
is A(θ|D) ≜ |D|
accuracy on the entire dataset, while A(θ|Dg ) is the model accuracy on a specific sub-group g.
Given access to a dense pre-trained model, we are interested in the effect of pruning on the accuracy
across sub-groups Dg . In realistic pruning applications the dense model may exhibit different
accuracies across sub-groups, thus we do not aim to equalize the accuracy of the sparse model across
groups. Therefore, we argue that the accuracies after pruning should change (approximately)
equally across sub-groups.
Let θd and θs denote the parameters of the dense and sparse models, respectively. We define the
global accuracy gap ∆ (θs , θd ) and group accuracy gaps ∆g (θs , θd ) as:
                          ∆ (θs , θd ) ≜ A(θd |D) − A(θs |D),                                       (1)
                        ∆g (θs , θd ) ≜ A(θd |Dg ) − A(θs |Dg )       ∀g ∈ G.                       (2)


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A positive gap (resp. negative) corresponds to a degradation (resp. improvement) in the performance
of the sparse model with respect to that of the dense model. This correspondence holds both at the
global ∆ (θs , θd ) and group levels ∆g (θs , θd ).
Disparate Impact of Pruning. Following our discussion above, we say a sparse model hθs experi-
ences low disparate impact (with respect to a dense model hθd ) if the changes in performance are
similar across sub-groups, i.e. ∆g (θs , θd ) ≈ ∆g′ (θs , θd ) , ∀g, g ′ ∈ G.
Due to the loss of model capacity caused by pruning, typically ∆ (θs , θd ) > 0. Thus, we consider
∆ (θs , θd ) as the reference point for defining the group excess accuracy gaps (EAGs):
                        ψg (θs , θd ) ≜ ∆g (θs , θd ) − ∆ (θs , θd ) ,       ∀g ∈ G.                       (3)
If ψg (θs , θd ) > 0, then g is more negatively impacted by pruning than the overall dataset. Conversely,
ψg′ (θs , θd ) < 0 indicates that group g ′ was less affected relative to the overall model degradation.
Note that if ψg = 0, ∀g ∈ G, then it follows that ∆g (θs , θd ) = ∆g′ (θs , θd ) , ∀g, g ′ ∈ G, and there
is no disparate impact. Thus, we quantify the disparate impact of pruning via:
 ΨPairWise (θs , θd ) ≜ max
                         ′
                            ψg (θs , θd )−ψg′ (θs , θd ) = max ∆g (θs , θd )−min
                                                                             ′
                                                                                 ∆g′ (θs , θd ) . (4)
                        g,g ∈G                                  g∈G                  g ∈G

Note that ΨPW ≥ 0 always. Moreover, ΨPW = 0 if and only if we are in an ideal setting where the
accuracy gaps are equal across all groups. However, aiming to constraint ΨPW directly can be difficult
in practice (see Appendix B.3). Instead, we consider constraints on each individual group EAG.

3.2   C ONSTRAINED E XCESS ACCURACY G APS F ORMULATION

We propose to impose upper-bounds (with a tolerance level ϵ ≥ 0) on the values of ψg (θs , θd ) ≤ ϵ.
Since ϵ ≥ 0, the constraints are effectively only enforced on ψg (θs , θd ) > 0, corresponding to
groups experiencing hyper-degradation in performance (with respect to the average degradation)2 .
Imposing a lower bound on group EAGs ψg would allow for better control over the resulting disparate
impact ΨPW . However, solving the problem with both of these bounds is challenging due to the small
size of the feasible region relative to the estimation noise in the constraints. Appendix B.3 provides
further discussion and motivation regarding the choice to constrain only positive ψg values.
This choice motivates an operational definition of disparate impact which focuses on the group with
the highest EAG, given by maxg ψg . Bounding this quantity can be achieved by imposing constraints
on every EAG. This gives rise to the following optimization problem with per-group constraints:
 (CEAG)        argmin L(θs |D),       s.t.   ψg (θs , θd ) = ∆g (θs , θd ) − ∆ (θs , θd ) ≤ ϵ,    ∀g ∈ G (5)
                θs ∈Θ

where L(θ|D) is the loss of hθ on dataset D, and the tolerance ϵ ≥ 0 is the maximum allowed EAG.
When ∆ (θs , θd ) > 0, the constraints require that the performance degradation for each group be at
most the overall model degradation plus the tolerance. Conversely, if ∆ (θs , θd ) < 0, the constraints
prescribe that all group accuracies must increase by at least the overall improvement, except for an ϵ.

3.3   D ISCUSSION

By formulating constraints on EAGs, CEAG directly addresses the disparate impact of pruning and
has benefits in terms of interpretability, flexibility, and accountability. See Appendix B for alternative
constrained formulations for addressing the disparate impact of pruning.
Tackling disparate impact. Existing methods aim to mitigate disparate impact by enforcing proper-
ties on the sparse model while being agnostic to the performance of the dense model. Since EAGs
relate the per-group performance of the dense and sparse models, we argue that our approach actually
addresses pruning-induced disparity, rather than other fairness notions such as loss equalization as
proposed by Tran et al. (2022).
Interpretability. The choice of tolerance level ϵ directly translates to bounds on AGs. For example,
setting ϵ = 1% implies the worst affected class may not lose beyond 1% accuracy compared to the
    2
      Note that the set of hyper-degraded groups {g ∈ G | ψg (θs , θd ) > 0} depends directly on the parameters
of the sparse model θs and thus changes at every training step.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


overall model change. In contrast, it is challenging to set interpretable tolerance levels for constraints
based on losses.
Flexibility. CEAG allows for some slack in the disparity of the pruned model, as prescribed by the
tolerance ϵ. This flexibility allows incorporating application-specific requirements into the learning
procedure. For example, small tolerance values allow enforcing strict fairness regulations. Moreover,
this flexibility may be necessary in practice since the reduced capacity of the sparse model can make
it impossible to attain ∆g (θs , θd ) = ∆ (θs , θd ) ∀g ∈ G.
Accountability. Being a constrained approach, establishing feasibility with respect to CEAG
constitutes a clear success criterion to determine if a pruned model achieves acceptable disparity
levels: a model is only admissible if it satisfies the constraints at a prescribed tolerance level.

4     S OLVING THE C ONSTRAINED E XCESS ACCURACY G APS P ROBLEM
A popular approach to solve constrained optimization problems such as CEAGin Eq. (5) is to
formulate its Lagrangian and optimize the resulting min-max problem:
                                                      X
                    min max L(θs , λ) ≜ L(θs |D) +       λg (ψg (θs , θd ) − ϵ) ,      (6)
                    θs ∈Θ λ≥0
                                                          g∈G

where λg ≥ 0 is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the constraint for group g and λ = [λg ]g∈G .
We refer to θs as the primal parameters, and to λ as the dual parameters.
Optimizing deep neural networks can be challenging, and generally requires carefully crafted proce-
dures and extensive hyper-parameter tuning (Choi et al., 2019). We are interested in re-using standard
techniques for optimizing θs . Therefore, we consider a generic optimization protocol on θs and
gradient ascent on λ, instead of specialized optimization approaches for min-max games such as
extragradient (Gidel et al., 2019; Korpelevich, 1976).

4.1   O PTIMIZATION WITH N ON -D IFFERENTIABLE C ONSTRAINTS

A natural next step is to optimize Eq. (6) with gradient-based updates. Unfortunately, this is not
possible as the ψg terms are not continuous (since they are accuracy gaps), and are non-differentiable
with respect to θs . Therefore, we must resort to a surrogate ψ̃g for computing gradients with respect to
θs . In contrast, Eq. (6) is differentiable with respect to λ, with gradients corresponding to constraint
violations. Thus, the dual variables can be updated using the non-differentiable constraints ψg . This
update scheme is inspired by the proxy-constraint technique introduced by Cotter et al. (2019).
                                                  ∆              P
                             argmin Lθ (θs , λ) = L(θs |D) + g∈G λg ψ̃g (θs , θd )
                             
                                θs ∈Θ
                  θs∗ , λ∗ ∈                       ∆ P                                                (7)
                             argmax Lλ (θs , λ) = g∈G λg ψg (θs , θd ) − ϵ ,
                             
                              λ≥0

Specifically, we choose surrogates ψ̃g given by the excess (negative) loss gaps: ψ̃g (θs , θd ) ≜

− L(θd |Dg ) − L(θs |Dg ) + L(θd |D) − L(θs |D) . Note that ψ̃g has the same structure as ψg , but
replaces accuracy measurements with negative loss terms. This is a reasonable choice of surrogate
function since drops in accuracy for the sparse model correspond to increases in loss.
Eq. (7) represents a two-player, non-zero-sum game. Rather than replacing the non-differentiable
constraints with their surrogates everywhere, this approach only performs the replacement when
necessary, i.e., for computing gradients for the primal parameters. Preserving the actual constraints
on the dual objective Lλ (θs , λ) is useful as it results in a problem closer to Eq. (6).
Equation (7) can be optimized via gradient descent on θs (based on Lθ ) and gradient ascent on λ
(based on Lλ ). Alternating gradient descent-ascent (Alt-GDA) updates yield:
                         h                                   i
               λ(t+1)
                 g     =   λ(t)
                            g   + η λ  ψg θ (t)
                                            s   , θ d   − ϵ                                     (8)
                                                              +
                                                                                            
                                                        X
               θs(t+1) = θs(t) − ηθ ∇θ L θs(t) |D +           λ(t+1)
                                                                g     ∇ θ ψ̃g   θ (t)
                                                                                  s   , θ d
                                                                                             , (9)
                                                         g∈G



                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where ηθ and ηλ are step-sizes and [ · ]+ = max(·, 0). We initialize the Lagrange multipliers to
λ(0) = 0. Appendix A contains more details on non-convex constrained optimization.

Algorithm 1 Constrained Excess Accuracy Gap (CEAG)
Input: θ: Initial model parameters, ηθ : Primal step-size, ηλ : Dual step-size, k: Memory size for
        replay buffer, ϵ: Tolerance hyper-parameter, B: Batch size, T: Total number of iterations,
        Agdense : Accuracy of the dense model on each group g, Adense : Aggregate accuracy of the
        dense model.
 1: λg ← 0, ∀g ∈ G                                                      ▷ Initialize dual parameters
 2: bufg ← queue(k), ∀g ∈ G                                                 ▷ Initialize replay buffer
 3: for iter = 1, . . . , T do
 4:    x, y, g ← Sample {(xi , yi , gi )}B
                                         i=1 ∼ D                   ▷ Sample batch from training set
 5:    idxg ← (g == g), ∀g ∈ G                              ▷ Calculate sub-group indices for batch
 6:    ŷ ← hθ (x)                                                          ▷ Compute forward-pass
 7:    bufg ← U PDATE B UFFER(bufg , ŷ, y, idxg ), ∀g ∈ G                    ▷ Update replay buffer
 8:    ψg ← Q UERY B UFFERS({bufg }Gg=1 , k, {Agdense }Gg=1 , Adense )        ▷ Query replay buffers
 9:    ψ̃g ← C OMPUTE S URROGATE(ŷ, y, idxg ), ∀g ∈ G                         ▷ Compute surrogates
10:    λg ← max{0, hλg + ηλ (ψg − ϵ)}, ∀g ∈ iG                                ▷ Update dual params
                                        P
11:    gradθ ← ∇θ L (θ|(x, y)) + g∈G λg ψ̃g                              ▷ Compute primal gradient
12:     θ ← P RIMAL O PTIM U PDATE(ηθ , gradθ )                                 ▷ Update model params
13: end for
14: return θ


4.2   S TOCHASTIC C ONSTRAINTS AND R EPLAY B UFFERS

In practice, the problem in Eq. (5) is solved by using mini-batch samples from the dataset to estimate
the objective function, the constraints, and their gradients. This procedure can yield constraint
estimates with high variance across mini-batches, especially for under-represented groups; or for all
groups when the number of constraints is large. In extreme cases, a mini-batch may contain very few
samples from a given sub-group, leading to multiplier updates based on very noisy estimates.
We overcome these issues by estimating constraints based on information across multiple mini-
batches. For calculating AGs, (i) we compute the performance of the dense model on the whole
dataset (once at the beginning of training), and (ii) we estimate the accuracy of the sparse model from
per-sample accuracy measurements on the k most recent datapoints of each group. We refer to the
data structure that stores historic accuracies as a replay buffer (RB), given the analogy to the technique
used in reinforcement learning (Mnih et al., 2013). The choice of buffer size k introduces a trade-off
between reducing the variance of the constraints, and biasing estimates towards old measurements.
These adjustments reduce variance in the estimation of the constraints, thus yielding stable updates
for the multipliers. This allows us to solve Eq. (5) in settings with large numbers of constraints
relative to the choice of batch size. We do not apply variance reduction on the model updates. For
details on our implementation of replay buffers, see Appendix C. For experimental evidence on their
benefits, see §5.3 and Appendix C.1.

4.3   A LGORITHMIC D ETAILS

Algorithm 1 presents our approach for solving CEAG. Note that Algorithm 1 is applicable to a broader
class of constrained optimization problems with stochastic constraints, including the equalized loss
formulation of Tran et al. (2022) (see Appendix B.1 for details).
Computational Overhead. The constrained approach in Algorithm 1 represents a negligible com-
putational overhead compared to fine-tuning the sparse model with empirical risk minimization.
An iteration of Alt-GDA (Eq. (8)) requires one forward pass and one backward pass through the
model since the same iterate of θs is used for both the primal and dual updates. This matches the
cost of gradient descent for ERM, except for the minimal overhead associated with the evaluation
of constraints after the forward pass. Note that, given our choice of surrogate, the gradient of the
Lagrangian with respect to θs is a weighted average of the per-sample loss gradients, which autograd


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


frameworks can compute as efficiently as ∇θ L (θs |D). For empirical evidence supporting the claim
that CEAG has negligible computational overhead compared to ERM, see Appendix E.1.
Memory Cost. The memory overhead of our approach is negligible in the context of training deep
networks: storing the dual variables requires one float per constraint, and the replay buffers store only
|G| booleans for each one of the k slots in the buffer memory.

5       E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we present an empirical comparison between naive fine-tuning, equalized loss (Tran
et al., 2022), and our proposed CEAG approach. The main goal of our experiments is to train
sparse models with low pruning-induced disparity. While low disparity may introduce a trade-off
with aggregate performance, we aim to achieve comparable overall accuracy to mitigation-agnostic
methods. We explore the reliability and accountability of our approach, along with the effect of replay
buffers on the constrained optimization problem. Our experiments demonstrate that our method
successfully scales to problems with hundreds of groups.

5.1       E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Tasks and architectures. We carry out experiments on the FairFace (Kärkkäinen & Joo, 2021)
and UTKFace (Zhang et al., 2017) datasets, following the works of Lin et al. (2022) and Tran et al.
(2022). Additionally, we perform experiments on CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky, 2009), a task with a
large number of sub-groups. The choice of target and group attributes for each dataset is specified in
Appendix D.1. The architectures for each task, and the source of our pre-trained models are presented
in Appendices D.3 and D.4, respectively.
Baseline methods. We compare with three baseline mitigation methods (i) NFT: the last iterate when
fine-tuning the sparse model via ERM, (ii) NFT+ES: the best iterate of NFT in terms of test accuracy
(early stopping), and (iii) EL+RB: our re-implementation of the equalized loss formulation proposed
by Tran et al. (2022), enhanced with replay buffers (see Appendix B.1). The optimization hyper-
parameters employed for each mitigation method (including CEAG) are described in Appendix D.6.
Model pruning. Previous work has shown that gradual magnitude pruning (GMP) (Zhu & Gupta,
2017) achieves SOTA aggregate performance on unstructured sparsity tasks (Blalock et al., 2020).
Because of this (and its simplicity), we employ unstructured GMP on all our tasks. GMP gradually
prunes the model by removing parameters with the smallest magnitude once every epoch. The
remaining weights are fine-tuned in between pruning episodes. We carry out GMP during the first 15
epochs. Appendix D.5 provides further details on our pruning protocol.
Choice of sparsity levels. For very high levels of unstructured sparsity (over 95%), Gale et al. (2019)
observe that pruning has a devastating impact on the overall performance of ResNet-50 models (He
et al., 2016). In contrast, performance remains essentially unaffected for models with up to 85%
sparsity. These observations may not carry over to other architectures such as MobileNets (Sandler
et al., 2018), or other ResNets. Nonetheless, our experiments stick to the [85%, 95%] range, except
for FairFace experiments, where we consider 99% sparsity, akin to FairGrape (Lin et al., 2022).
Software. Our implementations use PyTorch 1.13.0 (Paszke et al., 2019) and the Cooper library for
constrained optimization (Gallego-Posada & Ramirez, 2022).
Experimental uncertainty. All metrics reported in our tables and plots follow the pattern avg ±
std. Unless mentioned otherwise, all our experimental metrics are aggregated across 5 seeds.
For comprehensive experimental results across multiple tasks and sparsity levels, see Appendix F.

5.2       FAIR FACE AND UTKFACE
ResNet-34 Models on FairFace. Table 1 includes results for FairFace classification at 99% sparsity.
We compare the behavior of NFT, NFT+ES, EL+RB, and CEAG. We quote the results reported for
the FairGRAPE technique3 , aggregated over 3 seeds.
We observe that CEAG attains a feasible model in training (maxg ψg ≤ ϵ), as well as the smallest
maxg ψg both in the training and test sets. This does not come at the cost of aggregate performance,
    3
        We do not re-run FairGRAPE owing to its high computational cost, see discussion in Appendix E.2


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


as all methods achieve a comparable test accuracy of around 65%. We observe that FairGRAPE’s
maxg ψg and ΨPW are significantly higher than that of all other methods.
Table 1: Race prediction task on FairFace with race as group attribute. CEAG achieves a maxg ψg
within the prescribed threshold. Tol (ϵ) is the tolerance hyper-parameter of CEAG. We do not specify ϵ for
other formulations as they do not admit a tolerance.
                                                Train                                                                Test
 Sparsity Method            Accuracy       ΨPW       maxg ψg                              Tol (ϵ)     Accuracy       ΨPW        maxg ψg
             NFT            76.1 ± 0.2 3.9 ± 0.9 2.3 ± 0.3                                –           65.2 ± 0.4   4.2 ± 0.5    2.1 ± 0.5
             NFT + ES       74.0 ± 2.5 7.2 ± 3.3 4.0 ± 1.4                                –           65.4 ± 0.4   6.3 ± 2.6    2.9 ± 1.3
    99       EL + RB        76.1 ± 0.1 8.8 ± 1.3 2.6 ± 0.2                                –           65.1 ± 0.4   6.0 ± 1.5    2.4 ± 0.4
             FairGRAPE –                 –           –                                    –           65.1         15.9         10.7
             CEAG           76.2 ± 0.1 3.5 ± 0.6 1.8 ± 0.4                                ≤ 2% ✓      65.2 ± 0.4   4.3 ± 0.8    2.0 ± 0.3



Table 2: Race prediction task on the UTKFace dataset with the intersection of race and gender as
group attribute. For instance, if a sample has race Black and gender Female, its group is Black-Female.
CEAG consistently achieves a maxg ψg within the threshold, across sparsities.
                                                             Train                                                   Test
 Sparsity                  Method     Accuracy        ΨPW          maxg ψg                 Tol (ϵ)    Accuracy        ΨPW       maxg ψg
                           NFT        98.1 ± 0.1   11.5 ± 0.7     10.0 ± 0.7               –          79.6 ± 0.5   8.9 ± 2.3    3.1 ± 0.5
                           NFT + ES   90.5 ± 4.7   49.8 ± 23.0 44.8 ± 20.8                 –          81.0 ± 0.2   12.0 ± 5.3   6.9 ± 4.8
    90                     EL + RB    98.3 ± 0.2   3.2 ± 0.6      2.4 ± 0.6                –          79.4 ± 0.5   11.4 ± 0.9   3.0 ± 1.1
                           CEAG       96.2 ± 0.1   2.4 ± 0.6      1.0 ± 0.3                ≤ 3% ✓     80.2 ± 0.1   6.0 ± 2.5    2.3 ± 1.0
                           NFT        95.1 ± 0.2   34.2 ± 1.6     30.7 ± 1.5               –          79.2 ± 0.2   8.8 ± 3.2    3.6 ± 1.3
                           NFT + ES   91.2 ± 2.7   53.3 ± 9.6     48.0 ± 8.3               –          80.4 ± 0.4   7.5 ± 3.4    5.4 ± 3.1
   92.5                    EL + RB    95.4 ± 0.3   11.1 ± 1.5     8.6 ± 1.4                –          78.7 ± 0.3   16.3 ± 3.9   3.3 ± 0.6
                           CEAG       93.4 ± 0.3   3.8 ± 0.4      2.3 ± 0.4                ≤ 3% ✓     79.5 ± 0.1   10.8 ± 2.2   3.3 ± 1.0


                                      Train                                                    Test
                     100
                                                                              81                                       Methods
                                                                                                                         NFT
                      98                                                                                                 EL + RB
      Accuracy (%)


                                                               Accuracy (%)


                                                                              80                                         CEAG

                      96
                                                                                                                        Sparsity
                                                                              79                                           85 %
                      94                                                                                                   90 %
                                                                                                                           92.5 %

                         0        10       20        30                          0       1       2      3
                     Max Excess Accuracy Gap [maxg ψg ] (%)                   Max Excess Accuracy Gap [maxg ψg ] (%)
Figure 2: Trade-off between disparity and accuracy for UTKFace race prediction with race as group
attribute. NFT and EL+RB yield models with high disparity. In contrast, CEAG consistently
produces models that mitigate the disparate impact of pruning. CEAG’s gains do not entail a
degradation in overall test accuracy. Vertical dashed lines indicate the tolerance (ϵ) of our method, with
colors corresponding to different sparsity levels.


MobileNet-V2 Models on UTKFace. Fig. 2 illustrates results for UTKFace with race as group
attribute. CEAG consistently attains feasible models in training, and the smallest values of maxg ψg
in the test set. CEAG attains comparable performance to NFT and EL+RB in the test set.
Table 2 presents results for UTKFace with intersectional groups (race ∩ gender). NFT and NFT+ES
have very high disparity metrics. In contrast, CEAG attains a feasible maxg ψg and the smallest
ΨPW in the training set, for all sparsities. Our approach has worse aggregate performance than NFT
and EL+RB in the train set; however, the test accuracy of these three methods is comparable.
For NFT, both Fig. 2 and Table 2 show significantly higher disparity metrics in training when
compared to in test. This is an indicator that the sparse model achieves good performance in training
by overfitting to the majority groups and losing a lot of performance on the under-represented groups.


                                                                                8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.3    S CALING TO L ARGE N UMBERS OF G ROUPS

CifarResNet-56 models on CIFAR-100. Table 3 contains results for CIFAR-100 classification at
92.5% sparsity. By having the groups correspond to class labels, constrained formulations for this
experiment have 100 constraints. We include two additional experiments to illustrate the importance
of replay buffers: equalized loss (EL), and CEAG (no RB), both without replay buffers.
Disparity metrics for EL and CEAG are better when employing replay buffers, both on the train
and test sets. This difference is more notable for EL. We also observe the RBs improve the training
dynamics of the dual variables (Appendix C.1). CEAG obtains the best disparity on the train set.
Nonetheless, all approaches have a significant generalization gap in terms of disparity measurements.
We observe that the best accuracy and the smallest maxg ψg on the test set are obtained by EL+RB.

Table 3: CIFAR-100 classification with the group attributes being the class labels, at 92.5% sparsity.
EL is the equalized loss formulation without replay buffers; CEAG (no RB) is similarly defined.
                                              Train                                        Test
 Sparsity   Method          Accuracy       ΨPW     maxg ψg        Tol (ϵ)   Accuracy       ΨPW        maxg ψg
            NFT             99.8 ± 0.0   3.7 ± 0.9    3.0 ± 0.9   –         64.9 ± 0.4   26.2 ± 5.2   14.3 ± 3.4
            NFT + ES        99.3 ± 0.2   6.8 ± 1.9    5.8 ± 1.8   –         65.2 ± 0.4   27.4 ± 2.3   14.6 ± 2.0
            EL              98.5 ± 0.1   11.3 ± 0.9   9.8 ± 1.0   –         65.3 ± 0.5   25.8 ± 2.0   14.1 ± 1.3
    92.5    EL + RB         99.5 ± 0.0   6.7 ± 1.4    5.7 ± 1.5   –         65.3 ± 0.4   24.2 ± 2.9   13.3 ± 2.4
            CEAG (no RB)    99.6 ± 0.0   2.6 ± 0.3    1.7 ± 0.2   ≤ 2% ✓    65.0 ± 0.4   27.2 ± 2.6   14.9 ± 2.5
            CEAG            99.6 ± 0.0   2.4 ± 0.2    1.6 ± 0.1   ≤ 2% ✓    64.8 ± 0.3   25.0 ± 1.9   13.8 ± 1.2


6     D ISCUSSION
It is important to develop techniques that reliably mitigate the disparate impact of pruning since
deploying pruned models can have downstream consequences. We observe that NFT is unsucessful
at doing this, and NFT+ES amplifies the disparity induced by pruning. In contrast, CEAG reduces
disparity while achieving comparable aggregate performance to NFT. However, we observe that all
mitigation approaches may fail to mitigate disparate impact on unseen data.
Mitigating the disparate impact of pruning. Unlike other mitigation methods, our approach
consistently mitigates the disparate impact of pruning on the training set. We observe this across a
wide range of tasks and architectures. In contrast, other mitigation approaches generally yield worse
maximum degradation maxg ψg . In particular, NFT+ES yields models with very high disparity.
Accuracy trade-off. CEAG may introduce a trade-off in terms of accuracy in order to satisfy the
disparity requirements. On the train set, we observe a small degradation in performance in comparison
to NFT, typically of at most 2%; on the test set, CEAG’s accuracy is comparable to that of NFT.
Reliability. Our approach reliably yields models within the requested disparity levels. Moreover,
CEAG results in the smallest variance of the maxg ψg and ΨPW metrics across seeds.
Generalization. Although CEAG reliably satisfies the constraints on the train set, this may not
transfer to the test set. We highlight that (i) these generalization issues are present for other mitigation
methods, and (ii) our approach generally achieves better test disparity than the baselines. Improving
the generalization of disparity mitigation methods is an important direction for future research.

7     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we explore mitigating the disparate impact of pruning. We formalize disparate impact in
terms of accuracy gaps between the dense and sparse models, and propose a constrained optimization
approach for mitigating it. Our formulation offers interpretable constraints and allows for algorithmic
accountability. Although other methods can indirectly reduce disparity, our approach reliably
addresses the disparate impact of pruning across a wide range of tasks, while attaining comparable
aggregate performance. In particular, our method successfully scales to tasks with hundreds of sub-
groups. Despite the fact that current mitigation methods exhibit generalization issues, our approach
represents a solid step towards mitigating the disparate impact of pruning.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT
         • Facial recognition. Our paper makes use of datasets that contain face images. We focus on
           these datasets as they illustrate the disparate impact of pruning, and for comparisons with
           previous work. We would like to highlight that although our method focuses on reducing
           the disparate impact across groups, we do not endorse the use of our algorithm in facial
           recognition systems.
         • Data annotation. We use the UTKFace (Zhang et al., 2017) and FairFace (Kärkkäinen &
           Joo, 2021) datasets in this work. These datasets include annotations for sensitive demo-
           graphic attributes such as race, gender, and age. However, it is essential to recognize that
           these annotations represent normative ways of perceiving gender, race, and age, and we do
           not endorse or promote these normative categorizations.
         • Ethical sourcing of data. We don’t endorse using datasets where the data may not have
           been ethically sourced or the workers/subjects involved in the data collection process are
           not fairly compensated.
         • Fairness notions. We explore a specific notion of fairness in this paper: the disparate impact
           of pruning. Our framework can be extended to other fairness notions by incorporating
           additional constraints. However, certain notions of fairness are incompatible with each other,
           and a “fair” model in one definition could be “unfair” with respect to another (Friedler et al.,
           2021). Therefore, our method should not be considered a solution to all notions of fairness.
         • Disparate impact of pruning. In this paper, we propose a constrained optimization
           technique that mitigates the disparate impact of pruning and successfully solve the problem
           on the training data. Unfortunately, like all other surveyed techniques, we observe significant
           challenges at mitigating disparate impact on unseen data. We advise practitioners to consider
           the implications of these generalization challenges when deploying sparse models in real-
           world systems.
         • Deploying pruned models. We hope our paper brings about an important discussion on
           the implications of deploying pruned deep learning models in edge devices. As shown in
           this work, despite the application of mitigation techniques, pruning can exacerbate systemic
           biases. In particular, given the generalization issues across mitigation methods, it could
           cause unintended consequences when used in commercial applications.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide our code4 , including scripts to replicate the experiments in this paper. The pseudo-code
of our algorithm is described in Algorithm 1. Experimental details, as well as the hyper-parameters
used in our experiments, are included in Appendix D. Our implementation uses the open-source
libraries PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and Cooper (Gallego-Posada & Ramirez, 2022).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This research was partially supported by an IVADO PhD Excellence Scholarship, the Canada CIFAR
AI Chair program (Mila), a Google Excellence Award, and the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada (NSERC). Simon Lacoste-Julien is a CIFAR Associate Fellow in the
Learning in Machines & Brains program.
This research was enabled in part by compute resources, software, and technical help by Mila.
We would like to thank Nazanin Sepahvand for support in the initial stages of the project. We would
like to thank Christos Louizos for encouraging the pursuit of this research idea. Additionally, we
would like to thank Marwa El-Halabi, Stefan Horoi and Albert Orozco Camacho for their feedback
on the paper.


   4
       Our code is available here: https://github.com/merajhashemi/balancing-act


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal, Alina Beygelzimer, Miroslav Dudı́k, John Langford, and Hanna Wallach. A
  Reductions Approach to Fair Classification. In ICML, 2018. (Cit. on p. 3)
Michiel Bakker, Humberto Riverón Valdés, Patrick D Tu, Krishna P Gummadi, Kush R Varshney,
 Adrian Weller, and Alex Sandy Pentland. Fair Enough: Improving Fairness in Budget-Constrained
 Decision Making Using Confidence Thresholds. In CEUR-WS, 2020. (Cit. on p. 3)
Richard Berk, Hoda Heidari, Shahin Jabbari, Michael Kearns, and Aaron Roth. Fairness in Criminal
  Justice Risk Assessments: The State of the Art. Sociological Methods & Research, 2021. (Cit. on
  p. 3)
Dimitri P Bertsekas. Nonlinear Programming. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 1997.
  (Cit. on p. 16)
Aleksandr Beznosikov, Eduard Gorbunov, Hugo Berard, and Nicolas Loizou. Stochastic Gradient
  Descent-Ascent: Unified Theory and New Efficient Methods. In AISTATS, 2023. (Cit. on p. 3)
Davis Blalock, Jose Javier Gonzalez Ortiz, Jonathan Frankle, and John Guttag. What is the State of
  Neural Network Pruning? In MLSys, 2020. (Cit. on p. 7)
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ B. Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson,
  Shyamal Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri S. Chatterji, Annie S. Chen, Kathleen
  Creel, Jared Quincy Davis, Dorottya Demszky, Chris Donahue, Moussa Doumbouya, Esin Durmus,
  Stefano Ermon, John Etchemendy, Kawin Ethayarajh, Li Fei-Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Gale,
  Lauren Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah D. Goodman, Shelby Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori
  Hashimoto, Peter Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho, Jenny Hong, Kyle Hsu, Jing Huang,
  Thomas Icard, Saahil Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha Kalluri, Siddharth Karamcheti, Geoff Keeling,
  Fereshte Khani, Omar Khattab, Pang Wei Koh, Mark S. Krass, Ranjay Krishna, Rohith Kuditipudi,
  and et al. On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models. arXiv:2108.07258, 2021. (Cit.
  on p. 1)
Luiz Chamon and Alejandro Ribeiro. Probably Approximately Correct Constrained Learning. In
  NeurIPS, 2020. (Cit. on p. 16)
Luiz FO Chamon, Santiago Paternain, Miguel Calvo-Fullana, and Alejandro Ribeiro. Constrained
  Learning with Non-Convex Losses. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 2022. (Cit. on p.
  16)
Tatjana Chavdarova, Gauthier Gidel, François Fleuret, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Reducing Noise in
  GAN Training with Variance Reduced Extragradient. In NeurIPS, 2019. (Cit. on p. 3)
Yaofo Chen. PyTorch CIFAR Models. https://github.com/chenyaofo/pytorch-cifar-models, 2021.
  (Cit. on p. 20, 21, 22, 32)
D Choi, CJ Shallue, Z Nado, J Lee, CJ Maddison, and GE Dahl. On Empirical Comparisons of
  Optimizers for Deep Learning. arXiv:1910.05446, 2019. (Cit. on p. 5)
Andrew Cotter, Heinrich Jiang, Maya R Gupta, Serena Wang, Taman Narayan, Seungil You, and
  Karthik Sridharan. Optimization with Non-Differentiable Constraints with Applications to Fairness,
  Recall, Churn, and Other Goals. JMLR, 2019. (Cit. on p. 2, 3, 5, 16)
Aaron Defazio, Francis Bach, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. SAGA: A Fast Incremental Gradient
  Method With Support for Non-Strongly Convex Composite Objectives. In NeurIPS, 2014. (Cit. on
  p. 3)
William Dieterich, Christina Mendoza, and Tim Brennan. COMPAS Risk Scales: Demonstrating
 Accuracy Equity and Predictive Parity. Northpointe Inc, 2016. (Cit. on p. 3)
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness Through
  Awareness. In Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science, 2012. (Cit. on p. 3)


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Juan Elenter, Navid NaderiAlizadeh, and Alejandro Ribeiro. A Lagrangian Duality Approach to
  Active Learning. In NeurIPS, 2022. (Cit. on p. 3, 16)
Utku Evci, Trevor Gale, Jacob Menick, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Erich Elsen. Rigging the Lottery:
  Making All Tickets Winners. In ICML, 2020. (Cit. on p. 21)
Sorelle A. Friedler, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. The (Im)Possibility of
  Fairness: Different Value Systems Require Different Mechanisms for Fair Decision Making.
  Commun. ACM, 2021. (Cit. on p. 10)
Trevor Gale, Erich Elsen, and Sara Hooker. The State of Sparsity in Deep Neural Networks.
  arXiv:1902.09574, 2019. (Cit. on p. 1, 7, 20, 21)
Jose Gallego-Posada and Juan Ramirez. Cooper: a toolkit for Lagrangian-based constrained opti-
  mization. https://github.com/cooper-org/cooper, 2022. (Cit. on p. 7, 10, 20)
Jose Gallego-Posada, Juan Ramirez, Akram Erraqabi, Yoshua Bengio, and Simon Lacoste-Julien.
  Controlled Sparsity via Constrained Optimization or: How I Learned to Stop Tuning Penalties and
  Love Constraints. In NeurIPS, 2022. (Cit. on p. 3, 16)
Amir Gholami, Sehoon Kim, Zhen Dong, Zhewei Yao, Michael Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. A
 Survey of Quantization Methods for Efficient Neural Network Inference. arXiv:2103.13630, 2021.
 (Cit. on p. 1)
Gauthier Gidel, Hugo Berard, Gaëtan Vignoud, Pascal Vincent, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. A
  Variational Inequality Perspective on Generative Adversarial Networks. In ICLR, 2019. (Cit. on p.
  5, 16)
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative Adversarial Networks. In NeurIPS, 2014. (Cit.
  on p. 16)
Robert M Gower, Mark Schmidt, Francis Bach, and Peter Richtárik. Variance-Reduced Methods for
  Machine Learning. Proceedings of the IEEE, 2020. (Cit. on p. 3)
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of Opportunity in Supervised Learning. In
 NeurIPS, 2016. (Cit. on p. 3)
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image
  Recognition. In CVPR, 2016. (Cit. on p. 7, 20, 21, 29)
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural Network. In
  Deep Learning and Representation Learning Workshop at NeurIPS, 2015. (Cit. on p. 1)
Sara Hooker, Aaron Courville, Gregory Clark, Yann Dauphin, and Andrea Frome. What Do
  Compressed Deep Neural Networks Forget? arXiv:1911.05248, 2019. (Cit. on p. 1, 2)
Sara Hooker, Nyalleng Moorosi, Gregory Clark, Samy Bengio, and Emily Denton. Characterising
  Bias in Compressed Models. arXiv:2010.03058, 2020. (Cit. on p. 1, 2)
Ignacio Hounie, Luiz FO Chamon, and Alejandro Ribeiro. Automatic Data Augmentation via
  Invariance-Constrained Learning. In ICML, 2023. (Cit. on p. 16)
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In ICLR, 2014. (Cit.
  on p. 22)
Galina M Korpelevich. The extragradient method for finding saddle points and other problems.
 Matecon, 1976. (Cit. on p. 5, 16)
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images. Technical report,
  University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 2009. (Cit. on p. 7, 20)
Kimmo Kärkkäinen and Jungseock Joo. FairFace: Face Attribute Dataset for Balanced Race, Gender,
  and Age. In WACV, 2021. (Cit. on p. 7, 10, 20, 22)


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tianyi Lin, Chi Jin, and Michael Jordan. On Gradient Descent Ascent for Nonconvex-Concave
  Minimax Problems. In ICML, 2020. (Cit. on p. 3, 16)
Xiaofeng Lin, Seungbae Kim, and Jungseock Joo. FairGRAPE: Fairness-Aware GRAdient Pruning
  mEthod for Face Attribute Classification. In ECCV, 2022. (Cit. on p. 1, 2, 7, 15, 25, 26, 29)
Andrew Lowy, Sina Baharlouei, Rakesh Pavan, Meisam Razaviyayn, and Ahmad Beirami. A
  Stochastic Optimization Framework for Fair Risk Minimization. TMLR, 2021. (Cit. on p. 3)
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards Deep Learning Models Resistant to Adversarial Attacks. In ICLR, 2018. (Cit. on p. 16)
Ninareh Mehrabi, Fred Morstatter, Nripsuta Saxena, Kristina Lerman, and Aram Galstyan. A Survey
  on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning. ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 2021. (Cit. on p. 3)
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing Atari with Deep Reinforcement Learning. In NeurIPS
  Deep Learning Workshop, 2013. (Cit. on p. 3, 6)
Aryan Mokhtari, Asuman E Ozdaglar, and Sarath Pattathil. Convergence Rate of O(1/k) for Optimistic
  Gradient and Extragradient Methods in Smooth Convex-Concave Saddle Point Problems. SIAM
  Journal on Optimization, 2020. (Cit. on p. 16)
OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv:2303.08774, 2023. (Cit. on p. 1)
Michela Paganini. Prune Responsibly. arXiv:2009.09936, 2020. (Cit. on p. 1, 2)
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
 Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance
  Deep Learning Library. In NeurIPS, 2019. (Cit. on p. 7, 10, 20)
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical Text-
  Conditional Image Generation with CLIP Latents. In CVPR, 2022. (Cit. on p. 1)
Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, Menglong Zhu, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Liang-Chieh Chen. Mo-
 bileNetV2: Inverted Residuals and Linear Bottlenecks. In CVPR, 2018. (Cit. on p. 7, 20, 21,
 26)
Changjian Shui, Gezheng Xu, Qi Chen, Jiaqi Li, Charles X Ling, Tal Arbel, Boyu Wang, and Christian
  Gagné. On Learning Fairness and Accuracy on Multiple Subgroups. In NeurIPS, 2022. (Cit. on p.
  3)
Adam Stooke, Joshua Achiam, and Pieter Abbeel. Responsive Safety in Reinforcement Learning by
  PID Lagrangian Methods. In ICML, 2020. (Cit. on p. 3, 16)
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cris-
  tian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu,
  Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.
  arXiv:2307.09288, 2023. (Cit. on p. 1)
Cuong Tran, Ferdinando Fioretto, Jung-Eun Kim, and Rakshit Naidu. Pruning has a disparate impact
  on model accuracy. In NeurIPS, 2022. (Cit. on p. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 16, 20, 21)


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sahil Verma and Julia Rubin. Fairness Definitions Explained. In International Workshop on Software
  Fairness, 2018. (Cit. on p. 3)
J von Neumann. Zur Theorie der Gesellschaftsspiele. Mathematische Annalen, 100(1):295–320,
  1928. (Cit. on p. 16)
Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Rodriguez, Krishna Gummadi, and Adrian Weller.
 From Parity to Preference-based Notions of Fairness in Classification. In NeurIPS, 2017. (Cit. on
 p. 3)
Rich Zemel, Yu Wu, Kevin Swersky, Toni Pitassi, and Cynthia Dwork. Learning Fair Representations.
  In ICML, 2013. (Cit. on p. 3)
Guodong Zhang, Yuanhao Wang, Laurent Lessard, and Roger B Grosse. Near-optimal Local
  Convergence of Alternating Gradient Descent-Ascent for Minimax Optimization. In AISTATS,
  2022. (Cit. on p. 16)
Zhifei Zhang, Yang Song, and Hairong Qi. Age Progression/Regression by Conditional Adversarial
  Autoencoder. In CVPR, 2017. (Cit. on p. 7, 10, 20)
Han Zhao and Geoffrey J Gordon. Inherent Tradeoffs in Learning Fair Representations. JMLR, 2022.
  (Cit. on p. 3)
Michael Zhu and Suyog Gupta. To Prune, or Not to Prune: Exploring the Efficacy of Pruning for
 Model Compression. arXiv:1710.01878, 2017. (Cit. on p. 7, 20, 22)


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
Table of Contents
     A Constrained and Min-Max Optimization                                                       16

     B Alternative Constrained Formulations                                                       16
       B.1 Equalized Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     16
       B.2 Constrained Excess Loss Gaps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       17
       B.3 Constrained ΨPW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17

     C Replay Buffers                                                                             18
       C.1 Training Dynamics with Replay Buffers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      19
       C.2 Replay Buffer Size Ablation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    19

     D Experimental Details                                                                       20
       D.1 Tasks and Protected Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
       D.2 Mitigation Schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20
       D.3 Model Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    21
       D.4 Pre-Trained Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     21
       D.5 Gradual Magnitude Pruning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      22
       D.6 Primal Optimization Hyper-parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       22
       D.7 Dual Optimization Hyper-parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       23

     E Additional Experiments                                                                     24
       E.1 Computational Overhead . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       24
       E.2 Comparison to FairGRAPE (Lin et al., 2022) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       25
       E.3 Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25

     F Comprehensive Experimental Results                                                         25
       F.1 UTKFace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      26
       F.2 FairFace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29
       F.3 CIFAR-100 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      32


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     C ONSTRAINED AND M IN -M AX O PTIMIZATION

Lagrangian-based constrained optimization has gained popularity in machine/deep learning owing to
the fine-grained control it provides over specific properties of models (Cotter et al., 2019; Stooke
et al., 2020; Elenter et al., 2022; Gallego-Posada et al., 2022; Hounie et al., 2023). In the context of
our work, attaining a desired disparity level can be done directly by imposing the excess accuracy gap
constraints presented in Eq. (5). In contrast, achieving bounded disparity by augmenting the training
objective with additive penalties is challenging as it requires iteratively tuning a penalty coefficient
per group (Gallego-Posada et al., 2022).
The Lagrangian-based approach involves solving a non-convex-concave min-max optimization
problem. In general, as long as the constraints are differentiable, the min-max problem can be
optimized with gradient-based updates. Fortunately, Cotter et al. (2019) show how even when the
constraints are non-differentiable (but differentiable surrogates are available) proxy constraints can
be used to find a semi-coarse correlated equilibrium of the min-max problem.
The solution to the min-max optimization problem (i.e. a saddle point) associated with the Lagrangian
corresponds to a global constrained minimizer of the original constrained problem (Bertsekas, 1997).
However, a saddle point of the Lagrangian may not exist for non-convex problems (Cotter et al.,
2019; von Neumann, 1928).
In the context of machine learning, the success of adversarial formulations such as GANs (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) and adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018) has sparked interest in min-max optimization.
Lin et al. (2020) prove local linear convergence for simultaneous gradient descent-ascent in the non-
convex-concave setting. Moreover, Zhang et al. (2022) prove local linear convergence of Alt-GDA
in the strongly-convex-concave setting. They observe that the iteration complexity of Alt-GDA is
optimal (Mokhtari et al., 2020), thus matching that of extragradient (Korpelevich, 1976; Gidel et al.,
2019). These observations motivate our choice of Alt-GDA for optimizing Eq. (5).
Recent work has studied the statistical properties of constrained optimization problems (Chamon &
Ribeiro, 2020; Chamon et al., 2022). This line of work has formulated PAC generalization bounds on
feasibility and optimality, arguing that learning with constraints is not a more difficult problem than
learning without constraints (Chamon & Ribeiro, 2020).

B     A LTERNATIVE C ONSTRAINED F ORMULATIONS

This section elaborates on alternative constrained formulations for mitigating the disparate impact of
pruning. Appendix B.1 presents the equalized loss formulation of Tran et al. (2022), Appendix B.2
describes a problem that constrains excess loss gaps of the sparse model, and Appendix B.3 formulates
problems that (approximately) equalize the per-group excess accuracy gaps.

B.1   E QUALIZED L OSS

Equation (10) presents the equalized loss formulation for mitigating disparate impact (Tran et al.,
2022). This formulation matches the loss of each group with the overall loss.
                   argmin L(θ|D),         s.t.   L(θ|Dg ) − L(θ|D) = 0,      ∀g ∈ G                 (10)
                     θ∈Θ


Tran et al. (2022) provide theoretical arguments to link disparate impact (in terms of group-level
excess loss gaps) to the loss on each group. This justifies their choice of constraints.
Our implementation of this approach follows a pipeline akin to Algorithm 1: we optimize it with
alternating gradient descent-ascent and use group replay buffers to reduce variance in the estimation
of the constraints for updating the dual variables. The storage cost associated with the buffer in this
setting is higher than that for CEAG, since per-sample losses (floating point numbers) are stored
instead of accuracies (booleans).
As shown in Appendix C.1, we notice smoother training dynamics for the multipliers when using
the replay buffers. Table 3 shows how the equalized loss formulation benefits from them in terms of
mitigating the disparate impact of pruning.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2              C ONSTRAINED E XCESS L OSS G APS

An alternative to both CEAG and Eq. (10) is to constrain loss gaps between the dense and sparse
models. This yields the following constrained excess loss gaps problem:
                            argmin L(θs |D)                                                                           (11)
                             θs ∈Θ

                   s.t.     ψ̃g = − L(θd |Dg ) − L(θs |Dg ) + L(θd |D) − L(θs |D) ≤ ϵ,                   ∀g ∈ G

This formulation addresses the disparate impact of pruning, although in terms of loss gaps instead of
accuracy gaps. Selecting a tolerance ϵ for this formulation can be challenging as it requires specifying
acceptable levels of excess loss gaps, which can vary significantly across tasks.

B.3              C ONSTRAINED ΨPW

Constrained disparate impact. A natural formulation to consider involves constraining the disparate
impact, as defined in Eq. (4). The constrained optimization can be formulated as:
                      argmin L(θs |D),             s.t.    ΨPW = max ∆g (θs , θd ) − min ∆g (θs , θd ) ≤ ϵ.           (12)
                       θs ∈Θ                                          g∈G                 g∈G


The constraint on ΨPW considers the difference between the most and least degraded groups. There-
fore, when calculating the gradient of the Lagrangian, only the contribution from said extreme groups
appears. This “lack of signal” may make optimization dynamics challenging, illustrated in Fig. 3. The
formulation successfully mitigates the disparate impact problem in the context of race prediction for
the UTKFace dataset, which features 5 sub-groups. However, when confronted with the CIFAR-100
dataset, encompassing 100 sub-groups, gradient-based approaches to solve Eq. (12) are unable to
identify a feasible solution. For both of these scenarios, we observed that the value of the (single)
Lagrange multiplier grew continuously, without settling, confirming the previous intuition regarding
poor optimization dynamics.


            75                                             UTKFace          75                                CIFAR-100
 ΨP W (%)


            50                                                              50

            25                                                              25

             0                                                               0
                  0        10        20    30     40       50    60              0   10     20    30     40    50    60
                                          Epoch                                                  Epoch

Figure 3: Evolution of disparate impact of pruning (ΨPW ) during training under Eq. (12). Left:
UTKFace dataset at 92.5% sparsity. Right: CIFAR-100 dataset at 95% sparsity. The horizontal
dashed lines indicate the tolerance (ϵ) of 5% and 10%, respectively.


A potential approach to alleviate this problem could be to introduce constraints on the pair-wise
accuracy gaps:
                      argmin L(θs |D),            s.t. − ϵ ≤ ∆g (θs , θd ) − ∆g′ (θs , θd ) ≤ ϵ,    ∀g, g ′ ∈ G.      (13)
                      θs ∈Θ

However, this alternative formulation requires quadratically many constraints in the number of
protected groups and does not scale to situations where the number of protected groups is large.
Equalized excess accuracy gaps. Equalizing the per-group excess accuracy gaps to zero gives rise
to the following formulation:
                       argmin L(θs |D),             s.t.   ψg = ∆g (θs , θd ) − ∆ (θs , θd ) = 0,    ∀g ∈ G.          (14)
                          θs ∈Θ

Compared to CEAG, this formulation (i) does not have an additional tolerance hyper-parameter ϵ,
and (ii) prevents groups from having negative EAGs.


                                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


However, Eq. (14) can be challenging to solve because it may not have any feasible solutions;
equalizing accuracy values may not be possible due to their discrete nature. Moreover, the lack of a
tolerance hyper-parameter hurts flexibility as disparity requirements cannot be incorporated into the
problem formulation.
Approximately equal excess accuracy gaps. A possible way to circumvent the limitations of
Eq. (14) is to formulate the constrained problem:
          argmin L(θs |D),            s.t. |ψg | = |∆g (θs , θd ) − ∆ (θs , θd ) | ≤ ϵ,   ∀g ∈ G.   (15)
           θs ∈Θ

Feasible solutions of Eq. (15) achieve ΨPW ≤ 2ϵ by imposing both an upper and a lower bound on
per-group EAGs. Compared to CEAG, this formulation prevents groups from experiencing a large
improvement in performance compared to the global accuracy gap. Compared to Eq. (14), it allows
for some tolerance at satisfying the equality. Naturally, for reasonable values of ϵ, Eq. (15) has a
non-empty set of feasible solutions.
However, since the feasible set of Eq. (15) is small (as prescribed by ϵ), solving it is challenging,
especially in the context of stochastic optimization. Mini-batch estimates of the constraints have a
high chance of being infeasible due to the small feasible region and noise in the estimation. This
leads to updates on the dual variables that are positive most of the time. In turn, this yields dual
variables that perpetually increase and never stabilize.
Two-sided inequality. Alternatively, a two-sided inequality constrained optimization problem is:
                             argmin L(θs |D)                                                        (16)
                              θs ∈Θ
                     s.t.    ψg = ∆g (θs , θd ) − ∆ (θs , θd ) ≤ ϵ, ∀g ∈ G                          (17)
                            −ψg = − (∆g (θs , θd ) − ∆ (θs , θd )) ≤ ϵ, ∀g ∈ G.                     (18)
This problem allows for individual dual variables to behave akin to those of CEAG. However, note
how the two constraints for each EAG introduce conflicting terms to the gradient of θs : the model
would aim to increase or decrease ψg depending on the current values of the dual variables.
Discussion. We focus on Eq. (5), and argue that constraining negative EAGs is not crucial for
mitigating disparity. A side effect of this choice is allowing for sparse models whose group AGs are
arbitrarily below the overall AG. In practice, this may lead to some groups improving their perfor-
mance while the overall model accuracy decreases. We argue that this behavior is not problematic
since it is only likely to manifest for under-represented groups: groups with few samples can deviate
in performance from other groups, without significantly influencing overall accuracy.
Eqs. (14) to (16) consider bounds on negative EAGs, but carrying out experiments on them is outside
the scope of our work.

C    R EPLAY B UFFERS
Algorithm 2 Update Buffer
Input: bufg : Buffer for group g, ŷ: A batch of model predictions, y: The batch of true targets,
       idxg : The sub-group indices of the batch.
 1: function U PDATE B UFFER(bufg , ŷ, y, idxg )
 2:    SampleAcc ← (ŷ == y)[idxg ]
 3:    bufg ← P USH(bufg , SampleAcc)                  ▷ Drops old elements to respect capacity k
 4:    return bufg
 5: end function


Algorithms 2 and 3 contain functions for updating and querying the replay buffers, respectively.
These are called by Algorithm 1. Note that we wait until a buffer has been filled before considering
its contents for computing the ψg terms. Before a buffer is filled, its corresponding ψg is 0.
For all groups, we consider the same buffer memory size k. Thus, the effective dataset used when
computing EAGs of the sparse model is balanced across groups: it has k samples per group. However,
when the original dataset is not balanced, this design implies that over-represented classes refresh
their buffers faster as oppossed to under-represented classes.


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 3 Query Buffers
Input: bufg , ∀g ∈ G: All replay buffers, k: Memory size for the replay buffers, Agdense : Accuracy of
       the dense model on each group g, Adense : Aggregate accuracy of the dense model.
                                                      g
 1: function Q UERY B UFFERS({bufg }G                        G
                                           g=1 , k, {Adense }g=1 , Adense )
 2:    I ← {}                                                                      ▷ Indices of full buffers
 3:    for g ∈ G do
 4:        if L EN(bufg ) == k then
 5:             I ← I ∪ {g}
 6:             SampleAccg ← Q UERY(bufg , k)                         ▷ Query all elements of each buffer
 7:             Agsparse ← AVERAGE(SampleAccg )
 8:        end if
 9:    end for
10:    Asparse ← AVERAGE({Agsparse }g∈I )              ▷ Compute aggregate accuracy from full buffers
11:    for g ∈ G do
12:        if g ∈ I then
13:             ψg ← (Agsparse − Agdense ) − (Asparse − Adense )
14:        else
15:             ψg ← 0                                                      ▷ Ignore non-full buffers in ψg
16:        end if
17:    end for
18:    return {ψg }Gg=1
19: end function



C.1              T RAINING DYNAMICS WITH R EPLAY B UFFERS

In Fig. 4, we present the behavior of a select multiplier in a CIFAR-100 experiment with 90% sparsity.
We depict two training stages: on the left, the multiplier consistently maintains a non-zero value,
while on the right, it is frequently around zero. Multipliers are initialized at zero, and are expected to
increase during the first stages of training when constraints may not be satisfied. Moreover, they are
expected to eventually stabilize at a value (possibly zero) if their corresponding constraint is inactive
at the solution.
On the left plot, we observe a smooth curve for the dual variable corresponding to the run with replay
buffers. In contrast, the dual variable for the run without buffers is more noisy. On the right plot, the
multiplier associated with the run without buffers becomes active more frequently than the multiplier
of the run with buffers. Given the small magnitude of these multipliers (up to 0.003), the constraint
may actually be feasible in this region and so the desirable behavior is to keep multipliers at 0.

              0.02                                                   0.0030
                                                                                                            No Buffer
                                                                                                            With Buffer
 Multiplier


              0.01                                                   0.0015



              0.00                                                   0.0000
                     7600   7800   8000    8200   8400   8600                 18500   18700   18900 19100   19300   19500
                                      Step                                                        Step

Figure 4: Effects of replay buffers on the multiplier dynamics on CIFAR-100 under 90% sparsity. As
expected, the multiplier exhibits notably smoother dynamics when using replay buffers.


C.2              R EPLAY B UFFER S IZE A BLATION

Table 4 showcases the effect of the choice of buffer size in terms of accuracy and disparate impact.
We observe that having a buffer is beneficial in terms of the train and test maxg ψg , while yielding
models with similar accuracy to those obtained without replay buffers.


                                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Effects of the memory size of replay buffers on a CIFAR-100 task at 95% sparsity. Not using
a buffer yields poor results in terms of maxg ψg . For experiments with buffers, different choices of
memory sizes yield comparable results. We consider a tolerance of ϵ = 5%.
                                           Train                       Test
               Buffer Size (k)
                                   Accuracy     maxg ψg Accuracy            maxg ψg
                 No Buffer        95.8 ± 0.15    5.8 ± 0.53    62.5 ± 0.41    17.1 ± 3.59
                    20            95.7 ± 0.10    5.4 ± 0.69    62.6 ± 0.30    16.0 ± 2.82
                    40            95.6 ± 0.12    5.7 ± 0.49    62.7 ± 0.28    14.8 ± 1.52
                    60            95.6 ± 0.16    5.5 ± 0.63    62.7 ± 0.26    14.5 ± 1.92
                    80            95.6 ± 0.17    5.5 ± 0.42    62.8 ± 0.44    16.4 ± 4.59


We observe that changing the buffer size has a small impact in terms of accuracy. In terms of maxg ψg ,
the smallest (20) and largest (80) choices of buffer size result in more significant overfitting compared
to 40 and 60. Moreover, the maximum EAG in test shows high variance in these cases. Table 4
motivates our choice of k = 40 for most experiments.


D     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

Our implementations are in PyTorch 1.13.0 (Paszke et al., 2019), with the Cooper library for
Lagrangian-based constrained optimization (Gallego-Posada & Ramirez, 2022).
Pipeline. As illustrated in Fig. 1, our pipeline consists of 3 stages: (i) obtaining a dense pre-trained
model, (ii) pruning said model using gradual magnitude pruning, and (iii) fine-tuning the sparse
model using either empirical risk minimization, the equalized loss formulation of Tran et al. (2022),
or our approach.
Dense models. Except for tasks involving the UTKFace dataset, we use publicly accessible pre-
trained dense models. Appendix D.4 provides references to the pre-trained models we use throughout
this work.
Pruning. We perform unstructured, layer-wise, gradual magnitude pruning (Zhu & Gupta, 2017)
with a cubic sparsity schedule (see Appendix D.5). We sparsify the weights of the model, but not the
biases. We also do not sparsify the input and output layers of the model, as recommended by Gale
et al. (2019). See more details in Appendix D.3.
Tolerance level ϵ. We choose the tolerance level for each experiment by running NFT, measuring its
corresponding maxg ψg and choosing a value of ϵ below this level. This protocol is ran independently
for every task and every sparsity level. Finally, note that since EL imposes an equality constraint,
there is no tolerance hyper-parameter to be chosen.

D.1    TASKS AND P ROTECTED ATTRIBUTES

We carry out experiments on the UTKFace (Zhang et al., 2017), FairFace (Kärkkäinen & Joo, 2021),
and CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky, 2009) datasets; these respectively employ MobileNet-V2 (Sandler
et al., 2018), ResNet-34 (He et al., 2016), and CifarResNet-56 models (Chen, 2021), using different
sparsity levels. These details are summarized in Table 5.
We highlight the data transformations and the batch size we employ for each dataset in Table 6.

D.2    M ITIGATION S CHEMES

This section describes the approaches considered throughout this work for fine-tuning the sparse
model, with or without a scheme to mitigate the disparate impact of pruning. We fine-tune sparse
models on UTKFace and CIFAR for 45 epochs, and for 32 epochs on FairFace.
Naive Fine Tuning (NFT). The sparse model is fine-tuned on the training set using ERM.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Table 5: Tasks considered throughout this work.
                                             Predicted Group
            Dataset        Model                                           Sparsity
                                             Attribute Attribute
                                               Race          Race               85, 90, 92.5
            UTKFace        MobileNet-V2        Gender        Race               85, 90, 92.5
                                               Race          Race ∩ Gender      85, 90, 92.5
                                               Race          Race               99
            FairFace       ResNet-34           Gender        Race               99
                                               Race          Race ∩ Gender      99
            CIFAR-100      CifarResNet-56      Class         Class              90, 92.5, 95


                 Table 6: Transformations and batch sizes considered for each dataset.
                                         Transformations
      Dataset                                                                       Batch Size
                                  Train                            Test
      UTKFace      RandomHorizontalFlip(0.5)                            –                  128
                        Resize(224,224)
      FairFace                                              Resize(224,224)                256
                   RandomHorizontalFlip(0.5)
      CIFAR                          –                                  –                  128


Naive Fine Tuning with Early Stopping (NFT+ES). Obtained by selecting the best iterate of NFT
in terms of test accuracy. We analyze this approach since early stopping is a popular technique in deep
learning practice and, as evidenced by our experiments, often results in higher disparity (compared to
the last iterate in NFT).
EL. Our implementation of the equalized loss method proposed by Tran et al. (2022). More details of
this formulation can be found in Appendix B.1.
EL+RB. Enhanced version of EL employing replay buffers (§4.2) for updating the dual variables.
The replay buffers store the per-sample losses observed at the mini-batch level across groups.
CEAG. Our constrained excess accuracy gap approach (see §4.3), which uses replay buffers by
default.

D.3     M ODEL A RCHITECTURES

We employ MobileNet-V2 (Sandler et al., 2018), ResNet-34, and CifarResNet-56 models (He et al.,
2016). ResNet-34 models are composed of bottleneck residual blocks He et al. (2016), while
CifarResNet-56 models use basic residual blocks (Chen, 2021).
Following Evci et al. (2020), across all models, we do not sparsify the biases due to their low footprint
towards the total number of parameters. We also do not sparsify the first and last layers of the model
as recommended by Gale et al. (2019).
Table 7 specifies the number of parameters of all considered architectures. We also provide the number
of parameters remaining post-pruning across the considered sparsities for the reader’s convenience.

D.4     P RE -T RAINED M ODELS

Reusing and fine-tuning of pre-trained deep learning models is a common practice. For example, a
typical application pipeline might involve (i) obtaining a pre-trained model, (ii) fine-tuning it on an
application-specific task, and (iii) pruning it before deployment.
Therefore, we concentrate on studying the behavior of mitigation techniques when applied to openly
available pre-trained models.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Statistics on the total number of parameters and active parameters at different sparsity levels
for our employed architectures. † Sparsifiable parameters indicate the number of parameters that may be
removed during pruning (thus, excluding non-prunable parameters such as biases). ‡ Parameter counts reported
for MobileNet-V2 and ResNet-34 models are for race prediction tasks on UTKFace and FairFace, respectively.
                        Total       Sparsifiable              Active parameters at sparsity:
 Architecture
                                               †
                       Params         Params          85%         90%       92.5%       95%        99%
                 ‡
 MobileNet–V2         2,230,277       2,222,944     366,946     255,250    198,709       –          –
 ResNet-34‡          21,288,263      21,275,136        –           –          –          –       241,751
 CifarResNet-56        861,620         854,656         –         96,179     74,889     53,621       –


       • ResNet-34 models for FairFace use the weights provided by Kärkkäinen & Joo (2021).
       • CifarResNet-56 models for CIFAR-100 use the weights provided by Chen (2021).
       • We were unable to find publicly available pre-trained MobileNet-V2 models for the UTKFace
         dataset. Thus, we train these from scratch (see details below). As part of our reproducibility
         efforts, we are making our pre-trained UTKFace MobileNet-V2 models openly available.

For training UTKFace models, we use SGD with an initial learning rate of 0.01, decayed by a factor
of 0.1 at training milestones of 60%, 80%, and 90% of total training epochs. We use a momentum
coefficient of 0.9, and train for a total of 50 epochs. These hyper-parameters are used both for race
and gender prediction tasks.
The group-wise performance for all the dense models is reported in Tables 17, 18, 20, 21, 23, 24, 26,
27, 29, 30, 32 and 33.

D.5    G RADUAL M AGNITUDE P RUNING

As mentioned in §5.1, our experiments perform Gradual Magnitude Pruning (GMP), where a fraction
of the smallest weights (in magnitude) is pruned on every epoch. Zhu & Gupta (2017) consider the
following cubic schedule prescribing the proportion of parameters to prune at every epoch:
                                               3
                                  t − t0
   st = sf + (si − sf ) 1 −                       t ∈ {t0 , t0 + ∆t, ..., t0 + (Tend − t0 )∆t}, (19)
                              (Tend − t0 ) ∆t
where t0 is the initial training step, ∆t is the pruning frequency (in epochs), Tend is final epoch of
pruning, and si and sf denote the initial and final sparsities, respectively.
Our experiments carry out GMP since epoch t0 = 0, throughout Tend = 15 − 1 = 14 epochs, and
perform pruning once every epoch (∆t = 1).

D.6    P RIMAL O PTIMIZATION H YPER - PARAMETERS

We make use of SGD with momentum as the primal optimizer for all of our experiments. In our
initial ablation experiments on the choice of primal optimizer, we found that employing SGD with
momentum outperformed or matched the performance of Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014).
For UTKFace and CIFAR-100 datasets, we employ a primal step size of 1 · 10−2 along with a
momentum of 0.9 (Polyak), and apply weight decay at the rate of 1 · 10−4 .
For FairFace, we employ Nesterov momentum with a step-size of 1 · 10−3 and apply a weight decay
of 1 · 10−2 . Specifically, for race prediction tasks, we utilize a momentum of 0.95, while for gender
prediction tasks, a momentum of 0.99 is employed.
Additionally, we use PyTorch’s MultiStepLR as the learning rate scheduler, with decay γ = 0.1
across all experiments. For UTKFace and CIFAR-100, we set scheduler milestones at 60%, 80% and
90% of the total training epochs (including the execution of GMP). For instance, for a task that has
60 epochs where it employs GMP on 15 epochs, the above milestones would activate at epoch 36,
epoch 48 and epoch 54. For race prediction on FairFace we use a single milestone at 90%, while
gender prediction on FairFace uses a constant learning rate of 1 · 10−2 .


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.7     D UAL O PTIMIZATION H YPER - PARAMETERS

We employ stochastic gradient ascent on the dual parameters (corresponding to the Lagrange multi-
pliers) in all experiments. The choices of dual learning rate are presented in Tables 8 to 13.
We fix k = 40 as the memory size for the replay buffer. Preliminary ablations on the choice of
k ∈ [20, 80] showed low sensitivity to the specific value of this hyper-parameter (See Appendix C.2).
Note that the order of magnitude for the dual step-size choices is relatively consistent across datasets,
tasks, sparsity levels and disparity tolerances. This highlights the ease of tuning exhibited by this
hyper-parameter.

D.7.1    UTKFACE


                 Table 8: Tolerance and dual step-size for CEAG on UTKFace tasks.
  Target Attribute       Group Attribute      Sparsity       Dual Step-Size (ηλ )          Tolerance ϵ (%)

                                              85                     2 · 10−3              0.5
        Gender           Race                 90                     1 · 10−4              0.5
                                              92.5                   3 · 10−3              0.5
                                              85                     1 · 10−4              0.25
         Race            Race                 90                     2 · 10−3              1
                                              92.5                   2 · 10−3              1
                                              85                     1 · 10−5              0.5
         Race            Race ∩ Gender        90                     1 · 10−3              3
                                              92.5                   1 · 10−3              3



                       Table 9: Dual step-size for EL+RB on UTKFace tasks.
           Target Attribute       Group Attribute         Sparsity      Dual Step-Size (ηλ )

                                                             85                 1 · 10−4
                 Gender                Race                  90                 1 · 10−5
                                                            92.5                1 · 10−5
                                                             85                 1 · 10−5
                  Race                 Race                  90                 1 · 10−5
                                                            92.5                1 · 10−5
                                                             85                 1 · 10−5
                  Race             Race ∩ Gender             90                 1 · 10−5
                                                            92.5                1 · 10−5


D.7.2    FAIR FACE


        Table 10: Tolerance and dual step-size for CEAG on FairFace tasks at 99% sparsity.
         Target Attribute       Group Attribute      Dual Step-Size (ηλ )          Tolerance ϵ (%)

              Gender                Race                     1 · 10−5                        1
               Race                 Race                     1 · 10−4                        2
               Race             Race ∩ Gender                1 · 10−5                      0.25


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Table 11: Dual step-size for EL+RB on FairFace tasks.
                 Target Attribute        Group Attribute        Dual Step-Size (ηλ )

                        Gender                Race                    1 · 10−5
                         Race                 Race                    1 · 10−5
                         Race             Race ∩ Gender               1 · 10−5


D.7.3    CIFAR


                 Table 12: Tolerance and dual step-size for CEAG on CIFAR tasks.
    Target Attribute     Group Attribute       Sparsity      Dual Step-Size (ηλ )      Tolerance ϵ (%)

                                                    90              2 · 10−3                  1
         Class                  Class              92.5             2 · 10−3                  2
                                                    95              1 · 10−3                  5



                        Table 13: Dual step-size for EL+RB on CIFAR tasks.
             Target Attribute      Group Attribute        Sparsity     Dual Step-Size (ηλ )

                                                              90               1 · 10−5
                   Class                   Class             92.5              1 · 10−5
                                                              95               1 · 10−5


E     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
E.1     C OMPUTATIONAL OVERHEAD

Table 14 presents the wall-clock time of an experiment for different mitigation approaches on CIFAR-
100 at 95% sparsity. Note that the reported time includes the 15 epochs of gradual magnitude pruning
of the dense model, as well as the 45 epochs of fine-tuning.


Table 14: Runtime of different mitigation approaches on CIFAR-100 at 95% sparsity. All runs are
run on NVIDIA A100-SXM4-80GB GPUs. Runtimes are average across 5 runs for each mitigation
method.
                             Min                     Median                   Max
  Method           Wall-clock Overhead Wall-clock Overhead Wall-clock Overhead
                         Time           wrt NFT       Time          wrt NFT         Time          wrt NFT
    NFT                1h 0m 04s             1×     1h 3m 13s            1×      1h 12m 19s            1×
    EL                 1h 2m 37s         1.031×     1h 4m 34s        1.021×      1h 15m 50s        1.049×
    EL+RB              1h 4m 15s         1.058×     1h 7m 10s        1.062×      1h 17m 35s        1.073×
    CEAG (No RB)       1h 2m 08s         1.023×     1h 3m 08s        0.998×       1h 8m 35s        0.948×
    CEAG               1h 1m 58s         1.020×     1h 4m 28s        1.020×       1h 6m 27s        0.919×


We observe a negligible increase in training time for constrained approaches that use replay buffers
relative to NFT. For approaches that do not use replay buffers, the runtime is essentially the same as
NFT. This overhead is especially insignificant considering that the CIFAR-100 problem involves 100
constraints.


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2        C OMPARISON TO FAIR GRAPE (L IN ET AL ., 2022)

Computational cost: As a benchmarking exercise, we re-ran the code provided by Lin et al. (2022)
for UTKFace Race prediction and Race as protected group5 . The method took more than 90 hours
of compute time on an NVIDIA A100-SXM4-80GB GPU. Given how prohibitively expensive this
is, we refrained from running experiments with FairGRAPE. Furthermore, we expect the runtime to
increase for tasks with larger numbers of protected groups.
UTKFace: Lin et al. (2022) apply their method on UTKFace, but remove race group Others from the
dataset. The authors state that this was done as Others is an ambiguous class. Since we consider the
complete dataset in our experiments, we can not compare directly to the numbers reported by Lin
et al. (2022).
Although we could apply CEAG to the UTKFace dataset without race group Others, we choose
not to since we observe that this group is generally the most disproportionately affected by pruning.
Table 15 shows that NFT can achieve models with low disparity on UTKFace without Others, but
presents significantly worse accuracy and higher disparity on experiments with Others.

Table 15: NFT results on UTKFace race prediction with race as group attribute, with and without
race group Others.
                                             Train                                     Test
    Setup
                               Accuracy       ΨPW         maxg ψg       Accuracy        ΨPW        maxg ψg
    UTKFace (without Others)   99.5 ± 0.0   2.0 ± 0.16    0.5 ± 0.00   86.7 ± 0.55   10.9 ± 1.68   7.4 ± 0.14
    UTKFace                    98.2 ± 0.0   9.9 ± 0.82    8.7 ± 0.82   79.5 ± 0.46    6.1 ± 1.60   2.2 ± 0.68



E.3        S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS

Table 16 presents the sensitivity of our approach to the tolerance hyperparameter ϵ on a UTKFace
race prediction task with race as group attribute.

Table 16: Race prediction task for UTKFace with race as group attribute, at 92.5% sparsity. All
experiments use a dual step size of 2 · 10−3 . Results are aggregated across 5 seeds.
                               Tolerance Accuracy            maxg ψg
                                     1.5        93.6 ± 0.1      0.9 ± 0.61
                                     1.0        93.4 ± 0.3      1.1 ± 0.36
                                     0.5        93.2 ± 0.2      1.2 ± 0.44
                                      0         93.2 ± 0.2      0.9 ± 0.24

We observe small improvements in performance for experiments with large tolerance values. For low
tolerance values, we observe that feasibility is not attained. Moreover, the resulting maxg ψg values
are similar across the considered tolerances. These observations are indicative of robustness to the
choice of tolerance.


F        C OMPREHENSIVE E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

This section contains the results corresponding to all experiments mentioned in Table 5 across all
datasets, sparsities, and tasks considered in our work. As mentioned earlier, all metrics reported in
our tables and plots follow the pattern avg ± std. Unless mentioned otherwise, all our experimental
metrics are aggregated across 5 seeds.
Some of the tables displayed below are extensions of tables presented in the main paper. Such tables
have been clearly identified in the captions. For the tables reporting group accuracies, we report the
numbers for both the dense model as well as all the sparse models.
     5
         The FairGRAPE implementation can be found here: https://github.com/Bernardo1998/FairGRAPE


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.1     UTKFACE

We use MobileNet-V2 Sandler et al. (2018), similar to Lin et al. (2022).
F.1.1      G ENDER

Table 17: Groupwise train accuracy for gender prediction in UTKFace with race as protected attribute,
across sparsities.
 Sparsity Method            White         Black          Asian       Indian         Others
               Dense       100.0            99.9                99.9           99.8             99.3
               NFT         99.9 ± 0.02      99.8 ± 0.04         99.9 ± 0.06    99.8 ± 0.02      99.3 ± 0.1
 85
               EL + RB     99.9 ± 0.01      99.8 ± 0.03         99.9 ± 0.03    99.8 ± 0.04      99.4 ± 0.13
               CEAG        99.9 ± 0.03      99.8 ± 0.06         99.9 ± 0.05    99.8 ± 0.03      99.3 ± 0.12
               Dense       100.0            99.9                99.9           99.8             99.3
               NFT         99.8 ± 0.03      99.8 ± 0.04         99.7 ± 0.09    99.6 ± 0.1       98.9 ± 0.17
 90
               EL + RB     99.8 ± 0.05      99.8 ± 0.05         99.7 ± 0.09    99.6 ± 0.08      99.0 ± 0.17
               CEAG        99.8 ± 0.02      99.8 ± 0.02         99.7 ± 0.12    99.7 ± 0.04      99.1 ± 0.1
               Dense       100.0            99.9                99.9           99.8             99.3
               NFT         99.4 ± 0.07      99.5 ± 0.08         98.8 ± 0.22    99.1 ± 0.11      98.0 ± 0.23
 92.5
               EL + RB     99.5 ± 0.05      99.6 ± 0.09         98.6 ± 0.23    99.1 ± 0.1       98.1 ± 0.45
               CEAG        99.1 ± 0.22      99.3 ± 0.28         99.6 ± 0.12    98.7 ± 0.11      98.5 ± 0.29


Table 18: Groupwise test accuracy for gender prediction in UTKFace with race as protected attribute,
across sparsities.
 Sparsity Method           White         Black           Asian      Indian         Others
               Dense       94.2             95.0                89.5           93.2             89.5
               NFT         92.0 ± 0.42      94.0 ± 0.82         87.0 ± 0.62    92.5 ± 0.37      88.6 ± 0.83
 85
               EL + RB     92.1 ± 0.45      94.2 ± 0.52         87.2 ± 0.72    92.1 ± 0.41      88.4 ± 0.4
               CEAG        91.9 ± 0.3       93.8 ± 0.41         86.7 ± 0.75    92.1 ± 0.55      88.1 ± 1.03
               Dense       94.2             95.0                89.5           93.2             89.5
               NFT         91.1 ± 0.67      92.6 ± 0.57         85.9 ± 0.95    91.6 ± 0.67      87.1 ± 0.85
 90
               EL + RB     91.0 ± 0.1       93.0 ± 0.38         86.4 ± 0.64    91.4 ± 0.45      87.6 ± 0.83
               CEAG        91.0 ± 0.56      93.2 ± 0.64         85.5 ± 0.73    91.8 ± 0.64      86.3 ± 1.03
               Dense       94.2             95.0                89.5           93.2             89.5
               NFT         90.5 ± 0.67      92.6 ± 0.62         85.1 ± 0.83    91.0 ± 0.89      87.3 ± 1.05
 92.5
               EL + RB     90.2 ± 0.54      93.2 ± 0.66         85.0 ± 1.57    90.6 ± 0.4       86.6 ± 1.35
               CEAG        90.6 ± 1.0       92.7 ± 0.2          85.8 ± 0.93    90.5 ± 0.76      87.1 ± 0.91


Table 19: Gender prediction on UTKFace with race as group attribute, across sparsities. CEAG
consistently achieves a maxg ψg within the threshold, across sparsities.
                                              Train                                           Test
 Sparsity    Method
                        Accuracy        ΨPW        maxg ψg       Tol (ϵ)      Accuracy        ΨPW        maxg ψg
             NFT        99.8 ± 0.01   0.3 ± 0.15   0.0 ± 0.02    –            91.5 ± 0.25   2.2 ± 0.87   0.9 ± 0.43
             NFT + ES   98.0 ± 1.72   1.7 ± 1.19   1.3 ± 0.91    –            91.8 ± 0.28   2.1 ± 0.69   0.8 ± 0.23
      85
             EL + RB    99.9 ± 0.02   0.3 ± 0.18   0.0 ± 0.01    –            91.5 ± 0.29   1.9 ± 0.71   0.9 ± 0.41
             CEAG       99.8 ± 0.01   0.3 ± 0.16   0.1 ± 0.05    ≤ 0.5% ✓     91.3 ± 0.3    2.1 ± 0.78   0.9 ± 0.51
             NFT        99.7 ± 0.04   0.4 ± 0.26   0.3 ± 0.2     –            90.5 ± 0.2    2.7 ± 1.03   1.3 ± 0.65
             NFT + ES   97.4 ± 1.59   2.5 ± 1.42   1.8 ± 1.15    –            91.0 ± 0.15   1.8 ± 0.9    1.0 ± 0.65
      90
             EL + RB    99.7 ± 0.05   0.3 ± 0.16   0.2 ± 0.15    –            90.6 ± 0.17   2.0 ± 0.52   0.8 ± 0.27
             CEAG       99.7 ± 0.03   0.2 ± 0.1    0.2 ± 0.05    ≤ 0.5% ✓     90.4 ± 0.37   3.0 ± 0.82   1.4 ± 0.51
             NFT        99.2 ± 0.08   1.0 ± 0.17   0.7 ± 0.19    –            90.0 ± 0.44   3.1 ± 0.71   1.4 ± 0.57
             NFT + ES   96.2 ± 1.82   3.0 ± 0.98   2.2 ± 0.8     –            90.4 ± 0.37   2.8 ± 0.55   1.2 ± 0.52
   92.5
             EL + RB    99.2 ± 0.07   1.3 ± 0.34   0.9 ± 0.3     –            89.8 ± 0.29   3.1 ± 1.64   1.5 ± 0.98
             CEAG       99.1 ± 0.14   0.8 ± 0.24   0.4 ± 0.09    ≤ 0.5% ✓     90.1 ± 0.52   2.2 ± 0.75   1.0 ± 0.2



                                                       26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     Train                                                 Test

                99.8                                                                                                Methods
                                                                         91.5                                         NFT
                99.6                                                                                                  EL + RB
 Accuracy (%)


                                                          Accuracy (%)
                                                                         91.0                                         CEAG
                99.4
                                                                         90.5                                        Sparsity
                99.2                                                                                                    85 %
                                                                         90.0                                           90 %
                99.0                                                                                                    92.5 %
                                                                         89.5
                    0.0         0.5        1.0                               0          1           2
                 Max Excess Accuracy Gap [maxg ψg ] (%)                   Max Excess Accuracy Gap [maxg ψg ] (%)

                               Figure 5: UTKFace gender prediction with race as protected attribute.


F.1.2                  R ACE


Table 20: Groupwise train accuracy for race prediction in UTKFace with race as protected attribute,
across sparsities.
 Sparsity Method           White         Black          Asian      Indian         Others
                           Dense         99.8          99.7                      99.9             99.8          99.5
                           NFT           99.7 ± 0.08   99.6 ± 0.11               99.8 ± 0.06      99.7 ± 0.06   99.0 ± 0.13
 85
                           EL + RB       99.6 ± 0.11   99.6 ± 0.18               99.8 ± 0.1       99.8 ± 0.14   99.5 ± 0.1
                           CEAG          99.6 ± 0.13   99.5 ± 0.17               99.7 ± 0.09      99.7 ± 0.19   99.8 ± 0.09
                           Dense         99.8          99.7                      99.9             99.8          99.5
                           NFT           98.6 ± 0.26   99.2 ± 0.24               99.3 ± 0.04      98.9 ± 0.2    89.0 ± 0.79
 90
                           EL + RB       98.4 ± 0.19   98.8 ± 0.18               99.2 ± 0.22      98.7 ± 0.3    94.3 ± 0.61
                           CEAG          95.7 ± 0.35   95.5 ± 0.35               96.0 ± 0.4       97.1 ± 0.52   98.4 ± 0.42
                           Dense         99.8          99.7                      99.9             99.8          99.5
                           NFT           96.8 ± 0.15   98.0 ± 0.23               98.2 ± 0.44      96.3 ± 0.47   69.4 ± 3.72
 92.5
                           EL + RB       95.9 ± 0.37   97.2 ± 0.23               97.6 ± 0.55      95.9 ± 0.56   82.5 ± 1.36
                           CEAG          93.2 ± 0.28   92.9 ± 0.74               92.8 ± 0.99      93.9 ± 0.79   95.4 ± 0.35


Table 21: Groupwise test accuracy for race prediction in UTKFace with race as protected attribute,
across sparsities.
 Sparsity Method           White         Black          Asian      Indian        Others
                           Dense         90.6          87.9                      88.5             80.7          29.2
                           NFT           87.3 ± 0.24   84.4 ± 1.32               86.7 ± 0.82      74.9 ± 1.01   31.0 ± 1.55
 85
                           EL + RB       87.2 ± 0.48   84.1 ± 0.74               86.1 ± 1.33      75.2 ± 1.53   32.8 ± 1.47
                           CEAG          86.5 ± 0.31   84.3 ± 1.31               85.7 ± 1.25      75.3 ± 1.26   32.1 ± 2.36
                           Dense         90.6          87.9                      88.5             80.7          29.2
                           NFT           86.5 ± 0.52   83.3 ± 1.28               84.2 ± 2.46      74.6 ± 0.44   28.8 ± 1.95
 90
                           EL + RB       86.2 ± 0.94   83.7 ± 0.91               83.6 ± 1.15      75.3 ± 1.08   31.4 ± 1.33
                           CEAG          86.6 ± 0.83   84.2 ± 1.1                85.6 ± 1.12      77.7 ± 1.07   29.1 ± 2.73
                           Dense         90.6          87.9                      88.5             80.7          29.2
                           NFT           86.3 ± 0.78   83.8 ± 0.58               84.6 ± 0.8       73.8 ± 1.04   28.5 ± 2.52
 92.5
                           EL + RB       85.1 ± 1.0    82.8 ± 1.37               83.5 ± 1.49      73.4 ± 1.09   30.9 ± 2.49
                           CEAG          85.5 ± 0.6    83.0 ± 0.65               84.6 ± 1.66      76.3 ± 0.47   31.8 ± 2.38


                                                                           27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 22: Race prediction on UTKFace with race as protected attribute, across sparsities. CEAG
almost always achieves a maxg ψg within the threshold. It also has the minimum maxg ψg across
sparsities.
                                                                          Train                                                                       Test
 Sparsity                Method
                                         Accuracy                ΨPW                  maxg ψg                 Tol (ϵ)           Accuracy              ΨPW               maxg ψg
                         NFT             99.7 ± 0.02        0.3 ± 0.16          0.2 ± 0.13                    –                 80.6 ± 0.42       7.6 ± 1.8             2.7 ± 0.78
                         NFT + ES        92.1 ± 4.2         35.1 ± 20.55        30.3 ± 17.82                  –                 81.1 ± 0.51       10.7 ± 2.01           5.2 ± 2.81
                85
                         EL + RB         99.7 ± 0.03        0.4 ± 0.09          0.2 ± 0.08                    –                 80.6 ± 0.44       9.2 ± 2.67            2.4 ± 1.16
                         CEAG            99.6 ± 0.05        0.8 ± 0.14          0.2 ± 0.05                    ≤ 0.25% ✓         80.3 ± 0.5        8.4 ± 2.95            2.0 ± 0.91
                         NFT             98.2 ± 0.08        9.9 ± 0.82          8.7 ± 0.82                    –                 79.5 ± 0.46       6.1 ± 1.6             2.2 ± 0.68
                         NFT + ES        90.6 ± 4.72        45.5 ± 22.51        40.6 ± 20.13                  –                 81.0 ± 0.24       8.0 ± 4.73            5.3 ± 4.68
                90
                         EL + RB         98.3 ± 0.06        4.4 ± 0.58          3.6 ± 0.61                    –                 79.7 ± 0.37       8.0 ± 1.68            1.7 ± 0.91
                         CEAG            96.1 ± 0.11        3.5 ± 0.51          0.8 ± 0.26                    ≤ 1% ✓            80.5 ± 0.25       5.2 ± 1.86            1.5 ± 0.2
                         NFT             95.1 ± 0.36        28.2 ± 3.49         25.3 ± 3.35                   –                 79.4 ± 0.17       6.1 ± 3.0             2.5 ± 1.01
                         NFT + ES        91.2 ± 4.29        43.5 ± 10.64        38.7 ± 8.87                   –                 80.2 ± 0.21       5.7 ± 2.79            3.5 ± 1.76
         92.5
                         EL + RB         95.4 ± 0.22        14.6 ± 1.31         12.5 ± 1.12                   –                 78.6 ± 0.33       9.0 ± 3.2             2.2 ± 0.95
                         CEAG            93.4 ± 0.31        3.5 ± 0.86          1.1 ± 0.36                    ≤ 1% ✗            79.6 ± 0.4        8.0 ± 2.59            1.3 ± 0.43


                                         Train                                                                           Test
                100
                                                                                               81                                                              Methods
                                                                                                                                                                 NFT
                 98                                                                                                                                              EL + RB
 Accuracy (%)


                                                                                Accuracy (%)


                                                                                               80                                                                CEAG

                 96
                                                                                                                                                                 Sparsity
                                                                                               79                                                                   85 %
                 94                                                                                                                                                 90 %
                                                                                                                                                                    92.5 %

                     0        10       20        30                                               0       1       2      3
                 Max Excess Accuracy Gap [maxg ψg ] (%)                                        Max Excess Accuracy Gap [maxg ψg ] (%)


                                 Figure 6: UTKFace race prediction with race as protected attribute.



F.1.3                 I NTERSECTIONAL

For the sake of brevity, we use acronyms to refer to the intersectional sub-groups. The acronyms
are separated by a dash, the initial part refers to the race and the later part refers to the gender. For
instance, W-M refers to White and Male. Other races are B-Black, A-Asian, I-Indian, and O-Others.



Table 23: Groupwise train accuracy for race prediction in UTKFace with intersection of race and
gender as protected attribute, across sparsities.
Sparsity              Method      W-M            W-F           B-M           B-F                    A-M            A-F           I-M           I-F          O-M             O-F
                      Dense     99.7          99.9          99.6          99.8                  99.8           99.9           99.7          99.9          99.3           99.6
                      NFT       99.6 ± 0.09   99.7 ± 0.16   99.6 ± 0.18   99.7 ± 0.08           99.6 ± 0.09    99.9 ± 0.09    99.7 ± 0.1    99.8 ± 0.12   98.6 ± 0.37    99.2 ± 0.27
85
                      EL + RB   99.5 ± 0.09   99.5 ± 0.14   99.6 ± 0.16   99.7 ± 0.07           99.7 ± 0.12    99.9 ± 0.06    99.7 ± 0.15   99.9 ± 0.15   99.6 ± 0.19    99.7 ± 0.13
                      CEAG      99.6 ± 0.11   99.7 ± 0.1    99.6 ± 0.2    99.7 ± 0.09           99.7 ± 0.1     100.0 ± 0.04   99.7 ± 0.17   99.9 ± 0.07   99.4 ± 0.14    99.6 ± 0.17
                      Dense     99.7          99.9          99.6          99.8                  99.8           99.9           99.7          99.9          99.3           99.6
                      NFT       98.6 ± 0.2    98.4 ± 0.21   99.1 ± 0.27   99.1 ± 0.23           99.2 ± 0.24    99.5 ± 0.15    99.0 ± 0.33   98.8 ± 0.21   87.7 ± 1.07    89.9 ± 1.88
90
                      EL + RB   98.3 ± 0.31   98.0 ± 0.29   98.7 ± 0.44   98.6 ± 0.28           98.9 ± 0.27    99.2 ± 0.15    98.3 ± 0.6    98.1 ± 0.45   97.3 ± 0.64    95.6 ± 0.59
                      CEAG      96.4 ± 0.39   96.0 ± 0.33   96.1 ± 0.34   96.2 ± 0.27           95.3 ± 0.28    97.0 ± 0.78    95.7 ± 0.66   96.2 ± 0.57   96.0 ± 0.98    96.6 ± 1.29
                      Dense     99.7          99.9          99.6          99.8                  99.8           99.9           99.7          99.9          99.3           99.6
                      NFT       97.1 ± 0.61   96.7 ± 0.42   97.7 ± 0.46   98.0 ± 0.27           98.2 ± 0.33    98.8 ± 0.34    96.5 ± 0.54   96.3 ± 0.71   63.8 ± 1.49    70.9 ± 2.09
92.5
                      EL + RB   95.9 ± 0.48   95.1 ± 0.43   96.8 ± 0.32   96.9 ± 0.23           97.1 ± 0.5     98.1 ± 0.58    94.8 ± 0.83   94.8 ± 0.51   88.7 ± 1.91    86.4 ± 1.64
                      CEAG      94.2 ± 0.49   93.4 ± 0.16   93.6 ± 0.93   94.2 ± 0.58           91.9 ± 1.18    94.2 ± 0.55    91.6 ± 0.41   92.8 ± 1.31   92.0 ± 0.99    92.7 ± 1.89


                                                                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 24: Groupwise test accuracy for race prediction in UTKFace with intersection of race and
gender as protected attribute, across sparsities.
 Sparsity             Method      W-M            W-F           B-M           B-F                   A-M          A-F           I-M           I-F          O-M             O-F
                      Dense     90.9          90.2          86.9          88.9                 87.5          89.3          81.0          80.4          26.4           31.6
                      NFT       87.3 ± 0.7    86.5 ± 0.79   82.6 ± 1.21   86.7 ± 1.66          84.2 ± 1.91   87.5 ± 0.6    74.3 ± 1.66   78.4 ± 2.26   29.3 ± 1.56    32.0 ± 3.4
 85
                      EL + RB   87.3 ± 0.9    86.1 ± 1.18   82.2 ± 1.73   85.6 ± 0.51          84.5 ± 2.53   86.7 ± 1.88   74.6 ± 1.57   78.1 ± 1.15   31.2 ± 2.36    32.1 ± 2.81
                      CEAG      87.2 ± 0.65   85.8 ± 0.76   82.6 ± 1.27   86.0 ± 0.96          84.6 ± 0.52   87.7 ± 1.76   74.0 ± 1.18   77.2 ± 1.7    31.5 ± 1.83    32.3 ± 3.18
                      Dense     90.9          90.2          86.9          88.9                 87.5          89.3          81.0          80.4          26.4           31.6
                      NFT       86.8 ± 0.87   86.4 ± 0.97   81.9 ± 1.5    85.2 ± 1.1           82.2 ± 2.46   84.4 ± 1.99   74.2 ± 0.53   75.4 ± 1.09   26.8 ± 3.26    31.6 ± 1.74
 90
                      EL + RB   85.9 ± 1.17   85.6 ± 1.33   82.5 ± 0.58   83.8 ± 0.48          83.4 ± 1.95   85.0 ± 2.07   73.8 ± 1.29   76.1 ± 1.45   30.3 ± 1.11    32.3 ± 2.81
                      CEAG      86.2 ± 1.35   87.2 ± 0.92   83.5 ± 1.57   85.6 ± 0.6           82.6 ± 1.52   86.5 ± 1.22   76.9 ± 1.26   76.6 ± 1.23   25.8 ± 2.63    29.8 ± 1.16
                      Dense     90.9          90.2          86.9          88.9                 87.5          89.3          81.0          80.4          26.4           31.6
                      NFT       86.5 ± 1.04   86.6 ± 0.92   81.9 ± 1.48   83.0 ± 1.28          82.3 ± 1.09   85.5 ± 1.61   72.8 ± 1.26   75.6 ± 2.2    26.8 ± 3.56    29.6 ± 1.36
 92.5
                      EL + RB   85.0 ± 0.83   84.9 ± 0.9    81.8 ± 0.92   82.8 ± 1.28          81.7 ± 0.97   85.6 ± 1.32   72.8 ± 0.81   74.0 ± 2.07   32.8 ± 6.05    33.9 ± 2.71
                      CEAG      86.8 ± 0.64   85.3 ± 1.22   82.5 ± 1.47   84.8 ± 0.58          81.8 ± 1.98   86.2 ± 1.15   73.7 ± 1.73   76.0 ± 1.41   29.5 ± 1.4     30.7 ± 2.73


Table 25: Race prediction task on the UTKFace dataset with the intersection of race and gender as
group attribute, across sparsities. For instance, if a sample has race as Black and gender as Female, its
group label is Black-Female. CEAG consistently achieves a maxg ψg within the threshold, across
sparsities. This table is an extension of Table 2.
                                                                          Train                                                                    Test
 Sparsity                Method
                                         Accuracy                ΨPW                        maxg ψg          Tol (ϵ)          Accuracy             ΨPW               maxg ψg
                         NFT             99.6 ± 0.03        0.8 ± 0.26                  0.5 ± 0.33           –                80.6 ± 0.44      10.3 ± 2.09           3.4 ± 1.29
                         NFT + ES        91.8 ± 4.03        37.0 ± 21.45                31.8 ± 18.93         –                81.2 ± 0.4       13.0 ± 3.29           5.2 ± 2.03
                85
                         EL + RB         99.7 ± 0.02        0.8 ± 0.37                  0.2 ± 0.08           –                80.4 ± 0.29      11.7 ± 3.4            3.4 ± 1.53
                         CEAG            99.7 ± 0.03        0.5 ± 0.1                   0.2 ± 0.04           ≤ 0.5% ✓         80.4 ± 0.27      12.2 ± 2.62           3.6 ± 1.14
                         NFT             98.1 ± 0.06        11.5 ± 0.72                 10.0 ± 0.67          –                79.6 ± 0.49      8.9 ± 2.35            3.1 ± 0.46
                         NFT + ES        90.5 ± 4.73        49.8 ± 23.02                44.8 ± 20.76         –                81.0 ± 0.24      12.0 ± 5.34           6.9 ± 4.79
                90
                         EL + RB         98.3 ± 0.19        3.2 ± 0.63                  2.4 ± 0.61           –                79.4 ± 0.5       11.4 ± 0.91           3.0 ± 1.06
                         CEAG            96.2 ± 0.1         2.4 ± 0.59                  1.0 ± 0.27           ≤ 3% ✓           80.2 ± 0.13      6.0 ± 2.48            2.3 ± 1.03
                         NFT             95.1 ± 0.17        34.2 ± 1.64                 30.7 ± 1.48          –                79.2 ± 0.16      8.8 ± 3.18            3.6 ± 1.3
                         NFT + ES        91.2 ± 2.66        53.3 ± 9.55                 48.0 ± 8.28          –                80.4 ± 0.35      7.5 ± 3.41            5.4 ± 3.13
         92.5
                         EL + RB         95.4 ± 0.27        11.1 ± 1.45                 8.6 ± 1.42           –                78.7 ± 0.27      16.3 ± 3.92           3.3 ± 0.62
                         CEAG            93.4 ± 0.31        3.8 ± 0.4                   2.3 ± 0.41           ≤ 3% ✓           79.5 ± 0.14      10.8 ± 2.21           3.3 ± 1.02


                                         Train                                                                         Test
                100
                                                                                            81.0                                                            Methods
                                                                                                                                                              NFT
                                                                                            80.5
                 98                                                                                                                                           EL + RB
 Accuracy (%)


                                                                             Accuracy (%)


                                                                                            80.0                                                              CEAG

                 96                                                                         79.5                                                              Sparsity
                                                                                                                                                                 85 %
                                                                                            79.0
                 94                                                                                                                                              90 %
                                                                                            78.5                                                                 92.5 %

                     0       10       20     30                                                 0          2           4
                 Max Excess Accuracy Gap [maxg ψg ] (%)                                      Max Excess Accuracy Gap [maxg ψg ] (%)


   Figure 7: UTKFace race prediction with race and gender (intersectional) as protected attributes.



F.2                  FAIR FACE

We make use of ResNet-34 models (He et al., 2016) on FairFace, similar to Lin et al. (2022).


                                                                                              29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.2.1                  G ENDER


Table 26: Groupwise train accuracy for gender prediction in FairFace with race as protected attribute.
 Sparsity               Method    East Asian      Indian        Black                     White       Middle Eastern    Latino Hispanic    S.E. Asian
                        Dense     97.2          97.1          94.9                      97.4          98.0              97.2               96.8
                        NFT       99.4 ± 0.21   99.4 ± 0.23   98.9 ± 0.12               99.3 ± 0.14   99.5 ± 0.15       99.3 ± 0.2         99.2 ± 0.31
 99
                        EL + RB   99.2 ± 0.21   99.4 ± 0.11   99.0 ± 0.24               99.4 ± 0.03   99.6 ± 0.06       99.4 ± 0.09        99.2 ± 0.13
                        CEAG      99.3 ± 0.16   99.2 ± 0.21   98.9 ± 0.25               99.3 ± 0.12   99.5 ± 0.13       99.3 ± 0.15        99.1 ± 0.11


Table 27: Groupwise test accuracy for gender prediction in FairFace with race as protected attribute.
 Sparsity               Method    East Asian      Indian        Black                     White       Middle Eastern    Latino Hispanic    S.E. Asian
                        Dense     95.2          95.6          90.0                      94.2          96.6              95.2               94.4
                        NFT       92.1 ± 0.54   93.4 ± 0.53   86.5 ± 0.78               91.6 ± 0.48   95.1 ± 0.56       93.4 ± 0.59        91.4 ± 0.59
 99
                        EL + RB   92.4 ± 0.41   92.9 ± 1.14   86.8 ± 0.68               91.8 ± 0.2    94.9 ± 0.39       93.6 ± 0.36        91.4 ± 0.33
                        CEAG      92.8 ± 0.49   92.7 ± 0.32   86.2 ± 0.45               91.3 ± 0.66   94.6 ± 0.25       93.8 ± 0.25        91.2 ± 0.55


Table 28: Gender prediction on FairFace with race as protected attribute. CEAG achieves a maxg ψg
within the threshold.
                                                              Train                                                            Test
 Sparsity                Method
                                       Accuracy            ΨPW      maxg ψg                     Tol (ϵ)      Accuracy          ΨPW         maxg ψg
                         NFT           99.3 ± 0.17     2.6 ± 0.23                0.9 ± 0.13     –            91.8 ± 0.17    2.4 ± 0.81    1.1 ± 0.42
                         NFT + ES      97.6 ± 1.29     1.5 ± 0.67                0.5 ± 0.19     –            92.2 ± 0.13    2.8 ± 0.45    1.5 ± 0.35
                99       EL + RB       99.3 ± 0.09     2.7 ± 0.22                0.8 ± 0.07     –            91.9 ± 0.21    2.1 ± 0.39    1.0 ± 0.34
                         FairGrape     –               –                         –              –            90.5           2.3           1.0
                         CEAG          99.2 ± 0.14     2.7 ± 0.22                0.9 ± 0.07     ≤ 1% ✓       91.7 ± 0.1     2.4 ± 0.48    1.2 ± 0.44



                                     Train                                                                Test
                                                                                 92.1
                                                                                                                                      Methods
                99.4                                                             92.0                                                   NFT
                                                                                                                                        EL + RB
 Accuracy (%)


                                                                  Accuracy (%)


                99.3                                                             91.9                                                   CEAG

                                                                                 91.8                                                     Sparsity
                99.2                                                                                                                          99 %
                                                                                 91.7

                99.1                                                             91.6
                   0.0            0.5           1.0                                 0.0      0.5      1.0     1.5
                 Max Excess Accuracy Gap [maxg ψg ] (%)                           Max Excess Accuracy Gap [maxg ψg ] (%)


                               Figure 8: FairFace gender prediction with race as protected attribute.


F.2.2                  R ACE


Table 29: Groupwise train accuracy for race prediction in FairFace with race as protected attribute.
 Sparsity               Method    East Asian      Indian        Black                     White       Middle Eastern    Latino Hispanic    S.E. Asian
                        Dense     84.8          81.9          90.9                      84.7          76.8              68.0               74.1
                        NFT       81.1 ± 0.88   78.2 ± 0.59   87.3 ± 0.43               80.9 ± 1.06   70.2 ± 0.73       63.2 ± 1.47        68.6 ± 1.18
 99
                        EL + RB   78.7 ± 0.58   77.0 ± 0.95   84.7 ± 0.93               78.8 ± 1.03   71.9 ± 0.39       69.7 ± 1.13        70.1 ± 1.13
                        CEAG      80.7 ± 0.95   77.9 ± 0.61   87.2 ± 0.61               80.4 ± 1.14   73.7 ± 0.79       63.1 ± 1.46        68.5 ± 1.22



                                                                                    30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Table 30: Groupwise test accuracy for race prediction in FairFace with race as metrics attribute.
 Sparsity                 Method            East Asian                   Indian                     Black                    White                  Middle Eastern                Latino Hispanic                 S.E. Asian
                          Dense             78.3                       72.2                 86.2                           77.2                     63.9                          58.1                            64.3
                          NFT               72.5 ± 0.98                65.8 ± 0.97          81.4 ± 0.41                    70.1 ± 1.34              55.7 ± 0.94                   50.9 ± 1.19                     56.1 ± 1.06
 99
                          EL + RB           70.6 ± 1.28                65.0 ± 1.24          79.3 ± 0.57                    68.3 ± 0.85              56.5 ± 0.54                   54.8 ± 1.07                     57.7 ± 1.86
                          CEAG              72.5 ± 1.25                65.8 ± 1.04          81.5 ± 0.6                     69.5 ± 1.32              57.5 ± 0.84                   50.3 ± 1.22                     56.4 ± 0.89


Table 31: Race prediction task on FairFace with race as group attribute. Tol (ϵ) is the tolerance
hyper-parameter of CEAG. We do not specify ϵ for other formulations as they do not admit a tolerance.
CEAG achieves a maxg ψg within the threshold. This table is already presented in the main paper as
Table 1, we include this for completeness.
                                                                                         Train                                                                                                 Test
 Sparsity                  Method
                                                        Accuracy                      ΨPW      maxg ψg                                  Tol (ϵ)               Accuracy                         ΨPW                maxg ψg
                           NFT                          76.1 ± 0.19              3.9 ± 0.91                         2.3 ± 0.26          –                     65.2 ± 0.44                4.2 ± 0.51              2.1 ± 0.51
                           NFT + ES                     74.0 ± 2.55              7.2 ± 3.35                         4.0 ± 1.38          –                     65.4 ± 0.35                6.3 ± 2.59              2.9 ± 1.3
                99         EL + RB                      76.1 ± 0.13              8.8 ± 1.26                         2.6 ± 0.21          –                     65.1 ± 0.44                6.0 ± 1.51              2.4 ± 0.36
                           FairGrape                    –                        –                                  –                   –                     65.1                       15.9                    10.7
                           CEAG                         76.2 ± 0.13              3.5 ± 0.61                         1.8 ± 0.42          ≤ 2% ✓                65.2 ± 0.37                4.3 ± 0.8               2.0 ± 0.32


                                                  Train                                                                                                Test

                76.3                                                                                                65.6                                                                                     Methods
                                                                                                                                                                                                               NFT
                76.2                                                                                                65.4                                                                                       EL + RB
 Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                     Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                               CEAG
                                                                                                                    65.2
                76.1
                                                                                                                    65.0                                                                                       Sparsity
                76.0                                                                                                                                                                                               99 %
                                                                                                                    64.8
                75.9
                                                                                                                    64.6
                    0         1         2                                                                               0         1          2
                 Max Excess Accuracy Gap [maxg ψg ] (%)                                                              Max Excess Accuracy Gap [maxg ψg ] (%)


                                         Figure 9: FairFace race prediction with race as protected attribute.

F.2.3                  I NTERSECTIONAL
For the sake of brevity, we use acronyms to refer to the intersectional sub-groups. The acronyms
are separated by a dash, the initial part refers to the race and the later part refers to the gender.
For instance, EA-M refers to East Asian and Male. Other races are I-Indian, B-Black, W-White,
ME-Middle Eastern, LH-Latino Hispanic, and SA-South East Asian.


Table 32: Groupwise train accuracy for race prediction in FairFace with intersection of race and
gender as protected attribute.
Sparsity         Method      EA-M           EA-F            I-M            I-F           B-M                  B-F          W-M           W-F          ME-M           ME-F          LH-M          LH-F          SA-M          SA-F
                 Dense     83.8           86.3           80.9           83.3          89.8           91.9               83.7          85.4           80.7          68.0          64.9          70.9          75.3          72.4
                 NFT       78.6 ± 0.91    83.2 ± 0.81    76.8 ± 0.6     78.9 ± 0.48   86.5 ± 0.57    87.9 ± 0.43        79.3 ± 1.14   82.0 ± 1.08    74.0 ± 0.49   60.3 ± 1.02   59.3 ± 1.72   66.4 ± 1.31   69.8 ± 1.57   67.1 ± 1.16
99
                 EL + RB   77.9 ± 0.77    82.5 ± 0.71    76.7 ± 0.72    78.9 ± 0.31   86.0 ± 0.58    87.3 ± 0.52        78.8 ± 1.33   81.5 ± 1.03    74.4 ± 0.56   62.6 ± 0.8    61.0 ± 2.1    67.4 ± 1.57   70.2 ± 1.17   67.3 ± 1.22
                 CEAG      78.6 ± 0.72    83.1 ± 0.85    76.5 ± 0.77    79.0 ± 0.35   86.5 ± 0.58    87.9 ± 0.57        79.1 ± 1.15   81.7 ± 1.13    74.8 ± 0.77   63.1 ± 0.75   59.5 ± 1.59   66.0 ± 1.31   69.5 ± 1.48   66.8 ± 1.16


Table 33: Groupwise test accuracy for race prediction in FairFace with intersection of race and gender
as protected attribute.
Sparsity         Method      EA-M           EA-F            I-M            I-F           B-M                  B-F          W-M           W-F          ME-M           ME-F          LH-M          LH-F          SA-M          SA-F
                 Dense     78.8           77.9           68.5           75.9          86.1           86.4               75.6          79.1           71.7          47.7          53.5          62.5          67.3          61.0
                 NFT       70.6 ± 0.98    74.3 ± 1.63    61.4 ± 1.42    70.8 ± 0.9    83.1 ± 0.23    79.8 ± 0.53        69.3 ± 1.33   71.0 ± 1.78    62.4 ± 1.23   42.0 ± 2.72   46.1 ± 1.42   55.7 ± 1.28   57.6 ± 0.83   54.8 ± 1.0
99
                 EL + RB   69.6 ± 0.95    73.9 ± 1.73    60.7 ± 1.62    70.4 ± 0.64   82.7 ± 1.02    79.2 ± 1.19        68.8 ± 1.3    70.3 ± 1.2     62.8 ± 0.85   44.2 ± 1.93   46.3 ± 1.69   56.1 ± 1.42   58.0 ± 0.72   55.2 ± 0.84
                 CEAG      70.7 ± 1.15    74.3 ± 1.87    61.2 ± 1.48    70.9 ± 1.11   82.5 ± 0.24    80.1 ± 0.73        69.4 ± 1.22   70.5 ± 1.6     62.6 ± 1.05   43.3 ± 1.74   46.1 ± 1.18   55.1 ± 2.6    57.6 ± 0.82   55.1 ± 1.32


                                                                                                                       31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 34: Race prediction on FairFace with intersection of gender and race as protected attribute.
CEAG achieves a maxg ψg within the threshold.
                                                               Train                                                              Test
 Sparsity                 Method
                                      Accuracy           ΨPW        maxg ψg                      Tol (ϵ)          Accuracy        ΨPW          maxg ψg
                          NFT         75.8 ± 0.17      5.2 ± 0.94              2.9 ± 0.42        –                65.3 ± 0.45   7.6 ± 0.66     3.4 ± 0.73
                          NFT + ES    73.7 ± 2.33      8.9 ± 3.83              4.6 ± 2.14        –                65.4 ± 0.37   9.0 ± 2.45     4.3 ± 1.56
                99
                          EL + RB     75.8 ± 0.16      4.0 ± 1.72              2.3 ± 0.15        –                65.1 ± 0.4    7.6 ± 0.96     3.1 ± 0.36
                          CEAG        75.8 ± 0.14      4.3 ± 0.42              2.3 ± 0.26        ≤ 2.5% ✓         65.3 ± 0.51   7.6 ± 1.23     3.5 ± 0.97


                                     Train                                                                 Test
                76.0                                                               65.8
                                                                                                                                          Methods
                                                                                   65.6                                                     NFT
                75.9                                                                                                                        EL + RB
 Accuracy (%)


                                                                    Accuracy (%)
                                                                                   65.4                                                     CEAG
                75.8                                                               65.2                                                       Sparsity
                                                                                                                                                  99 %
                                                                                   65.0
                75.7
                                                                                   64.8

                        0        1        2       3                                    0            2            4
                     Max Excess Accuracy Gap [maxg ψg ] (%)                         Max Excess Accuracy Gap [maxg ψg ] (%)


           Figure 10: FairFace race prediction with race and gender (intersection) as protected attribute.


F.3                  CIFAR-100

We consider CifarResNet-56 (Chen, 2021) models for this task. We consider a scenario where
both the target and group attributes correspond to the class labels. In the context of mitigating the
disparate impact of pruning, we want to ensure that none of the classes degrade more than the average
degradation with a tolerance of ϵ. The dense model performance is 72.61%.


Table 35: CIFAR-100 classification with the group attributed being the class labels. CEAG yields
the best model in terms of disparate impact on the training set, and is competitive in terms of ΨPW
and maxg ψg on the test set.
                                                               Train                                                               Test
 Sparsity                Method
                                         Accuracy           ΨPW      maxg ψg                        Tol (ϵ)       Accuracy         ΨPW         maxg ψg
                         NFT             99.9 ± 0.0      0.9 ± 0.18                 0.4 ± 0.18      –             66.7 ± 0.35   25.0 ± 3.08   12.9 ± 2.92
                         NFT + ES        99.9 ± 0.01     1.1 ± 0.3                  0.6 ± 0.3       –             66.9 ± 0.27   24.6 ± 1.52   12.7 ± 1.72
                         EL              99.8 ± 0.03     3.1 ± 0.61                 2.4 ± 0.59      –             67.0 ± 0.32   24.4 ± 3.13   12.4 ± 1.72
                90
                         EL + RB         99.9 ± 0.01     1.3 ± 0.23                 0.8 ± 0.22      –             67.0 ± 0.38   23.6 ± 1.52   12.2 ± 2.06
                         CEAG (no RB)    100.0 ± 0.01    1.0 ± 0.09                 0.4 ± 0.09      ≤ 1% ✓        66.4 ± 0.31   26.4 ± 3.21   13.8 ± 1.77
                         CEAG            99.9 ± 0.01     1.0 ± 0.09                 0.4 ± 0.08      ≤ 1% ✓        66.7 ± 0.34   23.4 ± 1.52   12.5 ± 1.4
                         NFT             99.8 ± 0.02     3.7 ± 0.86                 3.0 ± 0.87      –             64.9 ± 0.39   26.2 ± 5.22   14.3 ± 3.39
                         NFT + ES        99.3 ± 0.2      6.8 ± 1.9                  5.8 ± 1.8       –             65.2 ± 0.42   27.4 ± 2.3    14.6 ± 1.97
                         EL              98.5 ± 0.09     11.3 ± 0.9                 9.8 ± 0.95      –             65.3 ± 0.51   25.8 ± 2.05   14.1 ± 1.29
         92.5
                         EL + RB         99.5 ± 0.01     6.7 ± 1.42                 5.7 ± 1.48      –             65.3 ± 0.41   24.2 ± 2.86   13.3 ± 2.35
                         CEAG (no RB)    99.6 ± 0.04     2.6 ± 0.3                  1.7 ± 0.19      ≤ 2% ✓        65.0 ± 0.37   27.2 ± 2.59   14.9 ± 2.48
                         CEAG            99.6 ± 0.04     2.4 ± 0.17                 1.6 ± 0.15      ≤ 2% ✓        64.8 ± 0.3    25.0 ± 1.87   13.8 ± 1.16
                         NFT             96.2 ± 0.09     14.8 ± 1.16                11.1 ± 1.24     –             62.6 ± 0.29   28.4 ± 3.21   15.6 ± 2.57
                         NFT + ES        93.9 ± 0.83     20.0 ± 1.52                14.6 ± 1.43     –             63.3 ± 0.21   30.6 ± 5.55   16.1 ± 3.22
                         EL              87.9 ± 0.45     21.4 ± 1.36                14.5 ± 1.31     –             60.7 ± 0.48   32.8 ± 3.7    16.1 ± 4.57
                95
                         EL + RB         94.6 ± 0.12     18.4 ± 1.05                13.6 ± 1.07     –             62.8 ± 0.16   27.4 ± 1.34   14.8 ± 0.85
                         CEAG (no RB)    95.8 ± 0.15     9.2 ± 0.52                 5.8 ± 0.53      ≤ 5% ✗        62.5 ± 0.41   29.6 ± 4.34   17.1 ± 3.59
                         CEAG            95.6 ± 0.12     9.1 ± 0.64                 5.7 ± 0.49      ≤ 5% ✗        62.7 ± 0.28   27.6 ± 1.14   14.8 ± 1.52



                                                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Train                                                    Test
                100
                                                                        67                                       Methods
                 99                                                                                                NFT
                                                                        66                                         EL + RB
 Accuracy (%)


                                                         Accuracy (%)
                 98
                                                                                                                   CEAG
                                                                        65
                 97
                                                                                                                  Sparsity
                                                                        64                                           90 %
                 96
                                                                                                                     92.5 %
                 95                                                     63
                                                                                                                     95 %

                    0        5        10       15                          0       5      10      15
                Max Excess Accuracy Gap [maxg ψg ] (%)                  Max Excess Accuracy Gap [maxg ψg ] (%)



Figure 11: CIFAR-100 classification with both target and protected attribute being the class labels.


                                                                         33
