Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C A S T RL: C ONTEXT-AWARE S TATE R EPRESENTATION
L EARNING WITH T RANSFORMER
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         Learning a versatile representation from high-dimensional observation data is
         a crucial stepping stone for building autonomous agents capable of effective
         decision-making in various downstream tasks. Yet, learning such a representa-
         tion without additional supervisory signals poses formidable practical challenges.
         In this work, we introduce Context-Aware State Representation Learning (CaS-
         tRL), a novel unsupervised representation pretraining approach that combines
         the strength of generative autoregressive modeling with the pretraining-finetuning
         paradigm. To encourage CaStRL to grasp the underlying dynamics information
         of the environment, we enforce it to jointly learn the latent state representation
         along with the contexts that influence the model’s ability to learn a general-
         izable representation for control tasks. In CaStRL, we first employ the Video-
         Swin Transformer as a vision encoder, customizing it to support auto-regressive
         modeling through the incorporation of a causal attention mask. Then, we design
         Context-GPT to learn context from historical sequences of state representation,
         which drives the model towards capturing global structural patterns by propagat-
         ing information across extended time horizons. This significantly improves the
         adaptability of the learned representation for diverse control tasks. By empha-
         sizing reward-free evaluation and limited data constraints in both pretraining and
         fine-tuning stages, we find, across a wide range of Atari experiments, that pre-
         trained representations can substantially facilitate downstream learning efficiency.


1   I NTRODUCTION
State representations are often crucial for effective Reinforcement Learning (RL), activity recogni-
tion, and other downstream tasks (van den Oord et al., 2018; Han et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2022).
A representation that focuses narrowly on relevant information can facilitate learning an effective
control policy, while a representation that includes irrelevant noise can be detrimental. Using hand-
crafted features or high-dimensional raw sensory data to define the state are two simple approaches.
Unfortunately, each has significant disadvantages. Handcrafting the state for Atari environments
(Mnih et al., 2015), for example, requires certain domain expertise and additional human oversight.
Often, manually designed state representations suffer certain drawbacks such as presence of irrel-
evant information, provide insufficient coverage of complex dependencies within state space. In
contrast, raw observation data is typically high-dimensional, and includes irrelevant information
that makes it difficult to leverage any synergistic benefits from multiple down-stream tasks.
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has gained extensive attraction in recent years, especially, its
ability to compress high-dimensional observation into a compact representation (Silver et al., 2016;
Berner et al., 2019). But,its extensive usage prevented from sample efficiency problem: requires
large amount of data which leads to lengthy training time (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019). To address
this issue, the focus has been shifted to incorporating inductive bias into DRL framework such as
exploring parameterized neural network architecture (Zambaldi et al., 2018). Choice of DRL archi-
tecture has been explored but not limited to state representation learning objective. Yet, what type
of DRL architecture is suitable for learning generalizable state representation remains elusive. The
rise of the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) has revolutionized the learning paradigm
in various domain. For instance, The profound success achieved by BERT (Devlin et al., 2019)
and GPT model (Radford et al., 2018) in machine translation, language understanding, has sparked
a big frenzy within machine learning community. As a result, this led to widespread adoption of


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the pretrain-then-finetune paradigm (Howard & Ruder, 2018) as popular method to progressively
enhance performance across wide-range of downstream learning tasks including imitation learning
(Schwarzer et al., 2021). The recent works have shown that transformer architecture enjoys great ex-
tent of scalability and suitable for modeling long decencies such sequential decision making (Khan
et al., 2021). Followed by such success, there has been increasing level of interest in adopting
transformer in RL, in particular, top choice for learning state representation.
We consider the question: how can learned state representations be made more generalizable for
downstream learning tasks? To address this question, we introduce Context-Aware State Represen-
tation Learning (CaStRL), a novel unsupervised representation pretraining approach. CaStRL not
only emphasizes state representation learning, but also integrates context-awareness, where context
pertains to features characterized by global structures that enable the propagation of information
across extended time horizons. By including contextual information as regularization, our approach
enhances the quality and relevance of learned state representations, making them more suitable for
downstream control tasks. In our proposed approach, firstly, we employ the Video-Swin Transformer
(Liu et al., 2021) as a vision encoder, tailoring it to support auto-regressive modeling through the in-
corporation of a causal-attention mask. Then, we design Context-GPT 4.3 aims to learn underlying
latent state representation with its context. Whereas, contexts encapsulate information pertaining to
all preceding states to enable jointly learning state-representation along with its context. Our empir-
ical results demonstrate significant performance gains with CaStRL, showcasing the effectiveness of
our unsupervised pretraining framework in enabling the model to rapidly emulate behaviors across
multiple environments simultaneously.


Figure 1: Performance of the top 3 CaStRL rollouts, normalized by the best training dataset scores.

The CaStRL framework has demonstrated significant performance gains and stability in multi-game
settings. We evaluate CaStRL’s capability to surpass the best training demonstrations and measure
its deviation from random behavior. Figure 1 presents the normalized scores using the best DQN
scores observed in the training dataset, following the Top-3 Metric as described in (Lee et al., 2022).
Our contributions are threefold; First, we propose CaStRL, a novel unsupervised representation pre-
training approach for jointly learning latent state representation and its context, that influence the
model’s ability to learn a versatile representation for control tasks. Second, we design Context-GPT
to learn context from historical sequences of state representation, which drives the model towards
capturing global structural patterns by propagating information across extended time horizons. This
significantly improves the adaptability of the learned representation for diverse control tasks. Third,
we conduct extensive experiments on a wide spectrum of 46 Atari 2600 video games (Mnih et al.,
2015). By evaluating using 41 games for training and 5 games for evaluation, we assess the gen-
eralizability of the learned representation. By emphasizing reward-free evaluation and limited data
constraints in both pretraining and fine-tuning stages, we find, across a wide range of Atari experi-
ments, that pretrained representations can substantially facilitate downstream learning efficiency.


2   R ELATED W ORKS

Recent work has extensively explored learning representations directly from raw sensory data with
deep neural networks (Lange et al., 2012; Böhmer et al., 2015; Wahlström et al., 2015). Using


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


DRL to learn latent states with minimal supervision or through fully unsupervised approaches has
gained significant traction (Radford et al., 2015; Anand et al., 2019). The main intuition is not
to mandate a model that is directly supervised using ground-truth states since underlying state is
inaccessible. Instead, it leverages sequences of observations and actions from offline experience
datasets, intensively benefiting from the power of autoregressive models like GPT (Radford et al.,
2018) to learn generalizable representations for diverse control tasks.
Reinforcement Learning as Sequence Modeling: In light of the significant success achieved by
Generative Pre-training Transformer (GPT) and Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al.,
2020) across a wide range of tasks, recent research, as seen in (Chen et al., 2021) and (Shang
et al., 2021), has extended the concept of generative pretraining to the realm of offline reinforcement
learning. This extension involves formulating the RL problem as a sequence modeling challenge,
enabling the learning of representations conditioned on rewards or return-to-go (RTG).
Pretraining For Reinforcement Learning: Subsequently, (Lee et al., 2022) presented empirical
evidence demonstrating the capability of Decision Transformer (DT) (Chen et al., 2021) in expert
action inference, showing a notable transfer learning performance gain by using multi-game settings
for pretraining. Other recent works, such as (Sun et al., 2023), introduce a self-supervised supervised
learning approach that incorporates momentum encoders and control transformers as a pretraining
framework. However, there remains a scarcity of works dedicated to the comprehensive exploration
of state representation learning from sequences of visual observations.
Vision Encoders For Control Tasks: Encoding visual observations is a fundamental building block
for various sequence modeling problems. In recent works focused on control tasks (Chen et al.,
2021; Shang et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2023), the visual encoder has typically been either a Convo-
lutional Neural Network (CNN) (LeCun et al., 1998) or a Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2020). However, these encoders lack the ability to incorporate temporal information effec-
tively resulting in a loss of the finer temporal details present in a sequence of observations within
their high-dimensional representation spaces. To address this concern, one potential approach is
to use a vision transformer model explicitly designed to account for temporal dimensions, like the
Video Swin Transformer (Liu et al., 2021). While the Video-Swin Transformer has demonstrated
remarkable success in learning representations from video clips, its design initially lacks a direct
emphasis on addressing control tasks formulated as autoregressive models. This is primarily due to
the inherent nature of its underlying attention mechanism — Shifted Window Masked Self-Attention
(SW-MSA), which lacks the causality required for autoregressive modeling with Transformers. An-
other challenge hindering the Video-Swin Transformer’s applicability in control tasks is its lower
inductive bias compared to basic convolution encoders, resulting in slower training.


3     P RELIMINARIES

The main objective of this work is to learn a compact, generalizable state representation to solve
downstream tasks where control tasks and environments are defined by Partially Observed Markov
Decision Processes (POMDPs), since the underlying state of the environment is not directly acces-
sible from available high-dimensional sensory observations. A POMDP is described by a tuple
⟨S, A, O, T , R, γ, E⟩, where: S is state space; A is action space; O is observation space, denoting
image collections rendered from the environment; T : S×A→S is state transition dynamics, which
specify the probability that action at ∈A in state s∈S will lead to next state st+1 ; R : S×A→R is
the reward function; and E is observation probability E(o|s) of perceiving observation o given state
s. At each timestep t, the RL agent observes ot based on underlying state st ∈S, takes action at ∈A,
and receives reward rt then transition to next state st+1 . Given sequences of observation-action
tuples of length L in the replay buffer, bt =(ot−L , at−L , ot−L+1 , at−L+1 , . . . , ot ), the agent takes
action at based on policy πP: at =π(bt ), the agent aims to learn optimal policy π ∗ that maximizes
                               ∞
the cumulative reward EP [ t=1 γ t rt ] (Sutton & Barto, 2005).

3.1   G OOD C RITERIA FOR S TATE R EPRESENTATION L EARNING

The main objective in State Representation Learning (SRL) is to learn an informative and sufficient
abstract representation from high-dimensional raw sensory data. We review important facets of
what defines a good state representation that facilitate downstream policy learning. From a broader


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


perspective, the state representation should retain sufficient, compact and generic information from
the observation in order to solve the RL task and filter out redundant information. Evaluating the
quality of learned state representation, we consider these dimension of state space:

       • Compactness: a state representation should be low-dimensional to directly guide the RL
         agent on decision making processes. Such compact representation should possess essential
         and meaningful representation, while ignoring redundant features.
       • Sufficiency: encoding high-dimensional observation into low-dimensional abstract repre-
         sentation must contain essential and sufficient information to solve downstream RL tasks.
         State representations that contain insufficient information may lead to sub-optimal policies.
       • Generalizability: learning more generelizable representation across semantically similar
         environments, which include but not limited to new environment states or totally different
         environments, has been considered as a key characteristic to assess its effectiveness in
         downstream learning tasks.

Tasks with long time horizon and partial observability are key challenges to representation learning.


4     M ETHOD

CaStRL jointly learn the latent state representation along with the contexts that influence the model’s
ability to extract a generalizable representation for control tasks. To learn such representation, firstly,
we employ the Video-Swin Transformer as our vision encoder, tailoring it to support auto-regressive
modeling through the incorporation of a causal-attention mask. In the second part of our work, we
design Context-GPT learns contexts given a sequence of state-representation aims to learn underly-
ing latent state representation with its context, where contexts encapsulate information pertaining to
all preceding states to enable jointly learning state-representation along with its context.


                      Figure 2: Illustration of the CaStRL pretraining pipeline.


4.1   V ISION E NCODER

In this work, we employ Video Swin Transformer, originally proposed for video understanding tasks
(Liu et al., 2021). We have adapted the Video-Swin Transformer by replacing the Shifted Window
Multi-Head-Self-Attention (SW-MSA) with the Causal Shifted-Window Multi-Head-Self-Attention
(CSW-MSA) (see details in appendix A.1). This tailored attention mechanism better suits the se-
quence modeling task, particularly in its autoregressive nature. Our primary focus is on leveraging
Video-Swin Transformer as a foundational vision encoder capable of effectively learning both spa-
tial and temporal representations. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to include Causal-
Attention into the Video-Swin architecture for state representation learning.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Figure 3: Performance of DT + Video Swin Transformer (With/Without CSW-MSA).



A fundamental question arises: to what extent does CSW-MSA broaden the scope of applicability
of the Video-Swin Transformer in autoregressive modeling-based learning? To address this ques-
tion, we replaced the convolutional encoder in the DT architecture (Chen et al., 2021) with the
Video-Swin Transformer. We then evaluated the model’s performance in Behavioral cloning (BC)
(Pomerleau, 1988) tasks across some Atari environments in single-game settings, results shown in
Figure 3. Another notable aspect we addressed is the lack of inductive bias in Video-Swin. Dur-
ing training, we simultaneously distilled knowledge from a convolution-based visual encoder (i.e.,
ResNet34 (He et al., 2015)) into our transformer-based encoder (Video-Swin). This resulted in the
learned features from convolution encoders guiding the transformer encoder in the early stages of
training. The knowledge distillation was achieved implicitly (Wang & Yoon, 2021), without the need
for any additional modeling objectives. Further details on how this implicit knowledge distillation
was achieved are discussed in section 4.2.


4.2   S TATE R EPRESENTATION L EARNING

The full architecture of our proposed Context-Aware State Representation Learning (CaStRL) ap-
proach is shown in Fig 2. CaStRL contains two learning components: state representation learning
and transitions context learning. This section primarily addresses key questions related to the state
representation learning component.
Choice of Representation Learning Method: While the Momentum encoder (He et al., 2019)
has shown effectiveness as a powerful representation learning method (Sun et al., 2023), it does
come with significant limitations regarding modeling flexibility. In this work, we emphasize the
critical role of flexibility in the learning process. However, as the learning becomes more flexible,
ensuring the effectiveness of what is learned becomes increasingly challenging. Issues such as
degenerated solutions and overfitting come into play, leading most representation learning methods
to incorporate regularization techniques. For instance, recent work (van den Oord et al., 2018)
places higher requirements on the network to reduce the risk of overfitting, making it an effective
regularization method for learning high-quality representations, as recognized in various studies.
Considering the modeling requirements outlined in section 4.1 for the visual encoder, we employ
Variance-Invariance-Covariance Regularization (VICReg) (Bardes et al., 2021) as our chosen rep-
resentation learning objective. Apart from VICReg’s inherent flexibility, we chose it as the primary
representation learning objective because it introduces two vision encoders that can be completely
asymmetric with no shared structure or parameters. This property empowers our approach and
contributes to its effectiveness in the task of representation learning. To achieve our objective of
aligning Video Swin Transformer learned features with those of the CNN encoder during the pre-
training phase. We employ both a CNN encoder (i.e., ResNet-like architecture) and a transformer
encoder (i.e., Video-Swin) in our approach. Through minimizing the discrepancy between the rep-
resentations acquired from these encoders, we enable Video-Swin to learn features comparable to
those of the CNN encoder, resembling the knowledge distillation process between a teacher and a
student network (Fan et al., 2018). The CNN encoder’s inherent locality in its operations provides
a substantial inductive bias, which the transformer lacks. Consequently, asserting that the CNN
encoder learns features as poorly as the transformer encoder becomes a challenging proposition.


                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The VICReg objective effectively avoids the representation collapse problem. The steps of incorpo-
rating the VICReg objective into CaStRL are describe in Appendix 2.

4.3    C ONTEXT-AWARE L EARNING

In contrast to GPT (Brown et al., 2020) and LLMs, which excel at processing sequences of to-
kens (typically words) and harness the power of contexts to enable in-context learning (Dong et al.,
2022), deriving context directly from a sequence of visual observations presents significantly greater
challenges. To address this, we start by optimizing state representations, then use these optimized
representations to learn context. This is a process of state representation optimization, followed
by representations refinement guided by a Context-GPT objective. As shown in Figure 2, The
learned state-representation Y ′ is fed into a projection layer, which aims to summarize the state-
representation in the feature dimension. This summarized output is referred to as the state-context
representation or intermediate-context representation Cs . Next, a sequence of intermediate-context
representations from previous steps are utilized as input for an autoregressive model - ContextGPT
(CGPT). The autoregressive model summarizes the sequence in the temporal dimension, resulting
in the transitions context Ctr = cgpt(Cs≤t ). During this process, each transition context at timestep
(k) is optimized to capture key information about all previous state-representations. The proper con-
text learning approach ensures that the resulting transition context enables predictions in the future
or past to be effectively independent of other timesteps, satisfying the Markovian property. As a
result, the transitions context serves as a valuable representation, retaining the essential temporal
dependencies.
In practice, there are various types of contexts that can induce context awareness. In this work, we
explore two primary approaches for learning context:

       1. Predicting multiple state representations in the future, akin to the way CPC (van den Oord
          et al., 2018) learns context. However, we do not employ contrastive losses in our method.
       2. Addressing the Blank-filling problem (Raffel et al., 2020), which involves masking some of
          the tokens and then attempting to retrieve them. This task encourages the model to consider
          neighboring unmasked tokens to gather information about the missing tokens.

Algorithm 1 Context GPT Loss (For Context-Aware StRL: Context Type ← Next State)
    ▷ T: Sequence Length
    ▷ W: Number of Future State Predictions to Make
    ▷ s[1:T ] : Sequence of States — s1 , s2 , . . . , sT
    ▷ Squeezer: Squeezer Network for Intermediate Context Representations
    ▷ ContextGPT: GPT2-like Transformer
    ▷ ContextDecoders[k] : kth Decoder Network
 1: procedure C ONTEXT GPTL OSS(s[1:T ] )
       % Project state into intermediate context representations.
 2:    cs [1:T ] ← Squeezer(s[1:T ] )
       % Predict the transitions context from a sequence of intermediate context representations.
                                            [1:T ]
 3:    ctr [1:T ] ← ContextGPT(cs                  )
       % Initialize Context-GPT loss.
 4:    loss ← 0
       % Computations of Context-GPT loss across shifted windows.
 5:    for t ← W + 1 to T do
 6:        for k ← 1 to W do
                  % Relevance of the context at (t − W ) in predicting the state at (t − W + k).
 7:              ρk = W −k+1
                           W
                  % Predict the state at (t − W + k) using the context at (t − W ).
                                                            [t−W ]
 8:              ŝ [t−W +k] ← ContextDecoders[k] (ctr             )
                  % Accumulate the discrepancy measure between s[t−W +k] and ŝ[t−W +k] .
 9:              loss ← loss + ρk ∗ VICReg(s[t−W +k] , ŝ[t−W +k] )
10:         end for
11:     end for
12: end procedure

Using these two approaches, we introduce 3 variants of the Context-GPT objective:

       1. Context Type ← Next State: This variant is tailored to support the learning of features
          extending over a longer time horizon, as elaborated in pseudocode 1.


                                                             6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      2. Context Type ← Masked State: This variant emphasizes context learning, with a focus
         on local context from neighboring states.
      3. Context Type ← Masked Action: While this variant involves supervised learning, it re-
         mains task-agnostic, as the model is not optimized to produce any specific BC policies.

The other variants of the Context-GPT objective are described in pseudocodes 3 and 4.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In our experiments, we focus our attention on using behavior cloning (BC) (Pomerleau, 1988) in
multi-environment scenarios as a downstream task to assess the effectiveness of CaStRL. Instead
of using setups that depend on rewards (Chen et al., 2021; Shang et al., 2021), we use BC to see
how useful our learned state representation is independently of rewards. Our experiments focus
on: examining the extent to which pretraining influences our model’s performance; in-depth inves-
tigation into how incorporating or excluding specific context information influences our model’s
performance; and assessment of the performance of existing methods (Chen et al., 2021; Shang
et al., 2021) in comparison to our framework.

5.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Throughout both the pretraining and finetuning phases, training takes several days on 4 V100 32GB
GPUs. To manage this computational demand, our studies are based on a limited portion of the Atari
offline experience datasets (Agarwal et al., 2019). In both the pretraining and fine-tuning phases, our
experiments were conducted with limited data constraints. This decision serves a twofold purpose:
to reduce training time and to gain insights into how our approach performs in situations with limited
data availability.
Pretraining and Finetuning Dataset: For both the pretraining, finetuning phases, and even the
baseline training, we used an existing offline experience datasets (Agarwal et al., 2019), and omitted
the consideration of incorporating rewards into our training data, as the primary objective is to
evaluate the CaStRL model in reward-free settings. This dataset consists of trajectories collected
during the training of a DQN agent.
Atari Environment Selection: In alignment with the environment selection strategy outlined in
Multi-Game DT (Lee et al., 2022), we used 41 environments in the pre-training phase while re-
serving 5 environments to assess CaStRL’s generalizability. This encompasses a total of 46 Atari
environments in our study.
Dataset Size for Multi-game Experiments: In all multi-game experiments, a limited subset of
offline experience datasets was employed, with each environment accumulating 100K steps, totaling
4.1 million environment steps across the 41 environments. This is notably smaller than the training
set of (Lee et al., 2022), where the same 41 environments were used with 160 billion environment
steps.
Data Augmentation: For data augmentation, we treat spatiotemporal aspects separately. Specifi-
cally, we applied color and noise-based augmentation individually to each frame while maintaining
consistent geometric transformations across frames for each segment of the observation sequence.
This strategy was implemented to prevent the model from excessively relying on low-level optical-
flow features for learning, aligning with the approach mentioned in (Han et al., 2019).
Generalization Evaluation: To assess CaStRL’s generalization capabilities, a multi-game experi-
ments conducted based on the pretrained model. Specifically, we evaluate the model’s performance
on 5 held-out environments.
Pretraining Procedure: We use an embedding size of 96 for the Video Swin Transformer (Liu
et al., 2021), complemented by our custom attention mechanism, CSW-MSA. In our architecture,
we incorporate ResNet34 with minor adjustments (He et al., 2015). To facilitate tokenization in
the temporal dimension, we introduce an embedding block consisting of a single 3D Convolution
layer, followed by Batch Norm, and ReLU activation function. For VICReg, we use an expander
network comprising 3 layers, each featuring a linear layer with a dimension of 1024, followed by
a GELU activation function. The hyperparameters for VICReg, including γ, β, and η, are set to


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1.0, 0.1, and 1.0, respectively. In the GPT module, both during pretraining and finetuning stage, we
employ 6 layers and 4 attention heads. We set a context length of T = 16 and a context dimension
of dimcontext = 192. During the pretraining phase, we simultaneously optimize two objectives:
VICReg and Context-GPT Loss. We conducted the pretraining for a total of 50 epochs and put
an explicit limit on the number of batch samples to 13.5K per epoch. This limitation was added
to speed up the pretraining process. while CaStRL continued to perform well under these training
constraints.
Finetuning Procedure: In the finetuning phase, we further optimize the pretrained model on the
BC task for 10 epochs in a multi-game setting. During this process, we employ 41 environments
to assess the effectiveness of CaStRL. Additionally, for the purpose of generalization testing, we
finetune the unsupervised pretrained version on 5 environments that were not encountered during
the pretraining phase. Similar to the pretraining phase, we impose an explicit limit on the number of
batch samples, set to 13.5K per epoch. It could be problematic if the model forgets what it learned
during the pre-training phase. This issue may arise due to a distribution shift, which is a result of not
using augmentation during the finetuning phase and incorporating environments not seen during the
pretraining phase for generalization testing. To overcome the challenge of catastrophic forgetting,
we adopt a simple yet effective approach: we initially freeze all layers except the last Linear layer
for the first epoch and subsequently unfreeze all layers, mirroring the approach proposed in (Howard
& Ruder, 2018). We finetuned the entire model, as freezing the pretrained model has shown to be
ineffective in handling complex environments (Sun et al., 2023). This decision is justified by the
realization that what is learned during the pretraining phase may not always be directly exploitable
during the finetuning phase, and some adaptation or refinement would be required.
Baselines: For DT (Chen et al., 2021) and Starformer (Shang et al., 2021) baselines, we replicate our
finetuning experiments settings. Since training multi-game environments takes a prohibitively long
time, we train DT and Starformer from scratch based on just one seed for evaluation. Nevertheless,
we carefully replicate our finetuning experimental settings, ensuring an identical subset of the data
was used. Additionally, to ensure a fair comparison with CaStRL, we matched the GPT model scale.
Evaluation Metrics: We assess the performance on individual Atari games relative to an assumed
lower bound: optimizing a randomly initialized version of our model, i.e., without any pretraining.
We then calculate the relative score of each game in reference to this baseline. See Appendix C.1
for more results.


5.2   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

We first evaluate how altering the context being learned affects BC task performance. To achieve
this, we pretrained 7 different versions of our model, each targeting a distinct context type, and the
results are presented in Figure 4. The best-performing context version is then compared against the
baseline models in the BC task. The best-performing variant of CaStRL is then compared against
the baseline models in the BC task, with the results shown in Figure 5.


Figure 4: Interquartile Mean (IQM) performance across 41 Atari games relative to a “No Pretrain”
architecture version using diverse initialization and pretraining strategies, all maintaining consistent
model size and dataset configurations.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Interquartile Mean (IQM) performance comparison over 41 Atari games relative to ”No
Pretrain” architecture version of CaStRL to the baselines, with the GPT model size in DT and
Starformer matched to that of CaStRL for a fair evaluation.


Figure 6: Fine-tuning performance on unseen environments after pretraining on a limited dataset
of 41 Atari environments. The fully unsupervised pretrained CaStRL notably outperforms DT and
Starformer in the ability to generate trajectories with higher returns.



The evaluation of CaStRL’s scalability is based on how quickly it outperforms DT and Starformer
in multi-game settings for the BC as downstream task. As shown in the Figure 6, CaStRL is much
more efficient to train. Given that it’s a completely unsupervised pre-training framework, its added
value is expected to increase with larger-scale training, a direction we will explore in future work.



6   C ONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we introduced Context-aware State Representation Learning (CaStRL), a novel un-
supervised state representation learning approach aimed at learning generalizable state representa-
tions. Despite explicit limitations in both pretraining and finetuning, which included small dataset
sizes, a limited number of epochs, and a focus on reward-free settings, CaStRL demonstrated the
adaptability of the resulting state representations, making it possible to seamlessly use the learned
representations across multiple environments simultaneously. Future work includes scaling up the
training of CaStRL, applying CaStRL to human demonstrations for tasks even more complex than
Atari, and exploring its zero-shot transfer capabilities.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Samira Abnar and Willem Zuidema. Quantifying attention flow in transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2005.00928, 2020.
Rishabh Agarwal, Dale Schuurmans, and Mohammad Norouzi. An optimistic perspective on offline
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:212628904.
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 34:29304–29320, 2021.
Ankesh Anand, Evan Racah, Sherjil Ozair, Yoshua Bengio, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and R. Devon
  Hjelm. Unsupervised state representation learning in atari. ArXiv, abs/1906.08226, 2019. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:195069283.
Adrien Bardes, Jean Ponce, and Yann LeCun. Vicreg: Variance-invariance-covariance regular-
  ization for self-supervised learning. ArXiv, abs/2105.04906, 2021. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:234357520.
Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemyslaw Debiak,
  Christy Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Christopher Hesse, Rafal
  Józefowicz, Scott Gray, Catherine Olsson, Jakub W. Pachocki, Michael Petrov, Henrique Pondé
  de Oliveira Pinto, Jonathan Raiman, Tim Salimans, Jeremy Schlatter, Jonas Schneider, Szy-
  mon Sidor, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang, Filip Wolski, and Susan Zhang. Dota 2 with large
  scale deep reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/1912.06680, 2019. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:209376771.
Wendelin Böhmer, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Joschka Boedecker, Martin A. Riedmiller, and Klaus
 Obermayer. Autonomous learning of state representations for control: An emerging field aims to
 autonomously learn state representations for reinforcement learning agents from their real-world
 sensor observations. KI - Künstliche Intelligenz, 29:353–362, 2015. URL https://api.
 semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:15176564.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Cynthia Chen, Xin Chen, Sam Toyer, Cody Wild, Scott Emmons, Ian S. Fischer, Kuang-Huei Lee,
  Neel Alex, Steven H. Wang, Ping Luo, Stuart J. Russell, P. Abbeel, and Rohin Shah. An empir-
  ical investigation of representation learning for imitation. ArXiv, abs/2205.07886, 2022. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:244906786.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Michael Laskin, P. Abbeel,
  A. Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via se-
  quence modeling. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:235294299.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. ArXiv, abs/1810.04805, 2019. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:52967399.
Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu,
  and Zhifang Sui. A survey for in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00234, 2022.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Daniel Jaymin Mankowitz, and Todd Hester.   Challenges of real-
  world reinforcement learning.  ArXiv, abs/1904.12901, 2019.   URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:140269588.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yang Fan, Fei Tian, Tao Qin, Xiang-Yang Li, and Tie-Yan Liu. Learning to teach. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1805.03643, 2018.
Tengda Han, Weidi Xie, and Andrew Zisserman. Video representation learning by dense pre-
  dictive coding. 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision Workshop (IC-
  CVW), pp. 1483–1492, 2019. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  202542591.
Kaiming He, X. Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition.
  2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 770–778, 2015.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:206594692.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross B. Girshick. Momentum con-
  trast for unsupervised visual representation learning. 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 9726–9735, 2019. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:207930212.
Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. Universal language model fine-tuning for text classification.
   In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018. URL https://
   api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:40100965.
Salman Hameed Khan, Muzammal Naseer, Munawar Hayat, Syed Waqas Zamir, Fahad Shah-
  baz Khan, and Mubarak Shah. Transformers in vision: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys
  (CSUR), 54:1 – 41, 2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  230435805.
Sascha Lange, Martin A. Riedmiller, and Arne Voigtländer. Autonomous reinforcement learning
  on raw visual input data in a real world application. The 2012 International Joint Conference on
  Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–8, 2012. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:17023340.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning ap-
  plied to document recognition. Proc. IEEE, 86:2278–2324, 1998. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:14542261.
Kuang-Huei Lee, Ofir Nachum, Mengjiao Yang, L. Y. Lee, Daniel Freeman, Winnie Xu,
  Sergio Guadarrama, Ian S. Fischer, Eric Jang, Henryk Michalewski, and Igor Mordatch.
  Multi-game decision transformers. ArXiv, abs/2205.15241, 2022. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:249192343.
Ze Liu, Jia Ning, Yue Cao, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Han Hu. Video
  swin transformer. 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition (CVPR), pp. 3192–3201, 2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:235624247.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Sgdr: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1608.03983, 2016.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.      Decoupled weight decay regularization.      arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin A. Riedmiller, Andreas Kirkeby Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig
  Petersen, Charlie Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran,
  Daan Wierstra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforce-
  ment learning. Nature, 518:529–533, 2015. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:205242740.
Dean A. Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. In NIPS, 1988. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:18420840.
Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsupervised representation learning with deep
  convolutional generative adversarial networks. CoRR, abs/1511.06434, 2015. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:11758569.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language under-
  standing by generative pre-training. 2018.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.
Max Schwarzer, Nitarshan Rajkumar, Michael Noukhovitch, Ankesh Anand, Laurent Charlin, De-
 von Hjelm, Philip Bachman, and Aaron C. Courville. Pretraining representations for data-
 efficient reinforcement learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:235377401.
Jinghuan Shang, Kumara Kahatapitiya, Xiang Li, and Michael S. Ryoo. Starformer: Trans-
   former with state-action-reward representations for visual reinforcement learning. In European
   Conference on Computer Vision, 2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
   CorpusID:250698698.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, L. Sifre, George van den Driess-
  che, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Vedavyas Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander
  Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy P. Lilli-
  crap, Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529:484–489, 2016. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:515925.
Yanchao Sun, Shuang Ma, Ratnesh Madaan, Rogerio Bonatti, Furong Huang, and Ashish Kapoor.
  Smart: Self-supervised multi-task pretraining with control transformers. ArXiv, abs/2301.09816,
  2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:256194594.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Neural Networks, 16:285–286, 2005. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:9166388.
Marin Toromanoff, Émilie Wirbel, and Fabien Moutarde. Is deep reinforcement learning
 really superhuman on atari?      ArXiv, abs/1908.04683, 2019. URL https://api.
 semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:204091962.
Aäron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding. ArXiv, abs/1807.03748, 2018. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:49670925.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam M. Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NIPS, 2017. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:13756489.
Niklas Wahlström, Thomas B Schön, and Marc Peter Deisenroth. From pixels to torques: Policy
  learning with deep dynamical models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.02251, 2015.
Lin Wang and Kuk-Jin Yoon. Knowledge distillation and student-teacher learning for visual in-
  telligence: A review and new outlooks. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
  intelligence, 44(6):3048–3068, 2021.
Vinı́cius Flores Zambaldi, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Victor Bapst, Yujia Li, Igor Babuschkin,
  Karl Tuyls, David P. Reichert, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Edward Lockhart, Murray Shanahan, Victoria
  Langston, Razvan Pascanu, Matthew M. Botvinick, Oriol Vinyals, and Peter W. Battaglia. Deep
  reinforcement learning with relational inductive biases. In International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2018. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  59233950.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     V IDEO S WIN T RANSFORMER FOR C ONTROL TASKS
A.1   TACKLING THE A BSENCE OF C AUSALITY IN V IDEO -S WIN T RANSFORMER


             Figure 7: Illustration of Causal Shifted-Window Multi-Head self attention

In this work, we introduce a tailored attention mechanism called CSW-MSA. The incorporation of
CSW-MSA seamlessly empowers the Video-Swin Transformer to excel in autoregressive control
tasks, all without the need for extensive architectural adjustments. See Figure 7 for an illustration.

A.2   I NDUCTIVE B IAS B OOST: P RE - TRAINING AND S HARED K NOWLEDGE WITH
      C ONVOLUTIONAL E NCODER


      Figure 8: The finetuning performance of CaStRL in comparison to DT and Starformer.

Even though the Video-Swin Transformer (Liu et al., 2021) relies on spatiotemporal locality as an
inductive bias, in control tasks, we’ve observed that its performance is significantly affected by
initialization. This is evident when observing the performance improvement of the CaStRL model
after pretraining across various Atari environments, and then finetuning the pretrained model in
single-game settings, as illustrated in Figure 8.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 State Representation Learning (StRL)
   ▷ T: Sequence Length
   ▷ o[1:T ] : Sequence of Observations — o1 , o2 , . . . , oT
   ▷ RandomTransformation: Spatiotemporal Augmenter
   ▷ ConvEncoder: ResNet34-Based Encoder
   ▷ TransformerEncoder: Video-Swin Transformer with CSW-MSA
   ▷ ConvExpander: Expander Network for ResNet34-Based Representations
   ▷ TransformerExpander: Expander Network for Video-Swin Transformer Representations
1: procedure S T RL(o[1:T ] )
      % Obtaining varying viewpoints of the same sequence of observations.
2:    x[1:T ] ← RandomTransformation(o[1:T ] )
3:    x̂[1:T ] ← RandomTransformation(o[1:T ] )
      % Encoding observational data into state representations.
4:    sx ← ConvEncoder(x[1:T ] )
5:    sx̂ ← TransformerEncoder(x̂[1:T ] )
      % Extend state representations into a higher-dimensional space.
6:    z ← ConvExpander(sx )
7:    ẑ ← TransformerExpander(sx̂ )
      % VICReg Loss: Optimize State Representation
8:    lossstrl ← VICReg(z, ẑ)
9: end procedure


CaStRL employs VICReg (Bardes et al., 2021) as the state representation learning objective, high-
lighting the necessity for two modules: a transformer module, exemplified by the Video-Swin Trans-
former, which possesses the capability to scale and learn spatiotemporal features, and another mod-
ule, such as ResNet34, designed to compensate for the initial lack of inductive bias during the early
stages of training. The pseudocode 2 illustrates the steps involved in StRL objective.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     C ONTEXT-GPT O BJECTIVES

Algorithm 3 Context GPT Loss (For Context-Aware StRL: Context Type ← Masked State)
   ▷ T: Sequence Length
   ▷ s[1:T ] : Sequence of States — s1 , s2 , . . . , sT
      [1:T ]
   ▷ smasked : Sequence of Masked States
   ▷ I: Locations of Intentionally Masked Tokens.
   ▷ Squeezer: Squeezer Network for Intermediate Context Representations
   ▷ ContextGPT: GPT2-like Transformer
   ▷ ContextDecoder: Decoder Network
1: procedure C ONTEXT GPTL OSS(s[1:T ] , s[1:T         ]
                                                  masked , I)
      % Project masked state into intermediate context representations.
                                  [1:T ]
2:    cs [1:T ] ← Squeezer(smasked )
      % Predict the transitions context from a sequence of intermediate context representations.
                                         [1:T ]
3:    ctr [1:T ] ← ContextGPT(cs                )
      % Initialize Context-GPT loss.
4:    loss ← 0
      % Computation of Context-GPT loss at masked locations.
5:    for l in I do
         % Retrieve the masked state at (l) using the context at (l).
                                              [l]
6:        ŝ[l] ← ContextDecoders(ctr )
         % Accumulate the discrepancy measure between s[l] and ŝ[l] .
7:        loss ← loss + VICReg(s[l] , ŝ[l] )
8:    end for
9: end procedure



Algorithm 4 Context GPT Loss (For Context-Aware StRL: Context Type ← Masked Action)
    ▷ T: Sequence Length
    ▷ s[1:T ] : Sequence of States — s1 , s2 , . . . , sT
    ▷ a[1:T ] : Sequence of Actions — a0 , a1 , . . . , aT −1
        [1:T ]
    ▷ Eamasked : Sequence of Masked Action Tokens (Embeddings)
    ▷ I: Locations of Intentionally Masked Tokens.
                                [1:T ]                                                              −1
    ▷ Stack: Stack s[1:T ] , Eamasked Sequences ← s1 , Ea0masked , s2 , Ea1masked , . . . , sT , EaTmasked
    ▷ Squeezer: Squeezer Network for Intermediate Context Representations
    ▷ ContextGPT: GPT2-like Transformer
    ▷ ContextDecoder: Decoder Network
 1: procedure C ONTEXT GPTL OSS(s[1:T ] , Ea[1:T         ]
                                                      masked
                                                             , a[1:T ] , I)
       % Project masked state into intermediate context representations.
                                   [1:T ]
 2:    cs [1:T ] ← Squeezer(smasked )
       % Stack the intermediate context representations and action embeddings.
                               [1:T ]     [1:T ]
 3:    csa [1:T ] ← Stack(cs          , Eamasked )
       % Predict the transitions context from a sequence of intermediate context representations.
                                            [1:T ]
 4:    ctr [1:T ] ← ContextGPT(csa )
       % Initialize Context-GPT loss.
 5:    loss ← 0
       % Computation of Context-GPT loss at masked locations.
 6:    for l in I do
          % Retrieve the masked action at (l) using the context at (l).
                                                  [l]
 7:        â[l] ← ContextDecoders(ctr )
          % Accumulate the discrepancy measure between a[l] and â[l] .
 8:        loss ← loss + ActionPredictionLoss(a[l] , â[l] )
 9:    end for
10: end procedure


C     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

C.1     C A S T RL N ORMALIZED S CORES

In Figures 10 and 9, we present human-normalized scores (HNS) (Toromanoff et al., 2019) and
DQN-normalized scores (Agarwal et al., 2021), respectively. Normalized scores are calculated as
follows:


                                                           15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Figure 9: DQN-Normalized Scores.


Figure 10: Human-Normalized Scores — Carnival and Pooya: NA (No Reference Human Scores).


                                     score − scorerandom
                                                                                              (1)
                                scorehuman/dqn − scorerandom


C.2   V ISUALIZE ATTENTIONS

We visualize the learned representations with CaStRL using the Attention-Rollout technique (Abnar
& Zuidema, 2020) to generate attention maps (as seen in Figure 11).


Figure 11: Visualization of attention maps in CaStRL, extracted for breakout game. We highlights
the movement of ball and paddel with heat-map style coloring


                                               16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
For both pretraining and fine-tuning, we employed the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter,
2017) with β1 =0.9, β2 =0.999, and λ (weight decay) set to 0.01. We implemented a learning
rate decay using a cosine annealing method described by (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2016), where
Tmax =2000 represents the maximum number of iterations, and the learning rate range is specified
as [ηmin , ηmax ] ← [7×10−5 , 6×10−4 ].


                                              17
