Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A DATABASE - BASED R ATHER T HAN A L ANGUAGE
M ODEL - BASED NLP M ETHOD
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Language model pre-training for NLP tasks take natural language as the direct
         modeling object. However, we believe that natural language is essentially a way
         of encoding information ( knowledge). Therefore, the study object of language
         should be the information encoded in language, and the organizational and com-
         positional structure of the information described in language. Based on this under-
         standing, we propose a database-based NLP method that changes the modeling
         object from language to the information encoded in language. On this basis, 1)
         sentence generation task is transformed into read operations implemented on the
         database, and some sentence encoding principles to be followed; 2) sentence un-
         derstanding task is transformed into sentence decoding principles and a series of
         Boolean operations implemented on the database; 3) learning task can be achieved
         by writing operations. Our method is more closer to how the human brain pro-
         cesses information and has excellent interpretability and scalability.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Enabling machines to understand and use natural language as humans do is the ultimate goal of
NLP. Many language models have been developed for related NLP tasks. For example: Word2Vec
Mikolov et al. (2013) and GloVe Pennington et al. (2014) model the correlations between words
by constructing numerical representation of words (i.e., word vector) and expect to obtain a word-
level understanding by computing the similarities between the word vectors. Seq2seq Sutskever
et al. (2014) and Transformer Vaswani et al. (2017) are used for translation tasks, they model the
mapping relations between words and the mapping relations between sentence structures in different
languages. GPT Radford et al. (2018) and Bert Devlin et al. (2018), which pre-train language models
on a large-scale corpus, aim to model the sequence features in the corpus.
However, language model-based approaches overlook the fact that language is just one way of en-
coding information (knowledge). Besides language, we also use other tools to encode and transmit
information (knowledge) between each other, such as body gestures, faces, drawings, etc. Therefore,
our research object should be the information (knowledge) encoded and represented by language, not
just language. Here, we propose a database-based NLP method that aims to discover and reveal how
information (knowledge) is organized and stored in human brains, then simulate the ﬁndings (struc-
tures) to build databases (models), and ﬁnally provide the solutions of NLG and NLU (including the
learning part) tasks based on these models.
To summarize the contribution of this work:
• Our method changes the modeling object from language to the information (knowledge) repre-
sented by language, giving the model we construct excellent interpretability and scalability.
• We propose a brand new NLP approach that is different from rule-based and statistical model-
based (i.e., language model) approaches, and it is more closer to the way the human brain processes
information.
• Based on the different and deeper understanding of natural language, we create a new framework
for solving NLP problems, as well as bringing new thought forn AI research.


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Differences in modeling objects. Language model-based methods take natural language
as the object to construct the model. Database-based methods take both the information in the real
world and the organizational and compositional structure of the information described in natural
language as the objects to construct the model.

       The United States is south of Canada.              Duke University is in North Carolina.
       The cat is in Tom‘s room.                          The table is in front of the fridge.
       The cat is on top of the fridge.                   The sofa is next to the fridge.

Table 1: Examples of sentences that describe the spatial position of target entities in the real world


2     M ETHODOLOGY

As shown in the red box in Figure 1, our method consists of two parts: 1) databases (models) and 2)
principles. The databases part is devote to ﬁnd out how information (knowledge) is organized and
stored in the human brain, accordingly to simulate these structures to build models that can be used
to generate databases. The principles part simulate how the information (knowledge) is processed
and utilized in the human brain to accomplish related human-like intelligent activities.

2.1   BACKGROUND

As we learned in neuroscience, people constantly receive information from the outside world
through their eyes, ears, noses, and other neural pathways Mark F. Bear (2004). This fact cre-
ates information (knowledge) gaps between people. Humans use language as one of the tools to
reduce the gap, mainly by encoding the information (knowledge) in the human brain into language
and exchanging it with each other. There are several steps prior to generating language, such as de-
termining what is to be output, reasoning (i.e., pre-processing the meta-knowledge or information),
encoding, etc. We should note that different types of information (knowledge) encoded in language
must be modeled and processed according to their different nature and characteristics. In this pa-
per, we only take the spatial position information (or knowledge) as the example to demonstrate our
methodology.
People exchange the spatial position information (knowledge) of real-world entities by encoding
them in sentences, as shown in Table 1. Looking at these sentences, we can see that they have the
same structure: (Entity 1) + (...) + (Spatial relation) + (Entity 2). ) + (spatial relation) + (entity
2), where “entity 1” is the target entity whose spatial position we want to describe by the sentence,
“entity 2” is a helper entity that helps to locate the target entity, and “spatial relation” describes the
spatial relation between the target entity and the helper entity. Table 2 shows three types of spatial
relations commonly used in languages: 1) spatial range relations, 2) spatial directional relations, and
3) spatial distance relations. The spatial direction relations can be further divided into 2.1) absolute
direction relations and 2.2) relative direction relations according to the different reference systems.
The above ﬁndings in language reveal how the knowledge (i.e.,the spatial position of real-world
entities) is organized and stored in the human brain. We can also see that people are used to using


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Spatial relations             Lexical representations               Reference system

                                      Inside: in, at...
        1.Range relations
                                      Outside: outside of...
                      2.1             East: east of...
                      Absolute        West: west of...
                      directional     North: the north side of ...
                      relations       South: the south side of...
        2.
                                      Top: on, above, over, on top of...
        Directional
                      2.2             Bottom: below, under, beneath...
        relations
                      Relative        Left: left of...
                      directional     Right: the right side of...
                      relations       Front: before, in front of...
                                      Back: behind, back of...
        3.Distance relations          by, near, next to, beside...

Table 2: Classiﬁcation of the relative spatial relations between entities, and lexical representations
of the relative spatial relations.


entities with a relatively stable spatial position (immovable entities) as the helper entities. The
immovable entities and the spatial relations between them form a stable system that we will use to
construct our model.

2.2     DATABASE (M ODEL A RCHITECTURE )

We construct a TGHM (Tree Graph Hybrid Model) to describe and store the spatial position of
real-world entities. In a TGHM, the real-world entities are abstracted as nodes; the spatial relations
between the nodes are abstracted as directed edges E. The TGHM is a data structure that consists
of two types of basic models: Tree and Graph.

2.2.1     T REE M ODEL

We use a tree model to describe the spatial
                                         {      range relations
                                                        }       (Es ) between entities. Es is consist
                                          inside outside
of two opposite directions, i.e., Es = −→ , ←− . For example, we use the tree in Figure 2 to
describe the spatial range relations between entities “North Carolina”, “Duke University”, “Tom‘s
room”,“Table”, “Cat”, etc. The tree in Figure 2 can also be written in tabular form as shown in Table
3. In a tree, the child nodes with the same parent node should be spatially independent of each other,
which means, there is no spatial range inclusion relation between them, if not, the child node must
be moved up or down until all the child nodes are spatially independent of each other.


Figure 2: The tree that describes the spatial Figure 3: The graph that describe the absolute
range relations between entities “North Car- spatial directional relations between some enti-
olina”, “Duke University”, ‘Table”, “Cat”, etc. ties in M1 in Figure 1.



                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          V                             Duke
               North Carolina                           Tom‘s room        Classroom 15           Fridge
  Es                                  University
                    Duke
                                     Tom‘s room,          Table,          Blackboard,            Coke
                  University
   inside
    −→                              Classroom 15          Sofa,                 Tom
                                                           Cat,
                                                          Fridge
   outside                                                Duke               Duke
    ←−                 ∅           North Carolina                                              Tom‘s room
                                                        University         University

                           Table 3: The tabular form of the tree in Figure 2


2.2.2   G RAPH M ODEL
We use graph models to describe the spatial directional relations between entities. The spatial direc-
tional relations can be future divided
                                    { into 1) absolute directional
                                                             }          relations (Ea ), which consists
                                       east west north south
of four ﬁxed directions, i.e., Ea = −→, −→, −→ , −→ , and 2) relative directional relations
                                                         { lef t right f ront                   }
                                                                              back top bottom
(Er ), which consists of six ﬁxed directions, i.e., Er = −→, −→ , −→ , −→, −→, −→ . Now,
we can use the graph in Figure 3 to describe the absolute directional relations between some entities
in M1 in Figure 1, and use the graph in Figure 4 to describe the relative directional relations between
the entities in M3 in Figure 1. These two graphs can also be written in tabular forms.

                                                                      V
                                                                          Table       Fridge      Sofa
                                                           Er
                                                              lef t
                                                             −→             ∅           ∅        Fridge
                                                             right
                                                             −→             ∅          Sofa        ∅
                                                             f ront
                                                             −→           Fridge        ∅          ∅
                                                             back
                                                             −→             ∅         Table        ∅
                                                                top
                                                             −→             ∅          Cat         ∅
                                                            bottom
                                                             −→             ∅           ∅          ∅

Figure 4: The graph describes the relative spatial Table 4: The tabular form of the graph in Figure
directional relations between the entities in M3 4
in Figure 1

2.2.3   TGHM
Finally, taking the nodes common to the tree and the graphs in Figures 2, 3 and 4 as connection
points, we can integrate the tree and the graphs into the tree-graph hybrid model (TGHM) as shown
in Figure 5. TGHM describes the spatial range relations between entities on the vertical structure
(i.e., the inter-layer structure) ; and the spatial directional relations between entities on the horizon-
tal structure (i.e., the intralayer structure). Each layer of a TGHM can accommodates multiple sub-
graphs. Usually, the Ea (absolute directional relations) is used as the reference frame of the whole
layer, and the Er (relative directional relations) is used as the reference frame in each subgraph. As
shown in Figure 5, the subgraph G20 and G10 take Er as their reference frame, and the layer L0 is us-
ing Ea as its reference frame. In a TGHM, the immovable nodes and the edges between them form
a stable frame, which is a new reference frame in addition to the widely used numerical positioning
system (e.g., GPS). TGHM also provides a bridge for information (knowledge) exchange between
language and the numerical reference frame, as shown in Figure 6.
TGHM can be continuously extended upwards and downwards in the vertical structures to add new
nodes, and continuously subdivided in the horizontal structure to add new nodes. Therefore, the
TGHM could satisfy people’s need to describe and store the spatial position of numerous entities in


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: A perspective example of the TGHM, which describes the spatial range relations between
entities in the vertical structure (inter-layer structure) and the spatial directional relations between
entities in the horizontal structure (intralayer structure). The encoding table stores the lexical rep-
resentations in different languages corresponding to each node in the TGHM. Here, we only list
English as an example.


Figure 6: Three ways of describing (or encoding) the spatial position of real-world entities. The
information exchange routes between different systems: ⃝   1 sentences generation. ⃝  2 sentences
understanding.⃝
              3 search for neighboring entities. ⃝
                                                 4 get the numerical position of the target entities.


the real world. When the spatial position of an entity changes, the corresponding data in the TGHM
is simply modiﬁed accordingly. In addition, we can also build datasets to store the spatial position of
the movable entities to record their footprint. Therefore, TGHM allows us to simulate how humans
organize and store the spatial position of real-world entities in the brain, which means we can create
memories for machines. Together with some corresponding data processing principles, the machine
is able to process and utilize the data in the TGHM, and this is a practice of artiﬁcial intelligence.

2.3   DATA P ROCESSING P RINCIPLES

TGHM consistent with the characteristics of the structural-mechanistic kind of model Schölkopf &
Bernhard (2015) which follow an underlying mechanistic understanding of reality. Thus, the TGHM
can be used for many purposes. In this paper, we only present how the data in the TGHM has been
processed and utilized in NLG and NLU (including learning part) tasks.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: If we take the entity “Cat” as the target, then we can ﬁnd the above 5 data chains in the
TGHM to help locate the entity “Cat”. The nodes marked with "✓" are the target nodes.


2.3.1    NATURAL L ANGUAGE G ENERATION

Since, language is a tool used to convey information (knowledge). The NLG task can be further
broken down into subtask 1- determining the information (knowledge) that needs to be conveyed,
and subtask 2- encoding that information (knowledge) into sentences.
•       DATA READING
In this paper, the knowledge to be conveyed is the spatial position of the target entity. Following
the language expression, we use a helper entity and the spatial relations between the helper and the
target entity to describe the spatial position of the target entity. For example, if we want to describe
the spatial position of the entity “Cat”, we ﬁrst need to ﬁnd the corresponding node (target node) of
the entity “Cat” in TGHM in Figure 5, then ﬁnd the helper nodes that have a spatial relation with the
target node, such as the nodes “Tom‘s room”, “Fridge”, “Table”, “Duke University”, “Tennessee”
and so on, then we can get 5 corresponding data chains as shown in Figure 7, which are composed
of the target node, the helper node, and the spatial relations between them. Each of these 5 data
chains can describe the spatial position of the entity “Cat”, but their precision is different. If we sort
these 5 data chains by precision, we can get the following result: L2 > L3 > L1 > L4 > L5.
However, when generating a sentence, precision is not the only goal we are pursuing, if we want to
describe the spatial position of the entity “Cat” to a particular person, we also need to know how
much this person knows about the spatial position of the 5 candidate helper nodes? and what is
the person‘s requirement for descriptive precision? So that we can ﬁlter out the appropriate one
accordingly. Here, we will skip this part and go straight to the sentence encoding part. Filtering out
the appropriate helper node and reading out the data chain is the goal of subtask 1.
•       ENCODING PRINCIPLES
Although the principles for encoding a data chain into a sentence vary slightly from language to
language, but the following parts are requisite: 1) the target and the helper nodes in the data chain, 2)
the spatial relation between the target node and helper node, and 3) judgment of the spatial relation.
Existence judgment of the spatial relation: A speciﬁc spatial relation may or may not exist be-
tween two nodes. In language we use "be" and "be not" to describe these two statuses. For example,
the words "is" and "is not" in row 4 of Table 5 describe whether the spatial relation in row 3 exist or
not.
Reasoning of the spatial relations: In the TGHM, the spatial relation between any two nodes can
be calculated. We have summarized some reasoning principles according to how humans process
them; see examples below:
                                  inside   outside       lef t   right    north    south
-   Elimination operation: e.g., −→ + ←− = ∅, −→ + −→ = ∅, −→ + −→ = ∅...
                          inside   inside inside east    east    north    northeast
-   Union operation: e.g., −→ + −→ = −→ , −→ + −→ + −→ = −→ ...
-   Hybrid operation: when a data chain contains both spatial range relations and spatial directional


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Data Chain
                                                   L1                L1*             L2              L2*
           Main Parts
     1     Target node                        The cat              The cat         The cat         The cat
     2     Helper node                      Tom‘s room           Tom‘s room       the fridge      the fridge
     3     Spatial relation (E)                 in                on top of       on top of           in
           Existence judgment of the E:
     4       • True                                is                                 is
             • False                                                is not                           is not

                  Table 5: Examples of the requisite parts for encoding a data chain.


                                        Existence
    Data Chain      Target Node                                   Spatial Relation            Helper Node
                                    Judgment of the E
         L1             The cat               is                           in                Tom‘s room
         L2             The cat               is                       on top of              the fridge
         L3             The cat               is                 in front of ( next to)        the table
         L4             The cat               is                           in               Duke University
         L5             The cat               is                  on the east side of         Tennessee
         L1*            The cat             is not                    on top of                Tom‘s room
         L2*            The cat             is not                        in                    the fridge

Table 6: Examples of sentence encoding for the data chains in Figure 7. All the above sentences are
100% correct, but some of them might be regarded as the right nonsense, and won’t be adopted in
practice due to their low precision in locating the target entity.


                                                                                         inside      top      inside
relations, the relations in the upstream of the data chain is dominant, e.g., −→ + −→ = −→ ,
east    inside   east
−→ + −→ = −→...
If there is only one edge in a data chain, we can encode it directly, such as the data chains L1 and L2.
If there is more than one edge in a data chain, e.g., the data chains L3, L4, and L5, we can perform
the reasoning principles to get the results below.
         f ront   top    upf ront         inside        inside   inside           east      inside         east
• L3: −→ + −→ = −→ ;                 L4: −→ + −→ = −→ ;                      L5: −→ + −→ ∗3 = −→.
Distance relations: In some cases, e.g.: 1) the spatial distance between the target entity and the
helper entity is very close, or 2) it is not necessary to provide the exact position of the target entity,
then we can use the spatial distance relations as an alternative, just like the sentence L3 in Table 6
You may argue that the sentences we generated are too simple. However, at the initial stage of
language appearance, it is just some simple words and short sentences. With the development of
human beings, more and more information is encoded in language, then sophisticated words and
long sentences emerged. Therefore, it is a good start to launch our research with some simple words
and sentences.
•     ENCODING PRINCIPLES FOR PROCESSING REQUESTS
Sentences encode not only the data chain to be conveyed, but also the processing requests for that
data chain. According to the implicit processing requests in the sentences, we divided sentences
into following three categories: 1) data description sentence (i.e., declarative sentence), 2) data veri-
ﬁcation sentence (i.e., the yes-no question sentence), 3) data searching sentence (i.e., WH-question
sentence).
Data description sentences implicit the processing request that listeners are expected to store the
information (knowledge) in their databases. For example, teachers expect the students to remember
what was taught in the class, and authors expect the readers to understand and remember the ideas
shared in the book, and so on.


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         Figure 8: The data chain L6 and its three different cases.

           Data Chain                          Target Node                   Helper Node
                L6                           Duke University      is   in    North Carolina     .
               L6-1                    Is    Duke University           in    North Carolina     ?
               L6-2        Which state is    Duke University           in                       ?
               L6-3                          Which University     is   in    North Carolina     ?

Table 7: Comparison of sentence structures that encode different information processing requests.
(English only)


Data veriﬁcation sentences implicit the processing request that listeners are expected to help verify
whether the spatial relation described in the sentence is true; and feedback the veriﬁcation result
as the response. For example, in the case of the data chain L6-1 in Figure 8, speakers are not
sure whether the spatial relation “inside” between the node (Duke University) and the node (North
Carolina) exists? They could express the processing request that ask listeners to help verity whether
the “inside” edge exists by moving the word “Is” to the beginning of the sentence and adding a
question mark at the end of the sentence, as shown in Table 7.
Data searching sentences, in which listeners are expected to search for the missing information
(knowledge) replaced by WH words in their databases and return the search result as the response.
Take data chains L6-2 and L6-3 in Figure 8 as examples, speakers can use the word “which” to
replace the missing parts and adjust the structure of the sentences, as shown in rows L6-2 and L6-3
in Table7, to express their expectation that the listener can help to search for the missing parts and
return the search results.

2.3.2      NATURAL L ANGUAGE U NDERSTANDING

The sentence understanding task consists of two parts: a) understanding of the processing requests
implicit in a sentence; and b) understanding of the speciﬁc knowledge conveyed in the sentence,
which includes all the requisite parts listed in Table 5. Whereas we only provide the model (TGHM)
to describe the spatial relation between entities, here we only introduce the principles for understand-
ing 3) the spatial relation and 4) the existence judgment of the spatial relation. The understanding
of 1) the target nodes and 2) the helper nodes requires other databases, which are beyond the scope
of this paper and will be introduced in other papers in the future.
•        DECODING PRINCIPLES
Extract the processing requests: The speciﬁc processing requests are expressed by the speciﬁc sentence
structures, speciﬁc feature words, and speciﬁc punctuation. These can be used to classify the sentences and
extract the processing requests accordingly.


    Figure 9: (1) General tree structure of sentences. (2) The sentence tree of sentence L1 in Table 6.


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Figure 10: Processing ﬂowchart of the data description sentences.


Sentence chunking: Listeners need to chunk the sentence and extract the requisite parts of the speciﬁc knowl-
edge. Considering the difference in the number of words and phrases used to represent each class of the requisite
parts, the most efﬁcient way is to chunk the sentences following the order shown in the left part of Figure 9,
and gain a sentence tree (see the example shown in the right part in Figure 9).
•     UNDERSTANDING OF THE SPCIFIC KNOWLEDGE
Validation: In the process of understanding the speciﬁc knowledge, listeners need to verify each parts of the
sentence tree in their TGHMs according to the ﬂowchart shown in Figure 10. For example: in the case of the
sentence tree in Figure 9, listeners should ﬁrst verity whether the helper entity “Tom‘s room” exists in their
TGHMs, if the helper entity exists, go ahead; if not, it means that the listeners cannot get the position of the
target entity “The cat” through the helper entity “Tom‘s room”, so the understanding mission fails. If the helper
entity “Tom‘s room” exists, the listeners can further verify whether the target entity “The cat” exists at the other
end of the "inside" edge, if the target node “The cat” exists, it means that it is known knowledge to the listeners.
Learning: If the target node "The cat" not exists, the listeners can create a node at the other end of the “Inside”
edge, to store the spatial position of “The cat” in their TGHMs, this is a learning process.
Conﬂict checking: Furthermore, suppose the speciﬁc knowledge described in the sentence conﬂicts with the
knowledge (or data) stored in their TGHMs, a conﬂict check is required, which may create a new NLG task.
•     RESPONDING TO THE PROCESSING REQUESTS
Strictly speaking, responding to the processing requests implicit in a sentence is not a sentence understanding
task, but a sentence generation task. Here, we brieﬂy introduce the principles for responding the different
processing requests. For a data description sentence, as shown by the part below the dotted line in Figure
10, the response can be further divided into validation, learning, conﬂict checking, etc., as introduced in the
previous section. For a data veriﬁcation sentence, the response is to return the veriﬁcation results to the
speakers. Take the sentence L6-1 in Table 8 as an example, in the listener’s TGHM, if the edge represented by
the word “in” can be found between the node “Duke University” and node “North Carolina”, the listener can
reply “Yes, it is” as feedback to the speaker. If not, the listener can reply “No, it is not” as the feedback. For a
data searching sentence, the response is to return the searching results to the speakers. Take the sentence L6-2
in Table 8 as an example, in the listener’s TGHM, if there is a node at the other end of the edge (represented by
the word “in”), the search mission succeeded, and the listener can give the speaker the lexical representation of
that node. If not, the listener can reply “I don‘t know” or “I don‘t have a clue” to the speaker, to let him or her
know that the search mission failed.

2.4    C ONCEPTUAL I NTERPRETATION

In this paper, we brieﬂy introduce the new method mainly at the conceptual and practical levels. For the new
concepts in the database-based method, we ﬁrst give a rough interpretation at the theoretical level for a better
understanding. For example: 1) the TGHM, data chains, and the processing requests implicit in sentences are
implicit knowledge; 2) the TGHM can also be explained as a semantic representation. 3) In the TGHM, the
structure consists of computable edges can also be seen as the reasoning path, which giving our method the
algebraic capacity to understand and generate a potentially inﬁnite number of novel combinations from known
components Malkus et al.. 4) the reasoning process is also a practice of systematic generalization Baroni
(2017). 5) Since, we have reclassiﬁed sentences according to their implicit processing requests, the previous
classiﬁcation of NLP tasks, e.g., dialogue and question answering, will be replaced. 6) The arrangement of the
requisite parts in a sentence (see Table 6) and the sentence structures for encoding different data processing
requests (see Table 7) are called syntax.


                                                         9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3    E FFECTIVENESS AND R ELATED W ORK
The best thing about the database-based NLP method is that its effectiveness is innate. Databases are the cor-
nerstone of the whole method, which factually describe how real-world information (knowledge) is organized
in the human brains. Furthermore, we can think of the database as the axiom set, the NLG task is to derive
propositions (i.e., sentences) from the axiom set; the NLU task is to verify sentences (propositions) with the
axiom set, in which involves the validation and conﬂict checking processes. In the NLU process, if a given
proposition is known to be true, the new information (knowledge) brought by the proposition can be written
into the database, further expanding the database (axiom set), which is a learning process. Translation tasks
can also be performed using the database, the encoding table (see Figure 5), and corresponding encoding prin-
ciples. The NLG, NLU, learning and translation processes summarized above simulate how the information
(knowledge) is processed in the human brain.
Somewhat surprisingly, the edges in TGHM and the computability of these edges correspond to the character-
istics of an algebraic structure. We are also working with mathematicians to give a theoretical argument for
the TGHM from the perspective of abstract algebra, in parallel with reﬁning and standardizing the relevant
operations.


4    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we provided a new framework for solving NLP problems, and discussed its potential in other AI
problems (e.g., learning, translation). So, what exactly can we learn from the study of language? As we have
learned in neuroscience, humans receive information through neural pathways such as eyes, ears, mouth, nose,
etc., and then send this received information to the brain for hierarchical processing and storage. Although we
cannot directly observe how this information is processed and stored in human brains, but, a small proportion
of the information is encoded as natural language for external output. Thus, we can take natural language as
a window to explore how the information (knowledge) is stored and processed in the human brain, which will
lead to a brand new direction in AI research.


R EFERENCES
Brenden Lake Marco Baroni. genera1ization without systematicity on the compositiona1 ski11s of sequence
  to sequence recurrent networks. 2017.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
   transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

D. S. Malkus, M. E. Plesha, and R. J. Witt: Concepts. [18] chomsky, n.: Syntactic structures. mouton, the
  hague, 1957 (reprint berlin and new york, 1985).

Michael A. Paradiso Mark F. Bear, Barry W. Connors. Neuroscience: Exploring the Brain, 2nd ed. Higher
  Education Press, Beijing, 2004.
Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efﬁcient estimation of word representations in
  vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781, 2013.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. Glove: Global vectors for word representa-
   tion. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP),
   pp. 1532–1543, 2014.

Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language understanding with
  unsupervised learning. 2018.

Schölkopf and Bernhard. Artiﬁcial intelligence: Learning to see and act. Nature, 518(7540):486–487, 2015.

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. Advances
   in neural information processing systems, 27, 2014.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz Kaiser,
  and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach,
  R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.


                                                     10
