Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A SSESSING V ISUALLY-C ONTINUOUS C ORRUPTION RO -
BUSTNESS OF N EURAL N ETWORKS R ELATIVE TO H U -
MAN P ERFORMANCE

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         While Neural Networks (NNs) have surpassed human accuracy in image classi-
         fication on ImageNet, they often lack robustness against image corruption, i.e.,
         corruption robustness. Yet such robustness is seemingly effortless for human per-
         ception. In this paper, we propose visually-continuous corruption robustness (VCR)
         – an extension of corruption robustness to allow assessing it over the wide and
         continuous range of changes that correspond to the human perceptive quality (i.e.,
         from the original image to the full distortion of all perceived visual information),
         along with two novel human-aware metrics for NN evaluation. To compare VCR of
         NNs with human perception, we conducted extensive experiments on 14 commonly
         used image corruptions with 7,718 human participants and state-of-the-art robust
         NN models with different training objectives (e.g., standard, adversarial, corruption
         robustness), different architectures (e.g., convolution NNs, vision transformers),
         and different amounts of training data augmentation.
         Our study showed that: 1) assessing robustness against continuous corruption can
         reveal insufficient robustness undetected by existing benchmarks; as a result, 2) the
         gap between NN and human robustness is larger than previously known; and finally,
         3) some image corruptions have a similar impact on human perception, offering
         opportunities for more cost-effective robustness assessments. Our validation set
         with 14 image corruptions, human robustness data, and the evaluation code is
         provided as a toolbox and a benchmark.



1    I NTRODUCTION

For Neural Networks (NN), achieving robustness against possible corruption (i.e., corruption robust-
ness) that can be encountered during deployment is essential for the application of NN models in
safety-critical domains (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019). Since NN models in these domains automate
tasks typically performed by humans, it is necessary to compare the model’s robustness with that of
humans.
Human versus NN robustness. Corruption robustness measures the average-case performance of an
NN or humans on a set of image corruption functions (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019). Existing stud-
ies, including out-of-distribution anomalies (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017), benchmarking (Hendrycks
& Dietterich, 2019; Hendrycks et al., 2021b), and comparison with humans (Hu et al., 2022; Geirhos
et al., 2021), generally evaluate robustness against a pre-selected, fixed set of transformation param-
eter values that represent varying degrees of image corruption. However, parameter values cannot
accurately represent the degree to which human perception is affected by image corruptions. For
instance, using the same parameter to brighten an already bright image will make the objects harder
to see but will have the opposite effect on a dark image (Hu et al., 2022). Additionally, humans can
perceive and generalize across a wide and continuous spectrum of visual corruptions from subtle
to completely distorted (Geirhos et al., 2019a; Sheikh & Bovik, 2006). Relying solely on preset
parameter values for test sets could lead to incomplete coverage of the full range of visual corruptions,
leading to potential biases in evaluation results, which cannot accurately represent NN robustness
compared with humans.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Contributions and Outlook. To address the above problem, we propose a new concept called
visually-continuous corruption robustness (VCR). This concept focuses on the robustness of neural
networks (NN) against a continuous range of image corruption levels. Additionally, we introduce two
novel human-aware NN evaluation metrics (HMRI and MRSI) to assess NN robustness in comparison
to human performance. We conducted extensive experiments with 7,718 human participants on the
Mechanical Turk platform on 14 commonly used image transformations. Comparing NN and human
VCR with our metrics, we found that a significant robustness gap between NNs and humans still
exists: no model can fully match human performance throughout the entire continuous range in terms
of both accuracy and prediction consistency, and few models can exceed humans by a small margin in
specific levels of corruption. Furthermore, our experiments yield insightful findings about robustness
of human and state-of-the-art (SoTA) NNs concerning accuracy, degrees of visual corruption, and
consistency of classification, which can contribute towards the development of NNs that match
or surpass human perception. We also discovered classes of corruption transformations for which
humans showed similar robustness (e.g., different types of noise), while NNs reacted differently.
Recognizing these classes can contribute to reducing the cost of measuring human robustness and
elucidating the differences between humans and computational models. To foster future research, we
open-sourced all human data as a comprehensive benchmark along with a Python code that enables
test set generation, testing, and retraining.

2    M ETHODS : VCR, TESTING , METRICS , CROWDSOURCING , NN MODELS
To study NN robustness against a wide and continuous spectrum of visual changes, we first define
the VCR and then describe our method for generating test sets. To study VCR of NNs in relation
to humans, we also present the human-aware metrics, followed by human robustness data and NN
models used in the study.
Visually-Continuous Corruption Robustness (VCR). A key difference between corruption robust-
ness and VCR is that the latter is defined relative to the visual impact of image corruption on human
perception, rather than the transformation parameter domain. To quantify visual corruption, VCR
uses the Image Quality Assessment (IQA) metric Visual Information Fidelity (VIF) (Sheikh & Bovik,
2006; Kumar, 2020). VIF measures the perceived quality of a corrupted image x′ compared to its
original form x by measuring the visual information unaffected by the corruption. Thus, we define the
change in the perceived quality caused by the corruption as ∆v (x, x′ ) = max(0, 1 − VIF(x, x′ )). See
the appendix for more detail on ∆v . With ∆v , whose value ranges from 0 and 1, we can consider VCR
against the wide, finite, and continuous spectrum of visual corruptions ranging from no degradation
to visual quality (i.e., the original image) (∆v = 0) to the full distortion of all visual information
(∆v = 1).
Limitation: VCR is limited to image corruption that is applicable to the chosen IQA metric, thus
by using VIF, VCR is limited to only pixel-level corruption. Further research is needed for metrics
suitable for other types of corruption (e.g., geometric).
For VCR, we consider a classifier NN f : X → Y trained on samples of a distribution of input
images PX , a ground-truth labeling function f ∗ , and a parameterized image corruption function TX
with a parameter domain C. We wish to consider the robustness of f against images with all degrees
of visual corruption uniformly ranging from ∆v = 0 to ∆v = 1.1 Therefore, given a value v ∈ [0, 1],
we define P (x, x′ |v) as the joint distribution of original images (x) and corresponding corrupted
images (x′ = TX (x, c), c ∈ C) with ∆v (x, x′ ) = v. VCR is defined in the presence of a robustness
property γ that f should satisfy in the presence of TX :
                                Rγ = Ev∼Uniform(0,1) (Px,x′ ∼P (x,x′ |v) (γ)).                              (1)

In this paper, we instantiate VCR with two existing robustness properties (see Fig. 7 in the appendix).
The first one is accuracy (a), requiring that the prediction on corrupted images should be correct,
i.e., f (x′ ) = f ∗ (x). It is also used in the existing definition of corruption robustness (Hendrycks &
Dietterich, 2019). Thus,
                         Ra = Ev∼Uniform(0,1) (Px,x′ ∼P (x,x′ |v) (f (x′ ) = f ∗ (x))).                     (2)
    1
      Note that distributions other than uniform can be used based on the application. For example, one may wish
to favour robustness against heavy snow conditions for NNs deployed in arctic areas.


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The second property is prediction consistency (p), requiring consistent predictions before and after
corruptions, i.e., f (x′ ) = f (x) (Hu et al., 2022). It is applicable when ground truth is not available,
which is common during deployment. Thus,
                          Rp = Ev∼Uniform(0,1) (Px,x′ ∼P (x,x′ |v) (f (x′ ) = f (x))).                (3)

Testing VCR. VCR of a subject (a human or an NN) is measured by first generating a test set through
sampling and then estimating it using the sampled data. The test set is generated by sampling images
and applying corruption to obtain P (x, x′ |v) for different ∆v values v. We sample x ∼ PX and
c ∼ Uniform(C), and obtain x′ = TX (x, c) and v = ∆v (x, x′ ), resulting in samples (x, x′ , c, v).
Then, we divide them into groups of (x, x′ , c), each with the same v value. Next, by dropping c,
we obtain groups of (x, x′ ) with the same v, which are samples from P (x, x′ |v). Note that this
procedure requires only sufficient data in each group but not uniformity, i.e., v ∼ Uniform(0, 1) is
not required. The varying size of each group, i.e., the non-uniformity of v distribution, will not distort
VCR estimates, but only impact the estimate uncertainty at a given v. Further, interpolation in the
next step helps address any missing points (see Alg. 1 in the appendix).
With the test set, we estimate the performance w.r.t. the property γ for each v. For each v in
the test data, we compute the rate of accurate predictions f (x′ ) = f ∗ (x) to estimate accuracy,
i.e., av = Px,x′ ∼P (x,x′ |v) (f (x′ ) = f ∗ (x)) [resp. consistent predictions f (x′ ) = f (x) to estimate
consistency, i.e., pv = Px,x′ ∼P (x,x′ |v) (f (x′ ) = f (x))]. Then by plotting (v, av ) and (v, pv ) and
applying monotonic smoothing splines (Koenker et al., 1994) to reduce randomness and outliers, we
obtain smoothed spline curves sa and sp , respectively. The curves sγ (namely, sa and sp ) describe how
the performance w.r.t. the robustness property γ (namely, a and p) decreases as the visual corruption
in images increases. Finally, we estimate Ra = Ev∼Uniform(0,1) (av ) [resp. Rp = Ev∼Uniform(0,1) (pv )]
                                                          R1                               R1
as the area under the spline curve, i.e., R̂a = Aa = 0 sa (v)dv [resp. R̂p = Ap = 0 sp (v)dv].
Human-Aware Metrics. A commonly used metric for measuring corruption robustness is the
Corruption Error (CE) (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019)—the top-1 classification error rate on the
corrupted images, normalized by the error rate of a baseline model. CE can be used to compare an
NN with humans if the baseline model is set to be humans. However, CE is not able to determine
whether an NN can exceed humans, and NN models could potentially have super-human accuracy for
particular types of perturbations or in some ∆v ranges. Therefore, inspired by CE, we propose two
new human-aware metrics, Human-Relative Model Robustness Index (HMRI) that measures NN VCR
relative to human VCR; and Model Robustness Superiority Index (MRSI) that measures how much an
NN exceeds human VCR. These metrics take both the estimated spline curve for humans, shγ , and for
NN, sm                                                           h      m
       γ , as inputs, and we denote areas under these curves as Aγ and Aγ , respectively (see Fig. 8).
Definition 1 [Human-Relative Model Robustness Index (HMRI)]. Given shγ and sm                  h>m
                                                                                      γ , let Aγ     =
R1 h          m     +
 0
   (sγ (v) − sγ (v)) dv denote the average (accuracy or preservation) performance lead of humans
over a model across the visual change range, where the performance lead is defined as the positive part
of performance difference, i.e., (shγ (v)−sm     +            h      m
                                           γ (v)) = max(0, sγ (v)−sγ (v)). HMRI, which quantifies
                                                                               Ah
                                                                                γ −Aγ
                                                                                     h>m
                                                                                               Ah>m
                                                                                                γ
the extent to which a DNN can replicate human performance, is defined as            h
                                                                                   Aγ
                                                                                         = 1 −  Ah
                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                  γ


The HMRI value ranges from [0, 1]; a higher HMRI indicates a NN model closer to human VCR, and
HMRI = 1 signifies that sm is the same as or completely above sh in the entire ∆v domain, meaning
that the NN is at least as reliable as a human (see Fig. 8 in the appendix).
Definition 2 [Model Robustness Superiority Index (MRSI)]. Given shγ and sm                     m>h
                                                                                      γ , let Aγ     =
R1 m           h      +
 0
   (s γ (v) − sγ (v))   dv denote  the average performance   lead  of a model over a human   across the
visual change range. MRSI, which quantifies the extent to which a DNN model can surpass human
                             Am>h
                              γ
performance, is defined as    Am  .
                                γ


The MSRI value ranges from [0, 1), with the higher value indicating better performance than humans.
MSRI = 0 means that the given NN model performs worse than or equal to humans in the entire ∆v
domain. A positive MSRI value indicates that the given NN model performs better than humans at
least in some ranges of ∆v (see Fig. 8).
Comparing humans and NNs with HMRI and MRSI yields three possible scenarios: (1) humans’
performance fully exceeds NN’s, i.e., 0 < HMRI < 1 and MRSI = 0; (2) NN’s performance fully


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


exceeds humans’, i.e., HMRI = 1 and MRSI > 0 ; and (3) humans’ performance is better than NN’s
in some ∆v intervals and worse in others, i.e., HMRI < 1 and MRSI > 0.
Image Corruptions. In this paper, we focus on studying VCR of NNs in relation to humans regarding
14 commonly used image corruptions from three different sources: Shot Noise, Impulse Noise,
Gaussian Noise, Glass Blur, Gaussian Blur, Defocus Blur, Motion Blur, Brightness and Frost from
I MAGE N ET-C (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019); Blur, Median Blur, Hue Saturation Value and Color
Jitter from Albumentations (Buslaev et al., 2020); and Uniform Noise from Geirhos et al. (2019a).
See the appendix for a visualization of these corruptions.
Crowdsourcing. Given that VCR is focused on the average-case performance, we chose to use
crowdsourcing for measuring human performance. This allowed us to involve a large number of
participants for a more precise estimation of the average-case human performance. The experiment
is designed following (Hu et al., 2022) and (Geirhos et al., 2019a). The experiment procedure is a
forced-choice image categorization task: humans are presented with one image at a time, for 200 ms
to limit the influence of recurrent processing, and asked to choose a correct category out of 16 entry-
level class labels (Geirhos et al., 2019a). For NN models, the 1,000-class decision vector was mapped
to the same 16 classes using the WordNet hierarchy (Geirhos et al., 2019a). The time to classify each
image was set to ensure fairness in the comparison between humans and machines (Firestone, 2020).
Between images, we showed a noise mask to minimize feedback influence in the brain (Geirhos et al.,
2019a). We included qualification tests and sanity checks aimed to filter out cases of participants
misunderstanding the task and spammers (Papadopoulos et al., 2017), and only considered results
from those participants who passed both tests. As a result, we had 7,718 participants and obtained
approximately (1) 70,000 human predictions on images with different levels of visual corruptions;
and (2) 50,000 human predictions on original images as these can be repeated in experiments for
different corruptions. The same original image, corrupted or not, was never shown again to the same
participant.
NN models. We studied 11 standard supervised models: N OISY M IX, N OISY M IX NEW (Erich-
son et al., 2022), SIN, SIN IN, SIN IN IN, HM ANY, HAUG M IX (Hendrycks et al., 2020),
S TANDARD R50 (Paszke et al., 2019), A LEX N ET (Krizhevsky et al., 2012); 4 adversarial learn-
ing models: D O 50 2 L INF (Salman et al., 2020), L IU -S WIN -L, L IU -C ONV N E X T-L (Liu et al.,
2023), S INGH -C ONV N E X T-L-C ONV S TEM (Singh et al., 2023); 2 SWSL models: SWSL RESNET 18,
SWSL RESNEXT 101 32 X 16 D (Yalniz et al., 2019); 3 ViT models: T IAN D EI T-S, T IAN D EI T-
B (Tian et al., 2022), DINOV 2 GIANT (Oquab et al., 2023); and 1 CLIP (clip-vit-base-patch32)
model (Radford et al., 2021). For CLIP, we used a simple prompt “a picture of (ImageNet class)”
while tokenizing the labels. See the appendix for more details on the models and their selection.


3   T ESTING ROBUSTNESS AGAINST V ISUAL C ORRUPTION

I MAGE N ET-C is the SoTA benchmark for corruption robustness. Rather than considering the continu-
ous range of corruption like VCR, I MAGE N ET-C includes all I MAGE N ET validation images corrupted
using 5 pre-selected parameter values for each type of corruption (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019).
This section compares robustness measured with I MAGE N ET-C vs. VCR on all 9 I MAGE N ET-C
corruption functions in our study. Due to the page limit, we include full results in the appendix.
Visual Corruption in Test Sets. For each corruption, our tests generated for checking VCR contain
50, 000 images, mirroring the size of the I MAGE N ET (Russakovsky et al., 2015) validation set, while
I MAGE N ET-C includes 5 × 50, 000 images. Because of the difference in how test sets are generated,
we can observe two major differences in the distributions of degrees of visual corruption: they have
different coverage and peak at different values (e.g., Fig. 1).
To quantitatively assess the actual coverage of ∆v in the test sets, Tab. 1 gives the coverage as a
percentage of the full ∆v range of [0, 1]. To compute it, the distribution is divided into 40 bins with
the same width. A bin is considered covered if it contains 20 or more images. The coverage is then
determined by dividing the number of covered bins by the total number of bins (40). We observed
that I MAGE N ET-C exhibits a low coverage of ∆v values. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1 and Tab. 1,
the distribution of I MAGE N ET-C in Gaussian blur has coverage of only 56.4% focusing mainly on
the center of the entire domain of ∆v and missing coverage for low and high ∆v values, which
can lead to biased evaluation. As we show in the appendix, the same can be observed for most


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                     Coverage
                                                                         Corruption
                                                                                          I MAGE N ET-C   VCR Test Set
                                                                         Brightness          0.590              1.000
                                                                         Gaussian Blur       0.564              0.974
                                                                         Defocus Blur        0.538              0.923
                                                                         Shot Noise          0.462              0.590
                                                                         Frost               0.436              1.000
                                                                         Gaussian Noise      0.436              0.872
           (a) I MAGE N ET-C             (b) VCR Test Set                Impulse Noise       0.385              0.641
                                                                         Motion Blur         0.333              0.974
                                                                         Glass Blur          0.333              0.949
   Figure 1: Histograms showing ∆v distribu-
   tion between I MAGE N ET-C and our VCR test Table 1: ∆v Coverage Comparison with
   sets for Gaussian Blur.                     I MAGE N ET-C.


 (a) I MAGE N ET-C Gaussian Noise Accuracy          (b) Gaussian Noise R̂a                    (c) Gaussian Noise R̂p

Figure 2: Comparison between I MAGE N ET-C and VCR with Gaussian Noise. Models discussed in
the text are marked by a red triangle.

I MAGE N ET-C corruption functions. On the other hand, our test sets provide coverage for almost the
entire domain, with a coverage percentage of 97.4%. This pattern holds true for other corruption
functions as well—our test sets have consistently higher coverage than I MAGE N ET-C.
As for VCR, Shot Noise and Impulse Noise have relatively low coverage, because the level of noise
these functions add is exponential to their parameters. As a result, uniform sampling of the parameter
range C fails to cover small ∆v values. When using uniform sampling over C, reaching the full
coverage of ∆v would require a large amount of data. Note, however, Alg. 1 still computes VCR
over the full ∆v range of [0..1], and the lack of samples for low values of ∆v has a limited impact on
the VCR estimate. This is because we fit a monotonic spline that is anchored with a known initial
performance for ∆v = 0, as discussed in the appendix.
Remark: The reported accuracy of I MAGE N ET-C can be directly impacted both by a lack of coverage
and by non-uniformity, as it is computed as the average accuracy of all transformed images. In contrast,
the shape of the ∆v distribution in the generated test set does not impact VCR once sufficient coverage
is achieved to estimate the spline curves sγ , as already explained.
Robustness Evaluation Results. Next, we compare robustness evaluation results obtained with
I MAGE N ET-C and VCR test sets. Consider results for Gaussian Noise in Fig. 2. N OISY M IX and
N OISY M IX NEW have almost the same robust accuracy on I MAGE N ET-C, but N OISY M IX NEW has
higher R̂a ; similarly, SIN has higher I MAGE N ET-C robust accuracy but lower R̂a than SIN IN IN.
This is due to the almost complete lack of coverage for ∆v < 0.5 for Gaussian Noise in I MAGE N ET-C
(see Tab. 1 and Fig. 11f), which can lead to biased evaluation results (i.e., biased towards ∆v ≥ 0.5).
Checking VCR allows us to detect such biases.
In addition to accuracy, VCR can also be used to check whether the NN can preserve its predictions
after corruption, i.e., the prediction consistency property p, which can give us additional information
about NN robustness. From Fig. 2b,c we can see that the model T IAN D EIT B has a higher R̂a than
S INGH -C ONV N E X T-L-C ONV S TEM but a lower R̂p . This suggests that even though T IAN D EIT B
has better accuracy for corrupted images, it labels the same image with different labels before and
after the corruption. Since ground truth would be hard to obtain during deployment, having low
prediction consistency indicates issues with model stability and could raise concerns about when to
trust the model prediction. The results for the remaining corruptions are in the appendix.
Summary: It is essential to test robustness before deploying NNs into an environment with a wide
and continuous range of visual corruptions. Our results confirmed that testing robustness in this range


                                                              5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          (a) HMRI for Ra                     (b) MRSI for Ra                 (c) Estimated curves sa


          (d) HMRI for Rp                     (e) MRSI for Rp                 (f) Estimated curves sp

Figure 3: VCR evaluation results for Gaussian Noise. Results include, for each NN, the estimated
curves sa and sp (representing how the performance w.r.t. the robustness properties a and p decreases
as ∆v increases); and the corresponding HMRI and MRSI values. Results are colored based on their
category: Human, Vision Transformer, Supervised Learning, SWSL, Adversarial Training, CLIP.


          (a) HMRI for Ra                     (b) MRSI for Ra                 (c) Estimated curves sa


          (d) HMRI for Rp                     (e) MRSI for Rp                 (f) Estimated curves sp

                        Figure 4: VCR evaluation results for Uniform Noise.

using a fixed and pre-selected number of parameter values can lead to undetected robustness issues,
which can be avoided by checking VCR. Additionally, accuracy cannot accurately represent model
stability when facing corruptions, which can be addressed by testing Rp .


4   VCR OF DNN S C OMPARED WITH H UMANS

We use our two new human-aware metrics, HMRI and MRSI, and the data from the human experiment
to compare VCR of the studied models against human performance as a baseline.
For Gaussian Noise, Fig. 3 presents our measured HMRI and MRSI values for Ra and Rp . For
both metrics, a higher value indicates better robustness. As shown in Fig. 3a, no NN has reached
1.0 for HMRIa , and in Fig. 3d, only 3 out of 21 NNs DINOV 2 GIANT, T IAN D EI T-B and S INGH -
C ONV N E X T-L-C ONV S TEM reached 1.0 for HMRIp , indicating that there are still unclosed gaps


                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


between human and NN robustness, with humans giving more accurate and more consistent pre-
dictions facing corruptions than most SoTA NNs. These thee top-performing models have also
the highest HMRI values for both Ra and Rp , making these models closest to human robustness.
In Fig. 3b, we can see that these three models have MRSIa values above 0.0, indicating that they
surpass human accuracy in certain ranges of visual corruption. This can be visualized by checking the
estimated curves sa as shown in Fig. 3c. The top-three models exceed human accuracy (the red curve)
when ∆v > 0.85. For prediction consistency, Fig. 3e shows that all NNs have the MRSIp value above
0.0 and this is because, as shown in Fig. 3f, all NN curves are above the human curve when the ∆v
value is small. Specifically, the top-three models completely exceed humans in the entire ∆v range.
Similarly, for Uniform Noise, as shown in Fig. 4a and Fig. 4d, no models reached 1.0 for HMRIa and
the top-three models, reached 1.0 for HMRIp . Together with Fig. 4b and Fig. 4e, we can see that for
both Ra and Rp , T IAN D EI T-B has higher HMRI values but T IAN D EI T-S has higher MRSI values.
This suggests that while T IAN D EI T-B is closer to human performance, T IAN D EI T-S exceeds
human performance more. This result may be counter-intuitive but can be explained with the curves
sa and sp representing how the performance w.r.t. the robustness properties a and p decreases as
∆v increases, as shown in Fig. 4c and Fig. 4f. From both sa and sp , we observed that for ∆v values
less than 0.8, the performance of T IAN D EI T-B is higher than T IAN D EI T-S and closer to human,
hence the higher HMRI value; and after ∆v = 0.8 when human performance starts decreasing, the
T IAN D EI T-B performance drops rapidly to much below that of T IAN D EI T-S, hence the lower
MRSI value.
This suggests that both HMRI and MRSI are useful for comparing NN robustness, and our curves sa
and sp can provide further information on NN robustness with different degrees of visual corruption.
Overall, in both Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, we observed that the three ViT models (shown in purple) have the
best performance for both Ra and Rp , making them the models closest to human robustness. The
same can also be observed for the rest of the corruption functions; see the appendix for more details.
This indicates that vision transformer is the most promising architecture for reaching human-level
robustness, even outperforming models trained with additional training data. The data in the appendix
also indicates the biggest remaining robustness gap for blur corruptions. Furthermore, as we show in
the appendix, our generated test sets can be used during model retraining for improved robustness
compared to humans, resulting in with higher HMRI and MRSI values.
Summary: As our results suggest, when considering the full range of visually-continuous corruption,
no NNs can match human accuracy, especially for blur corruptions, and only the best-performing
ones can match human prediction consistency. For some specific degrees of corruption, few NNs
can exceed humans by mostly tiny margins. This highlights a more substantial gap between human
and NN robustness than previously identified by Geirhos et al. (2021). By evaluating VCR using
our human-centric metrics, we gain deeper insights into the robustness gap, which can aid in the
development of models closer to human robustness.



5   VCR FOR V ISUALLY S IMILAR C ORRUPTION F UNCTIONS

One noteworthy observation we made from our experiments with humans is the existence of visually
similar corruption functions. This can contribute towards reducing experiment costs and a better
understanding of differences between humans and NNs.
Different corruptions change different aspects of the images, e.g., image colour, contrast, and the
amount of additive visual noise, and thus affect human perception differently (Geirhos et al., 2019a).
Also, multiple different corruption functions can be implemented for the same visual effect, such
as Gaussian noise and Impulse noise for noise addition. Although the difference between Gaussian
noise and Impulse noise can be picked up by complex NN models, an average human would struggle
to distinguish between the two. Therefore, for a specific visual effect, there should exist a class of
corruption functions implementing the effect that an average human is unable to tell them apart. We
call corruption functions in the same class visually similar. We postulate that since visually similar
functions, by definition, affect human perception similarly, they would affect human robustness
similarly as well. Therefore, human data for one function can be reused for other similar functions in
the same class possibly reducing experiment costs.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          (a) Blur class sha               (b) Noise class sha                (c) Dissimilar sha

Figure 5: Comparing human performance spline curves sha for similar and dissimilar corruption
functions. For each curve, the coloured region around the curve is the 83% confidence interval used
for comparison of similarity. See shp in supplementary materials.


Since VCR is estimated with the spline curves sha and shp , if the difference among the curves of a set
of functions is statistically insignificant, human data (i.e., the spline curves) can be reused among
the functions in this set. In Fig. 5, we plot the smoothed spline curves sha and shp obtained for all 14
corruption functions included in our experiments. We can observe that, for all corruption functions
shown, human performance decreases slowly for small values of visual degrade (∆v ), but once ∆v
reaches a turning point, human performance starts decreasing more rapidly. Then, we observe that
spline curves obtained for certain blur and noise transformations have similar shapes, while those
for dissimilar transformations start decreasing at different turning points with different slopes. More
specifically, the differences between two spline curves are statistically insignificant if their 83%
confidence intervals overlap (Koenker et al., 1994).
Summary: By checking statistical significance with 83% confidence interval for each corruption
function, we empirically observed two classes of visually similar corruptions in our experiments with
humans: (1) the noise class: Shot Noise, Impulse Noise, Gaussian Noise, and Uniform Noise; and (2)
the blur class: Blur, Median Blur, Gaussian Blur, Glass blur, Defocus Blur. The remainder of the 14
corruptions we considered are dissimilar. See Fig. 5.
NN Robustness for Visually Similar Corruption Functions. Because of the central difference
between humans and NNs, e.g., computational powers, it is intuitive that NNs might react completely
differently to corruptions visually similar to humans, and using VCR, we can empirically analyze such
difference. For example, during deployment, noise with unknown distributions (ranging from Uniform,
Gaussian, Poisson etc.), can be encountered. While noise distribution does not affect humans as we
showed in Fig. 5, NNs which are particularly susceptible to a certain distribution might raise safety
concerns. For example, two visually similar transformations Gaussian Noise and Uniform Noise
add an additional noise to the images with the Gaussian and the Uniform distribution, respectively.
However, our results in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 suggest that the distribution difference is picked up by
NNs. We can observe that most models have higher HMRI and MRSI values for Uniform Noise than
Gaussian Noise. For small amounts of corruption (∆v < 0.8), the difference between the estimated
sa and sp curves for both corruptions is not statistically significant, i.e., NN models perform similarly
when facing small amounts of Uniform and Gaussian Noise. For ∆v values between [0.8..1.0],
most visual information required for humans to recognize objects is corrupted by the noise, human
performance decreases quickly, but the most robust models, e.g., DINOV 2 GIANT and T IAN D EI T-S,
are able to pick up more information than humans and make reasonable recognition. When the added
noise is from a uniform distribution, NN models perform better than when it is from a Gaussian
distribution. Therefore, studying VCR also allows us to empirically analyze how changing the
noise distribution, which would not affect humans, affects NN performance for different degrees
of corruption. In the case of unknown or shifting distributions, such analysis would require human
data for all distributions which is impractical and expensive. Identifying classes of visually similar
corruption functions and reusing human data would significantly reduce the experiment costs.
Identifying Visually Similar Transformations. We provide a naive method for identifying classes of
visually similar corruptions. To identify whether two corruptions are similar enough to reuse human
data, the goal is to determine whether the difference between them is distinguishable to a human.
This can be done through a set of relatively inexpensive experiments. Without knowing the specific


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


corruptions introduced to the images, participants are shown corrupted images and asked if the
presented images are corrupted with the same corruption function. Presented images can be corrupted
with the same or different corruption functions. Then, by repeating the experiments with different
sampled images, the accuracy of distinguishing the corruptions can be calculated. We hypothesize that
if the corruption functions are indistinguishable, human accuracy should be close to random. Then,
since each experiment is either successfully distinguished or not, we use a binomial test to check
whether the accuracy is statistically significant to not be random. Visually similar transformations
included in this paper can be detected with this naive method. Our experiments showed that for each
pair of transformations, results with statistical significance can be reached in less than a minute.
Compared to the full set of experiments with 2,000 images and five different participants for each
experiment, identifying similar transformations significantly decreased the experiment time, from
approximately 5.55 hours to 5 minutes.
Limitation: Note that the results of this method can be highly dependent on the opinion of the
participants; thus, it is more optimal to select participants with a normal eyesight and a basic
knowledge of image corruptions. We acknowledge that this naive method cannot give the most
accurate identification of visually similar transformations. For example, it is reasonable to assume
that two transformations can have very different visual effects but still affect human robustness in
the same way, and this case would not be detected with this method. Nevertheless, we hope that our
findings will promote future investigations of how NNs and humans react differently to corruptions.



6    R ELATED W ORK

We briefly review related work on the comparison of human and NN robustness; a more extensive
review of related work on robustness can be found in the appendix.
Prior studies have used human performance to study the existing differences between humans and
neural networks (Firestone, 2020; Zhang et al., 2018c), to study invariant transformations (Kher-
adpisheh et al., 2016), to compare recognition accuracy (Ho-Phuoc, 2018; Stallkamp et al., 2012),
to compare robustness against image transformations (Geirhos et al., 2019a; 2021), or to specify
expected model behaviour (Hu et al., 2022). The main difference between our study and existing work,
specifically, the most recent study by Geirhos et al. (2021), is three-fold: 1) we are the first to quantify
robustness across the full continuous visual corruption range, thus revealing previous undetected
robustness gap; 2) our experiments for obtaining human performance are designed to include more
participants for measuring the average human robustness, resulting in more generalizable results and
reduced influence of outliers; 3) we identified visually similar transformations for humans but not
NNs, potentially reducing experiment costs.



7    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we revisit corruption robustness to consider it in relation to the wide and continuous
range of corruptions to human perceptive quality, defining visually-continuous corruption robustness
(VCR); along with two novel human-aware metrics for NN evaluation. Our results showed that the
robustness gap between human and NNs is bigger than previously detected, especially for blur
corruptions. We found that using the full and continuous range of visual change is necessary when
estimating robustness, as insufficient coverage can lead to biased results. We also discovered classes
of image corruptions that affect human perception similarly and identifying them can help reduce
the cost of measuring human robustness and assessing disparities between human perception and
computational models. In our study, we only considered the comparison of object recognition between
humans and NNs; however, human and machine vision can be compared in many different ways, e.g.,
against neural data (Yamins et al., 2014; Kubilius et al., 2019), contrasting Gestalt effects (Kim et al.,
2019), object similarity judgments (Hebart et al., 2020), or mid-level properties (Storrs et al., 2021).
Nevertheless, our results give indicators for future robustness studies, and to promote further research,
we provide our benchmark datasets with human performance data and our code as open source.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Alexander Buslaev, Vladimir I. Iglovikov, Eugene Khvedchenya, Alex Parinov, Mikhail Druzhinin,
  and Alexandr A. Kalinin. Albumentations: Fast and Flexible Image Augmentations. Information,
  11(2), 2020. ISSN 2078-2489. doi: 10.3390/info11020125. Licensed with MIT License. To view
  a copy of this license see https://github.com/albumentations-team/albumentations/blob/master/
  LICENSE.
Prithvijit Chattopadhyay, Judy Hoffman, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. RobustNav:
  Towards Benchmarking Robustness in Embodied Navigation. In 2021 IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada, October 10-17, 2021, pp.
  15671–15680. IEEE, 2021. doi: 10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.01540.
Francesco Croce, Maksym Andriushchenko, Vikash Sehwag, Edoardo Debenedetti, Nicolas Flammar-
  ion, Mung Chiang, Prateek Mittal, and Matthias Hein. RobustBench: A Standardized Adversarial
  Robustness Benchmark. In Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track on
  Datasets and Benchmarks 1, NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks 2021, December 2021, virtual,
  2021. URL https://robustbench.github.io/. Licensed with MIT license. To view a copy of this
  license see https://github.com/RobustBench/robustbench/blob/master/LICENSE.
Keyan Ding, Kede Ma, Shiqi Wang, and Eero P. Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: Unifying
  structure and texture similarity. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
  44(5):2567–2581, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2020.3045810.
N. Benjamin Erichson, Soon Hoe Lim, Winnie Xu, Francisco Utrera, Ziang Cao, and Michael W.
  Mahoney. NoisyMix: Boosting Model Robustness to Common Corruptions, 2022.
Chaz Firestone. Performance vs. Competence in Human–Machine Comparisons. Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 117(43):26562–26571, 2020.
Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, Christoph Stiller, and Raquel Urtasun. Vision Meets Robotics: The
  KITTI Dataset. Int. J. of Robotics Research (IJRR), 2013.
R Geirhos, CR Medina Temme, J Rauber, HH Schütt, M Bethge, and FA Wichmann. Generalisation
  in Humans and Deep Neural Networks. In NeurIPS 2018, pp. 7549–7561. Curran, 2019a.
Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A. Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. ImageNet-trained CNNs are Biased Towards Texture; Increasing Shape Bias
  Improves Accuracy and Robustness. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019, 2019b.
Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard S. Zemel, Wieland Brendel,
  Matthias Bethge, and Felix A. Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nat. Mach.
  Intell., 2(11):665–673, 2020. doi: 10.1038/s42256-020-00257-z.
Robert Geirhos, Kantharaju Narayanappa, Benjamin Mitzkus, Tizian Thieringer, Matthias Bethge,
  Felix A. Wichmann, and Wieland Brendel. Partial success in closing the gap between human and
  machine vision. In Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Alina Beygelzimer, Yann N. Dauphin, Percy Liang,
  and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34:
  Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December
  6-14, 2021, virtual, pp. 23885–23899, 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/
  c8877cff22082a16395a57e97232bb6f-Abstract.html.
Kaiming He, X. Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition.
  2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 770–778, 2016.
Martin N Hebart, Charles Y Zheng, Francisco Pereira, and Chris I Baker. Revealing the multidimen-
 sional mental representations of natural objects underlying human similarity judgements. Nature
 human behaviour, 4(11):1173–1185, 2020.
Dan Hendrycks and Thomas Dietterich. Benchmarking Neural Network Robustness to Common
  Corruptions and Perturbations. Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2019. URL https://github.com/hendrycks/robustness. Licensed with Apache-2.0 license.
  To view a copy of this license see https://github.com/hendrycks/robustness/blob/master/LICENSE.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. A Baseline for Detecting Misclassified and Out-of-Distribution
  Examples in Neural Networks. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings, 2017.
Dan Hendrycks, Norman Mu, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Justin Gilmer, and Balaji Lakshmi-
  narayanan. AugMix: A Simple Data Processing Method to Improve Robustness and Uncertainty.
  In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia,
 April 26-30, 2020, 2020.
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul
  Desai, Tyler Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, Dawn Song, Jacob Steinhardt, and Justin Gilmer.
  The Many Faces of Robustness: A Critical Analysis of Out-of-Distribution Generalization. In 2021
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada,
  October 10-17, 2021, pp. 8320–8329. IEEE, 2021a. doi: 10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00823.
Dan Hendrycks, Kevin Zhao, Steven Basart, Jacob Steinhardt, and Dawn Song. Natural Adversarial
  Examples. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2021,
  virtual, June 19-25, 2021, pp. 15262–15271. Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2021b. doi:
 10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.01501.
T. Ho-Phuoc. CIFAR10 to Compare Visual Recognition Performance between Deep Neural Networks
   and Humans. ArXiv, abs/1811.07270, 2018.
Boyue Caroline Hu, Lina Marsso, Krzysztof Czarnecki, Rick Salay, Huakun Shen, and Marsha
  Chechik. If a Human Can See It, So Should Your System: Reliability Requirements for Machine
  Vision Components. In Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering
  (ICSE’2022), Pittsburgh, USA. ACM, 2022.
Christoph Kamann and Carsten Rother. Benchmarking the Robustness of Semantic Segmentation
  Models with Respect to Common Corruptions. Int. J. Comput. Vis., 129(2):462–483, 2021. doi:
 10.1007/s11263-020-01383-2.
Oguzhan Fatih Kar, Teresa Yeo, Andrei Atanov, and Amir Zamir. 3D Common Corruptions and
  Data Augmentation. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
 CVPR 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, June 18-24, 2022, pp. 18941–18952. IEEE, 2022. doi:
 10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01839.
Saeed Reza Kheradpisheh, Masoud Ghodrati, Mohammad Ganjtabesh, and Timothée Masquelier.
  Deep Networks Can Resemble Human Feed-forward Vision in Invariant Object Recognition.
  Scientific reports, 6(1):1–24, 2016.
B Kim, E Reif, M Wattenberg, S Bengio, and MC Mozer. Neural networks trained on natural scenes
  exhibit gestalt closure. arxiv. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.01069, 2019.
Roger Koenker, Pin Ng, and Stephen Portnoy. Quantile Smoothing Splines. Biometrika, 81(4):
  673–680, 1994.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. ImageNet Classification with Deep
  Convolutional Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25: 26th
  Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2012. Proceedings of a meeting
  held December 3-6, 2012, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, United States, pp. 1106–1114, 2012.
Jonas Kubilius, Martin Schrimpf, Kohitij Kar, Rishi Rajalingham, Ha Hong, Najib Majaj, Elias Issa,
  Pouya Bashivan, Jonathan Prescott-Roy, Kailyn Schmidt, et al. Brain-like object recognition with
  high-performing shallow recurrent anns. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.
Abhinau Kumar. Python 3 implementation of the visual information fidelity (vif) image quality
  assessment (iqa) metric. https://github.com/abhinaukumar/vif, 2020. Licensed with MIT license.
 To view a copy of this license see https://github.com/abhinaukumar/vif/blob/main/LICENSE.
Chang Liu, Yinpeng Dong, Wenzhao Xiang, Xiao Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Yuefeng Chen, Yuan He,
  Hui Xue, and Shibao Zheng. A comprehensive study on robustness of image classification models:
  Benchmarking and rethinking, 2023.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Dong Yin, Ben Poole, Justin Gilmer, and Ekin D. Cubuk. Improving
  robustness without sacrificing accuracy with patch gaussian augmentation. CoRR, abs/1906.02611,
  2019.

Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards Deep Learning Models Resistant to Adversarial Attacks. In 6th International Conference
  on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018,
  Conference Track Proceedings, 2018.

Claudio Michaelis, Benjamin Mitzkus, Robert Geirhos, Evgenia Rusak, Oliver Bringmann, Alexan-
  der S. Ecker, Matthias Bethge, and Wieland Brendel. Benchmarking Robustness in Object
  Detection: Autonomous Driving when Winter is Coming. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.07484, 2019.

Eric Mintun, Alexander Kirillov, and Saining Xie. On Interaction Between Augmentations and
  Corruptions in Natural Corruption Robustness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021,
  December 6-14, 2021, virtual, pp. 3571–3583, 2021.

Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Mahmoud Assran, Nicolas
 Ballas, Wojciech Galuba, Russell Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Shang-Wen Li, Ishan Misra, Michael
 Rabbat, Vasu Sharma, Gabriel Synnaeve, Hu Xu, Hervé Jegou, Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut,
 Armand Joulin, and Piotr Bojanowski. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision,
 2023.

Dim P. Papadopoulos, Jasper R. R. Uijlings, Frank Keller, and Vittorio Ferrari. Training Object Class
  Detectors with Click Supervision. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, CVPR 2017, Honolulu, HI, USA, July 21-26, 2017, pp. 180–189. IEEE Computer
  Society, 2017. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.27.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
 Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance
  Deep Learning Library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 8024–8035.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch. Licensed with modified
  BSD license. To view a copy of this license see https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/blob/main/
  LICENSE.

Ori Press, Steffen Schneider, Matthias Kümmerer, and Matthias Bethge. Rdumb: A simple approach
  that questions our progress in continual test-time adaptation, 2023.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021.

E. Rusak, Lukas Schott, Roland S. Zimmermann, Julian Bitterwolf, O. Bringmann, M. Bethge, and
  Wieland Brendel. Increasing the Robustness of DNNs Against Image Corruptions by Playing the
   Game of Noise. ArXiv, abs/2001.06057, 2020.

Olga Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma, Zhiheng Huang, A. Karpathy,
  A. Khosla, M. Bernstein, A. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition
  Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision, 115:211–252, 2015.

Hadi Salman, Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Ashish Kapoor, and Aleksander Madry. Do Adversari-
  ally Robust ImageNet Models Transfer Better? In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020,
  December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.

H. R. Sheikh and A. C. Bovik. Image Information and Visual Quality. IEEE Transactions on Image
  Processing, 15(2):430–444, 2006.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H. R. Sheikh, M. F. Sabir, and A. C. Bovik. A Statistical Evaluation of Recent Full Reference Image
  Quality Assessment Algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 15(11):3440–3451,
  2006.
Naman D Singh, Francesco Croce, and Matthias Hein. Revisiting adversarial training for imagenet:
  Architectures, training and generalization across threat models, 2023.
J. Stallkamp, M. Schlipsing, J. Salmen, and C. Igel. Man vs. Computer: Benchmarking Machine
   Learning Algorithms for Traffic Sign Recognition. Neural Networks, 32:323 – 332, 2012. ISSN
   0893-6080. Selected Papers from IJCNN 2011.
Katherine R Storrs, Barton L Anderson, and Roland W Fleming. Unsupervised learning predicts
  human perception and misperception of gloss. Nature Human Behaviour, 5(10):1402–1417, 2021.
Jiachen Sun, Qingzhao Zhang, Bhavya Kailkhura, Zhiding Yu, Chaowei Xiao, and Z. Morley Mao.
   Benchmarking Robustness of 3D Point Cloud Recognition Against Common Corruptions. CoRR,
   abs/2201.12296, 2022.
Rui Tian, Zuxuan Wu, Qi Dai, Han Hu, and Yu-Gang Jiang. Deeper Insights into the Robustness of
  ViTs towards Common Corruptions, 2022.
Zhou Wang, A.C. Bovik, H.R. Sheikh, and E.P. Simoncelli. Image Quality Assessment: From Error
  Visibility to Structural Similarity. IEEE Trans. on Image Processing, 13(4):600–612, 2004.
I. Zeki Yalniz, Hervé Jégou, Kan Chen, Manohar Paluri, and Dhruv Mahajan. Billion-scale semi-
   supervised learning for image classification. CoRR, abs/1905.00546, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/
   abs/1905.00546.
Daniel LK Yamins, Ha Hong, Charles F Cadieu, Ethan A Solomon, Darren Seibert, and James J
  DiCarlo. Performance-optimized hierarchical models predict neural responses in higher visual
  cortex. Proceedings of the national academy of Sciences, 111(23):8619–8624, 2014.
Chenyu Yi, Siyuan Yang, Haoliang Li, Yap-Peng Tan, and Alex C. Kot. Benchmarking the Robustness
  of Spatial-Temporal Models Against Corruptions. In Proceedings of the Neural Information
  Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks 1, NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks
  2021, December 2021, virtual, 2021.
Dong Yin, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Jonathon Shlens, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, and Justin Gilmer. A
  Fourier Perspective on Model Robustness in Computer Vision. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019,
 NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 13255–13265, 2019.
Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, Sanghyuk Chun, Seong Joon Oh, Youngjoon Yoo, and Junsuk Choe.
  CutMix: Regularization Strategy to Train Strong Classifiers With Localizable Features. In 2019
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2019, Seoul, Korea (South),
  October 27 - November 2, 2019, pp. 6022–6031. IEEE, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2019.00612.
Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cissé, Yann N. Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond Empirical
  Risk Minimization. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018,
 Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference Track Proceedings, 2018a.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A. Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018b. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.00068.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A. Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In 2018 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2018, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, June 18-22, 2018, pp. 586–595.
  Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE Computer Society, 2018c. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.00068.


                                                13
