Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NVERSE A PPROXIMATION T HEORY FOR N ONLINEAR
R ECURRENT N EURAL N ETWORKS
 Shida Wang                                                              Zhong Li
 Department of Mathematics                                               Microsoft Research Asia
 National University of Singapore                                        lzhong@microsoft.com
 e0622338@u.nus.edu

 Qianxiao Li∗
 Department of Mathematics
 Institute for Functional Intelligent Materials
 National University of Singapore
 qianxiao@nus.edu.sg


                                               A BSTRACT

             We prove an inverse approximation theorem for the approximation of nonlinear
             sequence-to-sequence relationships using recurrent neural networks (RNNs). This
             is a so-called Bernstein-type result in approximation theory, which deduces prop-
             erties of a target function under the assumption that it can be effectively approx-
             imated by a hypothesis space. In particular, we show that nonlinear sequence
             relationships that can be stably approximated by nonlinear RNNs must have an
             exponential decaying memory structure - a notion that can be made precise. This
             extends the previously identified curse of memory in linear RNNs into the gen-
             eral nonlinear setting, and quantifies the essential limitations of the RNN archi-
             tecture for learning sequential relationships with long-term memory. Based on
             the analysis, we propose a principled reparameterization method to overcome the
             limitations. Our theoretical results are confirmed by numerical experiments.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Rumelhart et al., 1986) are one of the most basic machine
learning models to learn the relationship between sequential or temporal data. They have wide
applications from time series prediction (Connor et al., 1994), text generation (Sutskever et al.,
2011), speech recognition (Graves & Jaitly, 2014) to sentiment classification (Tang et al., 2015).
However, when there are long-term dependencies in the data, empirical results (Bengio et al., 1994)
show that RNN may encounter difficulties in learning. In this paper, we investigate this problem
from the view of approximation theory.
From approximation perspective, there are various types of theorems characterizing the connections
between target relationships and model architectures for learning them. Universal approximation
(Achieser, 2013, p. 32) and Jackson-type theorem (Achieser, 2013, p. 187) provide basic guarantees
of approximation and error estimates of sufficiently regular target functions by a particular hypoth-
esis space. A number of such results are available for sequence modeling, including the RNN (Li
et al., 2020; 2022). On the other hand, a relatively under-investigated domain in the machine learn-
ing literature are Bernstein-type theorems (Bernstein, 1914; Li et al., 2022), which are also known as
inverse approximation theorems. These results aims to characterize the regularity of target relation-
ships, assuming that they can be approximated efficiently with a hypothesis space. These regularity
notions intimately depends on, thus gives important insights into, the structure of the hypothesis
space under study.
    ∗
        Corresponding author


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This paper establishes an inverse approximation result for the approximation of nonlinear function-
als via RNNs. Previous works (Li et al., 2020; 2022) indicate that linear functionals that can be
universally approximated by linear RNNs must have exponential decaying memory. This phenom-
ena was coined the curse of memory for linear RNNs. A natural question is whether the nonlinear
recurrent activation used in practical RNNs changes the situation. This is important since a bigger
hypothesis space may lift restrictions on the target functions. Moreover, it is known that nonlinear
activation is crucial for feed-forward networks to achieve universality (Cybenko, 1989). Thus, it is
worthwhile to investigate whether the linear Bernstein result generalizes to the case of approximat-
ing nonlinear sequence relationships with nonlinear RNNs. In this paper, we prove that nonlinear
RNNs still suffer from a curse of memory in approximation - nonlinear functionals that can be sta-
bly approximated by RNNs with nonlinear activations must have an exponential decaying memory
function. The notions of stable approximation and memory function can be concretely defined. Our
results make precise the empirical observation that the RNN architecture has inherent limitations
when modeling long-time dependencies.
In summary, our main contributions are:

      1. We extends the concept of memory function in the linear settings (Li et al., 2020; 2022)
         to the nonlinear setting. This memory function can be numerically quantified in sequence
         modeling applications.
      2. We introduce a notion of stable approximation, which ensures that an approximant has the
         possibility to be found by a gradient-based optimization algorithm.
      3. We prove, to the best of our knowledge, the first Bernstein-type approximation theorem
         for nonlinear functional sequences through nonlinear RNNs. Our results characterize the
         essential limit of nonlinear RNNs in learning long-term relationship. Our analysis also
         suggests that appropriate parameterization can alleviate the ‘curse of memory’ phenomenon
         in learning targets with long memory. The theoretical result is corroborated with numerical
         experiments.

Notation. For a sequence of d-dimensional vectors indexed by R, x = {xt ∈ Rd : t ∈ R},
we
pPdenote the supremum         norm by ∥x∥∞ := supt∈R |xt |∞ . Here |x|∞ := maxi |xi |, |x|2 :=
        2 , |x| :=
                   P
      x
     i i       1      i |x  |
                           i are the usual max (L∞ ) norm, L2 norm and L1 norm. The bold face
represents sequence while the normal letters are scalars, vectors or functions. Throughout this paper
we use ∥ · ∥ to denote norms over sequences of vectors, or function(al)s, while | · | (with subscripts)
represents the norm of number, vector or weights tuple. The hat notation in this paper refers to the
hypothesis space (functional) while the original symbol is referring to the target space (functional).

2     P ROBLEM FORMULATION AND PRIOR RESULTS ON LINEAR RNN S
In this section, we introduce the problem formulation of sequence modeling as a functional sequence
approximation problem (Jiang et al., 2023). We pay particular attention to distinguish two types of
results: forward (Jackson-type) and inverse (Bernstein-type) approximation theorems. For approx-
imation theory in machine learning, most existing results focus on forward theorems. However,
inverse approximation theorems are of significant importance in revealing the fundamental limita-
tions of an approximation approach. This paper focuses on establishing such results in the general,
non-linear setting. We conclude this section with a review of known Bernstein-type estimates, which
is currently restricted to the linear case. In so doing, we highlight the definition of memory in the
linear case, which motivates our general definition of memory for nonlinear functional sequences in
Section 3.1. The relationship between memory and approximation is central to our results.

2.1   T HE APPROXIMATION PROBLEM FOR SEQUENCE MODELING

The goal of sequential modeling is to learn a relationship between an input sequence x = {xt }
and a corresponding output sequence y = {yt }. For ease of analysis, we adopt the continuous-
time setting in (Li et al., 2020), where t ∈ R. This is also a natural setting for irregularly sampled
time series (Lechner & Hasani, 2020). The input sequence space is X = C0 (R, Rd ), the space of
continuous functions vanishing at infinity. We assume the input and output sequences are related
by a sequence of functionals H = {Ht : X 7→ R; t ∈ R} via yt = Ht (x), t ∈ R. The sequential


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


approximation problem can be formulated as the approximation of the target functional sequence H
by a functional sequence H
                         b from a model hypothesis space such as RNNs.

Forward and inverse approximation theorems. Given a hypothesis space H    b (m) of complexity
m ≥ 1 (e.g. width-m RNNs), forward approximation theorems, also called Jackson-type theorems,
bound the optimal approximation error inf ∥H − H∥ b ≤ C(H, m).
                                         b H
                                         H∈ b (m)

Inverse approximation (Bernstein-type) results are “converse” statements to Jackson-type results.
From the starting assumption that an efficient approximation exists for a specific target H, Bernstein-
type results deduce the approximation spaces that H ought to belong to, i.e. it identifies a com-
plexity or regularity measure C(·) and show that C(H) is necessarily finite. Take the trigono-
metric polynomial approximation as an example, Bernstein (Achieser, 2013, p. 187) proved that if
   inf ∥H − H∥  b ≤ c , for all m ≥ 1 and some δ > 0, c > 0, then C(H) = |H (α) | < ∞, i.e.
H∈H
 b  b (m)             mα+δ
H must be α-times differentiable with δ-Hölder continuous derivatives.
Bernstein-type inverse approximation results are important in characterizing the approximation ca-
pabilities for hypothesis spaces. For trigonometric polynomial example, it says that only smooth
functions can be efficiently approximated, thereby placing a concrete limitation on the approxima-
tion capabilities of these models. Our goal in this paper is to deduce analogues of this result, but
for the approximation of general nonlinear functional sequences by RNNs. Unlike the classical case
where the notion of regularity enters in the form of smoothness, here we shall investigate the concept
of memory as a quantifier of regularity - a notion that we will make precise subsequently.

2.2   T HE RNN ARCHITECTURE AND PRIOR RESULTS

The continuous-time RNN architecture parameterizes functional sequences by the introduction of a
hidden dynamical system
                              dht
                               dt     = σ(W ht + U xt + b) h−∞ = 0,
                                                                                                   (1)
                                ŷt   = c⊤ ht ,            t ∈ R.

Here, ŷt ∈ R is the predicted output sequence value, and ht ∈ Rm denotes the hidden state1 .
The well-definedness of the continuous-time RNN will be discussed in Appendix A.1. The hyper-
parameter m is also known as the hidden dimension, or width, of recurrent neural networks. For
different hidden dimensions m, the RNN is parameterized by trainable weights (W, U, b, c), where
W ∈ Rm×m is the recurrent kernel, U ∈ Rm×d is the input kernel, b ∈ Rm is the bias and c ∈ Rm is
the readout. The complexity of the RNN hypothesis space is characterized by the hidden dimension
m. The nonlinearity arises from the activation function σ(·), which is a scalar function performed
element-wise, such as tanh, hardtanh, sigmoid or ReLU. The hypothesis space of RNNs is thus the
following functional sequence space
         b (m) = {x 7→ ŷ via Equation (1) : W ∈ Rm×m , U ∈ Rm×d , b ∈ Rm , c ∈ Rm }.
         H                                                                                         (2)
           RNN


Before presenting our main results, we review known Jackson and Bernstein-type results established
for linear RNNs, corresponding to setting σ(z) = z and b = 0 in equation 1. We shall pay attention
to the definition of memory for a target functional sequence, and how it relates to approximation
properties under the RNN hypothesis space.
We begin with some definitions on (sequences of) functionals as introduced in (Li et al., 2020).
Definition 2.1. Let H = {Ht : X 7→ R; t ∈ R} be a sequence of functionals. Without
loss of generality, we assume Ht (0) = 0 (Otherwise we can consider the adjusted relationship
Htadjusted (x) := Ht (x) − Ht (0)).

      1. (Linear) Ht is linear if for any λ, λ′ ∈ R and x, x′ ∈ X , Ht (λx + λ′ x′ ) = λHt (x) +
         λ′ Ht (x′ ).
   1
     The boundary condition h−∞ = 0 is consistent with practical implementations such as TensorFlow and
PyTorch, where the initial value of hidden state is set to be zero by default.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      2. (Continuous) Ht is continuous if for any x,′ x ∈ X , limx′ →x |Ht (x′ ) − Ht (x)| = 0.

      3. (Bounded) Ht is bounded if sup{x∈X ,x̸=0} |H t (x)|
                                                    ∥x∥∞ < ∞.

      4. (Time-homogeneous) H = {Ht : t ∈ R} is time-homogeneous (or shift-equivariant) if
         the input-output relationship commutes with time shift: let [Sτ (x)]t = xt−τ be a shift
         operator, then H(Sτ x) = Sτ H(x)
      5. (Causal) Ht is causal if it does not depend on future values of the input. That is, if x, x′
         satisfy xt = x′t for any t ≤ t0 , then Ht (x) = Ht (x′ ) for any t ≤ t0 .
                                                                                    (n)
      6. (Regular) Ht is regular if for any sequence {x(n) : n ∈ N} such that xs          → 0 for almost
         every s ∈ R, then limn→∞ Ht (x(n) ) = 0.
The works in Li et al. (2020; 2022) study the approximation of functional sequences satisfying
Definition 2.1 by linear RNNs. A key idea is showing that any such functional sequence H admits a
Riesz representation (see Appendix A.2 and Appendix A.3)
                                      Z ∞
                             Ht (x) =       ρ(s)⊤ xt−s ds,     t ∈ R.                         (3)
                                          0
In this sense, ρ completely determines H, and its approximation using linear RNNs can be reduced to
the study of the approximation of ρ ∈ L1 ([0, ∞), Rd ) by exponential sums of the form (c⊤ eW s U )⊤ .
An important observation here is that ρ captures the memory pattern of the target linear functional
sequence: if ρ decays rapidly, then the target has short memory, and vice versa.
By assuming that a target functional sequence H can be approximated uniformly by stable RNNs,
then the memory of the target functional sequence must satisfy eβ0 t |ρ(t)|1 = o(1) as t → ∞ for
some β0 > 0. This was coined the “curse of memory” (Li et al., 2020; 2022) and reveals fundamental
limitations of the RNN architecture to capture long-term memory structures.
The focus of this paper is to investigate whether the addition of nonlinear activation changes this
result. In other words, would the curse of memory hold for nonlinear RNNs in the approximation of
suitably general nonlinear functionals? This is a meaningful question, since Bernstein-type results
essentially constrain approximation spaces, and so a larger hypothesis space may relax such con-
straints. We expand on this in Appendix A.4. A significant challenge in the nonlinear setting is the
lack of a Riesz representation result, and thus one needs to carefully define a notion of memory that
is consistent with ρ in the linear case, but can still be used in the nonlinear setting to prove inverse
approximation theorems. Moreover, we will need to introduce a general notion of approximation
stability, which together with the generalized memory definition allows us to derive a Bernstein-type
result that holds beyond the linear case.

3     M AIN RESULTS
In this section, we establish a Bernstein-type approximation result for nonlinear functional se-
quences using nonlinear RNNs. We first give a definition of memory function for nonlinear function-
als. It is compatible with the memory definition in the linear functionals and it can be queried and
verified in applications. Next, we propose the framework of stable approximation. It is a mild re-
quirement from the perspective of approximation, but a desirable one from the view of optimization.
Moreover, we show that any linear functional with an exponential decaying memory can be sta-
bly approximated. Based on the memory function definition and stable approximation framework,
we prove a Bernstein-type theorem. The theorem shows that any nonlinear functionals that can
be stably approximated by general nonlinear RNNs must have an exponentially decaying memory,
which confirms that the curse-of-memory phenomenon is not limited to the linear case. Numerical
verifications are included to demonstrate the result.

3.1   M EMORY FUNCTION FOR NONLINEAR FUNCTIONALS

Recall that the memory for a linear functional sequence is defined by its Riesz representation in
Equation (3). While there are no known general analogues of Riesz representation for nonlinear
functionals, we may consider other means to extract an effective memory function from H.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                 x   t ≥ 0,
Let x ∈ R   d
                and consider the following Heaviside input sequence uxt = x · 1[0,∞) (t) =
                                                                                                 0   t < 0.
In the linear case, notice that according to Equation (3)
                                      d       x
                                      dt Ht (u )         |x⊤ ρ(t)|
                               sup                 = sup           = |ρ(t)|1 .                          (4)
                               x̸=0    ∥ux ∥∞        x̸=0 |x|∞

Hence, conditions on |ρ(t)|1 may be replaced by conditions on the left hand side, which is well-
defined also for nonlinear functionals. This motivates the following definition of memory function
for nonlinear functional sequences.
Definition 3.1 (Memory function of nonlinear functional sequences). For continuous, causal, regu-
lar and time-homogeneous functional sequences H = {Ht (x) : t ∈ R} on X , define the following
function as the memory function of H over bounded Heaviside input ux :
                                                    1    d
                               M(H)(t) := sup               Ht (ux ) .                         (5)
                                             x̸=0 |x| ∞  dt

In particular, in this paper we consider nonlinear functionals whose memory function is finite for all
t. Unlike traditional methods that evaluate memory through heuristic tasks, our approach offers a
precise, task-independent characterization of model memories. If the oracle of the target functional
is available, the memory function can be evaluated and the result is named queried memory. In
Appendix F and Appendix G, we discuss the memory function evaluated over different test inputs
and show the numerical equivalence in Appendix H. Without target functional oracle, we may ap-
proximate the target with the learned model and still evaluate the memory function. If the queried
memory are decaying for all Heaviside inputs, then we say the corresponding nonlinear functional
sequence has a decaying memory. We demonstrate in Appendix B that the memory querying shows
the memory pattern of LSTM and bidirectional LSTM sequence-to-sequence models in sentiment
analysis on IMDB movie reviews.
Definition 3.2 (Decaying memory). For continuous, causal, regular and time-homogeneous func-
tional sequences H = {Ht (x) : t ∈ R} on X , we say it has a decaying memory if:
                                          lim M(H)(t) = 0.                                        (6)
                                            t→∞
We say that H has an exponential decaying memory if for some β > 0,
                                           lim eβt M(H)(t) = 0.                                         (7)
                                          t→∞
Furthermore, the family {Hm } has a uniformly decaying memory if
                                   lim sup M(Hm )(t) = 0.                                               (8)
                                         t→∞ m

Remark 3.3. The requirement of decaying memory on time-homogeneous functionals is mild since
it is satisfied if dH
                    dt is continuous at Heaviside input, under the topology of point-wise convergence
                      t


(see Appendix A.5). We show that dH      dt are point-wise continuous over Heaviside inputs for all
                                           t

RNNs, thus RNNs have decaying memory (see Appendix A.6). Another related notion of fading
memory is discussed in the Appendix A.7.

3.2   S TABLE APPROXIMATION

We now introduce the stable approximation framework. Let us write the hypothesis space H       b (m)
as a parametric space H b (m) = {H(·;
                                   b θm ) : θm ∈ Θm } where for each m, Θm is a subset of a
Euclidean space with dimension depending on m, representing the parameter space defining the
hypothesis and H b is a parametric model. For example, in the case of RNNs, the parameter θm is
(Wm , Um , bm , cm ) ∈ Θm := {Rm×m × Rm×d × Rm × Rm } and m is the hidden dimension of the
RNN.
Let us consider a collection of functional sequences {H       b θm ) : m ≥ 1} that approximates
                                                      b m = H(·;
a target functional sequence H. Stable approximation requires that, if one were to perturb each
parameter θm by a small amount, the resulting approximant sequence should still have a continuous
perturbation error. For the gradient-based optimization, this condition is necessary for one to find
such an approximant sequence, as small perturbations of parameters should keep perturbation error
continuous for gradients to be computed. We now define this notion of stability precisely.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              102                                   m=2                                          102                                   m=2
                                                                    m=4                                                                                m=4

  Perturbation error Em( )


                                                                                     Perturbation error Em( )
                              101                                   m=6                                          101                                   m=6
                                                                    m=8                                                                                m=8
                              100                                   m=14                                         100                                   m=14

                             10 1                                                                               10 1

                             10 2                                                                               10 2

                             10 3                                                                               10 3
                                                        0
                             10 4                                                                               10 4
                                0   10 3    10 2       10 1   100          101                                     0   10 3    10 2       10 1   100          101
                                               Perturbation                                                                       Perturbation
                              (a) Target with exponential decay memory                                           (b) Target with polynomial decay memory

Figure 1: Perturbation errors for linear functionals with different decaying memory. The antici-
pated limiting curve E(β) is marked with a black dashed line. (a) For linear functional sequences
with exponential decaying memory, there exists a perturbation radius β0 such that the perturbation
error E(β) for 0 ≤ β < β0 is continuous. (b) Approximation of linear functional sequences with
polynomial decaying memory. As hidden dimension m increases, the perturbation radius where the
error remains small decreases, suggesting that there may not exist a β0 achieving the stable approx-
imation condition. The intersections of lines are shifting left as the hidden dimension m increases.
The anticipated limiting curve E(β) is not continous for the polynomial decaying memory target.

Definition 3.4. For target H and parameterized model H(·,
                                                     b θm ), we define the perturbation error
for hidden dimension m to be:
                          Em (β) :=       sup       ∥H − H(·;
                                                          b θ̃m )∥                        (9)
                                                              θ̃m ∈{θ:|θ−θm |2 ≤β}

Moreover, E(β) := lim supm→∞ Em (β) is the (asymptotic) perturbation error. Here |θ|2 :=
max(|W |2 , |U |2 , |b|2 , |c|2 ).
Definition 3.5 (Stable approximation via parameterized models). Let β0 > 0. We say a target
                                                               b (m) }, if there exists a sequence
functional sequence H admits a β0 -stable approximation under {H
of parameterized approximants Hm = H(·, θm ), θm ∈ Θm such that
                                   b   b
                                      lim ∥H − H b m ∥ → 0,                                   (10)
                                                              m→∞
and for all 0 ≤ β ≤ β0 , the perturbation error satisfies that E(β) is continuous in β for 0 ≤ β ≤ β0 .
Remark 3.6. It can be seen that approximation only requires E(0) = 0. Therefore the stable approx-
imation condition generalizes the approximation by requiring the continuity of E around β = 0. If
an approximation is unstable (E(0) = 0, limβ→0 E(β) > 0), it is difficult to be found by gradient-
based optimizations. Since our notion of stability depends on the size of weight perturbations, one
may wonder whether rescaling the norm of weights separately for each m achieves stability. There
are two issues with this approach. First, the rescaled version is no-longer the usual RNN hypoth-
esis space. Second, to achieve stability the rescaling rule may depend on information of the target
functional sequence, which we have no access to in practice. We discuss this in detail in Appendix C.
Next, we demonstrate that the stable approximation condition is not too stringent in the sense that,
for linear functional sequence with exponential decaying memory (Equation (7)) admits a stable
approximation. We show the numerical verification of this result in Figure 1. The approximation
of linear functional with exponential decay can be seen in the left panel at β = 0 since increasing
the hidden dimension m will make the estimated error decrease to 0 over β ∈ [0, β0 ]. Stable
approximation can be verified that for positive perturbation β, adding the hidden dimension does
not increase the perturbation error E(β). In contrast, for linear functional with polynomial decaying
memory, the perturbation error E(β) is not continuous at β = 0.

3.3                           B ERNSTEIN - TYPE APPROXIMATION RESULT FOR NONLINEAR RNN S

We now present the main result of this paper, which is a Bernstein-type approximation result for
nonlinear functional sequences using nonlinear RNNs. The key question is whether the addition


                                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of nonlinearity alleviates the curse of memory limitation and allows an efficient approximation of
functionals with slow memory decay. In the following, we show that the answer is negative, and a
similar Bernstein-type approximation result holds for nonlinear functionals and RNNs with a class
of recurrent activations, including the most often used hardtanh/tanh activations.
Definition 3.7. We consider the Sobolev-type norm:
                                                                                  !
                                        b t ∥∞ + dHt − dHt
                                                         b
                     H−H
                       b    = sup ∥Ht − H                                             .            (11)
                         W1    t                  dt    dt
                                                                              ∞

The nonlinear functional norm is given by ∥Ht ∥∞ := supx̸=0 |H t (x)|                  |Ht (x)|
                                                             ∥x∥∞ + |Ht (0)| = supx̸=0 ∥x∥∞ .
Definition 3.8. We consider the following family of bounded monotone Lipschitz continuous
activations which are locally-linear/locally-tanh around 0: For some Z0 > 0,
         A0 := {σ(·)|σ(z) = cσ z, cσ > 0, |z| < Z0 },                                              (12)
                                                       ′                2
         A1 := {σ(·)|σ(0) = 0; σ differentiable, σ (z) = a − bσ(z) , a, b ≥ 0, |z| < Z0 }.         (13)
Notice A0 ∪ A1 includes the commonly used activations such as hardtanh and tanh. In particular,
tanh corresponds to the case a = b = 1 for A1 with Z0 = ∞.
Theorem 3.9. Assume H is a sequence of bounded continuous, causal, regular and time-
homogeneous functionals on X with decaying memory. Let the activation be in A0 ∪ A1 . Sup-
                                                            b θm )}∞ in the norm defined in
pose H is β0 -stably approximated by a sequence of RNNs {H(·,      m=1
Equation (11). If the perturbed models’ memory functions are uniformly decaying (as defined in
Definition 3.2) and the weight norms are uniformly bounded in m:
                                           sup |θm |2 < ∞.                                         (14)
                                            m

Then the memory function M(H)(t) of the target decays exponentially:

                                  lim eβt M(H)(t) = 0,       β < β0 .                              (15)
                                 t→∞


The proofs are included in the Appendix A.8. Given that approximations are required to be stable,
the decaying memory property ensures that the derivative of the hidden states for the perturbed
model approaches 0 as time t → ∞. Using the Hartman-Grobman theorem, we can obtain bounds
on the eigenvalues of the matrices Wm . In Appendix J, we demonstrate that our methods can be
generalized to analyze the dynamics of GRU and LSTM. The framework is similar while the final
hidden dynamics of GRU and LSTM require more techniques to analyze.

Interpretation of Theorem 3.9. Our main result (Theorem 3.9) extends the previous linear result
from Li et al. (2022). Instead of smoothness (measured by the Sobolev norm) as a regularity mea-
sure, the RNN Bernstein-type result identifies exponential decaying memory (eβt M(H)(t) → 0) as
the right regularity measure. If we can approximate some target functionals stably using nonlinear
RNN, then that target must have exponential decaying memory. Previously this was only known
for linear case, but for nonlinear case, even addition of nonlinearity substantially increases model
complexity, it does not fix the essential memory limitation of RNNs.
From the numerical perspective, the theorem implies the following two statements, and we provide
numerical verification for each of them. First, if the memory function of a target functional sequence
                                                          C
decays slower than exponential (e.g. M(H)(t) = (t+1)        1.5 ), the optimization is difficult and the

approximation in Figure 2 is achieved at 1000 epochs while typically exponential decaying memory
achieves the approximation at 10 epochs. When the approximation is achieved, it can be seen in
Figure 2 that, for larger perturbation scale β, there is no perturbation stability. Second, if a target
functional sequence can be well-approximated and the approximation’s stability radius β0 can be
shown to be positive, then the target functional sequence should have exponential decaying memory.
See Figure 3 for the approximation filtered with perturbation stability requirement. (See Figure 5 in
Appendix B for the validation of memory over general sentiment classification task.)


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                             102           m=4
                                                                                           m=8


                                                   Perturbation error E( )
                                                                             101           m=16
                                                                                           m=64
                                                                             100

                                                                             10 1

                                                                             10 2
                                                                                    10 5   10 4    10 3 10 2                             10 1    100
                                                                                                   perturbation

Figure 2: Target with polynomial decaying memory + approximation (achieved at 1000 epochs) →
no stability. Similar to the linear functional case, when approximating nonlinear functionals with
polynomial decaying memory by tanh RNN, the intersections of curves are shifting left as the hidden
dimension m increases.
                                         stability of the approximation                                                         memory function of the target functional
                                            m=4
                                 101                                                                                         10 2

                                                                                                    Memory function (H)(t)
                                            m=8
         Perturbed error Em( )


                                            m=16
                                 100        m=32                                                                             10 3
                                            m=64
                                 10 1                                                                                        10 4

                                                                                                                             10 5
                                 10 2
                                        10 10 10 8 10 6 10 4                                10 2   100                              0       20     40      60   80   100
                                                 Perturbation                                                                                       Time t

Figure 3: Stable approximation via RNNs implies exponential decaying memory. We construct sev-
eral randomly-initialized RNN models as teacher models with large hidden dimension (m = 256).
When approximating the teacher model with a series of student RNN models, we can numerically
verify the approximation’s stability (left panel). We can apply a filtering: we only select those
teacher models which both can be approximated, and the approximations are stable (with perturba-
tion error Em (β) having a positive stability radius). We found that the only teachers that remain are
those with exponential decaying memory functions. An example is shown in the right panel.


3.4   S UITABLE PARAMETRIZATION ENABLES STABLE APPROXIMATION

The key insight of Theorem 3.9 can be summarized as follow: in order to approximate targets with
non-exponential decaying memory, the recurrent weights of RNNs must have eigenvalues’ real part
approaching 0 on the negative side. However, if the largest eigenvalue real parts are approaching
zero, then its stability under perturbation will decrease. This is why the approximation and stability
cannot be achieved at the same time if the target’s memory does not decay exponentially. The
stability problem can be resolved via reparameterization as the stability radius is not decreasing
even when the eigenvalues are approaching 0. If we reparameterize the recurrent weights so that
it approach zero and remain stable (i.e., eigenvalue real part being negative) under perturbations,
then this architecture will maintain stability while having the possibility of approximation. We can
accomplish this by substituting the recurrent weight with a continuous matrix function, which we
will refer to as “stable reparameterization”
                                                                  g : Rm×m → Rm×m,− ,                                                   g(M ) = W.                         (16)
This reparameterized RNN is stable as the eigenvalues’ real part are always negative. We show there
are several methods to achieve this reparameterization: The exponential function g(M ) = −eM
and the softplus function g(M ) = − log(1 + eM ) maps the eigenvalues of M to negative range
(see Figure 4 and Figure 8 for the stable approximation of linear functional with polynomial decay
memory). LRU (Orvieto et al., 2023) proposed to parameterizes the real part of eigenvalues by
exp(− exp(λ)), which corresponds to the discrete case for g(M ) = −eM .


                                                                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   102    m=2                                                                  102    m=2
                                          m=4                                                                         m=4


       Perturbation error Em( )


                                                                                   Perturbation error Em( )
                                   101    m=6                                                                  101    m=6
                                          m=8                                                                         m=8
                                   100    m=14                                                                 100    m=14

                                  10 1                                                                        10 1

                                  10 2                                                                        10 2

                                  10 3                                                                        10 3

                                  10 4                                                                        10 4
                                     0   10 3    10 2       10 1   100   101                                     0   10 3    10 2       10 1   100   101
                                                    Perturbation                                                                Perturbation
                        (a) Exp reparameterization + Linear RNN                    (b) Softplus reparameterization + Linear RNN

Figure 4: Stable approximation of linear functionals with polynomial decay memory by linear RNN
with exp and softplus reparameterization. The limiting dashed curve E(β) shall be continuous.


4   R ELATED WORK
Various results have been established in RNNs approximation theory, see Sontag (1998); Hanson
et al. (2021) and references therein. For unbounded input index sets, Lp approximation is estab-
lished by Gonon & Ortega (2020). In Gonon & Ortega (2021), the universal approximation theorem
is constructed for functionals with fading memory in the discrete time setting. In Li et al. (2020), the
universal approximation theorem and Jackson-type approximation theorem characterize the density
and speed of linear RNNs applied to linear functionals. Most existing results are forward (Jackson-
type) approximation theorems, which upper bound the optimal approximation error. Of most rele-
vance is the Bernstein-type result proved in Li et al. (2022), where it has been proved that the linear
functional sequences that can be efficiently approximated by linear RNNs must have an exponential
decaying memory. However, the main limitation of the above result is the linear setting for both
models and targets.
The notion of approximation stability is one of the central concepts we exploit in this paper. We note
that in classical approximation theory, stable approximation has numerous definitions depending on
the setting (DeVore et al., 2021). For example, in nonlinear approximation (DeVore, 1998), a stably
approximating sequence {Hm } of H is one that satisfies |Hm | ≤ C|H| for some absolute constant
C > 0 and all m. This approach is taken to show the non-existence of stable procedure to approx-
imating functions from equally-spaced samples with exponential convergence on analytic functions
(Platte et al., 2011). This notion of stability is on the conditioning of the approximation problem.
In contrast, our notion of stability introduced in Section 3.2 is more similar to a uniform continuity
requirement. Pertaining to sequence modeling, a related but different notion of dynamic stability
(Hanson & Raginsky, 2020) was used to prove a Jackson-type results for universal simulation of
dynamical systems. There, the stability is akin to requiring the uniform (in inputs) continuity of the
flow-map of the RNN hidden dynamics. In practice, some specific forms of the stable reparameter-
ization we defined in Equation (16) has been adopted in state-space models optimization (Gu et al.,
2020; 2021; Smith et al., 2023; Wang & Xue, 2023; Wang & Li, 2023).

5   C ONCLUSION
In summary, we derive an inverse approximation result in the setting of sequence modeling using
nonlinear RNNs. We show that, assuming that a given target sequence relationship (mathemati-
cally understood as a nonlinear functional sequence) can be stably approximated by RNNs with
nonlinear activations, then the target functional sequence’s memory structure must be exponentially
decreasing. This places a priori limitations on the ability of RNNs to learn long-term memory in
sequence modeling, and makes precise the empirical observation that RNNs do not perform well
for such problems. From the approximation viewpoint, our results show that this failure is not only
due to learning algorithms (e.g. explosion of gradients), but also due to fundamental limitations of
the RNN hypothesis space. At the same time, our analysis points to reparameterization as a princi-
pled methodology to remedy the limitations of RNN when it comes to long-term memory and we
demonstrate its effectiveness in by learning linear functionals with polynomial memory.


                                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore, under the NRF fellow-
ship (project No. NRF-NRFF13-2021-0005). Shida Wang is supported by NUS-RMI Scholarship.

R EFERENCES
N. I. Achieser. Theory of Approximation. Courier Corporation, June 2013. ISBN 978-0-486-15313-
  1.
Y. Bengio, P. Simard, and P. Frasconi. Learning long-term dependencies with gradient descent is
  difficult. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 5(2):157–166, March 1994. ISSN 1941-0093.
  doi: 10.1109/72.279181.
Serge Bernstein. Sur la meilleure approximation de |x| par des polynomes de degrés donnés. Acta
  Mathematica, 37(1):1–57, December 1914. ISSN 1871-2509. doi: 10.1007/BF02401828.
Stephen Boyd, L. O. Chua, and C. A. Desoer. Analytical Foundations of Volterra Series. IMA
  Journal of Mathematical Control and Information, 1(3):243–282, January 1984. ISSN 0265-
  0754. doi: 10.1093/imamci/1.3.243.
Jerome T. Connor, R. Douglas Martin, and Les E. Atlas. Recurrent neural networks and robust time
   series prediction. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 5(2):240–254, 1994.
G. Cybenko. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Mathematics of Con-
  trol, Signals and Systems, 2(4):303–314, December 1989. ISSN 1435-568X. doi: 10.1007/
  BF02551274.
Ronald DeVore, Boris Hanin, and Guergana Petrova. Neural network approximation. Acta Numer-
  ica, 30:327–444, 2021.
Ronald A DeVore. Nonlinear approximation. Acta numerica, 7:51–150, 1998. ISSN 1474-0508.
Lukas Gonon and Juan-Pablo Ortega. Reservoir Computing Universality With Stochastic Inputs.
  IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 31(1):100–112, January 2020.
  ISSN 2162-2388. doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2019.2899649.
Lukas Gonon and Juan-Pablo Ortega. Fading memory echo state networks are universal. Neural
  Networks, 138:10–13, 2021.
Alex Graves and Navdeep Jaitly. Towards End-To-End Speech Recognition with Recurrent Neural
  Networks. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1764–
  1772. PMLR, June 2014.
Albert Gu, Tri Dao, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. HiPPO: Recurrent Memory
  with Optimal Polynomial Projections. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 33, pp. 1474–1487. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher Re. Efficiently Modeling Long Sequences with Structured
  State Spaces. In International Conference on Learning Representations, October 2021.
Joshua Hanson and Maxim Raginsky. Universal Simulation of Stable Dynamical Systems by Recur-
  rent Neural Nets. In Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on Learning for Dynamics and Control,
  pp. 384–392. PMLR, July 2020.
Joshua Hanson, Maxim Raginsky, and Eduardo Sontag. Learning Recurrent Neural Net Models of
  Nonlinear Systems. In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Learning for Dynamics and Control,
  pp. 425–435. PMLR, May 2021.
Haotian Jiang, Qianxiao Li, Zhong Li, and Shida Wang. A Brief Survey on the Approximation
  Theory for Sequence Modelling. Journal of Machine Learning, 2(1):1–30, June 2023. ISSN
  2790-203X, 2790-2048. doi: 10.4208/jml.221221.
H.K. Khalil. Nonlinear Systems. Pearson Education. Prentice Hall, 2002. ISBN 9780130673893.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mathias Lechner and Ramin Hasani. Learning long-term dependencies in irregularly-sampled time
 series. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04418, 2020.
Zhong Li, Jiequn Han, Weinan E, and Qianxiao Li. On the Curse of Memory in Recurrent Neural
  Networks: Approximation and Optimization Analysis. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, October 2020.
Zhong Li, Jiequn Han, Weinan E, and Qianxiao Li. Approximation and Optimization Theory for
  Linear Continuous-Time Recurrent Neural Networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23
  (42):1–85, 2022. ISSN 1533-7928.
Antonio Orvieto, Samuel L Smith, Albert Gu, Anushan Fernando, Caglar Gulcehre, Razvan Pas-
  canu, and Soham De. Resurrecting recurrent neural networks for long sequences. In Proceedings
  of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of ICML’23, pp. 26670–
  26698. JMLR.org, July 2023.
Rodrigo B. Platte, Lloyd N. Trefethen, and Arno B. J. Kuijlaars. Impossibility of Fast Stable Ap-
  proximation of Analytic Functions from Equispaced Samples. SIAM Review, 53(2):308–318,
  January 2011. ISSN 0036-1445. doi: 10.1137/090774707.
David E. Rumelhart, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams. Learning representations by
  back-propagating errors. Nature, 323(6088):533–536, October 1986. ISSN 1476-4687. doi:
  10.1038/323533a0.
Jimmy T. H. Smith, Andrew Warrington, and Scott Linderman. Simplified State Space Layers for
  Sequence Modeling. In International Conference on Learning Representations, February 2023.
Eduardo D. Sontag. A learning result for continuous-time recurrent neural networks. Systems &
  Control Letters, 34(3):151–158, June 1998. ISSN 01676911. doi: 10.1016/S0167-6911(98)
  00006-1.
Ilya Sutskever, James Martens, and Geoffrey Hinton. Generating Text with Recurrent Neural Net-
   works. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1017–1024, January 2011.
Duyu Tang, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. Document Modeling with Gated Recurrent Neural Network
  for Sentiment Classification. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, pp. 1422–1432, Lisbon, Portugal, September 2015. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D15-1167.
Shida Wang and Qianxiao Li. Stablessm: Alleviating the curse of memory in state-space models
  through stable reparameterization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.14495, 2023.
Shida Wang and Beichen Xue. State-space models with layer-wise nonlinearity are universal approx-
  imators with exponential decaying memory. In Thirty-Seventh Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, November 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     T HEORETICAL RESULTS AND PROOFS
In this section, we first attach the famous Riesz representation theorem and the previous results for
linear RNNs in Section A.2 and Section A.3.

A.1    W ELL - DEFINEDNESS OF CONTINUOUS - TIME RNN

Here we discuss the well-definedness of continuous-time nonlinear RNNs. The −∞ boundary con-
dition is chosen to make the time-homogeneity well-defined, representing a more general scenario
than the boundary at 0. Regarding issues on the input continuity, Heaviside inputs are point-wise
limit of smooth inputs ux = limk→∞ uxk,cont . Therefore the outputs of continuous targets function-
als are well-defined: Ht (ux ) = Ht (limk→∞ uxk,cont ) = limk→∞ Ht (uxk,cont ).

A.2    R IESZ REPRESENTATION THEOREM

Theorem A.1 (Riesz-Markov-Kakutani representation theorem). Assume H : C0 (Rd ) 7→ R is
a linear and continuous functional. Then there exists a unique, vector-valued, regular, countably
additive signed measure µ on R such that
                                    Z              Xd Z
                                         ⊤
                           H(x) =      xs dµ(s) =         xs,i dµi (s).                      (17)
                                          R              i=1   R
                                                                     P
In addition, we have ∥H∥ := sup∥x∥X ≤1 |H(x)| = ∥µ∥1 (R) :=              i |µi |(R).

Based on the representation theorem, one can further obtain that the functionals {Ht : t ∈ R}
satisfying properties in Definition 2.1 can be represented by the following convolutional form
                                           Z ∞
                                 Ht (x) =       x⊤
                                                 t−s ρ(s)ds,   t ∈ R,                          (18)
                                              0
and the representation function ρ : [0, ∞) → Rd is a measurable and integrable function with
∥ρ∥L1 ([0,∞)) = supt∈R ∥Ht ∥. The details can be found in Appendix A.3 or Li et al. (2020), where
the causality and time-homogeneity play a key role.

A.3    T HREE TYPES OF APPROXIMATION FOR LINEAR FUNCTIONALS AND LINEAR RNN S

We include the statements of the universal approximation theorem and approximation rate for linear
functionals by linear RNNs from Li et al. (2020).
Theorem A.2 (Universal approximation for linear functionals by linear RNNs (Li et al., 2020)).
Let {Ht : t ∈ R} be a sequence of linear, continuous, causal, regular and time-homogeneous
functionals defined on X . Then, for any ϵ > 0, there exists {H̄t : t ∈ R} ∈ H̄linear such that
                       sup ∥Ht − H̄t ∥ ≡ sup sup |Ht (x) − H̄t (x)| ≤ ϵ.                        (19)
                        t∈R                   t∈R ∥x∥X ≤1

Theorem A.3 (Jackson-type approximation rate for linear functionals by linear RNNs (Li et al.,
2020)). Assume the same conditions as Theorem A.2. Consider the output of constant signals
                                  yi (t) = Ht (ei ), i = 1, . . . , d,
where ei is a constant signal with ei,t = ei 1{t≥0} , and {ei }di=1 denote the standard basis vectors in
Rd . Suppose there exist constants α ∈ N+ , β, γ > 0 such that for i = 1, . . . , d, k = 1, . . . , α + 1,
yi (t) ∈ C (α+1) (R) and
                                        (k)
                                  eβt yi (t) = o(1),        as t → +∞,
                                              (k)
                                      |eβt yi (t)|
                                  sup              ≤ γ.
                                  t≥0      βk
Then, there exists a universal constant C(α) only depending on α, such that for any m ∈ N+ , there
                                                                linear
exists a sequence of width-m RNN functionals {H̄t : t ∈ R} ∈ H̄m       such that
                                                                           C(α)γd
               R(m) = sup ∥Ht − H̄t ∥ ≡ sup sup |Ht (x) − H̄t (x)| ≤                .         (20)
                         t∈R               t∈R ∥x∥X ≤1                       βmα

                                                    12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem A.4 (Bernstein-type approximation for linear functionals by linear RNNs (Li et al., 2022)).
Let {Ht : t ∈ R} be a sequence of linear, continuous, causal, regular and time-homogeneous
functionals defined on X . Consider the output of constant signals
                        yi (t) = Ht (ei ) ∈ C (α+1) (R),       i ∈ 1, . . . , d, α ∈ N+ .             (21)
Suppose that for each m ∈ N+ , there exists a sequence of width-m RNN functionals {H̄t : t ∈ R} ∈
  linear
H̄m      approximating Ht in the following sense:
                             (k)         (k)
                lim sup |ȳi,m (t) − yi (t)| = 0,           i = 1, . . . , d, k = 1, . . . , α + 1,   (22)
               m→∞ t≥0

where
                                   ȳi,m (t) = H̄t (ei ),    i = 1, . . . , d.                        (23)

Define wm = maxj∈[m] Re(λj ), where {λj }m
                                         j=1 are the eigenvalues of W̄ in {H̄t : t ∈ R}.
Assume the parameters are uniformly bounded and there exists a constant β > 0 such that
lim supm→∞ wm < −β, then we have
                     (k)
                 eβt yi (t) = o(1) as t → +∞,           i = 1, . . . , d, k = 1, . . . , α + 1.       (24)

A.4      W HY SOLVE CURSE OF MEMORY BY ADDING NONLINEARITY ?

In feed-forward neural networks, the inclusion of nonlinear activation is known to fundamentally
change the approximation capacities of multi-layer networks. Without this nonlinear activation,
the model simply performs a linear transformation. In sequence modeling, linear RNNs serve as
universal approximators for linear functionals. However, they struggle to learn linear functionals
with polynomial decaying memory. Given this context, one might naturally wonder if incorporating
nonlinear activation could expand the hypothesis space in such a way as to overcome this ‘curse of
memory’ problem.
Section 3.3 indicates that the presence of nonlinear activation does not fundamentally alter the mem-
ory pattern of models. Consequently, for stable approximation, targets must demonstrate an expo-
nentially decaying memory. The proofs also show that hardtanh/tanh RNNs require the eigenvalues
to be bounded away from 0.
The findings in Section 3.3 lead to the proposal of stable parameterisation as a potential solution
for long-memory learning. Stable parameterisation ensures that the real parts of eigenvalues for the
recurrent weight matrix remain negative, even when the weights undergo perturbations. In Figure 4,
we demonstrate that linear RNNs can stably approximate linear functionals with polynomial decay
memory when the recurrent weight matrix is parameterised using exponential/softplus parameterisa-
tion. Moreover, by selecting linear functionals with either exponential or polynomial decay memory,
we can clearly change the targets’ memory structures.

A.5      P OINT- WISE CONTINUITY LEADS TO DECAYING MEMORY

Here we give the proof of decaying memory based on the point-wise continuity of dH
                                                                                 dt and bound-
                                                                                   t

edness and time-homogeneity of H:

Proof.
                        dHt x              dH0                     dH0
                  lim       (u ) = lim          (x · 1{s≥−t} ) =       (x) = 0.
                  t→∞    dt         t→∞     dt                      dt
The first equation comes from time-homogeneity. The second equation is derived from the point-
wise continuity where input x means constant x for all time x = x·1{s≥−∞} . By time-homogeneity
and boundedness, the output over constant input is the same: Ht (x) = Hs (x) for all s, t. Therefore
| dH
   dt (x)| = 0.
     0


A.6      P OINT- WISE CONTINUITY OF NONLINEAR RNN S

We prove that nonlinear RNNs with Lipschitz continuous activations are point-wise continuous over
bounded, piece-wise constant input sequences, including the Heaviside inputs.


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Without loss of generality, assume t > 0. The following | · | refers to p = ∞ norm.
Assume the continuous inputs sequence converges to some bounded piece-wise constant input se-
quence x in point-wise sense: limk→∞ xk = x. For any bounded interval [−B, B], we can see the
outputs are well-defined and the point-wise (in t) convergence holds:
Let hk,t and ht be the hidden states over xk and x. By definition and triangular inequality
 d|hk,t − ht |
               = |σ(W hk,t + U xk,t ) − σ(W ht + U xt )| ≤ L(|W ||hk,t − ht | + |U ||xk,t − xt |).
      dt
Here L is the Lipschitz constant of activation σ.
Apply Grönwall inequality to the above inequality, we have:
                                        Z t
                         |hk,t − ht | ≤     eL|W |(t−s) L|U ||xk,s − xs |ds
                                          0

As the inputs are bounded, by dominated convergence theorem we have RHS converges to 0 there-
fore
                                      lim |hk,t − ht | = 0.
                                       k→∞


Therefore the point-wise convergence of dH
                                         dt can be achieved:
                                           t



                  dyk,t   dyt
              lim |     −     | ≤ lim |c|L(|W ||hk,t − ht | + |U ||xk,t − xt |) = 0.
              k→∞  dt     dt     k→∞

                        dy
So we have: limk→∞ dtk,t = dy     t            dHt
                                dt . Therefore dt are point-wise continuous functionals over
“bounded piece-wise constant input sequence”.

A.7   C OMPARISON OF DECAYING MEMORY AND FADING MEMORY

The targets with decaying memory is a common assumption in the sense that it can also be de-
rived from the uniformly asymptotically incrementally stable assumption from Hanson & Raginsky
(2020), which is demonstrated by ‘imperfect system models may still be capable of generating out-
puts that uniformly approximate the outputs of the original system over infinite time intervals‘.
There is a concept of fading memory introduced in the nonlinear functional approximation with
Volterra series (Boyd et al., 1984). A functional is said to have fading memory if there exists a
monotonically decreasing function w : R+ → (0, 1], limt→∞ w(t) = 0, such that for any ϵ > 0,
there exists a δ > 0 such that for any x, x′ ∈ X ,
                 |Ht (x) − Ht (x′ )| < ϵ whenever     sup      |xs − x′s |w(t − s) < δ.          (25)
                                                    s∈(−∞,t]

Remark A.5. In terms of the relations between fading memory and decaying memory, they are
independent. On one hand, there exists a so-called peak-hold operator (Boyd et al., 1984) with a
decaying memory (but not fading memory). On the other hand, it is possible for a linear functional
to only have the fading memory (but no decaying memory), where it needs only the requirement
R ∞ |ρ(s)|2
 0 |w(s)|
            ds < ∞, which does not imply lims→∞ |ρ(s)|2 = 0.

A.8   I NVERSE APPROXIMATION THEOREM FOR LINEAR - LIKE ACTIVATIONS

We hereafter call H
                  e m = H(·,
                        b θ̃m ) to be the perturbed models.
We will briefly summarize the idea of the proof. Given that approximations are defined to be stable,
the decaying memory property ensures that the derivative of the hidden states for the perturbed
model approaches 0 as time t → ∞. The decay rate of the memory function is characterised by the
rate at which ddt
               h̃t
                   converges to 0. Using the Hartman-Grobman theorem, we can obtain bounds on
the eigenvalues of the matrices Wm . These bounds, in turn, determine the decay rate of ddt
                                                                                         h̃t
                                                                                             , leading
to an exponential decay in the model’s memory function. Finally, since the models with uniformly


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


exponential decaying memory can only approximate targets with exponential decay, the memory
function of the nonlinear target functionals must also be decaying exponentially.
For simplicity of the notation, we strengthen the assumption from lim supm→∞ to limm→∞ . To get
the result for lim supm→∞ , we only need to consider the subsequence of mk with a limit.

Proof. Define the derivative of hidden states (for unperturbed model Hb t (·, θm )) to be vm,t = dhm,t ,
                                                                                                        dt
similarly, ṽm,t is the derivative of hidden states for perturbed models (H et = H   b t (·, θ̃m )), ṽm,t =
dh̃m,t
  dt .
Since each perturbed model has a decaying memory, by Lemma A.6, we have
                                          lim ṽm,t = 0,      ∀m.                                      (26)
                                         t→∞

In particular, for each m and perturbation within the stability radius, there exists t0 which depends
on m and Z0 such that |ṽm,t |∞ < Z0 , t ≥ t0 .
If the inputs are limited to Heaviside input, the derivative of perturbed models’ hidden states ṽm,t
satisfies the following dynamics:
                       dṽm,t
                              = σ ′ (ṽm,t ) ◦ (W               fm ṽm,t , t ≥ t0
                                                fm ṽm,t ) = cσ W                                      (27)
                         dt
                       ṽm,t0 = σ(W fm ht + U    em xt + b̃m ), |ṽm,t |∞ < Z0 .                       (28)
                                             0        0                 0

                                                   fm,k }∞ satisfying the following two proper-
Select a sequence of perturbed recurrent matrices {W     k=1
ties:

      1. cσ W
            fm,k is Hyperbolic, which means the real part of the eigenvalues of the matrix are
         nonzero.
                 fm,k − Wm ) = β0 Im . (Notice that |W
      2. limk→∞ (W                                   fm,k − Wm |2 ≤ β0 Im for all k)

Moreover, by Lemma A.7, we know the each hyperbolic matrix cσ W
                                                              fm,k is Hurwitz as the system
for ṽm,t is asymptotically stable.
                                      max (Re(λi (W
                                                  fm ))) < 0,                                          (29)
                                      i∈[m]

                                      max (Re(λi (Wm ))) < −β0 .                                       (30)
                                      i∈[m]


Therefore the original unperturbed recurrent weight matrix Wm satisfies the following eigenvalue
inequality uniformly in m.
                                sup max (Re(λi (Wm ))) < −β0 .                              (31)
                                     m i∈[m]

As the memory functions of the perturbed models are uniformly decaying, we consider a subclass
of perturbed models where only the weight of linear readout map cm are perturbed. In other words,
we are considering perturbed models with weights (Wm , Um , bm , c̃m ). Since the supremum of
perturbed model memory functions are decaying:
                                                  d
                                       lim sup       ỹm,t = 0.                                        (32)
                                      t→∞ m       dt
For any ϵ > 0, there exists a Tϵ > 0 such that for all t > Tϵ ,
                                         d
                              sup           ỹm,t =       sup       |c̃⊤
                                                                       m vm,t | < ϵ.                   (33)
                         |c̃m −cm |2 ≤β0 dt         |c̃m −cm |2 ≤β0

We have
                               |c⊤
                                 m vm,t | + β0 |vm,t |2 < ϵ,                                           (34)
                                                           ϵ
                                               |vm,t |2 <    ,       t > Tϵ .                          (35)
                                                          β0


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Select ϵ = 12 β0 Z0 , we have the unperturbed derivative |vm,t |2 < Z0 for t > Tϵ . Therefore the
dynamics of vm,t is a linear system for t > Tϵ . For t ≥ Tϵ
                                   |vm,t |2 = |eWm (t−Tϵ ) vm,Tϵ |2                             (36)
                                                  Wm (t−Tϵ )
                                           ≤ |e                |2 |vm,Tϵ |2                     (37)
                                                −β0 (t−Tϵ )
                                           ≤e                 |vm,Tϵ |2                         (38)
The model memory decays exponentially: For t ≥ Tϵ ,
                                |c⊤
                                  m vm,t | ≤ |cm |2 |vm,Tϵ |2 e
                                                                −β0 (t−Tϵ )
                                                                                                (39)
                                                           −β0 (t−Tϵ )
                                           ≤ |cm |2 Z0 e                                        (40)
                                                           β0 Tϵ −β0 t
                                           = |cm |2 Z0 e         e                              (41)
For t ∈ [0, Tϵ ], as the memory function is continuous, there exists a constant C ′               :=
 sup eβ0 t |c⊤
             m vm,t | such that
t∈[0,Tϵ ]

                                  |c⊤           ′ −β0 t
                                    m vm,t | ≤ C e      ,       t ∈ [0, Tϵ ]                    (42)
There exists constant C0 := max(supm |cm |2 · Z0 eβ0 Tϵ , C ′ ) such that for any m,
                                       1     d
              M(H
                b m )(t) = sup                  ym,t ≤ |c⊤
                                                         m vm,t | ≤ C0 e
                                                                         −β0 t
                                                                               ,    t ≥ 0.      (43)
                              x̸=0 |x|∞  + 1 dt

Last, by Lemma A.10, the target H has an exponentially decaying memory as it is approximated by
                      b m }∞ with uniformly exponentially decaying memory.
a sequence of models {H    m=1


A.9     I NVERSE APPROXIMATION THEOREM FOR TANH - LIKE ACTIVATIONS

Next we give the proof for RNNs using tanh-like activations.

Proof. Similar to the previous proof, we still have
                                         lim ṽm,t = 0,         ∀m.                             (44)
                                        t→∞

In particular, for each m and perturbation within the stability radius, there exists t0 such that
|ṽm,t |∞ < Z0 , t ≥ t0 .
Now, the perturbed hidden states satisfies the following dynamics:
                   dṽm,t    ′               fm ṽm,t = (I − Diag(ṽm,t )2 )W
                          = σtanh (ṽm,t ) ◦ W                              fm ṽm,t ,          (45)
                     dt
                    ṽm,0 = σtanh (Uem x0 + b̃m ).                                              (46)
                                                   fm,k }∞ satisfying the following two proper-
Select a sequence of perturbed recurrent matrices {W     k=1
ties:

       1. W
          fm,k is Hyperbolic, which means the real part of the eigenvalues of the matrix are nonzero.

                  fm,k − Wm ) = β0 Im .
       2. limk→∞ (W

By Lemma A.7, we know each hyperbolic matrix Wfm,k is Hurwitz as the target functional sequence
has a stable approximation. Similarly, we have the following uniform bound on eigenvalues of
{Wm }:
                               sup max (Re(λi (Wm ))) ≤ −β0 .                              (47)
                                   m i∈[m]

Since every Wm is Hurwitz matrix, consider the corresponding (continuous) Lyapunov equation
(Khalil, 2002)
                                  T
                               Wm   Pm + Pm Wm = −Qm .                                 (48)


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For simplicity, we select the matrix Qm = Im . For any positive definite matrix Qm , it is known that
Pm has an explicit integral form:
                              Z ∞                      Z ∞
                                      ⊤                        ⊤
                       Pm =        eWm t Qm eWm t dt =      eWm t Im eWm t dt.                  (49)
                               0                            0
By Lemma A.8, we know Pm has a uniformly bounded L2 norm
                                                            1
                                          sup ∥Pm ∥2 ≤         .                                     (50)
                                            m              2β0

We construct a Lyapunov function V (v) = v T Pm v ≤ 2β1 0 |v|22 , which satisfies the following differ-
ential equation:
          dV (vm,t )   ⊤     ⊤
                     =vm,t (Wm (I − Diag(vm,t )2 )Pm + Pm (I − Diag(vm,t )2 )Wm )vm,t
             dt
                       ⊤     ⊤
                     =vm,t (Wm Pm + Pm Wm )vm,t                                                      (51)
                          ⊤     ⊤
                       − vm,t (Wm Diag(vm,t )2 Pm + Pm Diag(vm,t )2 Wm )vm,t
                                      ⊤     ⊤
                     = − |vm,t |22 − vm,t (Wm Diag(vm,t )2 Pm + Pm Diag(vm,t )2 Wm )vm,t .
                                                                q
By Lemma A.9, for any positive L ∈ (0, 1), there is an ΥL = βM0 L   0
                                                                      > 0 such that the following
inequality holds for any m,
      ⊤     ⊤
    |vm,t (Wm Diag(vm,t )2 Pm + Pm Diag(vm,t )2 Wm )vm,t | ≤ L|vm,t |22 ,         ∀|vm,t |2 ≤ ΥL .   (52)

As the memory functions of the perturbed models are uniformly decaying, we consider a subclass of
perturbed models where only the linear readout map cm are perturbed. Since the limit of perturbed
model memory functions are decaying:
                                                 d
                                      lim sup       ỹm,t = 0.                                       (53)
                                     t→∞ m       dt
For any ϵ > 0, there exists a Tϵ > 0 such that for all t > Tϵ
                                        d
                             sup           ỹm,t =       sup       |c̃⊤
                                                                      m vm,t | < ϵ.                  (54)
                        |c̃m −cm |2 ≤β0 dt         |c̃m −cm |2 ≤β0

We have
                                     |cm vm,t | + β0 |vm,t |2 < ϵ,                                   (55)
                                                                 ϵ
                                                     |vm,t |2 <    .                                 (56)
                                                                β0
Select ϵ < β0 ΥL , we have
                                                  ϵ
                                         |vm,t |2 < < ΥL .                                           (57)
                                                 β0
The Lyapunov function satisfies the following inequality for t ≥ Tϵ
          dV (vm,t )                  ⊤        ⊤
                     = − |vm,t |22 − vm,t (Wm    Diag(vm,t )2 Pm + Pm Diag(vm,t )2 Wm )vm,t          (58)
             dt
                     ≤ − |vm,t |22 + L|vm,t |22                                                      (59)
                     = − (1 − L)|vm,t |22                                                            (60)
                     ≤ − 2(1 − L)β0 V (vm,t ).                                                       (61)
The Lyapunov function V (vm,t ) is decaying exponentially for ϵ < β0 ΥL , t ≥ Tϵ ,
                               V (vm,t ) ≤ e−2(1−L)β0 (t−Tϵ ) V (vm,Tϵ ).                            (62)
Notice that |vm,t |2 < βϵ0 < ΥL . Therefore
                                                                    1 2
                               V (vm,t ) ≤ e−2(1−L)β0 (t−Tϵ ) ·       Υ .                            (63)
                                                                   2β0 L


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since the model weights are uniformly bounded, there is a constant M such that
                                       sup |Wm |2 = M < ∞.                                                 (64)
                                          m
Since |Im |2 = 1 ≤ 2|Wm |2 |Pm |2 , this implies
                                                             1
                                       min |Pm |2 ≥            > 0.                                        (65)
                                          m                 2M
                                                                          q             q
                1                                                             M             ML
As V (vm,t ) ≥ 2M |vm,t |22 , there exists a uniform constant C0 :=           β0 ΥL =       M0 such that

                             |vm,t |2 ≤ C0 e−(1−L)β0 (t−Tϵ ) ,        ∀t > Tϵ .                            (66)
Since the model weights cm are uniformly (in m) bounded C1 := supm |cm |2 < ∞. Therefore the
model memories are uniformly (in m) exponentially decaying
                                                    d b       x
                                                    dt Hm,t (u )
               sup M(H
                     b m )(t) = sup sup                            ≤ C0 C1 e−(1−L)β0 (t−Tϵ ) .             (67)
                m                    m x̸=0          |x|∞ + 1
Notice that Tϵ is independent of m, it only depends on ϵ.
Take L → 0, for any β < β0 there exists a constant C ∗ which depends on β such that
                                  sup M(H  b m )(t) ≤ C ∗ e−βt .                                           (68)
                                      m

Last, by Lemma A.10, the target has exponentially decaying memory as it is approximated by a
sequence of models with uniformly exponentially decaying memory.

A.10    P ROOFS OF L EMMAS

In the following section we include the lemmas used in the proof of main theorems. Lemma A.10 is
used in the proof for Theorem 3.9. Lemmas A.6 to A.10 are applied in Appendix A.9.
Lemma A.6. Assume the target functional sequence has a β0 -stable approximation and the per-
turbed model has a decaying memory, we show that ṽm,t → 0 for all m.

Proof. For any m, fix W
                      fm and U
                             em . Since the perturbed model has a decaying memory,
                                    d e
                              lim       Hm (ux ) = lim c̃⊤m ṽm,t = 0.                      (69)
                              t→∞  dt              t→∞

According to the definition of stable approximation about perturbation, as t → ∞, ṽm,t vanishes
over the projection to c̃m for any |c̃m − cm |∞ ≤ β. By linear algebra, there exist {∆ci }m i=1 ,
|∆ci |∞ < β such that cm + ∆c1 , . . . , cm + ∆cm form a basis of Rm . We can then decompose any
vector u into
                           u = k1 (cm + ∆c1 ) + · · · + km (cm + ∆cm ).                     (70)
Take the inner product of u and ṽm,t , we have
                                              m
                                              X
                            lim u⊤ ṽt =            ki lim (cm + ∆ci )⊤ ṽt = 0                            (71)
                            t→∞                       t→∞
                                              i=1
As the above result holds for any vector u, we get
                                               lim ṽm,t = 0.                                              (72)
                                               t→∞



Lemma A.7. Consider a dynamical system with the following dynamics:
                                 dvt
                                     = Diag(σ ′ (vt ))W vt ,
                                 dt                                                                        (73)
                                  v0 = σ(U x0 + b).
If W ∈ Rm×m is hyperbolic and the system in Equation (73) is asymptotically stable over any
bounded Heaviside input |x0 |1 < B, then the matrix W is Hurwitz.


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. When σ is the linear-like activation, σ ′ (z) = cσ for |z| ≤ 1, Diag(σ ′ (vm,t )) = cσ Im . When
σ is the tanh-like activation, σ ′ (z) = a − bσ(z)2 . Also, σ −1 is continuous at 0, therefore σ is an
open mapping around 0. For sufficiently large B, there exists δm > 0 such that a small ball centered
at 0 is contained in the initializations that are stable for the system in Equation (73).
                           v0 ∈ B(0, δm ) ⊆ {σ(U x0 + b) : |x0 |1 < B}.                           (74)

For systems with linear-like activations, since limt→∞ vt = 0 for any v0 ∈ B(0, δm ), it implies the
local asymptotic stability at the origin. If W has an eigenvalue with a positive real part, according
to Hartman-Grobman theorem, ṽt has an unstable manifold locally at the origin. However, this
contradicts the asymptotic stability around the origin with the initialization v0 in B(0, δm ) ⊂ Rm .
For systems with tanh-like activations, again by Hartman-Grobman theorem, the asymptotic stability
is determined by the linearized system, therefore W is Hurwitz.
Lemma A.8. Given a sequence of Lyapunov equation with Hurwitz matrices {Wm }∞
                                                                            m=1
                                      ⊤
                                     Wm Pm + Pm Wm = −Im .                                        (75)
Assume the eigenvalues of Wm are uniformly bounded away from 0:
                                      sup Re(λi (Wm )) ≤ −β0 .                                    (76)
                                     i∈[m]

Show that the L2 norm of Pm are uniformly bounded
                                                                  1
                                          sup ∥Pm ∥2 ≤               .                            (77)
                                          m                      2β0

Proof. By the theory of Lyapunov equation (Khalil, 2002, p. 136), it can be verified that the sym-
metric positive-definite matrix         Z         ∞
                                                          ⊤
                                    Pm =              eWm t Im eWm t dt                           (78)
                                              0
is the solution to the above Lyapunov equation.
Assume Wm ’s eigenvalue-eigenvector couples are (λi , vi ), i ∈ [m]. Without loss of generality, we
assume vi are all unit eigenvectors.
                                      ∥vi ∥2 = 1,         1 ≤ i ≤ m.                              (79)
For simplicity, we first assume the eigenvalues are distinct. Therefore, any unit vector u can be
decomposed into linear combination of eigenvectors
                                          m
                                          X                   m
                                                              X
                                     u=         ci vi ,             c2i = 1.                      (80)
                                          i=1                 i=1


We have
                                              Z ∞
                                 u⊤ Pm u =            ∥eWm t u∥22 dt                              (81)
                                                0
                                                 m
                                              Z ∞X
                                          =                   c2i e2λi t ∥vi ∥22 dt               (82)
                                                0i=1
                                              Z ∞Xm
                                          =                   c2i e2λi t dt                       (83)
                                                0i=1
                                              Z ∞Xm
                                          ≤                   c2i e−2β0 t dt                      (84)
                                                0      i=1
                                              Z ∞
                                                                          1
                                          =           e−2β0 t dt =           .                    (85)
                                                0                        2β0


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, ∥Pm ∥2 ≤ 2β1 0 . Notice the bound on L2 norm is uniform as the eigenvalue bound on Wm
is uniform.
Next, if Wm has repeated eigenvalues, we can consider Wm with slight perturbations such that the
perturbed Wfm are diagonalizable. In this case the eigenvalues might not be distinct but it’s feasible
to construct the eigenvectors to be orthogonal to each other. We can bound the perturbed matrix’s
L2 norm with the previous argument. The corresponding Pem converges to Pm by the continuity of
explicit form in Equation (78).
Lemma A.9. Assume {Wm ∈ Rm×m }∞m=1 is a sequence of Hurwitz matrices with eigenvalues
bounded away from 0:
                         sup max (Re(λi (Wm ))) ≤ −β0 .                          (86)
                                   m i∈[m]

Assume the max norms for matrices {Wm }∞
                                       m=1 are uniformly bounded:

                                 sup    sup     |Wm,ij | ≤ M0 .                                  (87)
                                  m 1≤i,j≤m

Define the solution to the following Lyapunov equation to be Pm :
                                   ⊤
                                  Wm Pm + Pm Wm = −Im .                                          (88)

We show that for any positive constant L, there exists an Υ > 0 such that the following inequality
holds for any m and |vm |2 ≤ Υ:
                     ⊤   ⊤
                   |vm (Wm Diag(vm )2 Pm + Pm Diag(vm )2 Wm )vm | ≤ L|vm |22 .                   (89)

Proof. First, by the property of matrix and vector norm:
                     ⊤
                   |vm Pm Diag(vm )2 Wm vm | ≤ |vm |2 |Pm |2 |Diag(vm )2 Wm vm |                 (90)
                                                 1
                                             ≤      |vm |2 |Diag(vm )2 Wm vm |.                  (91)
                                               2β0
Notice that the second inequality holds as a direct result for Lemma A.8.
Then,
                                            v
                                            um Xm
                                            uX
                                2                  2 W            2
                      |Diag(vm ) Wm vm |2 = t (   vm,j m,ji vm,i )                               (92)
                                                   i=1 j=1
                                               v
                                               um Xm
                                               uX
                                              ≤t (    2 |W               2
                                                     vm,j  m,ji ||vm,i |)                        (93)
                                                   i=1 j=1
                                               v
                                               um Xm
                                               uX
                                              ≤t (    2 M |v      2
                                                     vm,j 0 m,i |)                               (94)
                                                   i=1 j=1
                                                   v
                                                   um Xm
                                                   uX
                                                          2 |v       2
                                              = M0 t (   vm,j  m,i |)                            (95)
                                                        i=1 j=1
                                                   v
                                                   u m 2         m
                                                   uX           X
                                              = M0 t(  vm,j )2 (   |vm,i |2 )                    (96)
                                                            j=1    i=1
                                                             v
                                                    Xm       u m
                                                        2
                                                             uX
                                              = M0 (   vm,j )t(  |vm,i |2 )                      (97)
                                                     j=1          i=1

                                              ≤ M0 |vm |32                                       (98)
                                                        2
                                              ≤ M0 Υ |vm |2 .                                    (99)


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                  q
                      β0 L
For any 0 < Υ ≤       M0 , we have

     ⊤   ⊤                                                          1
   |vm (Wm Diag(vm )2 Pm + Pm Diag(vm )2 Wm )vm | ≤ 2 ∗                |vm |2 |Diag(vm )2 Wm vm |   (100)
                                                                   2β0
                                                               1
                                                            ≤    M0 Υ2 |vm |22                      (101)
                                                              β0
                                                            ≤ L|vm |22 .                            (102)


Lemma A.10. Consider a continuous function f : [0, ∞) → R, assume it can be approximated by a
sequence of continuous functions {fm }∞
                                      m=1 universally:

                                        lim sup |f (t) − fm (t)| = 0.                               (103)
                                        m→∞   t

Assume the approximators fm are uniformly exponentially decaying with the same β0 > 0:
                                        lim sup eβ0 t |fm (t)| → 0.                                 (104)
                                        t→∞ m∈N+

Then the function f is also decaying exponentially:
                                    lim eβt |f (t)| → 0,    ∀0 < β < β0 .                           (105)
                                 t→∞


Proof. Given a function f ∈ C([0, ∞)), we consider the transformation T f : [0, 1] → R defined
as:                                    (
                                         0,            s=0
                           (T f )(s) =   f (− log s
                                               β0 )
                                                                                         (106)
                                             s      ,  s ∈ (0, 1].
Under the change of variables s = e−β0 t , we have:
                                 f (t) = e−β0 t (T f )(e−β0 t ),    t ≥ 0.                          (107)
According to uniformly exponentially decaying assumptions on fm :
                                                   fm (t)
                        lim (T fm )(s) = lim                = lim eβ0 t fm (t) = 0,                 (108)
                       s→0+                   t→∞ e−β0 t      t→∞

which implies T fm ∈ C([0, 1]).
For any β < β0 , let δ = β0 − β > 0. Next we have the following estimate
                           sup |(T fm1 )(s) − (T fm2 )(s)|                                          (109)
                          s∈[0,1]

                              fm1 (t) fm2 (t)
                        = sup        − −βt                                                          (110)
                          t≥0  e−βt      e

                                        fm1 (t) fm2 (t)         −δT0
                        ≤ max    sup           − −βt , C0 e                                         (111)
                                0≤t≤T0   e−βt     e

                                 βT0                                 −δT0
                        ≤ max e       sup |fm1 (t) − fm2 (t)| , C0 e                                (112)
                                          0≤t≤T0

where C0 is a constant uniform in m.
                              ln( ϵ )
For any ϵ > 0, take T0 = − δC0 , we have C0 e−δT0 ≤ ϵ. For sufficiently large M which depends
on ϵ and T0 , by universal approximation (Equation (103)), we have ∀m1 , m2 ≥ M ,
                                        sup |fm1 (t) − fm2 (t)| ≤ e−βT0 ϵ,                          (113)
                                     0≤t≤T0

                              eβT0 sup |fm1 (t) − fm2 (t)| ≤ ϵ.                                     (114)
                                     0≤t≤T0

Therefore, {fm } is a Cauchy sequence in C([0, ∞)).


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since {fm } is a Cauchy sequence in C([0, ∞)) equipped with the sup-norm, using the above esti-
mate we can have{T fm } is a Cauchy sequence in C([0, 1]) equipped with the sup-norm. By the
completeness of C([0, 1]), there exists f ∗ ∈ C([0, 1]) with f ∗ (0) = 0 such that
                                                                    lim          sup |(T fm )(s) − f ∗ (s)| = 0.                                                                          (115)
                                                                  m→∞ s∈[0,1]


Given any s > 0, we have
                                                                   f ∗ (s) = lim (T fm )(s) = (T f )(s),                                                                                  (116)
                                                                                   m→∞

hence
                                                               lim eβt f (t) = lim+ (T f )(s) = f ∗ (0) = 0.                                                                              (117)
                                                              t→∞                          s→0


B    M EMORY QUERY IN SENTIMENT ANALYSIS BASED ON IMDB MOVIE
     REVIEWS

In the following example, we show the memory function of sentiment score’s for single repeated
word using LSTM and fine-tuned BERT model. In Figure 5, it can be seen that the memory function
of simple words such as “good” and “bad” is decaying exponentially. However, the memory of
sentiment in “ha” can be complicated as it’s not decaying fast. This phenomenon also holds for
stacked Bidirectional LSTM models.
As a comparison, we can see the memory pattern of BERT over repeated characters or words can be
decaying relatively slower. At the same time, the fluctuation of memory of “ha”, “bad” and “good”
can fluctuate a lot (compared with LSTM models). These phenomena indicate that the transformer-
type architectures might not have exponential decaying memory issues. (See Figure 6)


                                      100                                                                                          100
                                                                                    ha                                                                                          ha
                                                                                    good                                           10 1                                         good
                                      10 1                                          bad                                                                                         bad
         Memory of sentiment scores


                                                                                                      Memory of sentiment scores


                                      10 2                                                                                         10 2

                                      10 3                                                                                         10 3

                                      10 4                                                                                         10 4
                                                                                                                                   10 5
                                      10 5
                                                                                                                                   10 6
                                      10 6
                                             0   25   50   75 100 125      150    175   200                                               0   25   50   75 100 125      150   175   200
                                                            Repeat times                                                                                 Repeat times

                                                 (a) Bidirectional LSTM                                                                   (b) Stacked Bidirectional LSTM

Figure 5: Memory function of sentiment scores for different words based on IMDB movie reviews
using Bidirectional LSTM and stacked Bidirectional LSTM


C    R ESCALING IS NOT AN A PRIORI SOLUTION TO STABLE APPROXIMATION

Now we consider the special case: Assume W is diagonal W = diag([w1 , w2 , . . . , wm ]). Element
of matrix U is 1. And the vector c = [c1 , c2 , . . . , cm ].
                                                                                    Pm
In this section, we compare the vanilla linear RNN with a memory function ρ̂(t) = k=1 ck ewk t
                                                                Pm    1
and a rescaled linear RNN with a memory function ρ̂(t) = k=1 ck e k wk t . They are represented
in the simplest form with ck and wk as the trainable weights. It can be seen that the target linear
                                            P∞                1
functional with memory function ρ(t) = k=1 k12 e− k t cannot be stably approximated by linear
RNN but can be stably approximated by rescaled linear RNN. (For rescaled linear RNN, one just
need to pick wk = 1.)


                                                                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        repeat of 'a '                                            repeat of 'b '
                                   10 1                                                      10 1
                                   10 2                                                      10 2
                                   10 3                                                      10 3
                                   10 4
                                                                                             10 4
                                          0   20          40
                                                        repeat of 'c60 '      80   100              0   20          40
                                                                                                                  repeat    60
                                                                                                                         of 'd '     80        100
                                   10 1
                                                                                             10 2
                                   10 2
                                                                                             10 3
                                   10 3
                                                                                             10 4
                                   10 4
                                                                                             10 5
                                          0   20             40       60      80   100              0   20         40       60       80        100
                                                       repeat of 'ha '                                          repeat of 'bad '
                                   10 1
                                                                                             10 3
                                   10 2
                                   10 3
                                   10 4                                                      10 4

                                          0       10      20       30         40                    0   5        10    15     20     25        30
                                                       repeat of 'yes '                                         repeat of 'good  '
       Memory of sentiment score


                                                                                             10 1
                                   10 2
                                                                                             10 2
                                   10 3
                                                                                             10 3
                                   10 4
                                                                                             10 4
                                          0   5        10       15       20   25   30               0       5        10        15         20
                                                            repeat times

               Figure 6: Memory for sentiment scores based on IMDB movie reviews
The x-axis is the inputs repeated times, which can be viewed as the input length. The y-axis is the
derivative of sentiment score over repeated inputs, which is the memory of this sentiment analysis
model. This tiny example implies that the memory function required in application can be in various
patterns. The decaying pattern can be fluctuating in terms of the scale.


However, this rescaling does not work for all memory functions. Take the memory function ρ(t) =
P∞ 1 − 12 t
  k=1 k2 e       as an example, it may not be possible to stably approximate target with this memory
            k

function with linear RNN or the rescaled version.
Based on the above argument, there does not exists a rescaled RNN that can work for linear func-
tional with arbitrary memory function. In particular, it’s always feasible to construct a slow decay
target that a fixed rescaled linear RNN cannot stably approximate. This result indicates that rescaling
is not an a priori solution to achieve stable approximation. In practice, it’s hard to get the memory
function decay speed therefore it’s impractical to use the rescaling method.


D    N UMERICAL EXPERIMENTS DETAILS

Here we give the numerical experiments details for both the linear and nonlinear RNN experiments.

Linear functionals approximated by linear RNNs The linear functional approximation is equiv-
alent to the approximation of function ρ(t) by exponential sum c⊤ eW t U . For simplicity, we con-
duct the approximation in the interpolation approach and consider the one-dimensional input and
one-dimensional output case. Furthermore we reduce the approximation problem (numerically) into
the least square fitting over the discrete time grid. We fit the coefficients of polynomial and evaluate
the approximation error over [1, 2, . . . , 100].


                                                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The exponential decaying memory function is manually selected to show the significance across
different hidden dimensions:
                                       ρ(t) = 0.9t                                      (118)
                                                           1
while the polynomial decaying memory function is ρ(t) = (t+1)1.1 . The additional 1 is added as we

require the memory function to be integrable.
The perturbation list β ∈ [0, 5.0 ∗ 10−4 , 5.0 ∗ 10−4 ∗ 21 , . . . , 5.0 ∗ 10−4 ∗ 220 ]. Each evaluation of
the perturbed error is sampled with 10 different weight perturbations to reduce the variance.
The approximation of linear functional by linear RNN has simple structures. So we did not use
gradient-based optimisation. The approximation of linear functional via linear RNN is equivalent to
the minimisation problem minc,W,U ||HRt − Ĥt ||, which can be simplified into the following function
                                         ∞
approximation problem minc,W,U sup 0 |ρ(s) − c⊤ esW U |ds. After eigenvalue decompositions of
W and change of variables, the above problem can be reduced to the polynomial approximation of
function ρ(− ln t) over interval (0, 1]. Therefore we solve this approximation problem via linear
regression instead of the gradient-based optimisation. The code are attached in the supplementary
materials.

Nonlinear functionals approximated by nonlinear RNNs Still, we consider the one-
dimensional input and one-dimensional output case. We train the model over timestamp
[0.1, 0.2, . . . , 3.2] and evaluate the approximation error over the same horizon [0.1, 0.2, . . . , 10.0].
In the experiments to approximate the nonlinear functionals by nonlinear RNNs, we train each model
for 1000 epochs, the stopping criterion is the validation loss achieving 10−8 . The optimizer used is
Adam with initial learning rate 0.005. The loss function is mean squared error. The batch size is 128
while the train set size and test set size are 12800.
                                                     1
The polynomial decaying memory function is ρ(t) = (t+1) 1.5 equals to 1 at t = 0. The only

difference is the decaying speed.
The perturbation list β ∈ [0, 10−11 ∗ 20 , 10−11 ∗ 21 , . . . , 10−11 ∗ 235 ]. Each evaluation of the
perturbed error is sampled with 3 different weight perturbations (and take the maximum) to reduce
the variance of the perturbation error.

E    A DDITIONAL NUMERICAL RESULTS
Curse of memory over ReLU activation Despite the activation relu is not smooth at σ(0) = 0,
we numerically verify that the curse of memory phenomenon also holds. In Figure 7, the left RNN
using ReLU cannot stably approximate target with polynomial memory while the RNN with Softplus
reparameterization can stably approximate the target.

Stable re-parameterization as a potential solution In Figure 4, we show that stable reparame-
terization such as exponential reparameterization and softplus reparameterization enables the stable
approximation of linear functional with polynomial memory by linear RNNs. As shown in Figure 8,
we further verify that stable re-parameterization enables the stable approximation of targets with
polynomial decaying memory by hardtanh/tanh RNNs.


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                           Perturbation Error for Different Hidden Dimensions
                                            Hidden Dimension 8
                              1030          Hidden Dimension 16
                                            Hidden Dimension 32
                                            Hidden Dimension 64
                              1025


                              1020
         Perturbation error


                              1015


                              1010


                               105


                               100


                                     10 4                         10 3                       10 2               10 1
                                                                              Perturbation


                                                       (a) Without reparameterization + ReLU RNN



                                                           Perturbation Error for Different Hidden Dimensions
                                            Hidden Dimension 8
                               104          Hidden Dimension 16
                                            Hidden Dimension 32
                                            Hidden Dimension 64
                               103


                               102
         Perturbation error


                               101


                               100


                              10 1


                              10 2



                                     10 4                     10 3                10 2                10 1             100
                                                                              Perturbation


                                                       (b) Softplus reparameterization + ReLU RNN

Figure 7: When the activation used is ReLU, vanilla nonlinear RNN does not have stable approxi-
mation while the softplusRNN can be stably approximated.


                                                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          (a) Softplus reparameterization + Hardtanh RNN


                            (b) Softplus reparameterization + Tanh RNN

Figure 8: Linear functionals with polynomial memory can be stably approximated by hardtanh/tanh
RNNs using Softplus parameterisation for W . These empirical findings underscore that stable pa-
rameterisation is pivotal for attaining a stable approximation for targets with long-term memory.
The experiments build upon and extend the results presented in Figure 4.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                       parameterization=Direct                                  0.8
                        2.25
                                                                       parameterization=Exp                                     0.7
                        2.00                                           parameterization=Inverse
                                                                       parameterization=Softplus                                0.6
                        1.75
    Train loss (step)


                                                                                                             Train acc (step)
                                                                                                                                0.5
                        1.50
                                                                                                                                0.4
                        1.25
                                                                                                                                0.3                                       parameterization=Direct
                        1.00
                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                          parameterization=Exp
                        0.75                                                                                                                                              parameterization=Inverse
                                                                                                                                0.1                                       parameterization=Softplus
                                 0               500             1000           1500          2000                                    0               500           1000           1500          2000
                                                                      Steps                                                                                              Steps
                                                             (a) train loss                                                                             (b) train accuracy


                           2.4
                                                                       parameterization=Direct                                  0.7
                           2.2                                         parameterization=Exp
                                                                       parameterization=Inverse
                           2.0                                         parameterization=Softplus                                0.6
        Val loss (epoch)


                                                                                                             Val acc (epoch)
                           1.8
                                                                                                                                0.5
                           1.6
                           1.4                                                                                                  0.4

                           1.2                                                                                                                                            parameterization=Direct
                                                                                                                                0.3                                       parameterization=Exp
                           1.0                                                                                                                                            parameterization=Inverse
                                                                                                                                                                          parameterization=Softplus
                           0.8                                                                                                  0.2
                                     250   500         750     1000     1250   1500    1750   2000                                        250   500         750   1000     1250   1500    1750   2000
                                                                      Steps                                                                                              Steps
                                                   (c) validation loss                                                                            (d) validation accuracy

Figure 9: Image classification on MNIST. The performance of stable reparameterization is better
than the direct parameterization of recurrent weight g(M ) = M . Under the same weight initializa-
tion, the stable reparameterization can speed up the optimization. The shadow corresponds to the
standard error evaluated over 3 repeats.

                                                                                              Test loss(std err)                          Test accuracy (std err)
                                                        softplus (stable)                     0.8903 (0.0004)                                  71.36(0.03)
                                                          exp (stable)                        0.9028 (7.2E-05)                                 70.55(0.01)
                                                        inverse (stable)                      0.9082 (0.0005)                                  70.77(0.05)
                                                        direct (unstable)                     0.9177 (0.0105)                                  68.47(0.06)

                                 Table 1: Test loss and accuracy of different parameterization methods over MNIST

Stable re-parameterization facilitate the optimization In this subsection, we demonstrate the
optimization advantages provided by stable re-parameterization in enhancing long-term memory
learning. We train the nonlinear RNNs on the MNIST dataset for 10 epochs. The models are
initialized with identical weight configurations, underscoring the impact of recurrent weight param-
eterization. As illustrated in Figure 9, the implementation of stable reparameterization significantly
expedites the optimization process. It’s important to note that this parameterization technique does
not alter the inherent capacity of the model, resulting in comparable final performance outcomes
(Table 1).

F                       M EMORY FUNCTION DEFINED VIA IMPULSE INPUTS
Besides the Heaviside inputs, it’s also feasible to define the memory function via
                                                                                 the impulse inputs.
                                                                                 x t = 0,
Let x ∈ Rd and consider the following impulse inputs input sequence ixt =                  Hereafter
                                                                                 0 t ̸= 0.

                                                                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we call the following memory function to be impulse-inputs-induced memory function.
                                                              1
                                       M(H)(t) := sup                 |Ht (ix )| .                           (119)
                                                      x̸=0 |x|∞

In the linear functional case, notice that according to Equation (3)
                                      |Ht (ix )|       |x⊤ ρ(t)|
                                  sup    x
                                                 = sup           = |ρ(t)|1 .                                 (120)
                                  x̸=0 ∥i ∥∞       x̸=0 |x|∞

Based on the impulse-inputs-induced memory function, if we assume this memory function and its
derivative are decaying, then we have a similar result as Theorem 3.9.

Sketch proof for Theorem 3.9 based on impulse-inputs-induced memory function Assume β0
is the stability radius, apply the proof of Theorem 3.9, we have for any β < β0
                                                         d
                                              lim eβt       yt → 0.                                          (121)
                                             t→∞         dt
                                                        d
Fix C > 0, there exists t0 such that for any t ≥ t0 , | dt yt | ≤ Ce−βt . Since the target has decaying
memory y∞ := limt→∞ yt = 0. Then we have
                                                         Z ∞
                                                                 d
                           lim eβt |yt − y∞ | = lim |              ys ds|                         (122)
                          t→∞                   t→∞        t    ds
                                                         Z ∞
                                              ≤ lim |           Ce−β(s−t) ds|                     (123)
                                                        t→∞       t
                                                     ≤ C < ∞.                                                (124)
Therefore the memory function based on the impulse inputs is also decaying exponentially.
                                                lim eβt |yt | ≤ C.                                           (125)
                                               t→∞


G     M EMORY FUNCTION DEFINED VIA REVERSED INPUTS

                                                                           x t < 0,
Let x ∈ R   d
                and consider the following reversed inputs input sequence rxt =     Hereafter
                                                                           0 t ≥ 0.
we call the following memory function to be impulse-inputs-induced memory function.
                                                            1  d
                                    M(H)(t) := sup                Ht (rx ) .                                 (126)
                                                     x̸=0 |x|∞ dt
In the linear case, notice that according to Equation (3)
                                        d       x
                                        dt Ht (r )          |x⊤ ρ(t)|
                                sup                  = sup            = |ρ(t)|1 .                            (127)
                                x̸=0     ∥rx ∥∞         x̸=0 |x|∞

Based on the reversed-inputs-induced memory function, if we assume this memory function and its
derivative are decaying, then we have Theorem 3.9.

Sketch proof for Theorem 3.9 based on reversed-inputs-induced memory function Assume
β0 is the stability radius, apply the proof of Theorem 3.9, we have for any β < β0
                                                         d
                                              lim eβt       yt → 0.                                          (128)
                                             t→∞         dt
Therefore the memory function based on the reversed inputs is also decaying exponentially.
The memory function defined over reversed inputs can be harder to evaluate as the outputs of
different input sequences (x, 0, . . . , ), (x, x, 0, . . . , 0), (x, x, x, 0, . . . , 0), ... need to be evaluated.


                                                         28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      layers=1                                                                  layers=1
                 10 1                                                 layers=2            10 2                                                  layers=2
                                                                      layers=3                                                                  layers=3
                                                                      layers=4            10 6                                                  layers=4
                 10 4
                                                                                          10 10
                 10 7
                                                                                          10 14
        memory


                                                                                 memory
                 10 10                                                                    10 18
                                                                                          10 22
                 10 13
                                                                                          10 26
                 10 16
                                                                                          10 30

                         0     20         40   60       80      100    120                        0      20         40   60       80      100    120
                                               time t                                                                    time t
                         (a) RNN - Heaviside memory                                                   (b) RNN - Impulse memory


                  100                                                 layers=1             100                                                  layers=1
                                                                      layers=2                                                                  layers=2
                                                                      layers=3                                                                  layers=3
                 10 3                                                 layers=4            10 3                                                  layers=4

                 10 6                                                                     10 6
        memory


                                                                                 memory
                 10 9                                                                     10 9

                 10 12                                                                    10 12

                 10 15                                                                    10 15


                         0     20         40   60       80      100    120                        0      20         40   60       80      100    120
                                               time t                                                                    time t
                         (c) GRU - Heaviside memory                                                   (d) GRU - Impulse memory


                  100                                                 layers=1             100                                                  layers=1
                                                                      layers=2                                                                  layers=2
                                                                      layers=3                                                                  layers=3
                 10 3                                                 layers=4            10 3                                                  layers=4

                 10 6                                                                     10 6
        memory


                                                                                 memory


                 10 9                                                                     10 9

                 10 12                                                                    10 12

                 10 15                                                                    10 15


                         0     20         40   60       80      100    120                        0      20         40   60       80      100    120
                                               time t                                                                    time t
                         (e) LSTM - Heaviside memory                                                  (f) LSTM - Impulse memory


                 10 2                                                 layers=1                                                                  layers=1
                                                                      layers=2            10 2                                                  layers=2
                                                                      layers=3                                                                  layers=3
                 10 4
                                                                                          10 4

                 10 6                                                                     10 6
        memory


                                                                                 memory


                 10 8                                                                     10 8

                 10 10                                                                    10 10

                                                                                          10 12
                 10 12

                         0          500        1000          1500        2000                     0           500        1000          1500        2000
                                               time t                                                                    time t
                             (g) S4 - Heaviside memory                                                 (h) S4 - Impulse memory

Figure 10: Memory functions of randomly-initialized recurrent networks evaluated over Heaviside
inputs and impulse inputs. The memory functions evaluated over different inputs are numerically
equivalent. The shadow indicates the error bar for 20 repeats.

H    Q UALITATIVE EQUIVALENCE OF DIFFERENT MEMORY FUNCTION
     DEFINITIONS

Apart from the previous sections that study the equivalence of memory functions over linear func-
tionals. In Figure 10, we show that the memory29functions evaluated over different test inputs are
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


qualitatively equivalent. Since the reversed inputs are harder to evaluate numerically, we only com-
pare the memory functions evaluated over Heaviside inputs and impulse inputs.
Besides the qualitative comparison that different memory functions are “equivalent”, here we show
they all characterize the decay speed of the model’s memory of a impulse change at time t = 0.

Relation between memory decaying speed and target dependence on early inputs An intuitive
explanation is that current memory functions characterize how fast the memory about the sudden
input change at t = 0 decays as t grows. Inputs such as Heaviside inputs, reversed inputs, and
impulse inputs all have this feature. Therefore the memory function evaluated over these inputs can
be interpreted as a measure for “dependence of the target function on early inputs”.
                        |yT (ix )|        HT ((x, 0, ...))
            ρT := sup              = sup                   . Impulse-inputs-based memory
                   x̸=0    |x|       x̸=0      |x|
We show the “equivalence” of different memory functions in linear functional sense in Appendix F
and G. Since memory functions over Heaviside inputs are easier to evaluate numerically (as shown
in Appendix H), we adopt the corresponding derivative form (as shown in Equation 5) to define the
memory function.
Here we explain the reason that the memory function is evaluated over certain subclass of inputs
rather than all continuous inputs:

Why special inputs A natural question is why we need a particular set of inputs rather than use
any continuous input. The identity functional Ht (x) = xt takes the input sequence xt = 1t , t > 0 to
a polynomial decaying output yt = 1t . However, this does not mean the functional has a polynomial-
decaying memory. In fact, this identity functional has no memory of past inputs in the sense that
changing x0 does not influence the output of yt with t > 0. The above example indicates the
selection of inputs to extract the memory pattern needs to be chosen properly. This is also one of the
reasons we select the Heaviside inputs as the test inputs to construct the derivative form.

I     A DDITIONAL NUMERICAL RESULTS FOR THE FILTERING EXPERIMENT
In this section, we first show the existence of nonlinewar RNNs with non-decaying memory. There-
fore in Figure 3 we need to filter the targets. Then the example of learning transformer with nonlinear
RNN is included. This example shows that transformer in general does not have a decaying memory.
Therefore the learning of transformer can highly difficult that we cannot achieve the approximation
with 1000 epochs training.

I.1   E XISTENCE OF NONLINEAR RNN S WITHOUT DECAYING MEMORY

In Figure 3, we show that the filtering of nonlinear RNNs with stable approximation presents the
target with only exponentially decaying memory. Here we present in Figure 11 that nonlinear RNNs
with randomly initialized weights have diverse memory patterns. Moreover, consider the following
examples.


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              100
                                             10 1



                 memory function evaluated
                                             10 2
                                             10 3
                                             10 4
                                             10 5
                                             10 6
                                             10 7

                                                    100         101          102           103
                                                                         Time t
                                                (a) Examples of nonlinear RNNs have non-decaying memory


                                                                                                      1   1
                                             (b) Example of 2D RNN with periodic memory W =                    .
                                                                                                     −4   −3

Figure 11: In the left panel, we show the existence of tanh RNNs with non-decaying memory. In
the right panel, we use a specific 2D tanh RNN to show the existence of a periodic trajectory. In
                                                                                             dh      dh
the figure, [0, 0], [1, 1], [−1, −1] are the attractor for the trajectories of (v1 , v2 ) = ( dtt,1 , dtt,2 ).
Therefore the boundary of the different converging set will be a periodic trajectory over the 2D
plane. The periodic trajectory of hidden state derivative indicates a periodic memory function.


I.2   F ILTERING TOWARDS TRANSFORMER

Apart from the nonlinear RNNs targets, we also construct targets with polynomial decaying memory.
It can be seen in Figure 12 that the transformers with non-decaying memory function cannot be
stably approximated by tanh RNNs.


                                                                          31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  (a) Memory function of the target randomly initialized transformer


                                  105            Hidden Dimension 8
                                                 Hidden Dimension 16
                                  104            Hidden Dimension 32
             Perturbation error


                                                 Hidden Dimension 64
                                  103
                                  102
                                  101
                                  100
                              10 1
                                        10 4         10 3        10 2          10 1         100
                                                            Perturbation
                                                (b) Inexistence of stable approximation

Figure 12: If the target functional does not have an exponentially decaying memory, then the targets
cannot be stably approximated. The largest RNN with hidden dimension m = 64 failed to achieve
an approximation error smaller than the case for m = 32 and m = 16.


J   D ISCUSSION ON EXTENDING THE T HEOREM 3.9 TO GRU/LSTM

We will analyze GRU as LSTM comes with more complicated structure. The classical GRU is of
the following structure:
                                               zt = σ(Wz xt + Uz ht−1 + bz ),                          (129)
                                               rt = σ(Wr xt + Ur ht−1 + br ),                          (130)
                                               ĥt = ϕ(Wh xt + Uh (rt ⊙ ht−1 ) + bh ),                 (131)
                                               ht = (1 − zt ) ⊙ ht−1 + zt ⊙ ĥt .                      (132)


                                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here σ is sigmoid activation and ϕ is the tanh activation. The hidden state equations can be refor-
mulated into
                                  ht = ht−1 + zt ⊙ (ĥt − ht−1 ).                               (133)
The corresponding continuous-time version can be given by
               dht
                    =zt ⊙ (ĥt − ht )                                                            (134)
                dt
                    =σ(Wz xt + Uz ht + bz ) ⊙ (ĥt − ht )                                        (135)
                    =σ(Wz xt + Uz ht + bz ) ⊙ (ϕ(Wh xt + Uh (rt ⊙ ht ) + bh ) − ht )             (136)
                    =σ(Wz xt + Uz ht + bz )                                                      (137)
                       ⊙ (ϕ(Wh xt + Uh (σ(Wr xt + Ur ht + br ) ⊙ ht ) + bh ) − ht ).             (138)

                                                                             x t ≥ 0,
Let x ∈ Rd and we consider the Heaviside inputs uxt = x · 1[0,∞) (t) =                    After change
                                                                             0 t < 0.
of variable over the bias term bz := Wz x + bz , br := Wr x + br , bh := Wz x + bh , the corresponding
hidden dynamics can be simplified into
                         dht
                             =σ(Uz ht + bz )                                                    (139)
                          dt
                              ⊙ (ϕ(Uh (σ(Ur ht + br ) ⊙ ht ) + bh ) − ht ),                     (140)
Notice that h∗ = 0 is an equilibrium point if bh = 0:
                            σ(bz ) ⊙ (ϕ(Uh (σ(br ) ⊙ 0) + 0) − 0) = 0.                          (141)
Similar linearization can be utilized to analyse the corresponding first-order system:
                            dht
                                = Diag(σ(bz ))(Uh Diag(σ(br )) − I)ht .                         (142)
                             dt
Our stable approximation argument can be used to show Diag(σ(bz ))(Uh Diag(σ(br )) − I) is Hur-
witz. However, h∗ = 0 might not be the only equilibrium point. Furthermore, when bh ̸= 0, it’s
harder to find all equilibrium points therefore further analysis are needed.


                                                 33
