T RAINING D IFFUSION M ODELS
WITH R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

    Kevin Black∗ 1      Michael Janner∗ 1    Yilun Du2        Ilya Kostrikov1     Sergey Levine1
 1                                        2
     University of California, Berkeley     Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 {kvablack, janner, kostrikov, sergey.levine}@berkeley.edu                        yilundu@mit.edu


                                            A BSTRACT
          Diffusion models are a class of flexible generative models trained with an
          approximation to the log-likelihood objective. However, most use cases of diffusion
          models are not concerned with likelihoods, but instead with downstream objectives
          such as human-perceived image quality or drug effectiveness. In this paper, we
          investigate reinforcement learning methods for directly optimizing diffusion models
          for such objectives. We describe how posing denoising as a multi-step decision-
          making problem enables a class of policy gradient algorithms, which we refer
          to as denoising diffusion policy optimization (DDPO), that are more effective
          than alternative reward-weighted likelihood approaches. Empirically, DDPO can
          adapt text-to-image diffusion models to objectives that are difficult to express via
          prompting, such as image compressibility, and those derived from human feedback,
          such as aesthetic quality. Finally, we show that DDPO can improve prompt-image
          alignment using feedback from a vision-language model without the need for
          additional data collection or human annotation. The project’s website can be found
          at http://rl-diffusion.github.io.

1     I NTRODUCTION
Diffusion probabilistic models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) have recently emerged as the de facto
standard for generative modeling in continuous domains. Their flexibility in representing complex,
high-dimensional distributions has led to the adoption of diffusion models in applications including
image and video synthesis (Ramesh et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022), drug and
material design (Xu et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021; Schneuing et al., 2022), and continuous control
(Janner et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Hansen-Estruch et al., 2023). The key idea behind diffusion
models is to iteratively transform a simple prior distribution into a target distribution by applying a
sequential denoising process. This procedure is conventionally motivated as a maximum likelihood
estimation problem, with the objective derived as a variational lower bound on the log-likelihood of
the training data.
However, most use cases of diffusion models are not directly concerned with likelihoods, but instead
with downstream objective such as human-perceived image quality or drug effectiveness. In this paper,
we consider the problem of training diffusion models to satisfy such objectives directly, as opposed to
matching a data distribution. This problem is challenging because exact likelihood computation with
diffusion models is intractable, making it difficult to apply many conventional reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithms. We instead propose to frame denoising as a multi-step decision-making task, using
the exact likelihoods at each denoising step in place of the approximate likelihoods induced by a full
denoising process. We present a policy gradient algorithm, which we refer to as denoising diffusion
policy optimization (DDPO), that can optimize a diffusion model for downstream tasks using only a
black-box reward function.
We apply our algorithm to the finetuning of large text-to-image diffusion models. Our initial evaluation
focuses on tasks that are difficult to specify via prompting, such as image compressibility, and those
derived from human feedback, such as aesthetic quality. However, because many reward functions
of interest are difficult to specify programmatically, finetuning procedures often rely on large-scale
human labeling efforts to obtain a reward signal (Ouyang et al., 2022). In the case of text-to-image
diffusion, we propose a method for replacing such labeling with feedback from a vision-language
model (VLM). Similar to RLAIF finetuning for language models (Bai et al., 2022b), the resulting
procedure allows for diffusion models to be adapted to reward functions that would otherwise require


                                                   1
                                         Compressibility: llama


                                        Aesthetic Quality: rabbit


                          Prompt-Image Alignment: a raccoon washing dishes


Figure 1 (Reinforcement learning for diffusion models) We propose a reinforcement learning
algorithm, DDPO, for optimizing diffusion models on downstream objectives such as compressibility,
aesthetic quality, and prompt-image alignment as determined by vision-language models. Each row
shows a progression of samples for the same prompt and random seed over the course of training.

additional human annotations. We use this procedure to improve prompt-image alignment for unusual
subject-setting compositions.
Our contributions are as follows. We first present the derivation and conceptual motivation of DDPO.
We then document the design of various reward functions for text-to-image generation, ranging
from simple computations to workflows involving large VLMs, and demonstrate the effectiveness of
DDPO compared to alternative reward-weighted likelihood methods in these settings. Finally, we
demonstrate the generalization ability of our finetuning procedure to unseen prompts.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Diffusion probabilistic models. Denoising diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho
et al., 2020) have emerged as an effective class of generative models for modalities including
images (Ramesh et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022), videos (Ho et al., 2022; Singer et al., 2022), 3D
shapes (Zhou et al., 2021; Zeng et al., 2022), and robotic trajectories (Janner et al., 2022; Ajay et al.,
2022; Chi et al., 2023). While the denoising objective is conventionally derived as an approximation
to likelihood, the training of diffusion models typically departs from maximum likelihood in several
ways (Ho et al., 2020). Modifying the objective to more strictly optimize likelihood (Nichol &
Dhariwal, 2021; Kingma et al., 2021) often leads to worsened image quality, as likelihood is not
a faithful proxy for visual quality. In this paper, we show how diffusion models can be optimized
directly for downstream objectives.
Controllable generation with diffusion models. Recent progress in text-to-image diffusion mod-
els (Ramesh et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022) has enabled fine-grained high-resolution image synthesis.
To further improve the controllability and quality of diffusion models, recent approaches have in-
vestigated finetuning on limited user-provided data (Ruiz et al., 2022), optimizing text embeddings
for new concepts (Gal et al., 2022), composing models (Du et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2022), adapters
for additional input constraints (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023), and inference-time techniques such as
classifier (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) and classifier-free (Ho & Salimans, 2021) guidance.


                                                    2
Reinforcement learning from human feedback. A number of works have studied using human
feedback to optimize models in settings such as simulated robotic control (Christiano et al., 2017),
game-playing (Knox & Stone, 2008), machine translation (Nguyen et al., 2017), citation retrieval
(Menick et al., 2022), browsing-based question-answering (Nakano et al., 2021), summarization
(Stiennon et al., 2020; Ziegler et al., 2019), instruction-following (Ouyang et al., 2022), and alignment
with specifications (Bai et al., 2022a). Recently, Lee et al. (2023) studied the alignment of text-to-
image diffusion models to human preferences using a method based on reward-weighted likelihood
maximization. In our comparisons, their method corresponds to one iteration of the reward-weighted
regresion (RWR) method. Our results demonstrate that DDPO significantly outperforms even multiple
iterations of weighted likelihood maximization (RWR-style) optimization.
Diffusion models as sequential decision-making processes. Although predating diffusion models,
Bachman & Precup (2015) similarly posed data generation as a sequential decision-making problem
and used the resulting framework to apply reinforcement learning methods to image generation.
More recently, Fan & Lee (2023) introduced a policy gradient method for training diffusion models.
However, this paper aimed to improve data distribution matching rather than optimizing downstream
objectives, and therefore the only reward function considered was a GAN-like discriminator. In
concurrent work to ours, DPOK (Fan et al., 2023) built upon Fan & Lee (2023) and Lee et al. (2023)
to better align text-to-image diffusion models to human preferences using a policy gradient algorithm.
Like Lee et al. (2023), DPOK only considers a single preference-based reward function (Xu et al.,
2023); additionally, their work studies KL-regularization and primarily focuses on training a different
diffusion model for each prompt. In contrast, we train on many prompts at once (up to 398) and
demonstrate generalization to many more prompts outside of the training set. Furthermore, we study
how DDPO can be applied to multiple reward functions beyond those based on human feedback,
including how rewards derived automatically from VLMs can improve prompt-image alignment. We
provide a direct comparison to DPOK in Appendix C.


3     P RELIMINARIES

In this section, we provide a brief background on diffusion models and the RL problem formulation.

3.1   D IFFUSION M ODELS

In this work, we consider conditional diffusion probabilistic models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho
et al., 2020), which represent a distribution p(x0 |c) over a dataset of samples x0 and corresponding
contexts c. The distribution is modeled as the reverse of a Markovian forward process q(xt | xt−1 ),
which iteratively adds noise to the data. Reversing the forward process can be accomplished by
training a neural network µθ (xt , c, t) with the following objective:

           LDDPM (θ) = E(x0 ,c)∼p(x0 ,c), t∼U {0,T }, xt ∼q(xt |x0 ) ∥µ̃(x0 , t) − µθ (xt , c, t)∥2

                                                                                                      (1)
where µ̃ is the posterior mean of the forward process, a weighted average of x0 and xt . This objective
is justified as maximizing a variational lower bound on the log-likelihood of the data (Ho et al., 2020).
Sampling from a diffusion model begins with drawing a random xT ∼ N (0, I) and following the
reverse process pθ (xt−1 | xt , c) to produce a trajectory {xT , xT −1 , . . . , x0 } ending with a sample
x0 . The sampling process depends not only on the predictor µθ but also the choice of sampler. Most
popular samplers (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021) use an isotropic Gaussian reverse process with a
fixed timestep-dependent variance:
                          pθ (xt−1 | xt , c) = N (xt−1 | µθ (xt , c, t) , σt2 I).                      (2)

3.2   M ARKOV D ECISION P ROCESSES AND R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

A Markov decision process (MDP) is a formalization of sequential decision-making problems. An
MDP is defined by a tuple (S, A, ρ0 , P, R), in which S is the state space, A is the action space, ρ0
is the distribution of initial states, P is the transition kernel, and R is the reward function. At each
timestep t, the agent observes a state st ∈ S, takes an action at ∈ A, receives a reward R(st , at ),
and transitions to a new state st+1 ∼ P (st+1 | st , at ). An agent acts according to a policy π(a | s).


                                                    3
As the agent acts in the MDP, it produces trajectories, which are sequences of states and actions
τ = (s0 , a0 , s1 , a1 , . . . , sT , aT ). The reinforcement learning (RL) objective is for the agent to
maximize JRL (π), the expected cumulative reward over trajectories sampled from its policy:
                                                           hP                i
                                                              T
                                     JRL (π) = Eτ ∼p(τ |π)    t=0 R(st , at ) .


4     R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING T RAINING OF D IFFUSION M ODELS
We now describe how RL algorithms can be used to train diffusion models. We present two classes
of methods and show that each corresponds to a different mapping of the denoising process to the
MDP framework.

4.1   P ROBLEM S TATEMENT

We assume a pre-existing diffusion model, which may be pretrained or randomly initialized. Assuming
a fixed sampler, the diffusion model induces a sample distribution pθ (x0 | c). The denoising diffusion
RL objective is to maximize a reward signal r defined on the samples and contexts:
                             JDDRL (θ) = Ec∼p(c), x0 ∼pθ (x0 |c) [r(x0 , c)]
for some context distribution p(c) of our choosing.

4.2   R EWARD -W EIGHTED R EGRESSION

To optimize JDDRL with minimal changes to standard diffusion model training, we can use the
denoising loss LDDPM (Equation 1), but with training data x0 ∼ pθ (x0 | c) and an added weighting
that depends on the reward r(x0 , c). Lee et al. (2023) describe a single-round version of this procedure
for diffusion models, but in general this approach can be performed for multiple rounds of alternating
sampling and training, leading to an online RL method. We refer to this general class of algorithms
as reward-weighted regression (RWR) (Peters & Schaal, 2007).
A standard weighting scheme uses exponentiated rewards to ensure nonnegativity,
                                                  1
                                 wRWR (x0 , c) =    exp βr(x0 , c) ,
                                                  Z
where β is an inverse temperature and Z is a normalization constant. We also consider a simplified
weighting scheme that uses binary weights,

                                wsparse (x0 , c) = 1 r(x0 , c) ≥ C ,
where C is a reward threshold determining which samples are used for training. In supervised learning
terms, this is equivalent to repeated filtered finetuning on training data coming from the model.
Within the RL formalism, the RWR procedure corresponds to the following one-step MDP:
      s≜c        a ≜ x0       π(a | s) ≜ pθ (x0 | c)       ρ0 (s) ≜ p(c)       R(s, a) ≜ r(x0 , c)
with a transition kernel P that immediately leads to an absorbing termination state. Therefore,
maximizing JDDRL (θ) is equivalent to maximizing the RL objective JRL (π) in this MDP.
From RL literature, weighting a log-likelihood objective by wRWR is known to approximately max-
imize JRL (π) subject to a KL divergence constraint on π (Nair et al., 2020). However, LDDPM
(Equation 1) does not involve an exact log-likelihood — it is instead derived as a variational bound on
log pθ (x0 | c). Therefore, the RWR procedure applied to diffusion model training is not theoretically
justified and only optimizes JDDRL very approximately.

4.3   D ENOISING D IFFUSION P OLICY O PTIMIZATION

RWR relies on an approximate log-likelihood because it ignores the sequential nature of the denoising
process, only using the final samples x0 . In this section, we show how the denoising process can
be reframed as a multi-step MDP, allowing us to directly optimize JDDRL using policy gradient


                                                   4
estimators. This follows the derivation in Fan & Lee (2023), who prove an equivalence between their
method and a policy gradient algorithm where the reward is a GAN-like discriminator. We present a
general framework with an arbitrary reward function, motivated by our desire to optimize arbitrary
downstream objectives (Section 5). We refer to this class of algorithms as denoising diffusion policy
optimization (DDPO) and present two variants based on specific gradient estimators.
Denoising as a multi-step MDP. We map the iterative denoising procedure to the following MDP:

  st ≜ (c, t, xt ) π(at | st ) ≜ pθ (xt−1 | xt , c)   P (st+1 | st , at ) ≜ δc , δt−1 , δxt−1

                                                                             r(x0 , c) if t = 0
  at ≜ xt−1           ρ0 (s0 ) ≜ p(c), δT , N (0, I)        R(st , at ) ≜
                                                                             0            otherwise
in which δy is the Dirac delta distribution with nonzero density only at y. Trajectories consist of T
timesteps, after which P leads to a termination state. The cumulative reward of each trajectory is
equal to r(x0 , c), so maximizing JDDRL (θ) is equivalent to maximizing JRL (π) in this MDP.
The benefit of this formulation is that if we use a standard sampler with pθ (xt−1 | xt , c) parameterized
as in Equation 2, the policy π becomes an isotropic Gaussian as opposed to the arbitrarily complicated
distribution pθ (x0 | c) as it is in the RWR formulation. This simplification allows for the evaluation
of exact log-likelihoods and their gradients with respect to the diffusion model parameters.
Policy gradient estimation. With access to likelihoods and likelihood gradients, we can make direct
Monte Carlo estimates of ∇θ JDDRL . Like RWR, DDPO alternates collecting denoising trajectories
{xT , xT −1 , . . . , x0 } via sampling and updating parameters via gradient descent.
The first variant of DDPO, which we call DDPOSF , uses the score function policy gradient estimator,
also known as the likelihood ratio method or REINFORCE (Williams, 1992; Mohamed et al., 2020):
                                     " T                                      #
                                       X
                       ∇θ JDDRL = E        ∇θ log pθ (xt−1 | xt , c) r(x0 , c)          (DDPOSF )
                                          t=0

where the expectation is taken over denoising trajectories generated by the current parameters θ.
However, this estimator only allows for one step of optimization per round of data collection, as the
gradient must be computed using data generated by the current parameters. To perform multiple steps
of optimization, we may use an importance sampling estimator (Kakade & Langford, 2002):
                      " T                                                          #
                         X pθ (xt−1 | xt , c)
       ∇θ JDDRL = E                             ∇θ log pθ (xt−1 | xt , c) r(x0 , c)       (DDPOIS )
                             p (xt−1 | xt , c)
                         t=0 θold

where the expectation is taken over denoising trajectories generated by the parameters θold . This
estimator becomes inaccurate if pθ deviates too far from pθold , which can be addressed using trust
regions (Schulman et al., 2015) to constrain the size of the update. In practice, we implement the
trust region via clipping, as in proximal policy optimization (Schulman et al., 2017).

5     R EWARD F UNCTIONS FOR T EXT- TO -I MAGE D IFFUSION
In this work, we evaluate our methods on text-to-image diffusion. Text-to-image diffusion serves
as a valuable test environment for reinforcement learning due to the availability of large pretrained
models and the versatility of using diverse and visually interesting reward functions. In this section,
we outline our selection of reward functions. We study a spectrum of reward functions of varying
complexity, ranging from those that are straightforward to specify and evaluate to those that capture
the depth of real-world downstream tasks.

5.1   C OMPRESSIBILITY AND I NCOMPRESSIBILITY

The capabilities of text-to-image diffusion models are limited by the co-occurrences of text and
images in their training distribution. For instance, images are rarely captioned with their file size,
making it impossible to specify a desired file size via prompting. This limitation makes reward
functions based on file size a convenient case study: they are simple to compute, but not controllable
through the conventional methods of likelihood maximization and prompt engineering.


                                                    5
         “what is happening
           in this image?”    LLaVA                                    BERTScore
                                                                                                 similarity-based
                                               “a monkey is...”
                                                                                                      reward


                               Diffusion
                                                                  “a monkey washing dishes...”
                                Model


Figure 2 (VLM reward function) Illustration of the VLM-based reward function for prompt-image
alignment. LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023) provides a short description of a generated image; the reward is
the similarity between this description and the original prompt as measured by BERTScore (Zhang
et al., 2020).

We fix the resolution of diffusion model samples at 512x512, such that the file size is determined
solely by the compressibility of the image. We define two tasks based on file size: compressibility,
in which the file size of the image after JPEG compression is minimized, and incompressibility, in
which the same measure is maximized.

5.2   A ESTHETIC Q UALITY

To capture a reward function that would be useful to a human user, we define a task based on
perceived aesthetic quality. We use the LAION aesthetics predictor (Schuhmann, 2022), which
is trained on 176,000 human image ratings. The predictor is implemented as a linear model on
top of CLIP embeddings (Radford et al., 2021). Annotations range between 1 and 10, with the
highest-rated images mostly containing artwork. Since the aesthetic quality predictor is trained on
human judgments, this task constitutes reinforcement learning from human feedback (Ouyang et al.,
2022; Christiano et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2019).

5.3   AUTOMATED P ROMPT A LIGNMENT WITH V ISION -L ANGUAGE M ODELS

A very general-purpose reward function for training a text-to-image model is prompt-image alignment.
However, specifying a reward that captures generic prompt alignment is difficult, conventionally
requiring large-scale human labeling efforts. We propose using an existing VLM to replace additional
human annotation. This design is inspired by recent work on RLAIF (Bai et al., 2022b), in which
language models are improved using feedback from themselves.
We use LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023), a state-of-the-art VLM, to describe an image. The finetuning
reward is the BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020) recall metric, a measure of semantic similarity, using
the prompt as the reference sentence and the VLM description as the candidate sentence. Samples
that more faithfully include all of the details of the prompt receive higher rewards, to the extent that
those visual details are legible to the VLM.
In Figure 2, we show one simple question: “what is happening in this image?”. While this captures
the general task of prompt-image alignment, in principle any question could be used to specify
complex or hard-to-define reward functions for a particular use case. One could even employ a
language model to automatically generate candidate questions and evaluate responses based on the
prompt. This framework provides a flexible interface where the complexity of the reward function is
only limited by the capabilities of the vision and language models involved.

6     E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
The purpose of our experiments is to evaluate the effectiveness of RL algorithms for finetuning
diffusion models to align with a variety of user-specified objectives. After examining the viability of
the general approach, we focus on the following questions:
      1. How do variants of DDPO compare to RWR and to each other?
      2. Can VLMs allow for optimizing rewards that are difficult to specify manually?
      3. Do the effects of RL finetuning generalize to prompts not seen during finetuning?


                                                    6
                   Pretrained                                       Aesthetic Quality


                Compressibility                                     Incompressibility


Figure 3 (DDPO samples) Qualitative depiction of the effects of RL finetuning on different reward
functions. DDPO transforms naturalistic images into stylized artwork to maximize aesthetic quality,
removes background content and applies foreground smoothing to maximize compressibility, and
adds high-frequency noise to maximize incompressibility.


                       DDPOIS             DDPOSF              RWR             RWRsparse

Figure 4 (Finetuning effectiveness) The relative effectiveness of different RL algorithms on three
reward functions. We find that the policy gradient variants, denoted DDPO, are more effective
optimizers than both RWR variants.

6.1   A LGORITHM C OMPARISONS

We begin by evaluating all methods on the compressibility, incompressibility, and aesthetic quality
tasks, as these tasks isolate the effectiveness of the RL approach from considerations relating to the
VLM reward function. We use Stable Diffusion v1.4 (Rombach et al., 2022) as the base model for all
experiments. Compressibility and incompressibility prompts are sampled uniformly from all 398
animals in the ImageNet-1000 (Deng et al., 2009) categories. Aesthetic quality prompts are sampled
uniformly from a smaller set of 45 common animals.
As shown qualitatively in Figure 3, DDPO is able to effectively adapt a pretrained model with only
the specification of a reward function and without any further data curation. The strategies found to
optimize each reward are nontrivial; for example, to maximize LAION-predicted aesthetic quality,
DDPO transforms a model that produces naturalistic images into one that produces artistic drawings.
To maximize compressibility, DDPO removes backgrounds and applies smoothing to what remains.
To maximize incompressibility, DDPO finds artifacts that are difficult for the JPEG compression
algorithm to encode, such as high-frequency noise and sharp edges. Samples from RWR are provided
in Appendix G for comparison.


                                                  7
                      a dolphin riding a bike
                                                                                           Prompt Alignment
                                                                                    0.84


                                                                                    0.81



                       an ant playing chess                                         0.78


                                                                        BERTScore
                                                                                    0.75


                                                                                    0.72


                                                                                    0.69

                      a bear washing dishes
                                                                                             10k   20k   30k   40k   50k
                                                                                               Reward Queries


                                                                                              . . . riding a bike
                                                                                              . . . playing chess
                                                                                              . . . washing dishes


Figure 5 (Prompt alignment) (L) Progression of samples for the same prompt and random seed over
the course of training. The images become significantly more faithful to the prompt. The samples also
adopt a cartoon-like style, which we hypothesize is because the prompts are more likely depicted as
illustrations than realistic photographs in the pretraining distribution. (R) Quantitative improvement
of prompt alignment. Each thick line is the average score for an activity, while the faint lines show
average scores for a few randomly selected individual prompts.

We provide a quantitative comparison of all methods in Figure 4. We plot the attained reward
as a function of the number of queries to the reward function, as reward evaluation becomes the
limiting factor in many practical applications. DDPO shows a clear advantage over RWR on all
tasks, demonstrating that formulating the denoising process as a multi-step MDP and estimating the
policy gradient directly is more effective than optimizing a reward-weighted variational bound on
log-likelihood. Within the DDPO class, the importance sampling estimator slightly outperforms the
score function estimator, likely due to the increased number of optimization steps. Within the RWR
class, the performance of weighting schemes is comparable, making the sparse weighting scheme
preferable on these tasks due to its simplicity and reduced resource requirements.

6.2   AUTOMATED P ROMPT A LIGNMENT

We next evaluate the ability of VLMs, in conjunction with DDPO, to automatically improve the
image-prompt alignment of the pretrained model without additional human labels. We focus on
DDPOIS for this experiment, as we found it to be the most effective algorithm in Section 6.1. The
prompts for this task all have the form “a(n) [animal] [activity] ”, where the animal comes from
the same list of 45 common animals used in Section 6.1 and the activity is chosen from a list of 3
activities: “riding a bike”, “playing chess”, and “washing dishes”.
The progression of finetuning is depicted in Figure 5. Qualitatively, the samples come to depict the
prompts much more faithfully throughout the course of training. This trend is also reflected quanti-
tatively, though is less salient as small changes in BERTScore can correspond to large differences
in relevance (Zhang et al., 2020). It is important to note that some of the prompts in the finetuning
set, such as “a dolphin riding a bike”, had zero success rate from the pretrained model; if trained in
isolation, this prompt would be unlikely to ever improve because there would be no reward signal. It
was only via transferrable learning across prompts that these difficult prompts could improve.
Nearly all of the samples become more cartoon-like or artistic during finetuning. This was not
optimized for directly. We hypothesize that this may be a function of the pretraining distribution (one
would expect depictions of animals doing everyday activities to be more commonly cartoon-like than
photorealistic) or of the reward function (perhaps LLaVA has an easier time recognizing the content
of simple cartoon-like images).


                                                  8
                  Aesthetic Quality (New Animals)   Aesthetic Quality (Non-Animals)   Prompt Alignment (New Scenarios)


    Pretrained
    Finetuned


Figure 6 (Generalization) Finetuning on a limited set of animals generalizes to both new animals
and non-animal everyday objects. The prompts for the rightmost two columns are “a capybara
washing dishes” and “a duck taking an exam”. A quantitative analysis is provided in Appendix F,
and more samples are provided in Appendix G.

6.3              G ENERALIZATION

RL finetuning on large language models has been shown to produce interesting generalization
properties; for example, instruction finetuning almost entirely in English has been shown to improve
capabilities in other languages (Ouyang et al., 2022). It is difficult to reconcile this phenomenon
with our current understanding of generalization; it would a priori seem more likely for finetuning
to have an effect only on the finetuning prompt set or distribution. In order to investigate the
same phenomenon with diffusion models, Figure 6 shows a set of DDPO-finetuned model samples
corresponding to prompts that were not seen during finetuning. In concordance with instruction-
following transfer in language modeling, we find that the effects of finetuning do generalize, even
with prompt distributions as narrow as 45 animals and 3 activities. We find evidence of generalization
to animals outside of the training distribution, to non-animal everyday objects, and in the case of
prompt-image alignment, even to novel activities such as “taking an exam”.


7                D ISCUSSION AND L IMITATIONS

We presented an RL-based framework for training denoising diffusion models to directly optimize
a variety of reward functions. By posing the iterative denoising procedure as a multi-step decision-
making problem, we were able to design a class of policy gradient algorithms that are highly effective
at training diffusion models. We found that DDPO was an effective optimizer for tasks that are difficult
to specify via prompts, such as image compressibility, and difficult to evaluate programmatically,
such as semantic alignment with prompts. To provide an automated way to derive rewards, we also
proposed a method for using VLMs to provide feedback on the quality of generated images. While our
evaluation considers a variety of prompts, the full range of images in our experiments was constrained
(e.g., animals performing activities). Future iterations could expand both the questions posed to the
VLM, possibly using language models to propose relevant questions based on the prompt, as well as
the diversity of the prompt distribution. We also chose not to study the problem of overoptimization,
a common issue with RL finetuning in which the model diverges too far from the original distribution
to be useful (see Appendix A); we highlight this as an important area for future work. We hope
that this work will provide a step toward more targeted training of large generative models, where
optimization via RL can produce models that are effective at achieving user-specified goals rather
than simply matching an entire data distribution.
Broader Impacts. Generative models can be valuable productivity aids, but may also pose harm
when used for disinformation, impersonation, or phishing. Our work aims to make diffusion models
more useful by enabling them to optimize user-specified objectives. This adaptation has beneficial
applications, such as the generation of more understandable educational material, but may also be
used maliciously, in ways that we do not outline here. Work on the reliable detection of synthetic
content remains important to mitigate such harms from generative models.


                                                                9
8   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was partially supported by the Office of Naval Research and computational resource
donations from Google via the TPU Research Cloud (TRC). Michael Janner was supported by a
fellowship from the Open Philanthropy Project. Yilun Du and Kevin Black were supported by
fellowships from the National Science Foundation.

C ODE R EFERENCES

We used the following open-source libraries for this work: NumPy (Harris et al., 2020), JAX
(Bradbury et al., 2018), Flax (Heek et al., 2023), optax (Babuschkin et al., 2020), h5py (Collette,
2013), transformers (Wolf et al., 2020), and diffusers (von Platen et al., 2022).


R EFERENCES
Anurag Ajay, Yilun Du, Abhi Gupta, Joshua Tenenbaum, Tommi Jaakkola, and Pulkit Agrawal. Is con-
  ditional generative modeling all you need for decision-making? arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15657,
  2022.

Igor Babuschkin, Kate Baumli, Alison Bell, Surya Bhupatiraju, Jake Bruce, Peter Buchlovsky,
  David Budden, Trevor Cai, Aidan Clark, Ivo Danihelka, Antoine Dedieu, Claudio Fantacci,
  Jonathan Godwin, Chris Jones, Ross Hemsley, Tom Hennigan, Matteo Hessel, Shaobo Hou, Steven
  Kapturowski, Thomas Keck, Iurii Kemaev, Michael King, Markus Kunesch, Lena Martens, Hamza
  Merzic, Vladimir Mikulik, Tamara Norman, George Papamakarios, John Quan, Roman Ring,
  Francisco Ruiz, Alvaro Sanchez, Rosalia Schneider, Eren Sezener, Stephen Spencer, Srivatsan
  Srinivasan, Wojciech Stokowiec, Luyu Wang, Guangyao Zhou, and Fabio Viola. The DeepMind
  JAX Ecosystem, 2020. URL http://github.com/deepmind.

Philip Bachman and Doina Precup. Data generation as sequential decision making. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 28, 2015.

Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson
  Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez,
  Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Dario
  Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Ben Mann, and Jared Kaplan.
  Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022a.

Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Olsson,
  Christopher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson,
  Ethan Perez, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Kamile
  Lukosuite, Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Noemi Mercado, Nova
  DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El
  Showk, Stanislav Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Conerly, Tom Henighan,
  Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario Amodei, Nicholas
  Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and Jared Kaplan. Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from
  AI feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022b.

Arpit Bansal, Hong-Min Chu, Avi Schwarzschild, Soumyadip Sengupta, Micah Goldblum, Jonas
  Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Universal guidance for diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 843–852, 2023.

James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and
  Qiao Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL
  http://github.com/google/jax.


                                                10
Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shuran
  Song. Diffusion Policy: Visuomotor Policy Learning via Action Diffusion. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.04137, 2023.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
Andrew Collette. Python and HDF5. O’Reilly, 2013.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2009.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Quinn Nichol. Diffusion models beat GANs on image synthesis. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Yilun Du, Conor Durkan, Robin Strudel, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Sander Dieleman, Rob Fergus, Jascha
  Sohl-Dickstein, Arnaud Doucet, and Will Grathwohl. Reduce, reuse, recycle: Compositional
  generation with energy-based diffusion models and mcmc. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11552, 2023.
Yan Duan, Xi Chen, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, and Pieter Abbeel. Benchmarking deep
  reinforcement learning for continuous control. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1329–1338. PMLR, 2016.
Ying Fan and Kangwook Lee. Optimizing ddpm sampling with shortcut fine-tuning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.13362, 2023.
Ying Fan, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Hao Liu, Moonkyung Ryu, Craig Boutilier, Pieter Abbeel,
  Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Kangwook Lee, and Kimin Lee. Dpok: Reinforcement learning for
  fine-tuning text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16381, 2023.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2210.10760, 2022.
Gabriel Goh, Nick Cammarata †, Chelsea Voss †, Shan Carter, Michael Petrov, Ludwig Schubert,
  Alec Radford, and Chris Olah. Multimodal neurons in artificial neural networks. Distill, 2021.
  https://distill.pub/2021/multimodal-neurons.
Philippe Hansen-Estruch, Ilya Kostrikov, Michael Janner, Jakub Grudzien Kuba, and Sergey Levine.
  IDQL: Implicit q-learning as an actor-critic method with diffusion policies. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.10573, 2023.
Charles R. Harris, K. Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J. van der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David
  Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J. Smith, Robert Kern, Matti
  Picus, Stephan Hoyer, Marten H. van Kerkwijk, Matthew Brett, Allan Haldane, Jaime Fernández
  del Río, Mark Wiebe, Pearu Peterson, Pierre Gérard-Marchant, Kevin Sheppard, Tyler Reddy,
  Warren Weckesser, Hameer Abbasi, Christoph Gohlke, and Travis E. Oliphant. Array programming
  with NumPy. Nature, 585(7825):357–362, 2020.
Jonathan Heek, Anselm Levskaya, Avital Oliver, Marvin Ritter, Bertrand Rondepierre, Andreas
  Steiner, and Marc van Zee. Flax: A neural network library and ecosystem for JAX, 2023. URL
  http://github.com/google/flax.

Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on
  Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P.
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J. Fleet, and Tim Salimans. Imagen video: High
  definition video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022.


                                                11
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.

Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Planning with diffusion for
 flexible behavior synthesis. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.

Sham Kakade and John Langford. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the Nineteenth International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 267–274, 2002.

Diederik P Kingma, Tim Salimans, Ben Poole, and Jonathan Ho. Variational diffusion models. In
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.

W. Bradley Knox and Peter Stone. TAMER: Training an Agent Manually via Evaluative Reinforce-
  ment. In International Conference on Development and Learning, 2008.

Kimin Lee, Hao Liu, Moonkyung Ryu, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Craig Boutilier, Pieter Abbeel,
  Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Aligning text-to-image models using human
  feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12192, 2023.

Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. 2023.

Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional visual
  generation with composable diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01714, 2022.

Jacob Menick, Maja Trebacz, Vladimir Mikulik, John Aslanides, Francis Song, Martin Chadwick, Mia
  Glaese, Susannah Young, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham, Geoffrey Irving, and Nat McAleese. Teach-
  ing language models to support answers with verified quotes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11147,
  2022.

Shakir Mohamed, Mihaela Rosca, Michael Figurnov, and Andriy Mnih. Monte carlo gradient
  estimation in machine learning. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5183–5244,
  2020.

Ashvin Nair, Murtaza Dalal, Abhishek Gupta, and Sergey Levine. Accelerating online reinforcement
  learning with offline datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09359, 2020.

Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher
  Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, Xu Jiang, Karl Cobbe, Tyna Eloundou,
  Gretchen Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew Knight, Benjamin Chess, and John Schulman. Webgpt:
  Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332,
  2021.

Khanh Nguyen, Hal Daumé III, and Jordan Boyd-Graber. Reinforcement learning for bandit neural
  machine translation with simulated human feedback. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language
 Processing, 2017.

Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.

Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton,
  Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and
  Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.02155, 2022.

Xue Bin Peng, Aviral Kumar, Grace Zhang, and Sergey Levine. Advantage-weighted regression:
  Simple and scalable off-policy reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1910.00177, 2019. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.00177.

Jan Peters and Stefan Schaal. Reinforcement learning by reward-weighted regression for operational
  space control. In International Conference on Machine learning, 2007.


                                               12
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2103.00020, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Scott Gray Gabriel Goh, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.12092, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2208.12242, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S. Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Tim
  Salimans, Jonathan Ho, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image
  diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.
Arne Schneuing, Yuanqi Du, Arian Jamasb Charles Harris, Ilia Igashov, Weitao Du, Tom Blundell,
  Pietro Lió, Carla Gomes, Michael Bronstein Max Welling, and Bruno Correia. Structure-based
  drug design with equivariant diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022.
Chrisoph Schuhmann.        Laion aesthetics, Aug 2022.         URL https://laion.ai/blog/
  laion-aesthetics/.

John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
  Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video
  data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792, 2022.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2015.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
   id=St1giarCHLP.

Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. In Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradi-
  ent methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. In S. Solla, T. Leen,
  and K. Müller (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 12. MIT
  Press, 1999. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/1999/file/
  464d828b85b0bed98e80ade0a5c43b0f-Paper.pdf.

Patrick von Platen, Suraj Patil, Anton Lozhkov, Pedro Cuenca, Nathan Lambert, Kashif Rasul,
  Mishig Davaadorj, and Thomas Wolf. Diffusers: State-of-the-art diffusion models. https:
  //github.com/huggingface/diffusers, 2022.

Zhendong Wang, Jonathan J Hunt, and Mingyuan Zhou. Diffusion policies as an expressive policy
  class for offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.06193, 2022.


                                               13
Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Reinforcement learning, pp. 5–32, 1992.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger,
  Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural
  language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 38–45, Online, October 2020. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.emnlp-demos.
  6.

Tian Xie, Xiang Fu, Octavian-Eugen Ganea, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi S Jaakkola. Crystal
  diffusion variational autoencoder for periodic material generation. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.
Jiazheng Xu, Xiao Liu, Yuchen Wu, Yuxuan Tong, Qinkai Li, Ming Ding, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong.
   Imagereward: Learning and evaluating human preferences for text-to-image generation. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2304.05977, 2023.
Minkai Xu, Lantao Yu, Yang Song, Chence Shi, Stefano Ermon, , and Jian Tang. GeoDiff: A
 geometric diffusion model for molecular conformation generation. In International Conference on
 Learning Representations, 2021.
Xiaohui Zeng, Arash Vahdat, Francis Williams, Zan Gojcic, Or Litany, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten Kreis.
  Lion: Latent point diffusion models for 3d shape generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.06978,
  2022.
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models,
  2023.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore*, Felix Wu, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. BERTScore:
  Evaluating text generation with BERT. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.
Linqi Zhou, Yilun Du, and Jiajun Wu. 3d shape generation and completion through point-voxel
  diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  5826–5835, 2021.
Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B. Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


                                                14
A PPENDIX A         OVEROPTIMIZATION

                Incompressibility                                   Counting Animals
   DDPO


  RWR


Figure 7 (Reward model overoptimization) Examples of RL overoptimizing reward functions.
(L) The diffusion model eventually loses all recognizable semantic content and produces noise when
optimizing for incompressibility. (R) When optimized for prompts of the form “n animals”, the
diffusion model exploits the VLM with a typographic attack (Goh et al., 2021), writing text that is
interpreted as the specified number n instead of generating the correct number of animals.

Section 6.1 highlights the optimization problem: given a reward function, how well can an RL
algorithm maximize that reward? However, finetuning on a reward function, especially a learned one,
has been observed to lead to reward overoptimization or exploitation (Gao et al., 2022) in which the
model achieves high reward while moving too far away from the pretraining distribution to be useful.
Our setting is no exception, and we provide two examples of reward exploitation in Figure 7.
When optimizing the incompressibility objective, the model eventually stops producing semantically
meaningful content, degenerating into high-frequency noise. Similarly, we observed that LLaVA is
susceptible to typographic attacks (Goh et al., 2021). When optimizing for alignment with respect to
prompts of the form “n animals”, DDPO exploited deficiencies in the VLM by instead generating
text loosely resembling the specified number: for example, “sixx ttutttas” above a picture of eight
turtles.
There is currently no general-purpose method for preventing overoptimization. One common strategy
is to add a KL-regularization term to the reward (Ouyang et al., 2022; Stiennon et al., 2020); we refer
the reader to the concurrent work of Fan et al. (2023) for a study of KL-regularization in the context of
finetuning text-to-image diffusion models. However, Gao et al. (2022) suggest that existing solutions,
including KL-regularization, may be empirically equivalent to early stopping. As a result, in this
work, we manually identified the last checkpoint before a model began to deteriorate for each method
and used that as the reference for qualitative results. We highlight this problem as an important area
for future work.

A PPENDIX B         C OMPARISON TO C LASSIFIER G UIDANCE
Classifier guidance (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) was originally introduced as a way to improve sample
quality for conditional generation using the gradients from an image classifier. For a differentiable
reward function such as the LAION aesthetics predictor (Schuhmann, 2022), one could naturally
imagine an extension to classifier guidance that uses gradients from such a predictor to improve
aesthetic score. The issue is that classifier guidance uses gradients with respect to the noisy images in
the intermediate stages of the denoising process, which requires retraining the guidance network on

                          Method                              Aesthetic Score
                          Base model                            5.95 ± 0.03
                          Universal guidance                    6.14 ± 0.05
                          DDPOIS @ 20k reward queries           6.63 ± 0.03

Table 1 Comparison of DDPO with universal guidance using the LAION aesthetic predictor. We
report the mean and one standard error over 50 samples for the prompt “wolf”.


                                                   15
noisy images. Universal guidance (Bansal et al., 2023) sidesteps this issue by applying the guidance
network to the fully denoised image predicted by the diffusion model at each step.
We compare DDPO with universal guidance in Table 1. We used the official implementation of
universal guidance1 with the recommended hyperparameters for style transfer, substituting the
guidance network with the LAION aesthetics predictor. While universal guidance is able to produce
a statistically significant improvement in aesthetic score, the change is small compared to DDPO.
We only report results averaged over 50 samples for a single prompt, since universal guidance is
very slow; on an NVIDIA A100 GPU, it takes almost 2 minutes to generate a single image, whereas
standard generation (e.g., from a DDPO-finetuned model) takes 4 seconds.

A PPENDIX C                              C OMPARISON TO DPOK
Here we directly compare our implementation of DDPO to the results reported in the DPOK paper
(Fan et al., 2023), which was developed concurrently with this work. The key similarities and
differences between our experimental setups are summarized below:

                           • For this experiment only, we use Stable Diffusion v1-5 as the base model and train the UNet
                             with low-rank adaptation (LoRA; Hu et al. (2021)) in order to match DPOK.
                           • Rather than matching the hyperparameters in DPOK, we use the same hyperparameters as
                             in our other experiments (Appendix D.5) except for the learning rate which we increase to
                             3e-4. We found that when using LoRA, a higher learning rate is necessary to get comparable
                             performance to full finetuning.
                           • Like DPOK, we train on four prompts: “a green colored rabbit” (color), “four wolves in the
                             park” (count), “a dog and a cat” (composition), and “a dog on the moon” (location). Unlike
                             DPOK, we train a single model for all four prompts.
                           • Like DPOK, we train the model using ImageReward (Xu et al., 2023) as the reward function.
                             We evaluate the model using ImageReward and the LAION aesthetics predictor (Schuhmann,
                             2022).
                           • Unlike DPOK, we do not employ KL regularization.


                                         ImageReward                                                                Aesthetic Quality
                     2.0
                                                                                                  6.2
                                                                          LAION Aesthetic Score


                     1.5
 ImageReward Score


                                                                                                  6.0


                     1.0                                                                          5.8


                     0.5                                                                          5.6


                                                                                                  5.4
                     0.0

                                                                                                  5.2
                             0      5k     10k       15k   20k      25k                                 0      5k       10k     15k     20k   25k
                                         Reward Queries                                                               Reward Queries
                                             Color         Composition                                      DDPOIS
                                             Count         Location                                         DPOK



Figure 8 Comparison of DDPOIS with DPOK. We take the DPOK numbers directly from the paper,
which only reports scores at one point in training (after 20k reward queries). Like in DPOK, scores
are averaged over 50 samples for each prompt.



             1
                     https://github.com/arpitbansal297/Universal-Guided-Diffusion


                                                                         16
                    Color               Count              Composition               Location



  Pretrained
  Finetuned


Figure 9 Qualtitative examples of the results of ImageReward training on the DPOK prompts: “a
green colored rabbit” (color), “four wolves in the park” (count), “a dog and a cat” (composition), and
“a dog on the moon” (location). The finetuned images are generated from a model trained for 20k
reward queries.

The results are presented in Figure 8. Our implementation of DDPOIS outperforms DPOK accross
the board, without using KL regularization. Figure 8 also doubles as a quantitative study of overop-
timization (Appendix A), since the model is trained with one reward function (ImageReward) and
evaluated with another (LAION aesthetic score). We find that significant overoptimization does
begin to happen within 25k reward queries for one of the prompts (count: “four wolves in the park”),
which is reflected by a drop in LAION aesthetic score. However, the overoptimization is not severe
or unreasonably fast. We provide qualitative samples in Figure 9 showing that the model is able to
produce high-quality images at 20k reward queries.


A PPENDIX D                 I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

For all experiments, we use Stable Diffusion v1.4 (Rombach et al., 2022) as the base model and
finetune only the UNet weights while keeping the text encoder and autoencoder weights frozen.

D.1            DDPO I MPLEMENTATION

We collect 256 samples per training iteration. For DDPOSF , we accumulate gradients across all 256
samples and perform one gradient update. For DDPOIS , we split the samples into 4 minibatches and
perform 4 gradient updates. Gradients are always accumulated across all denoising timesteps for
a single sample. For DDPOIS , we use the same clipped surrogate objective as in proximal policy
optimization (Schulman et al., 2017), but find that we need to use a very small clip range compared
to standard RL tasks. We use a clip range of 1e-4 for all experiments.

D.2            RWR I MPLEMENTATION

We compute the weights for a training iteration using the entire dataset of samples collected for that
training iteration. For wRWR , the weights are computed using the softmax function. For wsparse , we
use a percentile-based threshold, meaning C is dynamically selected such that the bottom p% of a
given pool of samples are discarded and the rest are used for training.

D.3            R EWARD N ORMALIZATION

In practice, rewards are rarely used as-is, but instead are normalized to have zero mean and unit
variance. Furthermore, this normalization can depend on the current state; in the policy gradient
context, this is analogous to a value function baseline (Sutton et al., 1999), and in the RWR context,
this is analogous to advantage-weighted regression (Peng et al., 2019). In our experiments, we
normalize the rewards on a per-context basis. For DDPO, this is implemented as normalization by a
running mean and standard deviation that is tracked for each prompt independently. For RWR, this is
implemented by computing the softmax over rewards for each prompt independently. For RWRsparse ,
this is implemented by computing the percentile-based threshold C for each prompt independently.


                                                 17
D.4     R ESOURCE D ETAILS

RWR experiments were conducted on a v3-128 TPU pod, and took approximately 4 hours to reach
50k samples. DDPO experiments were conducted on a v4-64 TPU pod, and took approximately 4
hours to reach 50k samples. For the VLM-based reward function, LLaVA inference was conducted
on a DGX machine with 8 80Gb A100 GPUs.

D.5     F ULL H YPERPARAMETERS
                                                        DDPOIS      DDPOSF           RWR      RWRsparse
                   Denoising steps (T )                   50           50             50         50
      Diffusion
                   Guidance weight (w)                    5.0          5.0            5.0        5.0
                   Optimizer                            AdamW       AdamW           AdamW     AdamW
                   Learning rate                         1e-5        1e-5            1e-5      1e-5
                   Weight decay                          1e-4        1e-4            1e-4      1e-4
  Optimization     β1                                     0.9         0.9             0.9       0.9
                   β2                                    0.999       0.999           0.999     0.999
                   ϵ                                     1e-8        1e-8            1e-8      1e-8
                   Gradient clip norm                     1.0         1.0             1.0       1.0
                   Inverse temperature (β)                 -             -            0.2         -
                   Percentile                              -             -             -         0.9
       RWR         Batch size                              -             -            128        128
                   Gradient updates per iteration          -             -            400        400
                   Samples per iteration                   -             -            10k        10k
                   Batch size                             64           256             -          -
                   Samples per iteration                 256           256             -          -
       DDPO
                   Gradient updates per iteration          4            1              -          -
                   Clip range                            1e-4           -              -          -

D.6     L IST OF 45 C OMMON A NIMALS

This list was used for experiments with the aesthetic quality reward function and the VLM-based
reward function.
     cat       dog     horse   monkey        rabbit      zebra      spider            bird      sheep
    deer       cow      goat     lion         tiger       bear     raccoon            fox        wolf
   lizard     beetle     ant   butterfly       fish      shark      whale           dolphin    squirrel
   mouse        rat    snake    turtle        frog      chicken      duck            goose       bee
     pig      turkey     fly    llama        camel        bat       gorilla        hedgehog   kangaroo

A PPENDIX E        A DDITIONAL D ESIGN D ECISIONS

E.1    CFG T RAINING

Recent text-to-image diffusion models rely critically on classifier-free guidance (CFG) (Ho &
Salimans, 2021) to produce perceptually high-quality results. CFG involves jointly training the
diffusion model on conditional and unconditional objectives by randomly masking out the context c
during training. The conditional and unconditional predictions are then mixed at sampling time using
a guidance weight w:
                          ϵ̃θ (xt , t, c) = wϵθ (xt , t, c) + (1 − w)ϵθ (xt , t)                          (3)
where ϵθ is the ϵ-prediction parameterization of the diffusion model (Ho et al., 2020) and ϵ̃θ is the
guided ϵ-prediction that is used to compute the next denoised sample.
For reinforcement learning, it does not make sense to train on the unconditional objective since the
reward may depend on the context. However, we found that when only training on the conditional
objective, performance rapidly deteriorated after the first round of finetuning. We hypothesized that


                                                   18
this is due to the guidance weight becoming miscalibrated each time the model is updated, leading to
degraded samples, which in turn impair the next round of finetuning, and so on. Our solution was to
choose a fixed guidance weight and use the guided ϵ-prediction during training as well as sampling.
We call this procedure CFG training. Figure 10 shows the effect of CFG training on RWRsparse ; it has
no effect after a single round of finetuning, but becomes essential for subsequent rounds.


                                                         JPEG Compressibility
                                                 0

                     Negative Filesize (kb)
                                              −50


                                              −100


                                              −150


                                              −200

                                                     0      10k         20k   30k     40k
                                                                  Reward Queries
                                                     with CFG training        without CFG training
Figure 10 (CFG training) We run the RWRsparse algorithm while optimizing only the conditional ϵ-
prediction (without CFG training), and while optimizing the guided ϵ-prediction (with CFG training).
Each point denotes a diffusion model update. We find that CFG training is essential for methods that
do more than one round of interleaved sampling and training.


E.2   I NTERLEAVING

There are two main differences between DDPO and RWR, as compared in Section 6.1: the objective
(DDPO uses the policy gradient) and the data distribution (DDPO is significantly more on-policy,
collecting 256 samples per iteration as opposed to 10,000 for RWR). This choice is motivated by
standard RL practice, in which policy gradient methods specifically require on-policy data (Sutton
et al., 1999), whereas RWR is designed to work in on off-policy data (Nair et al., 2020) and is known
to underperform other algorithms in more online settings (Duan et al., 2016).
However, we can isolate the effect of the data distribution by varying how interleaved the sampling
and training are in RWR. At one extreme is a single-round algorithm (Lee et al., 2023), in which N
samples are collected from the pretrained model and used for finetuning. It is also possible to run
k rounds of finetuning each on Nk samples collected from the most up-to-date model. In Figure 11,
we evaluate this hyperparameter and find that increased interleaving does help up to a point, after
which it causes performance degradation. However, RWR is still unable to match the asymptotic
performance of DDPO at any level of interleaving.


A PPENDIX F        Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS FOR G ENERALIZATION

In Section 6.3, we presented qualitative evidence of both the aesthetic quality model and the image-
prompt alignment model generalizing to prompts that were unseen during finetuning. In Figure 12, we
provide an additional quantitative analysis of generalization with the aesthetic quality model, where
we measure the average reward throughout training for several prompt distributions. In accordance
with the qualitative evidence, we see that the model generalizes very well to unseen animals, and
everyday objects to a lesser degree.


                                                                   19
                                  Aesthetic Quality                                                                   JPEG Compressibility             Samples per Iteration (RWR)
                                                                                                            0                                                        256
                        5.2                                                                                                                                          512
LAION Aesthetic Score


                                                                                Negative Filesize (kb)
                                                                                                                                                                     1,024
                                                                                                         −50
                        5.0                                                                                                                                          2,048
                                                                                                                                                                     4,096
                        4.8                                                                                                                                          8,192
                                                                                                         −100
                                                                                                                                                                     16,384
                        4.6
                                                                                                         −150
                        4.4

                        4.2
                              0    10k                  20k         30k                                         0          10k         20k     30k   Samples per Iteration (DDPOIS )
                                    Reward Queries                                                                          Reward Queries                           256



Figure 11 (RWR interleaving ablation) Ablation over the number of samples collected per iteration
for RWR. The number of gradient updates per iteration remains the same throughout. We find that
more frequent interleaving is beneficial up to a point, after which it causes performance degradation.
However, RWR is still unable to match the asymptotic performance of DDPO at any level of
interleaving.


                                                                  Aesthetic Quality Quantitative Generalization
                                                                   Finetuning Prompts (Animals Only)
                                                  5.2              Unseen Animals
                                                                   Ordinary Objects

                                                  5.0


                                                  4.8
                                         Reward


                                                  4.6


                                                  4.4


                                                  4.2


                                                              0           10k                                   20k              30k         40k       50k
                                                                                                                Reward Queries

Figure 12 (Quantitative generalization) Reward curves demonstrating the generalization of the
aesthetic quality objective to prompts not seen during finetuning. The finetuning prompts are a list of
45 common animals, “unseen animals” is a list of 38 additional animals, and “ordinary objects” is a
list of 50 objects (e.g. toaster, chair, coffee cup, etc.).


                                                                                                                      20
                 Pretrained                                      Aesthetic Quality


               Compressibility                                    Incompressibility


                                     Figure 13 (RWR samples)

              a hedgehog riding a bike                         a dog riding a bike


                a lizard riding a bike                     a shark washing dishes


                a frog washing dishes                     a monkey washing dishes


                      Figure 14 (More image-prompt alignment samples)


A PPENDIX G       M ORE S AMPLES
Figure 13 shows qualitative samples from the baseline RWR method. Figure 14 shows more samples
on seen prompts from DDPO finetuning with the image-prompt alignment reward function. Figure 15
shows more examples of generalization to unseen animals and everyday objects with the aesthetic
quality reward function. Figure 16 shows more examples of generalization to unseen subjects and
activities with the image-prompt alignment reward function.



                                               21
Pretrained (New Animals)                     Aesthetic Quality (New Animals)


Pretrained (Non-Animals)                     Aesthetic Quality (Non-Animals)


              Figure 15 (Aesthetic quality generalization)


                                  22
a capybara washing dishes                   a snail playing chess


   a dog doing laundry                   a giraffe playing basketball


  a parrot driving a car                    a duck taking an exam


 a robot fishing in a lake               a horse typing on a keyboard


 a rabbit sewing clothes                     a tree riding a bike


 a car eating a sandwich                   an apple playing soccer


        Figure 16 (Image-prompt alignment generalization)


                               23
