Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M ULTI L AYER D IFFUSION : C OMPOSING G LOBAL C ON -
TEXTS AND L OCAL D ETAILS IN I MAGE G ENERATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

         Diffusion models have demonstrated their capability to synthesize high-quality
         and diverse images from textual prompts. However, simultaneous control over
         both global contexts (e.g., object layouts and interactions) and local details (e.g.,
         colors and emotions) still remains a significant challenge. The models often fail to
         understand complex descriptions involving multiple objects and reflect specified
         visual attributes to wrong targets or forget to reflect them. This paper presents
         MultiLayerDiffusion, a novel framework which allows simultaneous control over
         the global contexts and the local details in text-to-image generation without re-
         quiring training or fine-tuning. It assigns multiple global and local prompts to
         corresponding layers and composes them to generate images using pre-trained
         diffusion models. Our framework enables complex global-local compositions, de-
         composing intricate prompts into manageable concepts and controlling object de-
         tails while preserving global contexts. We demonstrate that MultiLayerDiffusion
         effectively generates complex images that adhere to both user-provided object in-
         teractions and object details. We also show its effectiveness not only in image
         generation but also in image editing.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Text-to-image generative models have emerged recently and demonstrated their amazing capabilities
in synthesizing high-quality and diverse images from text prompts. Diffusion models (Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021; Ho et al., 2020; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021) are currently one of the state-of-the-art
methods and widely used for the image generation. Despite their impressive advances in image
generation, lack of control over the generated images is a crucial limitation in deploying them to
real-world applications.
To provide further controllability over diffusion models, researchers have put a lot of effort into
control of object layouts, object interactions, and composition of objects. Chen et al. (2023) have
introduced Training-free layout control which takes a text prompt along with the object layout as an
input and control the object position based on a loss between the input layout and attention maps.
Bar-Tal et al. (2023) and Zhang et al. (2023) have proposed methods to place an object with specified
details on a certain region using segmentation masks and a prompt for each segment. Farshad et al.
(2023) and Yang et al. (2022) have leveraged a scene graph as an input and introduced models which
generate images from the scene graph to control the object interactions in the generated images.
However, these methods cannot control both the global contexts (e.g., object interactions and object
layouts) and the local details (e.g., object colors and emotions) simultaneously.
Visual scenes can be represented as wholes and parts in nature (Hinton, 2021), i.e., global contexts
and local details. Text-to-image models are required to understand both of them from a textual
description called a prompt and correctly reflect them in generated images. While texts are flexible
and can handle various expressions, the textual specification is a poor way of describing the precise
object layout. Although texts are also a linear structure, visual scenes are inherently graph structures.
The explicit connection between the global contexts and the local details in the scene may be lost
by describing a complex scene in a single prompt. Moreover, the text-to-image models encode the
text descriptions as fixed-size latent vectors, while it is difficult to retain all the details of the scene
in the fixed-size vector because complex information needs to be squeezed into it.


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         a man is talking with a woman            a bear is in a barrel       a girl is holding a cake   a Husky is playing with a cat


         a man with                      a bear is eating                     a cake with strawberries   a Husky wearing
         white beard                     an apple                             on top and surrounded      glasses
         a woman is wearing a necklace   water is leaking from a barrel       by cream                   a cat is short-hair and black
         and smiling


Figure 1: MultiLayerDiffusion takes multiple prompts as an input (e.g., a global prompt: ’a man is
talking with a woman’ and two local prompts: ’a man with white beard’ and ’a woman is wearing
a necklace and smiling’) along with their layout and assigns noises obtained from them into corre-
sponding layers with a diffusion model. Then, the layers are composed to generate an image. Details
of objects in the global layer are guided with the corresponding local layers.
                                                                                                                                         27

This paper proposes MultiLayerDiffusion, a novel diffusion framework that controls both global
contexts and local details using a pre-traind diffusion model without requiring any additional training
or finetuning. MultiLayerDiffusion takes multiple prompts (e.g., two global prompts and three local
prompts) and assigns noises obtained from them into corresponding layers (i.e., a noise from the
global prompt is on its global layer and noises from the local prompts are on their local layer) with a
diffusion model. We control the object layout on the global layer. Then, the layers are composed to
generate an image. Details of objects in the global prompt are guided with the each corresponding
local prompt. For example, instead of giving a complex prompt such as ’a man with white beard
is talking with a smiling woman wearing a necklace’, we decompose it into multiple prompts, a
global context ’a man is talking with a woman’ and two local details ’a man with white beard’ and
’a woman is wearing a necklace and smiling’. The details of the man and the woman in the global
prompt are guided with each local prompt in the image generation process. The generated examples
are as shown in Fig. 1.
Our framework enables both global-global compositions and global-local compositions. The global-
global composition composes foreground and background similar to the existing models, while the
global-local composition composes the global context like ’a dog is running with a man’ and the
details like ’a dog is black’ and ’a man is wearing a blue shirt’. Our core contributions are the
global-local composition. More than two layers can be composed with those composing methods.
Our framework also allows us to control over generated image in both image generation and image
editing without finetuning the models.
Our key contributions are summarized as follows1 :

          • We propose MultiLayerDiffusion, a novel framework for diffusion-based image synthesis
            and editing which enables controlling both global contexts and local details simultaneously.
          • Through experimental evaluations, we demonstrate that our proposed method can effec-
            tively generate complex images by composing the multi-prompts describing object interac-
            tions and details of each object in a scene.

   1
       The code will be made publicly available upon acceptance.


                                                                          2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  (a) Stable diffusion              (b) Layout Control              (c) MultiDiffusion        (d) MultiLayerDiffusion
                                                                                                                       (Ours)

                 a black dog is chasing a man                  a black dog is                in a park                    a dog is chasing
                 wearing a blue shirt in a park                chasing a man                 a man wearing                a man in a park
      Input                                                    wearing a blue                a blue shirt                 a man wearing
                                                               shirt in a park                                            a blue shirt
                                                                                             a black dog
                                                                                                                          a black dog


 Generated
  image


                black dog…       Husky dog…       black dog…     Husky dog…      black dog        Husky dog   black dog        Husky dog


    black dog

 Husky dog


Figure 2: MultiLayerDiffusion enables controlling global contexts (interaction between a dog and a
man, their layouts) and local details (the dog is black, the man is wearing a blue shirt) independently.
Local details can be specified (black dog → Husky dog) while preserving the global contexts. Note                                            16
that this is not image editing. We generate images from the text prompts and the layout.


2      R ELATED W ORK
2.1      D IFFUSION M ODELS

Diffusion models (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ho et al., 2020; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021) has attracted
a lot of attention as a promising class of generative models that formulates the data generation
process as an iterative denoising procedure. The models take a Gaussian noise input xT ∼ N (0, I)
and transform it into a sample x0 through the series of gradual denoising steps T . The sample
should be distributed according to a data distribution q. Many research works focus on improving the
diffusion process to speed up the sampling process while maintaining high sample quality (Nichol &
Dhariwal, 2021; Karras et al., 2022). The latent diffusion model (Rombach et al., 2022) has also been
developed to address this issue and applied the diffusion process in latent space instead of pixel space
to enable an efficient sampling. While the diffusion models have originally shown great performance
in image generation, enabling effective image editing and image inpainting (Meng et al., 2022;
Avrahami et al., 2023), these models been successfully used in various domains, including video
(Ho et al., 2022), audio (Chen et al., 2021), 3D scenes (Müller et al., 2023), and motion sequences
(Tevet et al., 2023). Although this paper focuses on image generation, our proposed framework may
further be applied in such domains.

2.2      C ONTROLLABLE I MAGE G ENERATION WITH D IFFUSION M ODELS

Diffusion models are first applied to text-to-image generative models, which generate an image con-
ditioned on a free-form text description as an input prompt. Classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans,
2021) plays important role in conditioning the generated images to the input prompt. Recent text-to-
image diffusion models such as DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022), and
Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) has shown remarkable capabilities in image generation. On
the other hand, recent studies (Chen et al., 2023; Bar-Tal et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023; Patashnik
et al., 2023) have stressed the inherent difficulty in controlling generated images with a text descrip-


                                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tion, especially in the control over (i) object layout and (ii) visual attributes of objects. To gain more
control over the object layout, some works have leveraged bounding boxes or segmentation masks
as an additional input along with text prompts. Training-free layout control (Chen et al., 2023) takes
a single prompt along with a layout of objects appeared in the prompt as shown in Fig. 2 (b). Object
layout is given in a form of the bounding. Layout control extracts attention maps from a pre-trained
diffusion model and updates the latent embeddings of the image based on an error between the input
bounding boxes and the attention maps. Since this method simply uses the pre-trained diffusion
model to generate images, it inherits the difficulties in control over the visual attributes of objects,
i.e., the local details. Also, the generated image may largely change even if a single word is added
or replaced in the prompt due to the fact that the input prompt describes both the global contexts
and the local details. MultiDiffusion (Bar-Tal et al., 2023) and SceneComposer (Zeng et al., 2023)
take multiple prompts along with their corresponding segmentation masks as a region as shown in
Fig. 2 (c). They effectively control the object layout and visual attributes of each object. However,
they cannot handle a prompt describing interactions between those objects, i.e., the global contexts.
Basically, they just place a specific object described by the prompt in a certain region. Thus, if the
input prompt is replaced (black dog → Husky dog), the new object (Huskey dog) does not inherit
the contexts (e.g., posture) from the replaced object (black dog). Unlike these methods, our method
aims to control both the global contexts and the local details simultaneously. Since we treat the
global contexts and the local details separately, the global contexts are preserved even if the local
details are changed, as shown in Fig. 2 (d). Some studies (Farshad et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2022)
focused on image synthesis from scene graphs for better control over the complex relations between
multiple objects in the generated images. However, these works require costly extensive training
on curated datasets. They regard a complex scene graph as an input prompt, while our approach
decomposes the complex prompts into multiple simple prompts and does not require any training or
finetuning.


2.3   L AYERED I MAGE G ENERATION AND E DITING

Some recent works (Zhang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Liao et al., 2023) have proposed layered
image generation and editing. They considers two layers, foreground and background, and enables
to control them individually with a segmentation mask of the foreground object. Their models are
needed to be trained with proposed losses. Unlike them, our goal is to control the global contexts
and the local details simultaneously without requiring the training and the accurate segmentation
masks as shown in Fig. 1. Our framework enables to control local details while keeping the global
contexts by composing the multiple layers, where the global layer may represent the foreground or
background and the local layer may represent the details of the objects in the global layer. The global
layer and the local layer are not independent but have a whole-part relationship. Our framework can
also handle more than two layers as shown in Fig. 7.


2.4   C OMPOSITIONAL G ENERATION

The compositional generation is an approach to generate the complex images by composing a set
of diffusion models, with each of them modeling a certain component of the image. This approach
has been an essential direction for image-to-text models because it is difficult for the current models
to handle complex prompts where multiple concepts are squeezed. Recently, Liu et al. (2022) has
demonstrated successful composition of independent concepts (e.g., “a bear” and “in a forest”) by
adding estimated score for each concept. Feng et al. (2023) has also proposed another approach
which can be directly merged into the cross-attention layers. Inspired by the first approach, we
propose a novel method to compose whole-part concepts (e.g., ”a bear is eating an apple” and ”the
apple is green”).


3     M ETHOD

Our goal is to generate images where given global contexts and local details are reflected. In this
section, we propose MultiLayerDiffusion to compose the global context and the local detail with
pre-trained diffusion models.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                             𝑙0
          𝑥𝑡                                                                                              𝑥𝑡−1
                                                   𝑙1
                                                                    𝑔𝑔

                                             𝑙2
                                                        𝑔𝑙


                                                                  𝑔𝑙                         Denoising


                          𝑀2 𝑒𝜃 𝑥𝑡 , 𝑡ห𝑐𝑙2
                                                  Layer composition


Figure 3: MultiLayerDiffusion composes multiple layers. Unconditional noise and noises condi-
tioned on global contexts (e.g., interactions) or local details (e.g., color) are assigned to separate
layers (l0 , l1 , l2 ). Those layers are then composed with global guidance gg and local guidance gl .


3.1   C OMPOSITIONS OF D IFFUSION M ODELS

We consider a pre-trained diffusion model, which takes a text prompt y ∈ Y as a condition
                                                                                    26    and
generates a intermediate image xt ∈ I = RH×W ×C :

                                                        xt−1 = Φ(xt |y).                                         (1)

The diffusion models are also regarded as Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs)
where generation is modeled as a denoising process. The objective of this model is to remove a
noise gradually by predicting the noise at a timestep t given a noisy image xt . To generate a less
noisy image, we sample xt−1 until it becomes realistic over multiple iterations:

                                     xt−1 = xt − ϵθ (xt , t) + N (0, σt 2 I),                                    (2)

where ϵθ (xt , t) is the denoising network. Liu et al. (2022) has revealed that the denoising network
or score function can be expressed as a compositions of multiple score functions corresponding to
an individual condition ci .

                                                             n
                                                             X
                       ϵ̂(xt , t) = ϵθ (xt , t) +                   wi (ϵθ (xt , t|ci ) − ϵθ (xt , t)).          (3)
                                                              i=0

where ϵθ (xt , t|ci ) predicts a noise conditioned on ci and ϵθ (xt , t) outputs an unconditional noise.
This equation only focuses on composing individual conditions over entire image, e.g., a foreground
condition like ’a boat at the sea’ and a background condition like ’a pink sky’.
We regard ϵθ (xt , t|ci ) − ϵθ (xt , t) as a guidance gi , which guides the unconditional noise toward the
noise conditioned on a given condition ci . Then, the composed denoising network is viewed as a
compositions of the guidance.
                                                                             n
                                                                             X
                                             ϵ̂(xt , t) = ϵθ (xt , t) +            wi gi .                       (4)
                                                                             i=0



3.2   L AYER C OMPOSITION

We propose MultiLayerDiffusion to extend the above concept to a composition of a global condition
and a local conditions, e.g., a global interaction like ’a man is walking with a dog’ and object
details like ’the man is smiling’ and ’the dog is white’. We consider a set of global conditions
cg = (cg1 , ..., cgk ) and a set of local conditions cl = (cl1 , ..., clm ). We also introduce a diffusion


                                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 MultiLayerDiffusion sampling.
Require: Diffusion model ϵθ (xt , t), global scales wi , local scales wj , global conditions cgi , local
    conditions clj , object region masks Mj
 1: Initialize sample xt ∼ N (0, I)
 2: for t = T, . . . , 1 do
 3:     xt ← f (xt , cgi , M )                              ▷ apply layout control f with cgi and M
 4:     ϵi ← ϵθ (xt , t|cgi )            ▷ compute conditional scores for each global condition cgi
 5:     ϵj ← ϵθ (xt , t|clj )              ▷ compute conditional scores for each local condition clj
 6:     ϵ ← ϵθ (xt , t)                                               ▷ compute unconditional score
               Pk
 7:     gg ← P i=0 wi (ϵi − ϵ).                                ▷ compute global guidance with Eq. 5
                  m
 8:     gl ← j=0 wj Mj (ϵj − ϵbj ).                             ▷ compute local guidance with Eq. 6
                                          2
 9:     xt−1 ∼ N (xt − (ϵ + gg + gl ), σt I)                                               ▷ sampling
10: end for



layer l = (l0 , ..., lt ), where a single global condition or multiple local conditions can be assigned to
a layer as shown in Fig. 3. Each layer contains a condition at least. We compose the layers with two
ways of guidance: (i) global guidance, which guides the image with global conditions.
                                    gg = ϵθ (xt , t|cgi ) − ϵθ (xt , t),                              (5)

where the unconditional noise is assigned to a global layer as a base layer and the global noise
on the other global layer is composed to the base layer. This is also well known as Classifier-free
guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2021). The classifier-free guidance works well on global conditions,
while it does not work effectively when we compose the global condition and the local condition
since their conditions have some overlap. Thus, we newly propose (ii) local guidance, which guides
an object on the base layer b conditioned on a condition cbi with a local condition cnlj on layer n.

                                gl = Mj (ϵθ (xt , t|cnlj ) − ϵθ (xt , t|cbi )),                       (6)

where Mj ⊂ {0, 1}H×W is a region mask of j-th region corresponding to the condition cnlj . The
local guidance emphasizes the difference between the global condition (e.g., ’a dog’) and the local
condition (e.g., ’the dog is black’). We use the local guidance to compose the local layers and the
global layers, e.g., composing the local noise on l2 and the global noise on l1 as shown in Fig. 3.

3.3   L AYOUT C ONTROL

Objects may appear somewhere in a generated image without any layout control. To effectively
compose the global noise and the local noise, we use Training-free layout control (Chen et al.,
2023). More specifically, we use the backward guidance to control the object layout in the global
layer before computing the global noise.
Algorithm 1 provides the pseudo-code for composing diffusion noises with the global guidance and
the local guidance. Our method composes noises obtained with pre-trained diffusion models during
inference without any additional training or finetuning.

4     R ESULTS
4.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We evaluate our method on the following conditions. In all experiments, we used Stable Diffusion
(Rombach et al., 2022) as our diffusion model, where the diffusion process is defined over a latent
space I = R64×64×4 , and a decoder is trained to reconstruct natural images in higher resolution
[0, 1]512×512×3 . We use the public implementation of Stable Diffusion by HuggingFace, specifically
the Stable Diffusion v2.1 trained on the LAION-5B dataset (Schuhmann et al., 2022) as the pre-
trained image generation model. We also set Euler Discrete Scheduler (Karras et al., 2022) as the


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Layout                 Local detail:   “a {g} cat is {l}.”

 Global context:                                          pink                          yellow                      long-haired
                    -
  “a cat is {g}.”                            Local               Composed       Local            Composed   Local            Composed


      walking


      sitting


      jumping


       lying


                                                                                                                                  35

Figure 4: MultiLayerDiffusion for a single object. The images in the first column and ’Local’
columns are sampled only from the global context (global images) and the local detail (local images)
as an input prompt, respectively. The images in ’Composed’ columns are sampled using our method,
which effectively applies local detail (e.g., long-haired) to the object in the image while preserving
the global contexts (i.e., object layouts and object postures).


noise scheduler. As our layout control (see 3.3) we use the backward guidance proposed in Training-
free layout control (Chen et al., 2023). All the experiments are running on one A30 GPU.
We compare our MultiLayerDiffusion with other state-of-the-art training-free methods, including
Training-free layout control (Chen et al., 2023) and MultiDiffusion (Bar-Tal et al., 2023), and strong
baselines, including OpenAI DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) and Adobe Firefly (Adobe, 2023).
We use the publicly available official codes and websites, and follow their instructions.

4.2       I MAGE G ENERATION WITH M ULTI L AYER D IFFUSION

We first demonstrate global-local compositions for a single object using MultiLayerDiffusion for a
better understanding, while our main targets are more complex scenes including multiple objects as
shown in Fig. 1. In Fig. 4, our method generates diverse samples which comply with compositions
of a global context (e.g., a cat is walking) and a local detail (e.g., a walking cat is pink). The images
in the first column and ’Local’ columns are sampled only from the global context (global images)
and the local detail (local images) as an input prompt, respectively. The images in ’Composed’
columns are sampled using our method, where the goal is to apply local detail (i.e., specified visual
attribute) to the object in the image while preserving the global contexts (i.e., object layouts and
object postures). Although we generated all the images with the same seed, the posture of the cat
is largely different in the corresponding global image and local image (e.g., the image of ’a cat is
sitting’ vs the image of ’a sitting cat is pink’). Our method can effectively generate the images
from the global context and the local detail along with the layout (see ’Composed’). Note that this is
image generation not the editing. The generated image retains most of the global contexts, including
postures and head directions. In a few cases, the visual attribute of the object changes only partially
(e.g., the image composed of ’a cat is lying’ and ’a lying cat is yellow’).
We then compare MultiLayerDiffusion with the other state-of-the-art methods in generating more
complex scene including multiple objects. In Fig. 5, we try to generate images of a complex scene
where there are multiple objects in the same category (sheep in this case) and each of them has
different attributes (a sheep is black and standing, another sheep is white and sitting). We show


                                                                            7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        (a) DALL-E 2              (b) Firefly       (c) Stable Diffusion   (d) Layout Control   (e) Ours
                                                                                                     Global
           “a black sheep standing and another white sheep sitting.”        + Layout
                                                                                                     Local


Figure 5: MultiLayerDiffusion for multiple objects. Our method (e) can control attributes of each
sheep, while the other methods fail to reflect the specified attributes to the correct targets.

                                                                                                              2

first four images generated by official web application of (a) DALL-E 2 and (b) Firefly at first and
second column, respectively. They can generate high-quality images, but they often fail to reflect the
specified attributes to the correct targets. We then find four seeds which generate failure samples of
Training-free layout control and generate images using Stable diffusion and our method with those
seeds. Both the layout control and our method use the same object layout as an additional input.
We set ’a black sheep and another white sheep’ as a global context, ’a sheep is black and standing’
as a local detail of a sheep, and ’a sheep is white and sitting’ as a local detail of the another sheep.
We make the global context similar to the original prompt to compare the generated images easily.
Figure 5 shows that our method effectively controls the attributes of each object in the image.
Figure 1 shows other samples depicting more complex scenes, where we give an interaction between
the objects as a global context (e.g., ’a Husky is playing with a cat’) and also specify the local details
(e.g., ’a Husky wearing glasses’ and ’a cat is short-hair and black’). Instead of giving a complex
prompt such as ’a Husky wearing glasses is playing with a black short-hair cat’, we decompose
and handle them separately to effectively synthesis complex visual scenes. MultiDiffusion (Bar-Tal
et al., 2023) cannot consider the global context since it just places a conditioned object on a certain
region as shown in Fig. 2.


4.3   G LOBAL -L OCAL C OMPOSITION

We compare our global-local composition with a conventional composition (Liu et al., 2022). Since
the conventional composition aims to compose independent concepts (e.g., foreground and back-
ground) by adding estimated score for each concept, it often fails to compose overlapped concepts
(e.g., ’running cat’ and ’white cat’) as shown in Fig. 6 (top). Our layer composition can effectively
compose such overlapped concepts as shown in Fig. 6 (bottom).


                                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


“a cat is running towards a ball”
                                        Conventional
                                        composition


                                    +    “a cat is white”                                                                                           Weight


                                             Ours


Figure 6: Comparison between our global-local composition (bottom) and the conventional com-
position (top). Our method can change the detail of the object while preserving the global context
by composing two prompts, whereas the conventional method often fails because they regard the
prompts as two independent concepts.


                                                                                                                                                             25
    a girl, bust up photo           a girl's face with earring   an earring with          a girl has eyeglasses   a girl wearing a cap   a logo on a cap
                                                                 a big blue diamond


Figure 7: MultiLayerDiffusion also enables layered image editing, where new objects can be added
on a certain region using additional prompts. Final image (right end) can be generated in one infer-
ence by composing six prompts.


4.4        I MAGE E DITING WITH M ULTI L AYER D IFFUSION

Figure 7 shows edited image samples with MultiLayerDiffusion. MultiLayerDiffusion enables lay-
ered image editing, where new objects can be added on a certain region using additional prompts.
Details of the objects on a base layer (e.g., earring) can be guided with the prompts on the upper
layer (e.g., adding a diamond) with our layer composition. Final image (right end) can be generated
in one inference by composing multiple prompts (six in this case).

5       C ONCLUSION
                                                                                                                                                                  25
Image generation with control over both object interactions and each object details is still an open
challenge. We proposed MultiLayerDiffusion, a first framework which composes the global context
and local detail with a pre-trained diffusion model. Our framework can handle both global-global
composition (e.g., foreground and background) and global-local composition (e.g., object layout
and object details). Through experimental evaluations, we demonstrated that MultiLayerDiffusion
effectively generates images that include interactions between objects with detailed visual control.
Unlike existing layered image generation or editing methods, our method can be used for both
generation and editing without requiring any training or fine-tuning. A limitation we found is that the
object appearance may change only partially when the latent of the object is significantly different
between the global layer and the local layer.


                                                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Adobe. Adobe firefly, 2023. URL https://www.adobe.com/sensei/generative-ai/
  firefly.html.

Omri Avrahami, Ohad Fried, and Dani Lischinski. Blended latent diffusion. ACM Transactions on
 Graphics, 42(4):1–11, jul 2023.

Omer Bar-Tal, Lior Yariv, Yaron Lipman, and Tali Dekel. Multidiffusion: Fusing diffusion paths
 for controlled image generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023,
 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
 search, pp. 1737–1752. PMLR, 2023.

Minghao Chen, Iro Laina, and Andrea Vedaldi. Training-free layout control with cross-attention
 guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03373, 2023.

Nanxin Chen, Yu Zhang, Heiga Zen, Ron J Weiss, Mohammad Norouzi, and William Chan. Wave-
  grad: Estimating gradients for waveform generation. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=NsMLjcFaO8O.

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Quinn Nichol. Diffusion models beat GANs on image synthesis.
  In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2021.

Azade Farshad, Yousef Yeganeh, Yu Chi, Chengzhi Shen, Björn Ommer, and Nassir Navab. Scene-
  genie: Scene graph guided diffusion models for image synthesis, 2023.

Weixi Feng, Xuehai He, Tsu-Jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Arjun Reddy Akula, Pradyumna Narayana,
 Sugato Basu, Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. Training-free structured diffusion guid-
 ance for compositional text-to-image synthesis. In The Eleventh International Conference on
 Learning Representations, 2023.

Geoffrey Hinton. How to represent part-whole hierarchies in a neural network, 2021.

Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on
  Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 6840–6851. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.

Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P.
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J. Fleet, and Tim Salimans. Imagen video: High
  definition video generation with diffusion models, 2022.

Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-
  based generative models. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2022.

Pengzhi Li, QInxuan Huang, Yikang Ding, and Zhiheng Li. Layerdiffusion: Layered controlled
  image editing with diffusion models, 2023.

Ting-Hsuan Liao, Songwei Ge, Yiran Xu, Yao-Chih Lee, Badour AlBahar, and Jia-Bin Huang. Text-
  driven visual synthesis with latent diffusion prior, 2023.

Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional visual
  generation with composable diffusion models. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th Euro-
  pean Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XVII, pp. 423–439.
  Springer, 2022.

Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  SDEdit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Norman Müller, Yawar Siddiqui, Lorenzo Porzi, Samuel Rota Bulo, Peter Kontschieder, and
  Matthias Nießner. Diffrf: Rendering-guided 3d radiance field diffusion. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4328–4338, 2023.
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic mod-
  els. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8162–8171. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021.
Or Patashnik, Daniel Garibi, Idan Azuri, Hadar Averbuch-Elor, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Localizing
  object-level shape variations with text-to-image diffusion models, 2023.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo-Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, Jonathan
  Ho, David J. Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with
  deep language understanding. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun
  Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade W Gordon, Ross Wightman,
  Mehdi Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, Patrick
  Schramowski, Srivatsa R Kundurthy, Katherine Crowson, Ludwig Schmidt, Robert Kaczmarczyk,
  and Jenia Jitsev. LAION-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text
  models. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and
  Benchmarks Track, 2022.
Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Brian Gordon, Yoni Shafir, Daniel Cohen-or, and Amit Haim Bermano.
  Human motion diffusion model. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2023.
Ling Yang, Zhilin Huang, Yang Song, Shenda Hong, Guohao Li, Wentao Zhang, Bin Cui, Bernard
  Ghanem, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Diffusion-based scene graph to image generation with masked
  contrastive pre-training, 2022.
Yu Zeng, Zhe Lin, Jianming Zhang, Qing Liu, John Collomosse, Jason Kuen, and Vishal M. Patel.
  Scenecomposer: Any-level semantic image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 22468–22478, June 2023.
Xinyang Zhang, Wentian Zhao, Xin Lu, and Jeff Chien. Text2layer: Layered image generation using
  latent diffusion model, 2023.
Guangcong Zheng, Xianpan Zhou, Xuewei Li, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, and Xi Li. Layoutdiffusion:
  Controllable diffusion model for layout-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 22490–22499, June 2023.


                                               11
