Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C LEAN -N E RF: D EFOGGING USING R AY S TATISTICS
P RIOR IN NATURAL N E RF S
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
        State-of-the-art Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) still struggle in novel view syn-
        thesis for complex scenes, producing inconsistent geometry among multi-view
        observations, which is manifested into foggy “floaters” typically found hovering
        within the volumetric representation. This paper introduces Clean-NeRF to im-
        prove NeRF reconstruction quality by directly addressing the geometry inconsis-
        tency problem. Analogous to natural image statistics, we first perform empirical
        studies on NeRF ray profiles to derive the natural ray statistics prior, which is
        employed in our novel ray rectification transformer capable of limiting the density
        only to have positive values in applicable regions, typically around the first inter-
        section between the ray and object surface. Moreover, Clean-NeRF automatically
        detects and models view-dependent appearances to prevent them from interfering
        with density estimation. Codes will be released.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) (Mildenhall et al., 2020) have seminal contribution in the fields
of novel view synthesis (Barron et al., 2021; Müller et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Tancik
et al., 2023), AR/VR (Zhang et al., 2021a; Li et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Attal et al.,
2023), digital human (Zhao et al., 2022; Işık et al., 2023; Kirschstein et al., 2023), and 3D
content generation (Chan et al., 2022; Poole et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2022). To date, unfortu-
nately, NeRF and its many variants encounter challenges when the reconstructed scene lacks view
consistency and has distractors such as objects that are transitory or have specular appearances.
(Although NeRF typically conditions radi-               NeRF                      Ours
ance colors on viewing directions, it can
often model view-dependent effects such
as specularity incorrectly due to insuffi-
cient input observations.) Such distractors
in the input observations give rise to ambi-
guity, resulting in a “foggy” density field
as shown in Fig. 1.
To address these issues, some approaches
utilize semantic segmentation models to
mask out distractors (Rematas et al.,
2022; Tancik et al., 2022). Dynamic
NeRFs (Pumarola et al., 2021; Zhang
et al., 2021a; Park et al., 2021; Wu et al.,
2022) can to some extent interpret distrac-
tors as dynamics within the scene. NeRF-
W (Martin-Brualla et al., 2021) explains
photometric and environmental variations
between images by learning a shared ap- Figure 1: Foggy vs Clear NeRF. Our Clean-NeRF
pearance representation. (Sabour et al., avoids foggy “floaters”. Below are density profiles
2023) and (Goli et al., 2023) estimate ro- along a given ray from vanilla NeRF and our approach.
bustness or uncertainty and down-weight
photometrically-inconsistent observations during optimization. NeRFbuster (Warburg et al., 2023)
leveraged a local 3D diffusion geometric prior to encouraging plausible geometry.


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In contrast to previous approaches, we propose to rectify NeRF representations from the aspects of
geometry and appearance. On one hand, we introduce a ray rectification transformer that utilizes
an MAE-like strategy to learn priors about ray profiles, capable of eliminating unreasonable density
emergence along each ray. On the other hand, we extend the vanilla NeRF radiance color estimation
module to account for view-inconsistent observations. In this way, we manage to disentangle view-
dependent and view-independent appearances.
Experiments verify that our proposed Clean-NeRF can effectively get rid of floater artifacts. In
summary, our contributions include the following:
       • We propose a ray rectification transformer with an MAE-like training strategy to learn ray
         profiles and eliminate incorrect densities along rays.
       • We disentangle view-independent and view-dependent appearances during NeRF training
         to eliminate the interference caused by view-inconsistent observations.
       • Extensive experiments and ablations verify the effectiveness of our core designs and results
         in improvements over the vanilla NeRF and other state-of-the-art alternatives.

2    R ELATED W ORKS

Neural Representations. Recent advancements in coordinate-based neural representations, also
known as neural fields, have significantly propelled the neural processing capabilities for 3D data and
multi-view 2D images (Sitzmann et al., 2019; Mescheder et al., 2019; Park et al., 2019; Mildenhall
et al., 2020). The seminal work NeRFs debut in (Mildenhall et al., 2020) has achieved unprecedented
effects in novel view synthesis by modeling the underlying 3D scene as a continuous volumetric field
of color and density using multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs). Subsequent research has broadened the
capabilities of NeRF models in various respects, encompassing the acceleration of training and
inference (Yu et al., 2021; Fridovich-Keil et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Müller et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2023), the modeling of dynamic scenes (Zhang et al., 2021a; Park et al., 2021; Pumarola
et al., 2021; Tretschk et al., 2021), and the improvement of scene understanding (Zhi et al., 2021;
Kobayashi et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2023; Kerr et al., 2023). the relaxation of stringent
camera calibration requirements (Lin et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2021; Bian et al., 2023), Despite
tremendous progress, NeRFs demand hundreds of input images and fall short in synthesizing novel
views under conditions of sparse observations, curtailing their prospective applications in real-world
scenarios.

Reflectance Decomposition. To acquire reflectance data, sophisticated devices have traditionally
been necessary to sample the light-view space (Kang et al., 2018; Matusik et al., 2003; Nielsen
et al., 2015). Subsequent research has proposed practical techniques for acquiring spatially varying
BRDFs, such as those presented in (Kang et al., 2018; Matusik et al., 2003; Nielsen et al., 2015;
Nam et al., 2018). More recently, deep learning methods have made it possible to acquire BRDF
information from a single flash image (Li et al., 2018b;a; Deschaintre et al., 2018).
In the context of NeRF, highly reflective objects can pose challenges in the reconstruction and re-
lighting process. Previous works have attempted to address this issue by decomposing appearance
into scene lighting and materials, but these methods assume known lighting (Bi et al., 2020; Srini-
vasan et al., 2021) or no self-occlusion (Boss et al., 2021a;b; Zhang et al., 2021b). Ref-NeRF (Verbin
et al., 2022) uses a representation of reflected radiance and structures this function using a collection
of spatially-varying scene properties to reproduce the appearance of glossy surfaces. Despite these
advances, Ref-NeRF requires accurate normal vectors and outgoing radiance estimation, which is
difficult to obtain for sparse input views. In addition, effectively addressing the view-dependent
appearance problem in the context of large scenes and sparse observations remains a challenge. To
address this issue, we propose a simple yet effective decomposition method to eliminate its interfer-
ence without the need to estimate surface normals or outgoing radiance.

Intrinsic Image Decomposition. Barrow and Tenenbaum introduced intrinsic images as a valu-
able intermediate representation for scenes (Barrow et al., 1978), assuming that an image can be
expressed as the pointwise product of the object’s true colors or reflectance and the shading on that
object. This can be represented as I = R · S,where I, R, and S denote the image, the reflectance,
and the shading, respectively.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Early optimization-based works addressed the problem of separating an image into its reflectance
and illumination components by assuming that large image gradients correspond to reflectance
changes and small gradients to lighting changes (Land & McCann, 1971; Horn, 1974). Incorpora-
tion of additional priors improves the accuracy and robustness, such as reflectance sparsity (Rother
et al., 2011; Shen & Yeo, 2011), low-rank reflectance (Adrien et al., 2009) and distribution differ-
ence in gradient domain (Bi et al., 2015; Li & Brown, 2014). Deep learning methods (Fan et al.,
2018; Yu & Smith, 2019; Zhu et al., 2022; Li & Snavely, 2018a;b) have emerged to perform intrin-
sic image decomposition, estimating the reflectance and shading on labeled training data. Notably
and differently, in intrinsic image decomposition, where shadows and highlights are separated as
high-frequency components, these components may still be separated as view-independent in our
Clean-NeRF as long as they are consistent across all input views, e.g., a static shadow is consistently
observed across all views. Thus, intrinsic image decomposition is inappropriate (both overkill and
inadequate) to the “vi-vd” decomposition of Clean-NeRF. IntrinsicNeRF (Ye et al., 2023) introduces
intrinsic decomposition to the NeRF-based neural rendering method, which allows for editable novel
view synthesis in room-scale scenes. Compared with our simple and effective appearance decom-
position, IntrinsicNeRF requires dense inputs (900 images for their indoor Replica scene), which
assumes the NeRF reconstruction is accurate.

3     M ETHOD

In this section, we propose Clean-NeRF
to address the floater artifacts caused by
view-inconsistent observations effectively.
In Sec. 3.1, we introduce the overall ar-            𝐱          Spatial                                     𝜎
chitecture of Clean-NeRF compared to the                         MLP      𝐛
                                                                                 Directional
                                                                                                            𝐜
vanilla NeRF. Sec. 3.2 describes our ray             𝐝                              MLP
rectification transformer with an MAE-                                                               NeRF
like training strategy to learn ray profiles
and eliminate incorrect densities along                                                                     𝜎$
rays. Sec. 3.3 describes our principled                                          Geometry
implementation for decomposing an ap-                                                                       𝜎
                                                     𝐱                           Correction
pearance into view-dependent (“vd”) and                         Spatial   𝐜!"
view-independent (“vi”) components.                              MLP
                                                                          𝐛                                 𝐜$
                                                                                 Directional   𝐜!#
3.1   OVERALL A RCHITECTURE                                                         MLP               *     𝐜
                                                     𝐝
                                                                                               𝛾
Fig. 2 compares vanilla NeRF (Mildenhall
                                                                                       Ours
et al., 2020) and our model, both taking
a sampled spatial coordinate point x =
(x, y, z) and direction d = (θ, ϕ) as input
and output the volume density and color. Figure 2: Vanilla NeRF and Clean-NeRF architec-
Vanilla NeRF uses a spatial MLP to esti- tures. We propose a “vi-vd” appearance decomposi-
mate volume density σ at position x. Then tion based on spherical harmonics (SHs) to account to
the directional MLP takes as input the di- view-inconsistent appearances, with a ray rectification
rection d as well as spatial feature b to transformer to refine ray profiles.
estimate a view-dependent output color c.
In Clean-NeRF architecture, we also use
the spatial MLP and the directional MLP
to output an initial estimation of density σ0 and color c0 , similar to the vanilla NeRF. The initial
estimation of color corresponding to ray r(t) = o + td can be evaluated from σ0 and c0 :
                                        K
                                        X
                                Ĉ0 =         T̂0 (tk )α(σ0 (tk )δk )c0 (tk ),                                   (1)
                                        k=1
                        P
                            k−1
where T̂0 (tk ) = exp − k′ =1 σ0 (tk )δ(tk ) , α (x) = 1 − exp(−x), and δp = tk+1 − tk . Without
requiring additional inputs, Clean-NeRF differs from vanilla NeRF in that while making the initial
estimation, we also predict the view-independent color component cvi with the spatial MLP and the


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Ray                                    Ray                        Ray
                Rectification                          Rectification              Rectification
                Transformer                            Transformer                Transformer


Figure 3: 1) We use an MAE-like training method to learn the prior about ray profiles. 2) We use
paired coarse-fine ray profiles to fine-tune the network. 3) During NeRF training, we use a ray
rectification transformer to correct the density distribution of the rays.


view-dependent color component cvd with the directional MLP. We supervise these estimations by
performing an SH-based decomposition of the initial color estimation c0 , as described in Sec. 3.3.
The directional MLP also estimates a view-dependent factor γ and we obtain a final color estimation
c by:
                                        c = γcvi + (1 − γ)cvd .                                       (2)
Note that cvi captures the overall scene color while cvd captures the color variations due to changes
in viewing angle. By blending these two components with the factor γ, we can synthesize a faithful
color of the underlying 3D scene, even from a limited number of input views. To better eliminate
the floating artifacts, we propose a ray correction transformer to correct the initial density estimation
and obtain the final density estimation σ, as described in Sec. 3.2. The final estimation of color
corresponding to ray r(t) = o + td is then computed as
                                          K
                                          X
                                   Ĉ =         T̂ (tk )α(σ(tk )δk )c(tk ),                          (3)
                                          k=1
                      P
                          k−1
where T̂ (tk ) = exp − k′ =1 σ(tk )δ(tk ) , α (x) = 1 − exp(−x), and δp = tk+1 − tk . We train
the network using photometric loss based on both the initial and the final estimations
                            X                       2                      2

                     Lpho =         Ĉ0 (r) − C(r) + Ĉ(r) − C(r)              .           (4)
                                                                2             2
                                r∈R



3.2   R AY R ECTIFICATION T RANSFORMER

Clean-NeRF is consistent with standard NeRF in that an initial density estimation, denoted as σ0 ,
is generated for volume rendering with the initial color estimation c0 . We propose a geometry
correction strategy for the final rendering that simultaneously refines the density estimation while
better handling unsightly floater artifacts.
Density priors through masked autoencoders. Masked autoencoders (MAE) have shown them-
selves as scalable self-supervised learners. Inspired by their success, we learn a transformer model
FΘ to capture NeRF ray geometry priors, where Θ denotes learnable parameters. Specifically, we
first perform NeRF reconstruction on numerous scenes, each with sufficient input observations. This
process generates a set of ray profiles {σi } for training our model. To train a geometry correction
module FΘ , we first perform MAE pre-training. Specifically, the training loss is:
                                                N
                                                X
                                   LMAE =             ∥FΘ (mi σi ) − σi ∥22                          (5)
                                                i=1

where m is a random binary mask that hides a portion of the density values, thus requiring the model
to predict them.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ray rectification Transformer With self-supervised pretraining, we generate paired coarse and
fine rays to fine-tune this model, enabling it to predict fine rays from coarse rays. Specifically, we
train two versions of NeRF for the same scene: a fine version of NeRF trained on all images, and
a coarse version of NeRF trained on only one-fifth of the images. By rendering from the same
viewpoint, these two opposing NeRFs can generate paired training data samples {σi,coarse , σi,fine }.
We then fine-tune this model using:
                                            M
                                            X
                                  Lcorr =         ∥FΘ (σi,coarse ) − σi,fine ∥22                         (6)
                                            i=1



3.3   A PPEARANCE D ECOMPOSITION                            𝜎        (a)    (b)    (c)   (d)   (e)

To guide our vi-vd decomposition, we utilize
Spherical harmonics (SHs) which are widely
used as a low-dimensional representation for
spherical functions, and have been used to
model Lambertian surfaces (Ramamoorthi &
Hanrahan, 2001; Basri & Jacobs, 2003) as well
as glossy surfaces (Sloan et al., 2002). To use
SH functions to model a given function, we
query the SH functions Yℓm : S2 7→ R at
a viewing angle d and then fit the estimation
c0 by finding the corresponding coefficients.                0
We use low-degree SH functions to compute
                                                                                          Forward Ray tracing
ideal values of view-independent color compo-
nents, and high-degree SH functions for view-
dependent components. In this subsection, we
will perform all of our calculations at an arbi- Figure 4: An example traced ray’s density pro-
trary position x in space, and therefore we will file. Peaks in region (a) and region (e) appear
omit the symbol x from our notation.                    as floating artifacts and would interfere with the
                                                        rendering process.
We use y(d) ∈ RL to represent the set of SH
function values at the viewing angle d:
         h                                                     i⊤
y(d) = Y00 (d), Y1−1 (d), Y10 (d), Y11 (d), . . . , Yℓℓmax
                                                        max
                                                            (d) ,
                                               (7)
where L = (ℓmax + 1)2 . To ensure clarity, we will use c : S2 7→ R to represent one of the
three channels of c0 at a given position x (also cvi and cvd ), noting the derivation should be readily
extended to all three channels. We begin by sampling a set of N viewing angles di , 1 ≤ i ≤ N ⊂ S2 .
The colors of all the sample directions are represented using a vector s ∈ RN :
                                                                                   ⊤
                            s = [c(d1 ) c(d2 ) . . .         c(dN −1 ) c(dN )]                           (8)
The coefficients to be determined are represented by a vector k ∈ RL . To find the optimal coeffi-
cients that fit the view-dependent color estimation, we solve the following optimization problem:
                                             min ∥s − Yk∥22 ,                                            (9)
                                             k∈RL

where
                           Y = [y(d1 ) y(d2 ) . . .             y(dN −1 ) y(dN )] .                     (10)
This is a standard linear regression problem, where we seek to find the values of the coefficient
vector k which minimizes the least squares error between the vector s and the linear combination
of the columns of Y, weighted by the coefficients in k. Using the normal equation, the solution is
given by:
                                       k∗ = (Y⊤ Y)−1 Y⊤ s                                     (11)
We can use the solution coefficients k∗ as weights to linearly combine SH functions. Retaining
the low-degree SH functions allows us to capture the view-independent appearance of the scene.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Conversely, including high-degree SH functions leads to a high-frequency view-dependent residue.
To differentiate between the two, we denote the low-degree and high-degree functions as Llow and
Lhigh , respectively. To compute ideal values for the view-independent component, we can use the
solution coefficients and apply the following equation:
                                        Llow          ZZ
                                        X    1
                               c̃vi =           2
                                                                ki∗ yi (d) sin θdθdϕ,                (12)
                                        i=1
                                            4πr            S2


where we take the mean value around the S2 surface. In our implementation, we approximate it by
                                                     Llow X
                                                     X    N
                                           c̃vi =                ki∗ yi (di ),                       (13)
                                                     i=1 i=1

This value is then used to guide the output of the view-independent color component cvi from the
spatial MLP using a regularizer. Specifically, we use the following equation to compute the vi-
regularizer loss Lvi :
                                        Lvi = (cvi − c̃vi )2 .                              (14)
We apply the following equation to compute optimal values for the view-dependent component:
                                                         L
                                                         X
                                          c̃vd (d) =               ki∗ yi (d).                       (15)
                                                       i=Lhigh

Incorporating the computed value to guide the output of the view-dependent color residue cvd from
the directional MLP using the vd-regularizer loss:
                                                               2
                                        cvd (d1 )     c̃vd (d1 )
                              Lvd =         ..             ..
                                                  −             .                          (16)
                                                              
                                              .              .
                                       cvd (dN )      c̃vd (dN ) 2

As aforementioned we consider a given position x in the space, while in actual implementation we
take the ℓ2 -norm among all the positions in a sampled batch for Eqn. 14 and Eqn. 16.
Refer to Fig. 4 again: peaks in region
(a) and region (e) appear as floating
artifacts and would interfere with the         (a)                         (b)          (c)
rendering process, and so they are
discarded. Notably, multiple salient
peaks may exist corresponding to
other surface points along the ray,
such as region (d), e.g., correspond-
ing to the two slices of toast inter-          (d)                         (e)          (f)
sected by the pertinent ray in the pre-
vious figure. If the salient peak (d) is
further from the ray origin but lower
than (b), as Fig. 4 shows, the cor-
responding surface point is occluded
by (b), which can be safely detected
by backward pass while occlusion-
correct rendering is unaffected, as            Figure 5: Appearance Decomposition. (a, d) For ob-
peak (d) is lower. Otherwise, sup-             ject surfaces with strong view-dependent effects, vanilla
pose the peak (d) is higher (e.g., the         NeRF often gets disrupted, resulting in poor reconstruc-
toast further back is higher), then the        tion quality. We propose decomposing appearance into (b)
peak in (b) should have been clamped           view-independent and (c) view-dependent components dur-
to reveal the true geometry (d) as the         ing NeRF training and incorporating geometry-related pri-
first salient peak as seen from the ray        ors to improve reconstruction quality. Our approach shows
origin.                                        the ability to (e) render the view-independent component of
                                               the scene and (f) more accurate recovery of the scene.

                                                           6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Ground Truth                TensoRF               Nerfbusters                Ours

Figure 6: Qualitative evaluation of Clean-NeRF on Shiny Blender dataset. We render the view-
independent component image, and the final color image combining both view-independent and
view-dependent components to compare with the ground truth.
                       Method        PSNR(↑)        SSIM(↑)            LPIPS(↓)
                       NeRF            15.19          0.475             0.592
                      TensoRF          16.35          0.571             0.533
                      Nerfbuster       20.94          0.596             0.406
                        Ours           21.05          0.642             0.313

Table 1: Quantitative comparison. We compare our proposed Clean-NeRF with representative
NeRF-based methods. best second-best


4   R ESULTS

In this section, we provide comparisons with previous state-of-the-art NeRF-based methods and
evaluation of our main technical components, both qualitatively and quantitatively. We run our
proposed Clean-NeRF on NeRF 360 (Mildenhall et al., 2020), a challenging real dataset of photo-
realistic outdoor scenes, and compare our approach with other methods in the same field. We use
the given accurate camera poses from the dataset. We train our Clean-NeRF for 500K iterations to
guarantee convergence on a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 Ti GPU. All the shown cases and
reported metrics are from held-out views. We report three error metrics, including peak signal-to-
noise ratio (PSNR), structural similarity index measure (SSIM) (Wang et al., 2004), mean absolute
error (MAE), and learned perceptual image patch similarity (LPIPS) (Zhang et al., 2018).

Comparison on Challenging Outdoor Scenes We compare Clean-NeRF with TensoRF (Chen
et al., 2022) and Nerfbuster (Warburg et al., 2023), which are representative NeRF-based meth-
ods and strong baselines for large-scale scenes. As shown in Fig. 6 and Tab 1, our method recovers
intricate details of objects in the outdoor scene.


                                                7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       View-independent                                      View-independent
    Ground Truth                              Color        Ground Truth                            Color
                          Component                                             Component


Figure 7: Qualitative evaluation of Clean-NeRF on Shiny Blender dataset. We render the view-
independent component image, and the final color image combining both view-independent and
view-dependent components to compare with the ground truth.


              Ground Truth                w/o appearance decomposition    w/ appearance decomposition (Ours)

Figure 8: Qualitative evaluation on appearance decomposition. Without appearance decomposi-
tion, our model fails to recover the glossy objects such as the glass, the floor, and the plant.

Appearance Decomposition on Glossy Objects To verify Clean-NeRF’s ability to decompose ob-
ject appearances into the corresponding view-independent and view-dependent components, we
evaluate Clean-NeRF on and render the view-independent component image and color image with
both view-independent and view-dependent components (Fig. 7). The Shiny Blender dataset con-
tains different glossy objects rendered in Blender under conditions similar to typical NeRF datasets,
to verify our model’s ability to handle challenging material properties by proper decomposition of
observed appearance into the corresponding view-independent and view-dependent components.

Ablation Study on our Architecture Design We qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate the main
components of Clean-NeRF on Hypersim, a Fig. 8 shows that without appearance decomposition,
NeRF struggles to recover the glossy floor and plants.

5    D ISCUSSION AND L IMITATIONS
Our method assumes fixed lighting conditions and no semi-transparent objects in a scene. In ad-
dition, we observe that, when we deal with sparse inputs and the specular highlights of a point


                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


appear in most of the inputs, such highlights may be regarded as view-independent colors, since our
method does not make any assumption about the surface properties and colors. Below, we discuss
some important questions related to our work:

Why are there floaters in sparse but not in dense inputs? In vanilla NeRF, observation errors are
backpropagated according to Eqn. 1, which are backpropagated equally to density and color along
a given ray without any prior. With dense inputs, the strong geometry constraint from other view
points can correct the density errors along a ray, and thus the view dependent observations will be
correctly backpropagated to the color component. In contrast, when the number of inputs is limited,
the network cannot resolve the ambiguity that the view dependent observations are caused by change
of colors, or by the semi-transparent occluders, i.e., floaters. Since errors are backpropagated equally
to both density and color along a ray, generating floaters is more preferable by Eqn. 1.

What are the benefits of vi- and vd- color decomposition? Such decomposition can stabilize the
solution by reducing the ambiguity in handling view-dependent observations as residual errors in
cvd , while keeping the cvi stable across multiple views, thus leading to a reconstruction of higher
quality. Additionally, in downstream tasks such as NeRF object detection (Hu et al., 2023) and
segmentation (Ren et al., 2022), one may have to estimate the color of voxel features that is inde-
pendent of viewpoints. Our cvi can provide such voxel feature extraction for free without additional
computations.

Why is the decomposition in Eqn. 2 correct? Eqn. 2 can be considered as a simplified BRDF model,
e.g., a simplified Phong model with diffuse and specular components but without normal and light.
Although not entirely physically correct, this formulation can handle most view-dependent obser-
vations in the real world without resorting to estimating surface normals and incoming lighting
conditions, thus providing a fast and easy way to optimize. According to our experiments, this
formulation is generally applicable, and the resulting decomposition is reasonably accurate.


R EFERENCES
Bousseau Adrien, Paris Sylvain, and Durand Frédo. User-assisted intrinsic images. ACM Transac-
  tions on Graphics (TOG), 2009.

Benjamin Attal, Jia-Bin Huang, Christian Richardt, Michael Zollhoefer, Johannes Kopf, Matthew
  O’Toole, and Changil Kim. Hyperreel: High-fidelity 6-dof video with ray-conditioned sampling.
  In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 16610–
  16620, 2023.

Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Peter Hedman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and
  Pratul P Srinivasan. Mip-nerf: A multiscale representation for anti-aliasing neural radiance fields.
  In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5855–5864,
  2021.

Harry Barrow, J Tenenbaum, A Hanson, and E Riseman. Recovering intrinsic scene characteristics.
  Computer Vision Systems, 2(3-26):2, 1978.

Ronen Basri and David W Jacobs. Lambertian reflectance and linear subspaces. IEEE Transactions
  on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (PAMI), 25(2):218–233, 2003.

Sai Bi, Xiaoguang Han, and Yizhou Yu. An l1 image transform for edge-preserving smoothing and
  scene-level intrinsic decomposition. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 2015.

Sai Bi, Zexiang Xu, Pratul Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Miloš Hašan, Yannick
  Hold-Geoffroy, David Kriegman, and Ravi Ramamoorthi. Neural reflectance fields for appearance
  acquisition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.03824, 2020.

Wenjing Bian, Zirui Wang, Kejie Li, Jia-Wang Bian, and Victor Adrian Prisacariu. Nope-nerf:
 Optimising neural radiance field with no pose prior. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 4160–4169, 2023.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mark Boss, Raphael Braun, Varun Jampani, Jonathan T Barron, Ce Liu, and Hendrik Lensch. Nerd:
 Neural reflectance decomposition from image collections. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 12684–12694, 2021a.

Mark Boss, Varun Jampani, Raphael Braun, Ce Liu, Jonathan Barron, and Hendrik Lensch. Neural-
 pil: Neural pre-integrated lighting for reflectance decomposition. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 34:10691–10704, 2021b.

Eric R. Chan, Connor Z. Lin, Matthew A. Chan, Koki Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini De Mello,
  Orazio Gallo, Leonidas J. Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis, Tero Karras, and Gordon
  Wetzstein. Efficient geometry-aware 3d generative adversarial networks. In IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 16123–16133, June 2022.

Anpei Chen, Zexiang Xu, Andreas Geiger, Jingyi Yu, and Hao Su. Tensorf: Tensorial radiance
  fields. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022.

Zhiqin Chen, Thomas Funkhouser, Peter Hedman, and Andrea Tagliasacchi. Mobilenerf: Exploiting
  the polygon rasterization pipeline for efficient neural field rendering on mobile architectures. In
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.

Valentin Deschaintre, Miika Aittala, Fredo Durand, George Drettakis, and Adrien Bousseau. Single-
  image svbrdf capture with a rendering-aware deep network. ACM Transactions on Graphics
  (TOG), 37(4):1–15, 2018.

Qingnan Fan, Jiaolong Yang, Gang Hua, Baoquan Chen, and David Wipf. Revisiting deep intrinsic
  image decompositions. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 8944–8952, 2018.

Zhiwen Fan, Peihao Wang, Yifan Jiang, Xinyu Gong, Dejia Xu, and Zhangyang Wang. Nerf-sos:
  Any-view self-supervised object segmentation on complex scenes. International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.

Sara Fridovich-Keil, Alex Yu, Matthew Tancik, Qinhong Chen, Benjamin Recht, and Angjoo
  Kanazawa. Plenoxels: Radiance fields without neural networks. In IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 5501–5510, 2022.

Lily Goli, Cody Reading, Silvia Sellán, Alec Jacobson, and Andrea Tagliasacchi. Bayes’ Rays:
  Uncertainty quantification in neural radiance fields. arXiv, 2023.

Berthold KP Horn. Determining lightness from an image. Computer Graphics and Image Process-
  ing, 3:277–299, 1974.

Benran Hu, Junkai Huang, Yichen Liu, Yu-Wing Tai, and Chi-Keung Tang. Nerf-rpn: A general
  framework for object detection in nerfs. IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2023.

Mustafa Işık, Martin Rünz, Markos Georgopoulos, Taras Khakhulin, Jonathan Starck, Lourdes
 Agapito, and Matthias Nießner. Humanrf: High-fidelity neural radiance fields for humans in
 motion. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 42(4):1–12, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3592415. URL
 https://doi.org/10.1145/3592415.

Kaizhang Kang, Zimin Chen, Jiaping Wang, Kun Zhou, and Hongzhi Wu. Efficient reflectance
  capture using an autoencoder. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 37(4):127–1, 2018.

Justin Kerr, Chung Min Kim, Ken Goldberg, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Matthew Tancik. Lerf: Lan-
  guage embedded radiance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09553, 2023.

Tobias Kirschstein, Shenhan Qian, Simon Giebenhain, Tim Walter, and Matthias Nießner. Nersem-
  ble: Multi-view radiance field reconstruction of human heads, 2023.

Sosuke Kobayashi, Eiichi Matsumoto, and Vincent Sitzmann. Decomposing nerf for editing via
  feature field distillation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Edwin H Land and John J McCann. Lightness and retinex theory. Journal of the Optical Society of
  America (1917-1983), 61(1):1, 1971.
Tianye Li, Mira Slavcheva, Michael Zollhoefer, Simon Green, Christoph Lassner, Changil Kim,
  Tanner Schmidt, Steven Lovegrove, Michael Goesele, Richard Newcombe, et al. Neural 3d video
  synthesis from multi-view video. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5521–5531, 2022.
Yu Li and Michael S. Brown. Single image layer separation using relative smoothness. In IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2014.
Zhengqi Li and Noah Snavely. Cgintrinsics: Better intrinsic image decomposition through
  physically-based rendering. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 371–387,
  2018a.
Zhengqi Li and Noah Snavely. Learning intrinsic image decomposition from watching the world.
  In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 9039–9048,
  2018b.
Zhengqin Li, Kalyan Sunkavalli, and Manmohan Chandraker. Materials for masses: Svbrdf acqui-
  sition with a single mobile phone image. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
  pp. 72–87, 2018a.
Zhengqin Li, Zexiang Xu, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Kalyan Sunkavalli, and Manmohan Chandraker.
  Learning to reconstruct shape and spatially-varying reflectance from a single image. ACM Trans-
  actions on Graphics (TOG), 37(6):1–11, 2018b.
Chen-Hsuan Lin, Wei-Chiu Ma, Antonio Torralba, and Simon Lucey. Barf: Bundle-adjusting neural
  radiance fields. In IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 5741–
  5751, 2021.
Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten
  Kreis, Sanja Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3d: High-resolution text-to-3d content
  creation. IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Xinhang Liu, Jiaben Chen, Huai Yu, Yu-Wing Tai, and Chi-Keung Tang. Unsupervised multi-view
  object segmentation using radiance field propagation. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Noha Radwan, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Jonathan T. Barron, Alexey Dosovit-
  skiy, and Daniel Duckworth. NeRF in the Wild: Neural Radiance Fields for Unconstrained Photo
  Collections. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  2021.
Wojciech Matusik, Hanspeter Pfister, Matt Brand, and Leonard McMillan. A data-driven reflectance
 model. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 22(3):759–769, 2003.
Quan Meng, Anpei Chen, Haimin Luo, Minye Wu, Hao Su, Lan Xu, Xuming He, and Jingyi Yu.
  Gnerf: Gan-based neural radiance field without posed camera. In IEEE/CVF International Con-
  ference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 6351–6361, 2021.
Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, Michael Niemeyer, Sebastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger.
  Occupancy networks: Learning 3d reconstruction in function space. In IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 4460–4470, 2019.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020.
Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. Instant neural graphics primi-
  tives with a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41(4):102:1–
  102:15, July 2022. doi: 10.1145/3528223.3530127. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
  3528223.3530127.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Giljoo Nam, Joo Ho Lee, Diego Gutierrez, and Min H Kim. Practical svbrdf acquisition of 3d
  objects with unstructured flash photography. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 37(6):1–12,
  2018.
Jannik Boll Nielsen, Henrik Wann Jensen, and Ravi Ramamoorthi. On optimal, minimal brdf sam-
  pling for reflectance acquisition. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 34(6):1–11, 2015.
Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove.
  Deepsdf: Learning continuous signed distance functions for shape representation. In IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 165–174, 2019.
Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Jonathan T. Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman, Steven M.
  Seitz, and Ricardo Martin-Brualla. Nerfies: Deformable neural radiance fields. IEEE/CVF Inter-
  national Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d
  diffusion. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Albert Pumarola, Enric Corona, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer. D-nerf: Neural
  radiance fields for dynamic scenes. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10318–10327, 2021.
Ravi Ramamoorthi and Pat Hanrahan. On the relationship between radiance and irradiance: deter-
  mining the illumination from images of a convex lambertian object. JOSA A, 18(10):2448–2459,
  2001.
Konstantinos Rematas, Andrew Liu, Pratul P Srinivasan, Jonathan T Barron, Andrea Tagliasacchi,
  Thomas Funkhouser, and Vittorio Ferrari. Urban radiance fields. In IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 12932–12942, 2022.
Zhongzheng Ren, Aseem Agarwala, Bryan Russell, Alexander G Schwing, and Oliver Wang. Neural
  volumetric object selection. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion (CVPR), pp. 6133–6142, 2022.
Carsten Rother, Martin Kiefel, Lumin Zhang, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Peter V Gehler. Recovering
  intrinsic images with a global sparsity prior on reflectance. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2011.
Sara Sabour, Suhani Vora, Daniel Duckworth, Ivan Krasin, David J. Fleet, and Andrea Tagliasacchi.
  Robustnerf: Ignoring distractors with robust losses. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 20626–20636, June 2023.
Li Shen and Chuohao Yeo. Intrinsic images decomposition using a local and global sparse repre-
  sentation of reflectance. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2011.
Vincent Sitzmann, Michael Zollhöfer, and Gordon Wetzstein. Scene representation networks: Con-
  tinuous 3d-structure-aware neural scene representations. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems (NeurIPS), 32, 2019.
Peter-Pike Sloan, Jan Kautz, and John Snyder. Precomputed radiance transfer for real-time ren-
  dering in dynamic, low-frequency lighting environments. In ACM Transactions on Graphics
  (SIGGRAPH), pp. 527–536, 2002.
Pratul P Srinivasan, Boyang Deng, Xiuming Zhang, Matthew Tancik, Ben Mildenhall, and
  Jonathan T Barron. Nerv: Neural reflectance and visibility fields for relighting and view synthesis.
  In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 7495–7504,
  2021.
Matthew Tancik, Vincent Casser, Xinchen Yan, Sabeek Pradhan, Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srini-
 vasan, Jonathan T Barron, and Henrik Kretzschmar. Block-nerf: Scalable large scene neural view
 synthesis. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
 8248–8258, 2022.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Matthew Tancik, Ethan Weber, Evonne Ng, Ruilong Li, Brent Yi, Justin Kerr, Terrance Wang,
 Alexander Kristoffersen, Jake Austin, Kamyar Salahi, et al. Nerfstudio: A modular framework
 for neural radiance field development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04264, 2023.
Edgar Tretschk, Ayush Tewari, Vladislav Golyanik, Michael Zollhöfer, Christoph Lassner, and
  Christian Theobalt. Non-rigid neural radiance fields: Reconstruction and novel view synthesis
  of a dynamic scene from monocular video. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 12959–12970, 2021.
Dor Verbin, Peter Hedman, Ben Mildenhall, Todd Zickler, Jonathan T Barron, and Pratul P Srini-
  vasan. Ref-nerf: Structured view-dependent appearance for neural radiance fields. In IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5481–5490. IEEE, 2022.
Liao Wang, Jiakai Zhang, Xinhang Liu, Fuqiang Zhao, Yanshun Zhang, Yingliang Zhang, Minye
  Wu, Jingyi Yu, and Lan Xu. Fourier plenoctrees for dynamic radiance field rendering in real-
  time. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 13524–
  13534, 2022.
Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment:
  from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing, 13(4):600–
  612, 2004.
Frederik Warburg, Ethan Weber, Matthew Tancik, Aleksander Hołyński, and Angjoo Kanazawa.
  Nerfbusters: Removing ghostly artifacts from casually captured nerfs. 2023.
Tianhao Wu, Fangcheng Zhong, Andrea Tagliasacchi, Forrester Cole, and Cengiz Oztireli. Dˆ 2nerf:
  Self-supervised decoupling of dynamic and static objects from a monocular video. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 35:32653–32666, 2022.
Weicai Ye, Shuo Chen, Chong Bao, Hujun Bao, Marc Pollefeys, Zhaopeng Cui, and Guofeng Zhang.
 IntrinsicNeRF: Learning Intrinsic Neural Radiance Fields for Editable Novel View Synthesis. In
 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023.
Alex Yu, Ruilong Li, Matthew Tancik, Hao Li, Ren Ng, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Plenoctrees for real-
  time rendering of neural radiance fields. In IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision (ICCV), pp. 5752–5761, 2021.
Ye Yu and William AP Smith. Inverserendernet: Learning single image inverse rendering. In
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 3155–3164,
  2019.
Jiakai Zhang, Xinhang Liu, Xinyi Ye, Fuqiang Zhao, Yanshun Zhang, Minye Wu, Yingliang Zhang,
   Lan Xu, and Jingyi Yu. Editable free-viewpoint video using a layered neural representation. ACM
   Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 40(4):1–18, 2021a.
Kai Zhang, Fujun Luan, Qianqian Wang, Kavita Bala, and Noah Snavely. Physg: Inverse rendering
  with spherical gaussians for physics-based material editing and relighting. In IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5453–5462, 2021b.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 586–595, 2018.
Fuqiang Zhao, Wei Yang, Jiakai Zhang, Pei Lin, Yingliang Zhang, Jingyi Yu, and Lan Xu. Human-
  nerf: Efficiently generated human radiance field from sparse inputs. In IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 7743–7753, 2022.
Shuaifeng Zhi, Tristan Laidlow, Stefan Leutenegger, and Andrew J Davison. In-place scene labelling
  and understanding with implicit scene representation. In IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 15838–15847, 2021.
Rui Zhu, Zhengqin Li, Janarbek Matai, Fatih Porikli, and Manmohan Chandraker. Irisformer: Dense
  vision transformers for single-image inverse rendering in indoor scenes. In IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2822–2831, 2022.


                                                13
