Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L EARNING VARIABLE - LENGTH SKILLS THROUGH
N OVELTY- BASED D ECISION P OINT I DENTIFICATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                               A BSTRACT
            Intelligent agents are able to make decisions based on different levels of gran-
            ularity and duration. Recent advances in skill learning with data-driven behav-
            ior priors enabled the agent to solve complex, long-horizon tasks by effectively
            guiding the agent in choosing appropriate skills. However, the practice of using
            fixed-length skills can easily result in skipping valuable decision points, which ul-
            timately limits the potential for further exploration and faster policy learning. For
            example, making a temporally-extended decision at a crossroad can offer more
            direct access to parts of the state space that would otherwise be challenging to
            reach. In this work, we propose to learn variable-length skills by identifying de-
            cision points through a state-action novelty module that leverages offline agent
            experience datasets, which turns out to be an efficient proxy for the critical deci-
            sion point detection. We show that capturing critical decision points can further
            accelerate policy learning by enabling a more efficient exploration of the state
            space and facilitating transfer of knowledge across various tasks. Our approach,
            NBDI (Novelty-based Decision Point Identification)1 , substantially outperforms
            previous baselines in complex, long-horizon tasks (e.g. robotic manipulation and
            maze navigation), which highlights the importance of decision point identification
            in skill learning.


1       I NTRODUCTION
The ability to make decisions based on different levels of granularity and duration is one of the key
attributes of intelligence. In reinforcement learning (RL), temporal abstraction refers to the concept
of an agent reasoning over a long horizon, planning, and taking high-level actions. Each high-level
action corresponds to a sequence of primitive actions, or low-level actions. For example, in order to
accomplish a task with a robot arm, it would be easier to utilize high-level actions such as grasping
and lifting, instead of controlling every single joint of a robot arm. Temporal abstraction simplifies
complex tasks by reducing the number of decisions the agent has to make, thereby alleviating the
challenges that RL faces in long-horizon, sparse reward tasks.
Due to the advantages of temporal abstraction, there has been active
research on developing hierarchical RL algorithms, which structure
the agent’s policy into a hierarchy of two policies: a high-level pol-
icy and a low level policy. The option framework (Sutton, 1998)
was proposed to achieve temporal abstraction by learning options,
which are high-level actions that contain inner low level policy, ini-
tiation set and termination conditions. Termination conditions are
used to figure out when to switch from one option to another, en-            S                G
abling the agent to flexibly respond to changes in environment or
task requirements. While the option framework can achieve tem-
                                                                       Figure 1: An example where
poral abstraction without any loss of performance when the options
                                                                       discovering fixed-length skills
are optimally learned, it is usually computationally challenging to
                                                                       is highly inefficient.
optimize for the ideal set of options within complex domains.
In this case, the skill discovery framework, which aims to discover meaningful skills (fixed-length
executions of low-level policy) from the dataset through unsupervised learning techniques, has been
    1
        Our code is available at: https://github.com/asdfnbdi/nbdi


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


used as an alternative. Recently, notable progress has been made in skill-based deep RL models,
showing promising results in complex environments and robot manipulations (Pertsch et al., 2021a;
Hakhamaneshi et al., 2021). However, the use of fixed-length skills and the absence of appropriate
termination conditions often restrict them from making decisions at critical decision points (e.g.,
crossroads). This can result in significant loss in performance, as illustrated in Figure 1. While there
have been some studies incorporating the option framework into deep RL as is, the algorithmic
complexity and unstable performance in large environments limit its widespread adoption (Kulkarni
et al., 2016; Hutsebaut-Buysse et al., 2022).
In this paper, we present NBDI (Novelty-based Decision Point Identification), a task-agnostic, sim-
ple state-action novelty-based decision point identification method that allows the agent to learn
variable-length skills through critical decision point detection. Identifying critical decision points
promote knowledge transfer between different tasks and stimulate exploration by closely connecting
different areas in the state space (McGovern & Barto, 2001; Menache et al., 2002; Şimşek & Barto,
2004). For example, detecting doorways between rooms is useful regardless of the specific task at
hand. We demonstrate the straightforward applicability of our method to the skill-based deep RL
framework, and illustrate how it can lead to improvements in decision-making.
The paper is organized as follows: we first introduce the discovery of state-action novelty-based
critical decision points in reinforcement learning (Section 4). Next, we demonstrate how we learn
variable-length skills through state-action novelty (Section 5). Then we illustrate the inefficiency
of employing fixed-length skills and demonstrate that executing variable-length skills, based on
state-action novelty, can accelerate policy learning in both robot manipulation and navigation tasks
(Section 6). Finally, we provide insights into how our model successfully uses state-action novelty
to improve policy learning by implementing several ablation studies (Appendix A).

2   R ELATED W ORK
Option Framework One major approach of discovering good options is to focus on identifying
good terminal states, or sub-goal states. For example, landmark states (Kaelbling, 1993), reinforce-
ment learning signals (Digney, 1998), graph partitioning (Menache et al., 2002; Şimşek et al., 2005;
Machado et al., 2017a;b), and state clustering (Srinivas et al., 2016) have been used to identify
meaningful sub-goal states. Digney (1998); Simsek et al. (2005) and Kulkarni et al. (2016) focused
on detecting bottleneck states, which are states that appear frequently within successful trajectories,
but are less common in unsuccessful trajectories (e.g., a state with access door). Şimşek & Barto
(2004) tried to identify access states, which are similar to bottleneck states, but determined based on
the relative novelty score of predecessor states and successor states. Access states are found based
on the intuition that sub-goals will exhibit a relative novelty score distribution with scores that are
frequently higher than those of non sub-goals. These studies motivated us to search for states with
meaningful properties to terminate skills. However, these methods frequently face challenges in
scaling to large or continuous state spaces.

Skill-based deep RL As extending the classic option framework to high-dimensional state spaces
through the adoption of function approximation is not straightforward, a number of practitioners
have proposed acquiring skills, which are fixed-length executions of low-level policies, to achieve
temporal abstraction. For example, skill discovery (Gregor et al., 2016; Achiam et al., 2018; Mavor-
Parker et al., 2022) and skill extraction (Yang et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2020; Pertsch et al., 2021b;
Hakhamaneshi et al., 2021) frameworks have proven to be successful in acquiring meaningful sets
of skills. Especially, Pertsch et al. (2021a) showed promising results in complex, long-horizon tasks
with sparse rewards by extracting skills with data-driven behavior priors. The learned prior enables
the agent to explore the environment in a more structured manner, which leads to better performance
in downstream tasks. However, we believe that its performance is greatly constrained by the use of
fixed-length skills, which restricts them from making decisions at critical decision points.

Novelty-based RL Novelty has been utilized in reinforcement learning for various purposes. De-
pending on its design, novelty can be used for curiosity-driven exploration (Burda et al., 2018;
Pathak et al., 2019; Sekar et al., 2020), or data coverage maximization (Bellemare et al., 2016;
Hazan et al., 2019; Seo et al., 2021). It has been also used to identify sub-goals in discrete envi-
ronments (Goel, 2003; Şimşek & Barto, 2004). However, to the best of our knowledge, there has


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         𝝌 𝒔𝒌+𝟏 , 𝒂𝒌+𝟏 ≈ 𝟎. 𝟎𝟓 Open the Slide Cabinet                                𝝌 𝒔𝒌+𝟏 , 𝒂𝒌+𝟏 ≈ 𝟎. 𝟎𝟑 Open the Slide Cabinet

    𝝌 𝒔𝟎 , 𝒂𝟎 ≈ 𝟎. 𝟎𝟏   𝝌 𝒔𝒌 , 𝒂𝒌 ≈ 𝟎. 𝟒𝟑                                   𝝌 𝒔𝟎 , 𝒂𝟎 ≈ 𝟎. 𝟎𝟓       𝝌 𝒔𝒌 , 𝒂𝒌 ≈ 𝟎. 𝟑𝟑
    Move the Cattle                                                         Flip the Light Switch



                                                 Turn the oven Knob                                                           Open the Left Hinge
                                                                                                                              Cabinet


                         𝝌 𝒔𝒌+𝟏 , 𝒂𝒌+𝟏 ≈ 𝟎. 𝟎𝟒                                                        𝝌 𝒔𝒌+𝟏 , 𝒂𝒌+𝟏 ≈ 𝟎. 𝟎𝟒


Figure 2: Visualization of an example of critical decision points in the kitchen environment. High
state-action novelty can be found in states where a subtask has been completed, and multiple subse-
quent subtasks are accessible.


been no research that has utilized state-action novelty for identifying decision points in the context
of deep RL or for improving exploration in downstream tasks.


3       BACKGROUND

Markov Decision Process (MDP) MDP is a mathematical framework to model decision making
problems with discrete-time control processes. It is defined by a tuple {S, A, P, R}, where S de-
notes a state space, A denotes a set of actions the agent can execute, P (s′ |s, a) denotes a transition
probability and R(s, a) is a reward function. In a MDP, the probability of transitioning to a future
state depends solely on the current state, which is known as the Markov property. Given a MDP, we
aim to find an optimal policy π ∗ that maximizes the expected discounted sum of reward. The state
value function V π (s) and the action value function Qπ (s, a) denote the conditional expectation of
discounted sum of reward following policy π.

Option Framework The option framework (Sutton, 1998) is one of the first studies to achieve
temporal abstraction in RL. The option framework is composed of two major elements: a meta-
control policy µ and a set of options O. An option is defined as ⟨I, π, β⟩, where I ⊆ S defines an
initiation set, π : S ×A → [0, 1] defines a policy, and β : S → [0, 1] defines a termination condition.
The policy π chooses the next action, until the option is terminated by the stochastic termination
condition β. Once the option terminates, the agent has an opportunity to switch to another available
option at the termination state. Options usually refer to low-level polices that are promised to be
good only for a subset of the state space. Thus, the presence of an appropriate initiation set I and
termination condition β is crucial for the agent’s overall performance.
Any MDP with a fixed set of options can be classified as a Semi-Markov Decision Process (SMDP)
(Sutton, 1998). SMDP (Bradtke & Duff, 1994) is an extended version of MDP for the situations
where actions have different execution lengths. It serves as the foundational mathematical frame-
work for many hierarchical RL algorithms, including the option framework.


4       S IMPLE AND E FFICIENT I DENTIFICATION OF D ECISION P OINTS

The option framework aims to achieve temporal abstraction by learning good options, and good
options can be learned through the identification of meaningful sub-goal states (Digney, 1998; Men-
ache et al., 2002; Şimşek & Barto, 2004), i.e., the critical decision points. In this work, we propose
to use state-action novelty to identify critical decision points for skill termination, which leads to the
execution of variable-length skills. Compared to other approaches for decision point identification,
our proposed method is much simpler to implement, and it can be used jointly with any skill-based
hierarchical RL algorithms. Furthermore, any state-action novelty estimation mechanism that mea-
sures the joint novelty of state-action pairs can be used for our approach.


                                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.1   S TATE - ACTION N OVELTY- BASED D ECISION P OINT I DENTIFICATION

In short, our proposed method classifies a state-action pair with high joint state-action novelty as a
decision point. A more insightful perspective on this choice can be obtained by breaking down a
novelty estimator as in (1). By interpreting joint novelty χ(s, a) as the reciprocal of joint visitation
count N (s, a), we can decompose a state-action joint novelty χ into the product of a state novelty and
a conditional action novelty. The proposed method combines the strength of both novelty estimates.
                              1         1         1
               χ(s, a) =           =         ·         = χ(s) ·            χ(a|s)                    (1)
                          N (s, a)    N (s) N (a|s)         |{z}           | {z }
                                                           state novelty conditional action novelty

The state novelty χ(s) will seek for a novel state, which refers to a state that is either challenging
to reach or rare in the dataset of agent experiences. As the skills are derived from the same pool
of experiences that we use to estimate the novelty, a high state novelty implies a potential lack of
diverse skills to explore neighboring states effectively. Increasing the frequency of decision-making
in such unfamiliar states will lead to improved exploration and broader coverage of the state space.
A conditional action novelty χ(a|s) will seek for a novel action. With the state conditioning, action
novelty will be high in a state where a multitude of actions have been frequently executed. For exam-
ple, unlike straight roads, crossroads provide the agent with options to move in multiple directions.
In such states, the agent may need to perform different actions to accomplish the current goal, rather
than solely depending on the current skill. This necessity arises because the current skill may have
been originally designed for different goals, making it potentially less than ideal for the current goal.
Guiding the agent to make more decisions in such states can increase the likelihood of solving the
task at hand, ultimately accelerating the policy learning.

Examples Critical decision points are not just limited to navi-
gation tasks; they can also be found in robot manipulation tasks.
In the kitchen environment, as shown in Figure 2, high state-
action novelty χ(s, a) tends to occur in states where a subtask has
been completed. After completing the subtask of flipping the light
switch, the agent has the option to open either the left hinge cab-
inet or the right slide cabinet. In sequential manipulation tasks,
such critical points are valuable because completing one subtask
grants access to multiple other subtasks.
Figure 3 shows an example of critical decision points in the maze Figure 3: An example of criti-
environment. When the agent encounters a maze with an unseen cal decision points in the maze
goal, it would have no way of knowing which direction would lead environment that has diverse
to the goal. Therefore, encouraging the agent to make more deci- plausible actions (crossroad).
sions at crossroads would effectively connect different areas within
the maze, ultimately promoting exploration. As a multitude of actions tends to be executed at cross-
roads, the state-action novelty χ(s, a) tends to be high in these states due to the high conditional
action novelty χ(a|s).

4.2   T ERMINATION I MPROVEMENT FROM S TATE - ACTION N OVELTY- BASED T ERMINATIONS

We provide an alternative interpretation on the potential benefits of identifying decision points based
on state-action novelty. While maximizing skill length is advantageous in terms of temporal abstrac-
tion, extended skills can result in suboptimal behavior, especially when the skills are derived from
task-agnostic trajectories. Such suboptimality of extended skills (or options) can be theoretically
quantified using the termination improvement theorem (Sutton, 1998).
Theorem. [Termination Improvement, Sutton (1998), informal] For any meta-control policy µ
on set of options O, define a new set of options O′ , which is a set of options that we can additionally
choose to terminate whenever the value of a state V µ (s) is larger than the value of a state given that
we keep the current option o, Qµ (s, o). With µ′ , which has the same option selection probability as
                                                 ′
µ but over a new set of options O′ , we have V µ (s) ≥ V µ (s).
The termination improvement theorem basically implies that we should terminate an option when
there are much better alternatives available from the current state. When the options/skills are dis-


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Termination Improvement       Conditional Action Novelty            State Novelty              100

                      G                                G                                G          75


                                                                                                        Percentile
                                                                                                   50


                      G                                G                                G          25


G                               G                                G                                 0



Figure 4: The relative frequency of termination improvement occurrences (left), conditional action
novelty (middle), and state novelty (right) in a small grid with three different goals. Higher per-
centile colors indicate a relatively greater number of termination improvement occurrences, higher
conditional action novelty, and higher state novelty. Further details on the visualization procedure
are provided in Appendix H.1


covered from diverse trajectories (e.g., trajectories gathered from a diverse set of goals), termination
improvement is typically observed in states where a multitude of actions have been executed, such
as crossroads.
To identify the states where termination improvement occurs, we plotted the relative frequency of
termination improvement occurrences in a small grid maze with three different goal settings (Figure
4 (left)). It shows that termination improvement frequently occurs in states where diverse plausible
actions exist. In states with a single available option, V µ (s) would be equal to Qµ (s, o). On the
other hand, as more actions/options are plausible, Qµ (s, o) would exhibit a broader range of values,
thereby increasing the likelihood of satisfying Qµ (s, o) < V µ (s).
However, terminating skills based on the termination improvement theorem can be challenging when
the downstream task is unknown, as it requires Qµ (s, o) and V µ (s) to be computed in advance with
the skills extracted from the downstream task trajectories. Thus, by leveraging the data collected
across a diverse set of tasks, we propose to employ conditional action novelty as a tool for pinpoint-
ing the states where a multitude of plausible actions can be taken (Figure 4 (middle)). We have
also found state novelty to be useful in terminating skills, as it encourages the agent to sufficiently
explore unfamiliar parts of the state space (Figure 4 (right)).

5     L EARNING VARIABLE - LENGTH S KILLS THROUGH N OVELTY- BASED
      D ECISION P OINT I DENTIFICATION
Our goal is to accelerate the learning of a new complex, long-horizon task by deriving variable-
length skills from a state-action novelty module. While fixed-length skills have been mostly consid-
ered for temporal abstractions in recent studies (Pertsch et al., 2021a; Hakhamaneshi et al., 2021),
utilizing fixed-length skills can easily skip valuable decision points, ultimately reducing the oppor-
tunities for further exploration and faster policy learning.
In this work, we propose to incorporate state-action novelty into the skill prior and skill embed-
ding learning procedure to effectively capture critical decision points and execute skills of variable-
lengths. Our approach, as shown in Figure 5, consists of three major steps: (i) Training the state-
action novelty model, (ii) Learning the skill prior, skill embedding space and termination distribution
with the pre-trained novelty model, (iii) Performing reinforcement learning with skills of variable-
length to solve an unseen task.

Problem Formulation For training the skill prior, skill embedding space, and state-action novelty
module, we assume access to unstructured agent experiences of states and actions in the form of N
                                     −1 N −1
trajectories D = τ i = {(st , at )}Tt=0

                                         i=0
                                              , which are collected across a diverse set of tasks except
for the one we are specifically interested in. Since we do not make any assumptions about rewards


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  (ii) Skill Extraction                                                           (i) Novelty Learning

                                  Data                                                                   Data

                          State-Action                                                            𝑠, 𝑎      State-Action
                         Novelty Module                                                                    Novelty Module                          𝜒(𝑠, 𝑎)

                                         𝜒(𝑠, 𝑎)

      𝛽!     𝛽!"#    ⋯    𝛽!"& = 1 𝛽!"&"# ⋯ 𝛽!"$%#                                (iii) Skill Execution
                                                                                                                        𝑠"
      𝜏!     𝜏!"#    ⋯    𝜏!"&            𝜏!"&"#   ⋯ 𝜏!"$%#


                          Skill Encoder                         Skill Prior                                       Skill Policy                    Skill Prior
                               𝑞$ (𝑧|𝜏, 𝜷)                       𝑝! (𝑧|𝑠" )                                         𝜋% (𝑧|𝑠" )                     𝑝! (𝑧|𝑠" )



                         Skill Embedding                                                                        Skill Embedding
                                                                                                                                          Regularization
                                                      𝑠"

                          Skill Decoder                                                                         Skill Decoder
                          𝑝# (𝑎" , 𝛽" |𝑧, 𝑠" )             Environment             Environment                  𝑝# (𝑎" , 𝛽" |𝑧, 𝑠" )


                         𝛽/"       𝑎-"                                                                                  𝑎-"      𝛽/"

      𝛽(!    𝛽(!"#   ⋯    𝛽(!"& = 1 𝛽(!"&"# ⋯ 𝛽(!"$%#                                       𝛽(!    𝛽(!"#   ⋯     𝛽(!"& = 1 𝛽(!"&"# ⋯ 𝛽(!"$%#

      𝑎#!    𝑎#!"#   ⋯    𝑎#!"&           𝑎#!"&"# ⋯   𝑎#!"$%#                               𝑎#!    𝑎#!"#   ⋯    𝑎#!"&         𝑎#!"&"# ⋯      𝑎#!"$%#


Figure 5: Our approach, Novelty-based Decision Point Identification (NBDI), has three main proce-
dures: (i) novelty learning: training the state-action novelty model. (ii) skill extraction: learning
the skill prior, skill embedding space and termination distribution with the pre-trained novelty model.
(iii) skill execution: performing reinforcement learning with skills of variable-length to solve an un-
seen task.

or task labels, our model can leverage real-world datasets that can be collected at a lower cost (e.g.,
autonomous driving and drones).

5.1         U NSUPERVISED L EARNING OF VARIABLE - LENGTH S KILLS

In the process of unsupervised learning, our goal is to pre-train the termination distribution, the
skill latent space and the skill prior. We define a skill z ∈ Z as an embedding of state-action pairs
                t+H−1                                          t+H−1
τ = {(si , ai )}i=t     and termination conditions β = {βi }i=t       . The termination conditions β
are Bernoulli random variables that decide when to stop the current skill. Through the classification
of state-action pairs demonstrating significant novelty χ(s, a), β are trained to predict the critical
decision points. The point at which novelty is considered significant varies depending on the en-
vironment. In downstream tasks, the skill being executed will be terminated either when β = 1 is
sampled or when the maximum skill length H is reached.
To learn the skill embedding space Z, we train a latent variable model consisting of a Long
short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) encoder qϕ (z|τ, β) and a decoder
pψ (at , βt |z, st ). To learn model parameters ϕ and ψ, the latent variable model receives a randomly
sampled experience τ from the training dataset D along with a termination condition vector β from
the state-action novelty module, and tries to recoinstruct the corresponding action sequence and its
length (i.e., point of termination) by maximizing the evidence lower bound (ELBO):
       log p(at , βt |st ) ≥ Ez∼qϕ (z|τ,β),τ ∼D [log pψ (at , βt |z, st ) +α (log p(z) − log qϕ (z|τ, β)] (2)
                                                 |        {z           }     |           {z            }
                                                                              Lrec (ϕ,ψ)                                       Lreg (ϕ)

where α is used as the weight of the regularization term (Higgins et al., 2016). The Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence between the unit Gaussian prior p(z) = N (0, I) and the posterior log qϕ (z|τ, β)
makes smoother representation of skills.


                                                                              6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Reinforcement learning with variable-length skills
 1: Inputs: trained skill decoder pψ (a, β|z, s), discount factor γ, target divergence δ, learning rates
    λπ , λQ , λω , target update rate ϵ
 2: Initialize replay buffer D, high-level policy πθ (z|s), critic Qξ (s, z), target network ξ¯ = ξ
 3: for each iteration do
 4:      for each environment step do
 5:          zt ∼ πθ (zt |st )                                                      ▷ sample skill from policy
 6:          for k = 0, 1, ... do
 7:              at+k , βt+k ∼ pψ (at+k , βt+k |zt , st+k )
 8:              st+k+1 ∼ p(st+k+1 |st+k , at+k )                               ▷ execute skill in environment
 9:              if βt+k = 1 then Break
                    Pt+k
10:          r̃t ← i=t γ i−t R(si , ai )                                             ▷ compute k-step reward
11:          D ← D ∪ {st , zt , r̃t , st+k+1 , k}                           ▷ store transition in replay buffer
12:      for each gradient step do
13:          zt+k+1 ∼ πθ (zt+k+1 |st+k+1 )
14:          Q̄ = r̃t +γ k Qξ̄ (st+k+1 , zt+k+1 ) − ωDKL (πθ (zt+k+1 |st+k+1 )∥pη (zt+k+1 |st+k+1 ))
15:          θ ← θ − λπ ∇θ [Q    ξ (st , zt ) − ωDKL (π
                                                        θ (zt |st )∥pη (zt |st ))]
16:          ϕ ← ξ − λQ ∇ξ 12 (Qξ (st , zt ) − Q̄)2
17:          ω ← ω − λω ∇ω [ω · (DKL (πθ (zt |st )∥pη (zt |st )) − δ)]
18:          ξ¯ ← ϵξ + (1 − ϵ)ξ¯
19: return trained policy πθ (zt |st )


To offer effective guidance in selecting skills for the current state, the skill prior pη (z|st ), parame-
terized by η, is trained by minimizing its KL divergence from the predicted posterior qϕ (z|τ, β). In
the context of the option framework, it can also be viewed as the process of obtaining an appropriate
initiation set I for options/skills. This will lead to the minimization of the prior loss:
                             Lprior (η) = Eτ ∼D [DKL (qϕ (z|τ, β)∥pη (z|st ))]                             (3)

The basic architecture for skill extraction and skill prior follows prior works (Pertsch et al., 2021a;
Hakhamaneshi et al., 2021), which have proven to be successful. In summary, termination distribu-
tion, skill embedding space, and skill prior are jointly optimized with the following loss:
                               Ltotal = Lrec (ϕ, ψ) + αLreg (ϕ) + Lprior (η)                               (4)

5.2   R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING WITH VARIABLE - LENGTH S KILLS

In downstream learning, our objective is to learn a skill policy πθ (z|st ) that maximizes the expected
sum of discounted rewards, parameterized by θ. The pre-trained decoder pψ (at , βt |z, st ) decodes a
skill embedding z into a series of actions, which persists until the skill is terminated by the predicted
termination condition βt . The downstream learning can be formulated as a SMDP which is an
extended version of MDP that supports actions of different execution lengths.
Adapted from Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018), we aim to maximize discounted
sum of rewards while minimizing its KL divergence from the pre-trained skill prior on SMDP. The
regularization weighted by ω effectively reduces the size of the skill latent space the agent needs to
explore.                         X

                     J(θ) = Eπ       r̃(st , zt ) − ωDKL π(zt |st ), pη (zt |st )                  (5)
                                     t∈T
where T is set of time steps where we execute skills, i.e., T = {0, k0 , k0 + k1 , k0 + k1 + k2 , . . .}
where ki is the variable skill length of i-th executed skill.
To handle actions of different execution lengths, the following Q-function objective is used:

                                                                          1
             JQ (ξ) = E(st ,zt ,r̃t ,st+k+1 ,k)∼D,zt+k+1 ∼πθ (·|st+k+1 ) (Qξ (st , zt ) − Q̄)2 ,           (6)
                                                                          2
  where Q̄ = r̃t +γ k [Qξ̄ (st+k+1 , zt+k+1 ) − ωDKL (πθ (zt+k+1 |st+k+1 )∥pη (zt+k+1 |st+k+1 ))]


                                                      7
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       NBDI (Ours)                   NBDI- (s)                          NBDI- (a|s)                           SPiRL                SAC
                                      Maze 30x30 Navigation                                                                                Maze 40x40 Navigation
Success Rate     0.3                                                                                     0.3

                 0.2                                                                                     0.2

                 0.1                                                                                     0.1

                 0.0                                                                                     0.0
                       0.00   0.25   0.50   0.75    1.00     1.25    1.50     1.75    2.00                            0.00   0.25     0.50     0.75     1.00     1.25   1.50     1.75   2.00
                                       Sparse Block Stacking                                                                                Kitchen Environment


                                                                                             Completed Subtasks
                 1.5
                                                                                                                  4
Stacked Blocks


                 1.0                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                  2
                 0.5
                                                                                                                  1
                 0.0                                                                                              0
                       0.00   0.25   0.50   0.75     1.00    1.25     1.50    1.75    2.00                            0.00          1.00         2.00            3.00          4.00        5.00
                                       Environment steps (1M)                                                                               Environment steps (1M)


  Figure 6: Performances of our method and baselines in solving downstream tasks. The shaded
  region represents 95% confidence interval across five different seeds.

             Environment                          SAC             SPiRL          NBDI-χ(a|s)                          NBDI-χ(s)            NBDI (Ours)         Improvement over SPiRL(%)
       Maze 30x30 (Success rate)               0.04±0.03        0.13±0.03         0.07±0.01                           0.04±0.01             0.24±0.01                    84.62
       Maze 40x40 (Success rate)               0.01±0.01        0.09±0.02         0.02±0.01                           0.02±0.02             0.25±0.02                   177.78
        Sparse Block Stacking
                                               0.14±0.28        0.67±0.29            0.87±0.19                         0.54±0.34            1.12±0.16                     67.16
           (Stacked Blocks)
         Kitchen Environment
                                                   0.0±0.0          3.0±0.0          3.25±0.41                          3.0±0.0             3.67±0.43                     22.33
        (Completed Subtasks)


  Table 1: Performances of our method and baselines in solving downstream tasks. (final performance
  and 95% confidence interval)


  ω represents the temperature for KL-regularization, k denotes the number of time steps elapsed from
  the start state st to the termination state st+k+1 , and r̃ represents the cumulative discounted reward
  over the k time steps. The detailed RL learning loop is described in Algorithm 1.

  6                    E XPERIMENTS
  We designed the experiments to address the following questions: (i) Does learning variable-length
  skills through critical decision point identification accelerate policy learning in unseen tasks? (ii)
  How does each component of state-action novelty contribute to the identification of critical decision
  points? (iii) Have we successfully identified the decision points that match our intuition? In the
  following experiments, we utilize Intrinsic Curiosity Module (ICM) (Pathak et al., 2017) to calculate
  state-action novelty for both image-based and non-image-based observations (See Appendix B).

  6.1                  E NVIRONMENTS

  A navigation task (mazes sized 30 × 30 and 40 × 40), and two simulated robot manipulation tasks
  (kitchen, sparse block stacking) are used to evaluate the performance of NBDI. A large set of task-
  agnostic agent experiences is collected from each environment to pre-train the termination distri-
  bution, skill embedding space, and skill prior. We evaluate the models based on their ability to
  solve unseen tasks in each specific environment. Further details about the environments and the data
  collection procedure are provided in Appendix G.

  6.2                  R ESULTS

  We use the following models for comparison: Flat RL (SAC): Baseline Soft Actor-Critic (Haarnoja
  et al., 2018) agent that does not leverage prior experience for skill learning. This comparison il-


                                                                                             8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Visitation (SPiRL)       Visitation (NBDI)      End of Skill (SPiRL)     End of Skill (NBDI)
                                                                                                     100


                                                                                                     75


                                                                                                         Percentile
                                                                                                     50


                                                                                                     25


                                                                                                     0

                                           start       target


Figure 7: Visualization of decision points made by SPiRL and NBDI in the maze environment. We
sampled 100 trajectories for each trained policy to observe the points at which they make decisions.
Higher percentile colors suggest a relatively greater number of visitation frequencies and termi-
nation frequencies. Note that the termination frequencies are normalized by the overall visitation
frequencies for better visualization.


lustrates the effectiveness of temporal abstraction. Fixed-length Skill Policy (SPiRL): The agent
that learns a fixed-length skill policy (Pertsch et al., 2021a). This comparison shows the benefit of
learning variable-length skills through state-action novelty. NBDI (Ours): The agent that learns a
variable-length skill policy through state-action novelty χ(s, a). All NBDI agents learn the termina-
tion distribution pψ (β|z, s) from each novelty module to predict skill termination at the current step.
For robot manipulation tasks, we additionally tested NBDI agents with different types of novelty.
State novelty decision point identification (NBDI-χ(s)): The agent that learns a variable-length
skill policy through state novelty. To exclusively assess the influence of the novelty type, we distilled
the state-action novelty module used in NBDI into a separate network, χ(s), which solely depends
on the current state. Conditional action novelty decision point identification (NBDI-χ(a|s)): The
agent that learns a variable-length skill policy through conditional action novelty χ(s,a)
                                                                                      χ(s) , where χ(s)
is the distilled state novelty module used for NBDI-χ(s).
As shown in Figure 6, our key findings are as follows: (i) In both the robot manipulation tasks and
the navigation task, executing variable-length skills through state-action novelty (NBDI-χ(s, a))
speeds up policy learning and facilitates convergence toward a more effective policy. It can be seen
that conditional action novelty (NBDI-χ(a|s)) is also helpful in terminating skills. (ii) In alignment
with our motivation for state-action novelty, conditional action novelty appears to play a crucial
role in identifying critical decision points. While it appears that terminating skills solely based on
state novelty doesn’t lead to much performance enhancement, combining it with conditional action
novelty leads to better exploration and better convergence. Table 1 indicates that NBDI surpasses
SpiRL, even within a challenging robotic simulation environment where there are no clearly defined
subtasks (Sparse block stacking). Figure 7 compares critical decision points made by SPiRL and our
method in the maze environment. This result provides the answer to our third question: (iii) While
the SPiRL agent makes decisions in random states, our model tends to make decisions in crossroad
states or states that are unfamiliar. For instance, in the lower-right area of the maze, SPiRL shows
periodic skill terminations due to its fixed-length of skills, whereas our approach tends to make
decisions in states characterized by high conditional action novelty or state novelty.

7   C ONCLUSION
We present NBDI, an approach for learning variable-length skills by detecting decision points
through a state-action novelty module that leverages offline, task-agnostic datasets. We propose
an efficient method that jointly optimizes the termination distribution, skill embedding space, and
skill prior using a deep latent variable model. Our approach significantly outperforms prior baselines
in solving complex, long-horizon tasks, which highlights the importance of decision point identi-
fication in skill learning. A promising direction for future work is to use novelty-based decision
point identification to learn variable-length skills in offline execution settings (Ajay et al., 2020;
Hakhamaneshi et al., 2021) or in meta-reinforcement learning (Nam et al., 2022).


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Joshua Achiam, Harrison Edwards, Dario Amodei, and Pieter Abbeel. Variational option discovery
  algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.10299, 2018.

Anurag Ajay, Aviral Kumar, Pulkit Agrawal, Sergey Levine, and Ofir Nachum. Opal: Offline prim-
  itive discovery for accelerating offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.13611,
  2020.

Marc Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Remi Munos.
 Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. Advances in neural information pro-
 cessing systems, 29, 2016.

Steven Bradtke and Michael Duff. Reinforcement learning methods for continuous-time markov
  decision problems. Advances in neural information processing systems, 7, 1994.

Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12894, 2018.

Bruce Digney. Learning hierarchical control structures for multiple tasks and changing environ-
  ments. In Proceedings of the fifth conference on the simulation of adaptive behavior: SAB, vol-
  ume 98, pp. 295. Citeseer, 1998.

Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning, 2021.

Sandeep Kumar Goel. Subgoal discovery for hierarchical reinforcement learning using learned
  policies. The University of Texas at Arlington, 2003.

Karol Gregor, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Daan Wierstra. Variational intrinsic control. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.07507, 2016.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.

Kourosh Hakhamaneshi, Ruihan Zhao, Albert Zhan, Pieter Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. Hierarchi-
  cal few-shot imitation with skill transition models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.08981, 2021.

Elad Hazan, Sham Kakade, Karan Singh, and Abby Van Soest. Provably efficient maximum entropy
  exploration. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2681–2691. PMLR, 2019.

Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a
   constrained variational framework. In International conference on learning representations, 2016.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.

Matthias Hutsebaut-Buysse, Kevin Mets, and Steven Latré. Hierarchical reinforcement learning:
 A survey and open research challenges. Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction, 4(1):
 172–221, 2022.

Yiding Jiang, Evan Liu, Benjamin Eysenbach, J Zico Kolter, and Chelsea Finn. Learning options
  via compression. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:21184–21199, 2022.

Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Hierarchical learning in stochastic domains: Preliminary results. In Pro-
  ceedings of the tenth international conference on machine learning, volume 951, pp. 167–173,
  1993.

Tejas D Kulkarni, Ardavan Saeedi, Simanta Gautam, and Samuel J Gershman. Deep successor
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.02396, 2016.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Marlos C Machado, Marc G Bellemare, and Michael Bowling. A laplacian framework for op-
 tion discovery in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 2295–2304. PMLR, 2017a.
Marlos C Machado, Clemens Rosenbaum, Xiaoxiao Guo, Miao Liu, Gerald Tesauro, and Murray
 Campbell. Eigenoption discovery through the deep successor representation. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1710.11089, 2017b.
Augustine Mavor-Parker, Kimberly Young, Caswell Barry, and Lewis Griffin. How to stay curious
  while avoiding noisy tvs using aleatoric uncertainty estimation. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 15220–15240. PMLR, 2022.
Amy McGovern and Andrew G Barto. Automatic discovery of subgoals in reinforcement learning
 using diverse density. 2001.
Ishai Menache, Shie Mannor, and Nahum Shimkin. Q-cut—dynamic discovery of sub-goals in rein-
   forcement learning. In Machine Learning: ECML 2002: 13th European Conference on Machine
   Learning Helsinki, Finland, August 19–23, 2002 Proceedings 13, pp. 295–306. Springer, 2002.
Taewook Nam, Shao-Hua Sun, Karl Pertsch, Sung Ju Hwang, and Joseph J Lim. Skill-based meta-
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.11828, 2022.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2778–2787.
  PMLR, 2017.
Deepak Pathak, Dhiraj Gandhi, and Abhinav Gupta. Self-supervised exploration via disagreement.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 5062–5071. PMLR, 2019.
Karl Pertsch, Youngwoon Lee, and Joseph Lim. Accelerating reinforcement learning with learned
  skill priors. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 188–204. PMLR, 2021a.
Karl Pertsch, Youngwoon Lee, Yue Wu, and Joseph J Lim. Guided reinforcement learning with
  learned skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.10253, 2021b.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
  Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8583–8592. PMLR, 2020.
Younggyo Seo, Lili Chen, Jinwoo Shin, Honglak Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Kimin Lee. State entropy
  maximization with random encoders for efficient exploration. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 9443–9454. PMLR, 2021.
Özgür Şimşek and Andrew G Barto. Using relative novelty to identify useful temporal abstractions
   in reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the twenty-first international conference on Machine
   learning, pp. 95, 2004.
Özgür Simsek, Alicia P. Wolfe, and Andrew G. Barto. Identifying useful subgoals in reinforcement
   learning by local graph partitioning. In Luc De Raedt and Stefan Wrobel (eds.), Machine Learn-
   ing, Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Conference (ICML 2005), Bonn, Germany,
   August 7-11, 2005, volume 119 of ACM International Conference Proceeding Series, pp. 816–
   823. ACM, 2005. doi: 10.1145/1102351.1102454. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
   1102351.1102454.
Özgür Şimşek, Alicia P Wolfe, and Andrew G Barto. Identifying useful subgoals in reinforcement
   learning by local graph partitioning. In Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on
   Machine learning, pp. 816–823, 2005.
Avi Singh, Huihan Liu, Gaoyue Zhou, Albert Yu, Nicholas Rhinehart, and Sergey Levine. Parrot:
  Data-driven behavioral priors for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.10024, 2020.
Aravind Srinivas, Ramnandan Krishnamurthy, Peeyush Kumar, and Balaraman Ravindran. Option
  discovery in hierarchical reinforcement learning using spatio-temporal clustering. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1605.05359, 2016.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Richard S Sutton. Between mdps and semi-mdps: Learning, planning, and representing knowledge
  at multiple temporal scales. 1998.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
  In 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pp. 5026–5033.
  IEEE, 2012.
Mengjiao Yang, Sergey Levine, and Ofir Nachum. Trail: Near-optimal imitation learning with
 suboptimal data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14770, 2021.


                                             12
       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       A                    A BLATION
       A.1                      A BLATION IN VARIABLE - LENGTH S KILLS

       Figure 9 (left) compares the performance of our model (NBDI-
       th0.3) in the kitchen environment with different state-action novelty
       threshold values. We can see that there is no significant improve-
       ment in performance compared to SPiRL when the threshold value
       is not appropriately chosen. For example, as illustrated in Figure
       8, termination distributions learned with low threshold values can
       disturb the policy learning by terminating skills in states that lack
       significance. It illustrates that threshold value needs to be appropri-
       ately chosen to capture meaningful decision points.
                                                                                                                                                              Figure 8: A bad example of
       A.2                      A BLATION IN N O T ERMINATION D ISTRIBUTION                                                                                   decision points in the maze
                                                                                                                                                              environment.
       Figure 9 (middle) shows the performance drop when we do not
       learn the termination distribution in advance. NBDI-NoTermDistr directly uses the state-action
       novelty module in the downstream learning phase to terminate skills. The performance gap indi-
       cates that the skill embedding space needs to be learned with terminated skills to effectively guide
       the agent in choosing variable-length skills. Thus, it is necessary to jointly optimize the termination
       distribution, skill embedding space, and skill prior using the deep latent variable model.

       A.3                      A BLATION IN C RITERIA TO D ETERMINE D ECISION P OINTS

       Figure 9 (right) shows the performance difference when we use cumulative sum of state-action
       novelties to learn decision points. NBDI-CumulativeSum terminates skills once the cumulative sum
       of state-action novelty reaches or surpasses a predefined threshold. This comparison implies that
       accumulating novelties does not lead to the identification of significant termination points.
                                  Kitchen Environment                                                        Kitchen Environment                             0.3
                                                                                                                                                                         Maze 40x40 Navigation
                     4                                                                           4
Completed Subtasks


                                                                            Completed Subtasks


                                                                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                                                                              Success Rate


                     3                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                  NBDI
                     2                                                                           2                                                                                NBDI-CumulativeSum
                                                                                                                                                             0.1
                     1                                      NBDI-th0.3                           1
                                                            NBDI-th0.1                                                     NBDI                              0.0
                     0                                      NBDI-th0.5                                                     NBDI-NoTermDistr
                                                                                                 0
                         0.00   1.00   2.00   3.00   4.00     5.00   6.00                            0.00    1.00   2.00       3.00    4.00                        0.0     0.5     1.0    1.5     2.0
                                 Environment steps (1M)                                                     Environment steps (1M)                                       Environment steps (1M)


       Figure 9: Ablation in variable-length skills (left), no termination distribution (middle), and criteria
       to determine decision points (right). The shaded region represents 95% confidence interval across
       five different seeds.


                                                                                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    U SING I NTRINSIC C URIOSITY M ODULE TO ESTIMATE STATE - ACTION
     NOVELTY

We use Intrinsic Curiosity Module (ICM) to calculate state-action novelty for both image-based
and non-image-based observation environments. While ICM is typically recognized for providing
intrinsic motivation signals to drive exploration in online RL, we found it to be an efficient state-
action novelty estimator when it is pre-trained with offline trajectory datasets. Since ICM takes in
state-action pair to predict next state representation, it would have high prediction error for sparse
state-action pairs in the offline dataset.
Figure 10 illustrates the prediction error of state-action pairs from 25 randomly selected trajectories
within the offline trajectory dataset used for training ICM. We visualized the states of the state-
action pairs with high prediction error ((A), (B), (C)) and low prediction error ((D), (E), (F)) on
the right. It can be seen that high prediction error can be typically seen in states where we have
multitude of plausible actions ((A), (C)) or rare state configuration (B). Note these characteristics
correspond to the conditional action novelty and state novelty as illustrated in Figure 4, and leads to
a high state-action novelty as in Equation 1. On the other hand, low prediction error can be seen in
states where we do not have any of these properties ((D), (E), (F)). Since a stack of two consecutive
images is used as state for training ICM and NBDI, it is easy for ICM to get the next state prediction
correct in these states. Figure 11 shows prediction error of state-action pairs in sparse block stacking
environment, which is a more complex robotic simulation environment that has no clearly defined
subtasks. In this environment, the agent needs to stack blocks on top of each other. We can see
that high prediction error occurs in states where the agent has multitude of plausible actions ((A),
(B), (C)). When the robotic arm is positioned above a block, it must choose between descending
to lift that block or moving towards other blocks. Likewise, when the robotic arm is holding a
block, it needs to determine which block to stack it onto. This characteristic also corresponds to
the conditional action novelty as depicted in Figure 4, and results in a high state-action novelty as
in Equation 1. Similar to the maze environment, low prediction error occurs in states where we
do not have multitude of plausible actions, or rare configuration ((D), (E), (F)). Thus, our findings
validate that ICM can serve as an efficient state-action novelty estimator when pre-trained with
offline trajectory datasets.


Figure 10: Visualization of prediction error of ICM in maze environment. Note the same offline data
that is used to train ICM was used to compute this prediction error. (A), (B) and (C) are the state-
action pairs with the highest prediction error, while (D), (E) and (F) are the ones with the lowest.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: Visualization of prediction error of ICM in sparse block stacking environment. Note the
same offline data that is used to train ICM was used to compute this prediction error. (A), (B) and
(C) are the state-action pairs with the highest prediction error, while (D), (E) and (F) are the ones
with the lowest.


C    C RITICAL DECISION POINTS WITH S UBOPTIMAL DATA
We investigate how the quality of offline data affects the performance of our approach. We trained
a behavior cloning (BC) policy on expert-level trajectories to generate mediocre quality demon-
strations. We additionally added weighted Gaussian random noise to actions of BC policy to add
stochasticity to the generated dataset. Table 2 shows that even in a less challenging goal setting
compared to Figure 7, SPiRL fails to reach the goal, while NBDI achieves a success rate of 28% and
22%. Figure 12 shows that SPiRL can only navigate around the initial state using fixed-length skills
extracted from the suboptimal dataset, whereas NBDI can successfully reach the goal by employing
variable-length skills. Figure 13 (top, middle) shows that with suboptimal dataset, NBDI is still
able to learn termination points characterized by high conditional action novelty or state novelty.
However, with dataset generated by random walk (Figure 13 (bottom)), it becomes challenging to
learn meaningful decision points. As the policy generating the trajectory becomes more stochas-
tic, it gathers data primarily around the initial state, leading to an overall reduction in the scale of
prediction errors. Thus, we can see that the level of stochasticity influences critical decision point
detection.

                                Dataset quality           NBDI     SPiRL
                            Stochastic BC (σ = 0.5)       28%       0%
                            Stochastic BC (σ = 0.75)      22%       0%

Table 2: Success rate of NBDI and SPiRL with offline trajectories generated by mediocre-level
policy with weighted Gaussian random noise in maze environment


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Visitation (SPiRL)     Visitation (NBDI)      End of Skill (SPiRL)   End of Skill (NBDI)
                                                                                                100


                                                                                                75


                                                                                                    Percentile
                                                                                                50


                                                                                                25


                                                                                                0

                                          start     target
     Visitation (SPiRL)     Visitation (NBDI)      End of Skill (SPiRL)   End of Skill (NBDI)
                                                                                                100


                                                                                                75


                                                                                                    Percentile
                                                                                                50


                                                                                                25


                                                                                                0

                                          start        target


Figure 12: Visualization of visitations and decision points made by SPiRL and NBDI in the maze
environment (top: trained with stochastic BC (σ = 0.5) dataset, bottom: trained with stochastic
BC (σ = 0.75) dataset). We sampled 100 trajectories for each trained policy to observe the points at
which they make decisions. Higher percentile colors suggest a relatively greater number of visitation
frequencies and termination frequencies. Note that the termination frequencies are normalized by
the overall visitation frequencies for better visualization.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 13: Visualization of prediction error of ICM in maze environment (top: trained with stochas-
tic BC (σ = 0.5) dataset, middle: trained with stochastic BC (σ = 0.75) dataset, bottom: trained
with random walk dataset). Note the same offline data that is used to train ICM was used to compute
this prediction error. (A), (B) and (C) are the state-action pairs with the highest prediction error,
while (D), (E) and (F) are the ones with the lowest.


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D       C RITICAL DECISION POINTS IN COMPLEX PHYSICS SIMULATION TASKS
We further investigate whether meaningful decision points can be found in complex physics sim-
ulation tasks. We trained ICM using different offline datasets provided by D4RL (Fu et al., 2021)
(halfcheetah-medium-expert, halfcheetah-medium-replay, ant-medium-expert, ant-medium-replay)
to assess its ability to detect critical decision points. Figure 14 illustrates the presence of critical
decision points in complex physics simulation tasks. For instance, the cheetah has the option of
spreading its hind legs or lowering them to the ground, and the ant has the choice of flipping to the
right or lowering themselves to the ground. However in completely random datasets (halfcheetah-
random, ant-random), we were not able to find any meaningful decision points. Similar to Appendix
C, it shows that the degree of stochasticity present in the offline dataset can influence critical decision
point detection.

                                𝝌 𝒔𝒌+𝟏 , 𝒂𝒌+𝟏 ≈ 𝟏. 𝟓𝟐                                    𝝌 𝒔𝒌+𝟏 , 𝒂𝒌+𝟏 ≈ 𝟑. 𝟔𝟔

    𝝌 𝒔𝟎 , 𝒂𝟎 ≈ 𝟐. 𝟖𝟎     𝝌 𝒔𝒌 , 𝒂𝒌 ≈ 𝟑𝟗. 𝟒𝟑                 𝝌 𝒔𝟎 , 𝒂𝟎 ≈ 𝟓. 𝟐𝟒     𝝌 𝒔𝒌 , 𝒂𝒌 ≈ 𝟏𝟖. 𝟑𝟓
    Halfcheetah-medium-expert                                Flip the Light Switch
                                                             Halfcheetah-medium-replay


                                𝝌 𝒔𝒌+𝟏 , 𝒂𝒌+𝟏 ≈ 𝟒. 𝟏𝟒                                    𝝌 𝒔𝒌+𝟏 , 𝒂𝒌+𝟏 ≈ 𝟒. 𝟕𝟐


                                𝝌 𝒔𝒌+𝟏 , 𝒂𝒌+𝟏 ≈ 𝟗. 𝟗𝟎                                    𝝌 𝒔𝒌+𝟏 , 𝒂𝒌+𝟏 ≈ 𝟒. 𝟔𝟐

    𝝌 𝒔𝟎 , 𝒂𝟎 ≈ 𝟏. 𝟎𝟎     𝝌 𝒔𝒌 , 𝒂𝒌 ≈ 𝟔𝟓. 𝟏𝟐                 𝝌 𝒔𝟎 , 𝒂𝟎 ≈ 𝟏𝟖. 𝟔𝟒    𝝌 𝒔𝒌 , 𝒂𝒌 ≈ 𝟗𝟓. 𝟐𝟐
    Ant-medium-expert                                        Ant-medium-replay


                                𝝌 𝒔𝒌+𝟏 , 𝒂𝒌+𝟏 ≈ 𝟒. 𝟏𝟒                                𝝌 𝒔𝒌+𝟏 , 𝒂𝒌+𝟏 ≈ 𝟏𝟎. 𝟑𝟖


Figure 14: Visualization of critical decision points in MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012) environment
(top-left: halfcheetah-medium-expert, top-right: halfcheetah-medium-replay, bottom-left: ant-
medium-expert, bottom-right: ant-medium-replay)


                                                        18
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  E                                  M ODEL CAPACITY AND CRITICAL DECISION POINT DETECTION
  To assess how the model capacity and dataset utilization influence critical point detection, we varied
  the width and depth of the neural network across different settings. Figure 15 (left) shows that the
  estimated state-action novelty is not affected by the number of parameters used to train the model.
  Figure 15 (right) demonstrates that the scale of the estimated state-action novelty remains consistent
  even as the dataset size decreases. We can see that our proposed approach for detecting critical
  decision points is robust to various number of parameters or size of datasets.

                                     15.0                                                        15.0
mean value of state-action novelty


                                                                                      width
                                     12.5                                             depth      12.5
                                     10.0                                                        10.0
       for 25 trajectories


                                      7.5                                                         7.5
                                      5.0                                                         5.0
                                      2.5                                                         2.5
                                      0.0                                                         0.0
                                      2.5                                                         2.5
                                      5.0                                                         5.0
                                            30.0 32.5 35.0 37.5 40.0 42.5 45.0 47.5 50.0                    0.2     0.4         0.6        0.8       1.0
                                                      Nubmer of Parameters (K)                                       Dataset Usage


  Figure 15: Illustration of the impact of varying the number of parameters and dataset usage on state-
  action novelty estimation. The error bar represents the standard deviation of state-action novelty
  across 25 trajectories.


  F                                  C OMPARISON TO DIFFERENT VARIABLE LENGTH ALGORITHM
  We compared the performance of NBDI and LOVE (Learning Options Via Compression) (Jiang
  et al., 2022) in the maze environment. LOVE extracts variable-length skills from the offline expe-
  rience dataset with an objective that integrates the maximum likelihood objective while imposing a
  penalty on the length of skill descriptions.
  Figure 16 shows that LOVE encounters difficulties in learning useful variable-length skills in com-
  plex maze environment. Since LOVE relies on consistent structures within the dataset to effectively
  learn variable-length skills (Jiang et al., 2022), it faces challenges in learning variable-length skill in
  complex environments.

                                     Visitation (LOVE)          Visitation (NBDI)             End of Skill (LOVE)         End of Skill (NBDI)
                                                                                                                                                 100


                                                                                                                                                 75
                                                                                                                                                     Percentile


                                                                                                                                                 50


                                                                                                                                                 25


                                                                                                                                                 0

                                                                              start            target


  Figure 16: Visualization of visitations and decision points made by LOVE and NBDI in the maze
  environment. We sampled 50 trajectories for each trained policy to observe the points at which they
  make decisions. Higher percentile colors suggest a relatively greater number of visitation frequen-
  cies and termination frequencies.


                                                                                         19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    DATA AND E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS

We evaluate NBDI on three environments: one simulated navigation task (maze navigation) and two
simulated robotic manipulation tasks (kitchen and sparse block stacking). We employ the environ-
ment configuration and dataset provided by Pertsch et al. (2021a). Note that task and environment
setup differ between the training data and the downstream task, demonstrating the model’s capacity
to handle unseen downstream tasks.

Kitchen Environment The kitchen environment is provided by the D4RL benchmark (Fu et al.,
2021), featuring seven manipulable objects. The training trajectories consist of sequences of object
manipulations. The downstream task of the agent involves performing an unseen sequence of four
object manipulations.
The agent is tested by its ability to reassemble the skills learned from the training dataset to solve
the downstream task.

       • State space: 30-dimensional vector of the agent’s joint velocities and the positions of the
         manipulatable objects
       • Action space: 7-dimensional set for controlling robot joint velocities and a 2-dimensional
         set for gripper opening/closing degree
       • Reward: one-time reward upon successfully completing any of the subtasks

Maze Navigation The maze navigation environment is derived from the D4RL benchmark (Fu
et al., 2021). During the collection of training data, a maze is generated randomly, and both the
starting and goal positions are selected at random as well. The agent successfully reaches its goal in
all of the collected trajectories.
In the downstream task, the maze layout is four times bigger than the one employed during training.

       • State space: (x, y)-velocities and an image of local top-down view centered around the
         agent
       • Action space: (x, y)-directions
       • Reward: binary reward when the agent’s position is close to the goal (computed using
         Euclidean distance)

Sparse Block Stacking The sparse block stacking environment is created using the Mujoco
physics engine. To gather training data, a hand-coded data collection policy interacts with a smaller
environment with five blocks to stack as many blocks as possible.
In the downstream task, the agent’s objective is to stack as many blocks as possible in a larger
version of the environment with eleven blocks.

       • State space: (x, z)-displacements for the robot
       • Action space: 10-dimensional continuous symmetric gripper movements
       • Reward: only rewarded for the height of the highest stacked blocks

Differences to Pertsch et al. (2021a). While Pertsch et al. (2021a) employed a block stacking
environment with dense rewards (the agent is rewarded based on the height of the stacked tower and
for actions like picking up or lifting blocks), we evaluated our model and the baselines in a sparse
block stacking environment, leading to different performance outcomes. In this setting, the agent is
rewarded solely for the height of the tower it constructs, which increases the task complexity. Fur-
thermore, there have been consistent reports indicating that performance in large maze environments
displays a high level of sensitivity to random seeds, primarily due to the high stochasticity of the
task. For the five different seeds that we used to compare the algorithms, we found the performance
to be generally lower than what was previously reported, mainly due to the sensitivity to seeds.


                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
H.1   T ERMINATION I MPROVEMENT AND N OVELTY

We present termination improvement and conditional action novelty in a simple 8 × 8 grid maze
domain. As we mentioned in Appendix G, training data for the state-action novelty module is
collected with diverse tasks. Thus, we set up the environment as follows: We randomly select
one starting location and three goal locations to generate three trajectories for each goal location.
The goal-reaching data collection policy randomly executes a discrete action, moving towards four
different directions (left, right, forward, backward) while avoiding moving toward walls. The agent
receives a binary reward when reaching the goal state.
We define an option o = ⟨I, π, β⟩ where a deterministic policy π follows the given trajectory, an ini-
tiation set I ⊆ S defines all states that the policy visits, and a termination condition β defines states
where the option terminates (every option has a length of three). Each set of options, denoted as Og
for each goal g = 1, 2, 3, contains distinguishable options for each goal location. The frequencies
of termination improvement occurrences in each state for each goal setting have been aggregated to
generate Figure 4.
Using the trajectories collected from different goals, state novelty and conditional action novelty are
simply computed as N1(s) and NN(s,a)(s)
                                        respectively. N (s) represents the number of times a discrete
state s has been visited and N (s, a) represents the number of times a discrete state-action pair has
been used.

H.2   S TATE -ACTION N OVELTY M ODULE

We use Intrinsic Curiosity Module (ICM) to calculate state-action novelty for both image-based
and non-image-based observations. The feature encoder ϕ, responsible for encoding a state st into
its corresponding features ϕ(st ), is implemented differently for each environment. In the kitchen
environment, it consists of a single fully-connected layer with a hidden dimension of 120. The both
maze and sparse block stacking environments have three convolution layers with (4, 4) kernel sizes
and (8, 16, 32) channels.
The forward dynamic model f takes at and ϕ(st ) as inputs to predict the feature encoding of the
state at time step t + 1. In the kitchen environment, the structure of the dynamic model is the same
as its feature encoder. In the maze and sparse block stacking environment, a single fully-connected
layer with hidden dimension 52 and 70 have been used, respectively.
The state-action novelty χ(s, a) is computed as the squared L2 distance between ϕ̂(ϕ(st ), at ) and
ϕ(st+1 ), representing the prediction error in the feature space. We employed the Adam optimizer
with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999 and a learning rate of 1e−3 to train the ICM. We found that state-actions
within the top 1% prediction error percentile serve well as a critical decision points, and used the
corresponding threshold to learn the termination distribution.


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H.3   H YPERPARAMETERS

 Hyperaparameter                          Value
 State-Action Novelty Module
 Batch size                               150
 Optimizer                                Adam(β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, lr = 1e − 3)
 Kitchen
   Feature encoder
      hidden dim                          120
   Forward dynamic model
      hidden dim                          120
 Maze
   Feature encoder
      kernel size                         (4, 4)
      channels                            8, 16, 32
   Forward dynamic model
      hidden dim                          52
 Sparse Block Stacking
   Feature encoder
      kernel size                         (4, 4)
      channels                            8, 16, 32
   Forward dynamic model
      hidden dim                          70
 Skill Prior Learning
 Batch size                               16
 Optimizer                                RAdam(β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, lr = 1e − 3)
 Regularization weight α                  1.0
 Skill Encoder
   dim-Z in VAE                           32
   hidden dim                             128
   # LSTM Layers                          1
 Skill Prior (Kitchen)
   hidden dim                             128
   # FC Layers                            6
 Skill Prior (Maze, Block Stacking)
   kernel size                            (4, 4)
   channels                               8, 16, 32
   # Convolution Layers                   3
 Skill Decoder
   hidden dim                             128
   # hidden layers                        6
 Downstream Reinforcement Learning
 Batch size                               256
 Optimizer                                Adam(β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, lr = 3e − 4)
 Replay buffer size                       1e6
                                               1
 Discount factor γ                        0.99 10
 Target network update rate ϵ             5e − 3
 Target divergence δ                      5 (Kitchen), 1 (Maze, Sparse Block Stacking),
 Variable Length Skill
 Threshold of novelty                     0.3 (Kitchen), 50 (Maze), 40 (Sparse Block Stacking)
 Maximum skill length H                   30

                              Table 3: Training Hyperparameters


                                               22
