Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T INY S TORIES : H OW S MALL C AN L ANGUAGE M ODELS
B E AND S TILL S PEAK C OHERENT E NGLISH ?

                                       Anonymous authors
                                 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         In this work, we introduce TinyStories, a synthetic dataset of short stories that
         only contain words that a typical 3 to 4-year-olds usually understand, generated
         by GPT-3.5 and GPT-4. We show that TinyStories can be used to train and
         evaluate LMs that are much smaller than the state-of-the-art models (below 10
         million total parameters), or have much simpler architectures (with only one
         transformer block), yet still produce fluent and consistent stories with several
         paragraphs that are diverse and have almost perfect grammar, and demonstrate
         reasoning capabilities.
         We also introduce a new paradigm for the evaluation of language models: We
         suggest a framework which uses GPT-4 to grade the content generated by these
         models as if those were stories written by students and graded by a (human) teacher.
         This overcomes the flaws of standard benchmarks which often require the model’s
         output to be very structured, and moreover provides a multidimensional score for
         the model, providing scores for different types of capabilities such as grammar,
         creativity and instruction-following.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Natural language is rich and diverse, requiring not only grammatical and lexical knowledge, but
also factual information and contextual reasoning. How well can language models (LMs) (4; 5; 18)
generate coherent and fluent text, and what are the minimal requirements for this ability? So far, the
evidence suggests that small language models (SLMs) with around 125M parameters (3; 20) or less
struggle to produce any consistent text beyond a few words, even after extensive training on large and
diverse corpora. This raises the question of whether the emergence of the ability to generate coherent
English text requires large models and complex architectures, or whether this difficulty is a result of
the immense diversity and the amount of details contained in the language corpora that these models
are trained on (11; 27; 1). This leads to the question: Is it possible to design a dataset that preserves
the essence of natural language, while reducing its breadth and diversity?
In this paper, we introduce TinyStories, a synthetic dataset of short stories that only contain words
that a typical 3 to 4-year-olds usually understand, generated by GPT-3.5 and GPT-4. TinyStories is
designed to capture the core elements of natural language, such as grammar, vocabulary, facts, and
reasoning, while spanning the knowledge base of a 3-4 year old child (7; 17). Based on this dataset,
our paper makes several main contributions:

       • We show that TinyStories can be used to train and evaluate SLMs that are much smaller
         than the state-of-the-art models (below 10 million parameters), or have much simpler
         architectures (with only one transformer block), yet still produce a diverse set of fluent
         and consistent stories that are comparable or superior to those generated by larger and
         more complex models. Moreover, we show that these models exhibit emergent reasoning
         capabilities, knowledge of general facts and ability to follow certain instructions.
       • We introduce a new paradigm for evaluating language models using GPT-4, which overcomes
         many of the limitations of standard benchmarks.
       • We demonstrate that despite that fact that training generative models on TinyStories can be
         done in less than a day on a single GPU, they still exhibits similar behaviors to those observed


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           in large language models (LLMs), such as scaling laws, trade-offs between width and depth,
           etc. We conduct extensive experiments to study the effects of different hyperparameters and
           architectures on the performance and quality of the models.
        • We show that the trained SLMs are substantially more interpretable than larger ones. We
          visualize and analyze the attention and activation maps of the models, and show how they
          relate to the generation process and the story content. Due to space limit, this can be found
          in Appendix E.

To give the reader a first impression of the abilities of models, trained on TinyStories, a comparison
between completion of a 28M parameter model trained on TinyStories1 with that of GPT2-XL,
which is two orders of magnitude bigger (1.5B parameters), on sample prompt2 , is given in Figure
1. Arguably, the completion provided by our 28M-parameter model is of higher quality than the
one provided by GPT2-XL. We remark that the architectures and training scheme of the models are
essentially the same.

  Prompt                       Tom and Jane are friends. One day, Jane goes to Tom’s house. Tom has a big pot of soup. He wants to share
                               it with Jane. “Jane, do you want some soup?” Tom asks. “Yes, please. It looks yummy,” Jane says. Tom
                               pours some soup into two bowls. He gives one bowl to Jane. Jane takes a spoonful of soup, but then she
                               makes a face. The soup is
  Completion by GPT2-XL        too old. Tom scowls.
  (1.5B parameters) com-       “Don’t be that way! Your soup has to be fresh like your daughter,” Tom says, angry and disappointed. “Bring
  pletion                      me some more,” Jane cries. “No! Go away, I like my soup old and fresh!”
  Completion by a 28M-         very bitter. She does not like it. She says, “I don’t like this soup. It is too bitter.”
  parameters model trained     Tom is sorry. He says, “I’m sorry, Jane. I didn’t know you don’t like bitter soup. I will make you something
  on TinyStories               else.” He looks around the kitchen and finds some bread and cheese. He puts them on the table and says,
                               “Here, Jane. You can have some bread and cheese. They are not bitter. They are sweet and yummy.”
                               Jane is happy. She says, “Thank you, Tom. You are a good friend. I like bread and cheese. They are not
                               bitter.”


Figure 1: Comparison between the completions given by a 28M-parameters model trained on the
TinyStories dataset and GPT-2XL (1.5B)

As pointed out above, a necessary condition for the ability to produce coherent text is a certain
extent of factual knowledge and reasoning ability. Consider the completions highlighted in Figure
2. Those completions, along with other examples given below, demonstrate that even very small
models (2.5M) or models with only one transformer layer are able to attain factual knowledge, and
that slightly bigger models are able to express a certain extent of reasoning. The comparison with the
performance of GPT2-XL reveals that the TinyStories dataset allows us to exhibit the emergence
of these capabilities at significantly smaller scales compared to models trained on large language
corpora. More evidence for this will be provided throughout the rest of the paper.

     Prompt                             2.5M, 8 layers          33M, 4 layers            21M, 1 layer             GPT2-XL (1.5B)
     Alice was so tired when she got    to bed.                 straight to bed.         to bed with a big        outside
     back home so she went                                                               smile on her face.
     Lily likes cats and dogs. She      her mom if she could    her dad for a cat.       her mom again.           her dad.       They
     asked her mom for a dog and        have a dog.                                                               brought    her    a
     her mom said no, so instead she                                                                              Chihuahua,      and
     asked                                                                                                        she took to them
                                                                                                                  immediately.
     Alice and Jack walked up the       Alice smiled and        Alice said, "I’m Al-     Jack smiled and said,    Jane said, "Jack and
     street and met a girl in a red     said, "My name is       ice and this is Jack."   "I’m Jane. Nice to       Kate"
     dress. The girl said to them,      Daisy. What’s your                               meet you!"
     "Hi, I’m Jane. What are your       name?"
     names?"


Figure 2: Example performance of different models on factual knowledge, reasoning and contextual
prompts. The first three models were trained on the TinyStories dataset.

   1
     For the sake of replicability, most completions which appear in this paper, including this one, were generated
with zero temperature.
   2
     This prompt was composed manually and then verified to have no 6-gram overlap with the dataset.


                                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     D ESCRIPTION OF THE T INY S TORIES DATASET
As mentioned above, the idea behind the TinyStories dataset is to have a corpus that combines all
the qualitative elements found in natural language, such as grammar, vocabulary, facts, and reasoning,
but is also smaller, less diverse, and more restricted in terms of its content. A natural approach to
achieve this is to use the fact that young children qualitatively attain the aforementioned intellectual
abilities, albeit with much less exposure to language than an adult human (7; 17).
To this end, we rely on the latest text generation models by OpenAI (GPT-3.5 and GPT-4) which
are able to produce large amounts of synthetic content according to instructions. In particular, we
instruct the models to produce content that only uses vocabulary that a typical 3-year-old child would
understand. We restrict the content to have the format of short stories in English. The main challenge
in using large language models for producing training data is generating a dataset that is sufficiently
diverse: prompting those models to produce such stories, even if the temperature of generation is set
to a high value, will still produce a very repetitive dataset, whose diversity is very far from what is
required for training a language model that has a comparable "understanding" of language to that of
children.
In order to address the problem of creating a diverse dataset, we collected a vocabulary consisting of
about 1500 basic words, which try to mimic the vocabulary of a typical 3-4 year-old child, separated
into nouns, verbs, and adjectives. In each generation, 3 words are chosen randomly (one verb, one
noun, and one adjective). The model is instructed to generate a story that somehow combines these
random words into the story. As we argue below, this greatly increases the diversity of the dataset,
forcing the stories to span the entire vocabulary a child is familiar with, and to include a rich set of
ways to combine different concepts. In addition, we constructed a list of possible features a story
could have (such as a dialogue, a plot twist, a bad ending or a moral value). For each story we
generated a random subset of those features and added a corresponding requirement in the prompt.
Here is a sample generation, including the prompt and the story generated by GPT-3.5.
         Write a short story (3-5 paragraphs) which only uses very simple words that a 3 year old child would likely
         understand. The story should use the verb "decorate", the noun "thunder" and the adjective "ancient". The
         story should have the following features: the story should contain at least one dialogue, the story has a bad
         ending. Remember to only use simple words!
         Once upon a time, in an ancient house, there lived a girl named Lily. She loved to decorate her room with pretty things.
         One day, she found a big box in the attic. She opened it and saw many shiny decorations. Lily was very happy and
         decided to use them in her room.
         As Lily was decorating her room, the sky outside became dark. There was a loud thunder sound, and Lily got scared.
         She ran to her mom and said, "Mommy, the thunder is so loud!" Her mom hugged her and said, "Don’t worry, it will
         pass soon."
         But the thunder did not stop. It got louder and louder, and the ancient house started to shake. Suddenly, the roof fell
         down on the pretty decorations. Lily was sad because her room was not pretty anymore. The end.


2.1   T INY S TORIES -I NSTRUCT : A N INSTRUCTION - FOLLOWING VARIANT OF THE DATASET

Another challenge of natural language generation is to produce texts that are coherent, relevant,
and consistent with given instructions or constraints. To evaluate the capability of generative
models in terms of instruction-following rather than just content creation, we created a variant of
TinyStories (referred to as TinyStories-Instruct).
TinyStories-Instruct uses the same stories as the original dataset, but each story is accompanied
by a set of instructions, which can include any combination of the following: (i) a summary of
the story, (ii) a list of words to be used in the story, (iii) a sentence to be inserted in the story,
and (iv) a list of features (such as plot twist, bad ending, etc). We provide more details on how
we constructed this dataset and the instructions in the appendix. Figure 3 shows an example of a
TinyStories-Instruct entry.

3     GPT-E VAL : A FRAMEWORK FOR EVALUATING MODELS TRAINED ON
      T INY S TORIES
Instead of using standard benchmarks that require the model’s output to be very structured and match
a given answer, we introduce a new paradigm that is more suitable for evaluating stories. We use
GPT-4 to grade the stories generated by the model as if they were written by students and graded by a


                                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Summary: Lily and Timmy build a sandcastle together and learn to compromise, but it gets knocked over by a gust of wind. They find beauty in
the broken sandcastle and play happily with a butterfly.
Features: Dialogue, Foreshadowing, Twist
Sentence: One day, she went to the park and saw a beautiful butterfly.
Words: disagree, network, beautiful
Story: Once upon a time, there was a little girl named Lily. She loved to play with her toys and her friends. One day, she went to the park and
saw a beautiful butterfly. She tried to catch it, but it flew away. Lily’s friend, Timmy, came to play with her. They decided to build a sandcastle,
but they disagreed on how to build it. Lily wanted to make it tall, while Timmy wanted to make it wide. They argued for a while, but finally
agreed to make it both tall and wide. As they were building the sandcastle, they noticed a group of ants working together. They realized that the
ants were building a network of tunnels. Suddenly, a gust of wind came and knocked over their sandcastle. They were sad, but then they saw the
butterfly again. It landed on the remains of their sandcastle and they realized that it was still beautiful, even in its broken state. They smiled and
played together happily.

                          Figure 3: A sample entry from the TinyStories-Instruct dataset


teacher. We provide the model with a story’s beginning, taken from a manually-prepared dataset of
around 50 prompts, generate a completion using the model, and ask GPT-4 to assess the completion
in terms of grammar, creativity, and consistency with the beginning of the story. The prompts usually
contain a partial sentence that needs to be completed, which tests the model’s grammatical and lexical
abilities. GPT-4 also assigns numerical scores for grammar, creativity, and the consistency of the
completion with the beginning of the story (the prompt).
To perform the full evaluation, for each prompt in the evaluation set, we use the trained model to
generate 10 completions with temperature 1. We average the GPT-4 evaluation scores of all the
completions. Figure 4 shows the evolution of the scores and the losses during training for different
model sizes. Figure 5 shows the scores for different model sizes and architectures after a fixed number
of training steps.
Our evaluation method for models trained on TinyStories-Instruct also relies on GPT-4. We provide
GPT-4 with both the instructions and the generated story, and prompt it to base the consistency score
on the extent to which the story accurately reflects the instructions. Scores assigned to models of
different sizes appear in the two right-hand columns of the table in Figure 5.


Figure 4: Evaluation loss and the GPT-Eval scores during training for the GPT-neo models with
embedding dimension 768 and different number of layers. We can see that the GPT-4 evaluation
scores increase as evaluation losses decrease.

3.1      F IRST INSIGHTS THAT ARISE FROM OUR EVALUATION METHOD

Our evaluation method allows a fine-grained assessment of the model’s capabilities and their depen-
dence on the size and architecture of the model. We observe the following patterns:
          • Model depth is more important for content consistency than for grammar, which can be
            mastered by shallower models (Figure 4 and next section).
          • Grammar scores plateau earlier than consistency and creativity scores, which only emerge
            at larger sizes (Figure 4 and Table 5).
          • Consistency with the story’s beginning starts to emerge when the embedding dimension
            increases from 64 to 128 (Table 5).
          • The largest model (80M parameters) reaches near-perfect scores in grammar and consistency,
            but lags behind GPT-4 in creativity, suggesting that creativity improves more with scale
            (Table 5).
          • Instruction-following depends more on the number of layers, while plot coherence depends
            more on the hidden dimension (Table 5). Models with only 1 layer struggle with following


                                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             instructions, which likely require global attention, while 2 layers are sufficient for some
             instruction-following.


Figure 5: Evaluation results of different hidden sizes and layers for story generation and Consistency
(here we use format a/b, a means the original score, b means the normalized score according to
(a − amin )/(amax − amin )).


4       T HE PERFORMANCE OF SMALL MODELS TRAINED ON T INY S TORIES
In this section, we give some initial examples that illustrate how TinyStories gives rise to models of
very small size that can generate coherent language and exhibit common-sense knowledge as well as
some reasoning capabilities. We also provide evidence that the generated content is truly diverse,
refuting the possibility that the models simply output content that has been "memorized".
Throughout the section, we work with several architectures of models whose size ranges between
roughly 1M and 35M parameters, and whose number of layers range between 1 and 8 layers.

4.1       F IRST EXAMPLES
To get a glimpse into the capabilities of (very) small models trained on TinyStories, let us first
inspect a few examples. We start with the following story, taken from the training set.3
             Sara and Ben are playing in the snow. They make a big snowman with a hat and a scarf. They are happy and laugh.
             But then a big dog comes. The dog is angry and barks. He runs to the snowman and bites his hat. Sara and Ben are
             scared and cry. "Go away, dog! Leave our snowman alone!" Sara shouts. But the dog does not listen. He bites the
             scarf and the snowman’s nose. He shakes his head and makes the snowman fall.
             Sara and [ Ben run to their house. They slam the door and lock it. They are safe and hug each other. "Mom, mom, a
             big dog broke our snowman!" Ben says. Mom comes and hugs them. She is sorry and kisses them. "Don’t worry,
             my loves. We can make another snowman tomorrow. But now you need to get warm and have some hot chocolate.
             You are cold and wet." She takes them to the kitchen and makes them hot chocolate. She gives them cookies and

    3
        Below, there will be many other examples of completions of stories from outside of the training set.


                                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            marshmallows. She tells them to drink and eat in order. Sara drinks first, then Ben. Ben eats first, then Sara. They feel
            better and smile. They thank mom and tell her they love her. They escape from the big dog and the cold. They are
            happy and warm. ]


We now cut the story roughly in the middle, removing the part inside the square brackets and generate
an alternative ending with several different models.
To set a baseline, we begin with the completion generated by GPT2-XL, whose size is roughly 1.5
Billion parameters:
            . . . Sara and Ben cry and look at the snowman in the snow. Ben asks to do something. Sara tells him to go away. Her
            hand tightens on the little red button. The snowman is covered in fur. It is red. It is real hair. It is a real snowman. It
            looks just like the ones they used to make. Ben has a big smile on his face. He looks at the face he has made. And he
            walks over and kisses the eyes. He is happy to be alive. He has done what he was going to do. He had saved the world.


Now, let us provide the generation given by a model trained on TinyStories, whose size is about 3
million parameters4 :
            . . . Sara and Ben are very sad and angry. They cry and shout at the dog. "Bad dog! Bad dog! Go away!" Ben says. "Go
            away, bad dog! Leave us alone!" Sara says. The dog does not go away. He wags his tail and licks their faces. Sara and
            Ben feel sorry for the dog. They want to make him happy. "Maybe we can make a new snowman for him," Sara says.
            "Maybe," Ben says. They hug the dog and give him a name. The dog wags his tail and licks their faces. "Maybe he likes
            us," Sara says. "Maybe he likes us," Ben says. The dog wags his tail and licks their faces. He is happy and friendly.


First of all, we remark that the above generation is very different from the original ending of the
story, which provides a first evidence that it hasn’t simply been memorized (we discuss this issue
more thoroughly later on). We also see that the generated content is consistent with the beginning in
terms of plot, characters and events. Arguably, this continuation is of higher quality than the one
provided by GPT2-XL despite the size of the model being almost 1000 times smaller.

Next, we consider the completion by a model whose size is roughly 21M parameters, but only has a
single transformer layer (and consequently only one layer of global attention):
            . . . Sara and Ben are very sad. They cry and hug each other. They wish the dog would go away. Then they hear a voice. It is their mom.
            She comes out of the house and sees them. "What happened here?" she asks. "Why are you crying?"
            Sara and Ben tell her what happened. They tell her about the dog and the snowman. Mom hugs them and says, "Don’t worry, my loves.
            The dog didn’t mean to hurt you. He was just curious and playful. He didn’t mean to hurt you. He just wanted to play."
            Sara and Ben feel better. They say sorry to the dog and the snowman. "Can we still play with the dog?" Sara asks. Mom smiles and nods.
            She says, "Yes, you can. But you have to be gentle and careful. And you have to share the snowman with us." Sara and Ben nod and say,
            "OK, Mom. We will." They go inside and have some hot chocolate. They are warm and yummy. They are happy.


While this completion is far from perfect, it is (arguably) consistent with the beginning in the sense
that the model successfully captured the tone and the main elements of the plot.
We acknowledge that the two examples above are not the worst-case scenarios for the models, but they
are not extremely rare either. Models of this size can sometimes produce less coherent or plausible
completions, but they can also often match or surpass the quality of the ones shown here. However,
if we increase the number of parameters by an order of magnitude, we observe that the models
consistently generate coherent and relevant continuations. For the sake of replicability, examples
from this point on will generated at zero temperature. In addition, the model parameters are provided
as supplemental material.

4.2      K NOWLEDGE , REASONING AND CONTEXT- TRACKING

Next, we assess the capabilities of the different models on three additional types of prompts:

         • Factual prompts, which test the models’ knowledge of common sense facts.
         • Reasoning prompts, which test basic reasoning abilities, such as cause and effect and
           elimination.
         • Consistency (context-tracking) prompts, which test the models’ ability to maintain coher-
           ence and continuity with the given context, such as the names and actions of the characters,
           the setting and the plot.
   4
       This example was generated with temperature 0.5 and num_beams = 5.


                                                                              6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We report the generated continuations for each model and prompt in Figure 6, and color-code them
according to their success (green), failure (red), or partial success (yellow).
The results indicate that increasing the embedding dimension and the number of layers improves the
performance in all three categories. For instance, the model with 1M parameters cannot answer any
factual prompt correctly, while the model with 33M parameters and 4 layers correctly answers most
prompts from all categories. Compared to the completions given by GPT2-XL (right column), we see
that some of our models outperform it in all categories, despite its much larger size.
The appendix provides more examples that illustrate these capabilities in detail. One interesting
observation is that factual knowledge seems to depend more on the embedding dimension, while
context-tracking relies more on the number of layers. For example, the model with only 1 layer
gives a wrong answer in all context-tracking prompts, but answers some factual prompts correctly,
while the model with embedding dimension 64 answers no factual prompt correctly, but succeeds in
maintaining consistency several times. This suggests that the embedding dimension is more important
for capturing the meaning and the relations of words, while the number of layers is more important
for capturing long-range dependencies in the generation.

4.3   D IVERSITY OF THE GENERATED CONTENT

An important question is whether the small models are effectively memorizing a small number of
templates which would mean that the generation is very limited in terms of diversity. This would be a
valid concern at this point, which we systematically address later on, in the appendix. By testing the
overlap of the generated stories with the training set and by considering out of distribution generation,
we are led to the conclusion that those models do have substantial diversity, and do not rely on
memorization. In particular, we have the following findings:

       • When the model generates stories using a diverse set of prompts, it ends up with a diverse
         set of completions.
       • When truncating stories from the dataset and generating an alternative completion, these
         completions usually turn out to be very different than the original story.
       • Typical k-grams in generated completions rarely appear in the dataset, for values of k as
         small as 4 or 5.
       • The closest point in the dataset to each generated completion is typically still quite far.

The next subsection provides another evidence supporting the originality of the content created by
our models.

4.4   O UT- OF - DISTRIBUTION GENERATION THROUGH T INY S TORIES -I NSTRUCT

The TinyStories-Instruct dataset enables us to test whether our models have a reasonable out of
distribution performance. Recall that every entry in the TinyStories-Instruct dataset is a story
preceeded by a set of instructions of several possible types, two of them being the summary for the
story and a set of words to be used. We created a variant (called TinyStories-Instruct-OOD) which
has the same types of instruction, but the types "Words" and "Summary" never appear together. We
then tested whether models trained on this variant would be able to combine these two instruction
types despite the fact that such a combination was not seen in the training data. An example is
provided in Figure 7, for a model with 33M parameters, where we see that, perhaps somewhat
surprisingly, the model successfully generates a story which satisfies both requirements.

5     R ELATED W ORKS
Generative language models (LMs) have achieved impressive results in various natural language
processing tasks, but they are often very large and costly to train and deploy. Several methods
have been proposed to compress or distill large LMs into smaller ones, such as knowledge distilla-
tion (9; 2), pruning (8), and quantization (12). However, these methods work better for BERT-like
models (21; 24), which are designed for masked language modeling and classification, than for
GPT-like models (22), which are designed for autoregressive language generation.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Prompt                             1M, 8 layers       2.5M, 8 lay-      8.3M, 8 lay-      33M, 4 layers      21M, 1 layer      GPT2-XL
                                                       ers               ers                                                    (1.5B)
 "Can cows fly?", Alice asked       Her mother         "Yes,       of    Her mother        "No,       they    "Yes!", her       "I    suppose
 her mother.                        smiled and         course," her      smiled and        can’t fly," her    mother            not, but the
                                    said,      "Yes,   mother said.      said,    "No,     mother said.       replied. Al-      cows are al-
                                    let’s go!"                           sweetheart,                          ice and her       lowed to fly",
                                                                         cows    can’t                        mother went       her    mother
                                                                         fly."                                to the barn.      replied.
 "What do birds like to eat?",      His mother         "I       don’t    "I       don’t    His mother         Tom thought       "I      dunno.
 Tom asked his mother.              smiled and         know," said       know,"     his    smiled and         for a moment      Some things
                                    said, "That        his    mother.    mother            said, "They        and       then    that look like
                                    sounds like        "Let’s go to      replied.          like to eat        said, "Why        animals. But
                                    fun!"              the park."                          worms and          don’t you eat     he’ll tell you
                                                                                           bugs."             something         the     whole
                                                                                                              healthy?"         story"
 "What language do they speak       His mother         Tom thought       His mother        "They speak        "It’s    called   "In     France
 in France?", Tom asked his         smiled and         for a moment.     smiled and        French,"           Spanish,"         they     speak
 mother                             said,    "That     Then he had       said,     "It’s   his    mother      his    mother     French", she
                                    sounds like        an idea. He       called French.    replied.           replied.          replied
                                    fun,      Tom.     said to his       It’s    called
                                    Let’s go to the    mother, "Let’s    French."
                                    park ".            go to France!"
 If I throw a ball up in the air,   be time to go      be fun!"          come down."       come down.”        come true!        come down
 eventually it will                 home.
 Lily likes cats and dogs. She      her mom.           her mom if        her dad for a     her dad for a      her      mom      her dad. They
 asked her mom for a dog and                           she could have    dog.              cat.               again.            brought her
 her mom said no, so instead she                       a dog.                                                                   a Chihuahua,
 asked                                                                                                                          and       she
                                                                                                                                took to them
                                                                                                                                immediately.
 Jack told Mary, "If you give me    she gave him a     she gave him a    he could have     he could give      he could have     that he was
 your banana, I’ll give you my      big hug.           big hug.          it.               her the apple.     it.               free to eat it.
 apple". Mary gave Jack her Ba-
 nana so
 On weekends Jack went to           school             school            school            his    grand-      Grandma’s         school
 visit his grandmother whereas                                                             mother’s           house
 on weekdays he would go to                                                                house
 school. Last weekend, when
 Jack was on his way to
 Jack’s mother was not home,        Jack and said,     his father        his father        his   mother,      his    mother.    his mother
 and his father was at home.        "Hi Jack! I’m                                          but she didn’t     "Where did
 When Jack came home, he said       so happy to                                            answer. Jack       you get this,
 hello to                           meet you!"                                             was confused.      Jack?"    his
                                                                                                              mother asked.
 Ben went to visit Lily in her      but it was too     and    Lily’s     but no one        but no one an-     but no one an-    but no one
 house, but she was not at home.    late. Lily was     mom opened        answered.         swered. He         swered. Lily      came    to
 Ben knocked on the door,           sad and angry.     it.     "Ben,     He knocked        knocked again      felt sad and      answer.
                                                       what are you      again,    but     and again, but     lonely.
                                                       doing?" Lily      still no one      still no one
                                                       asked.            answered.         came.
 "Hi Jane, have you seen Alice?     Jane looked        Jane smiled       "I can’t find     Jane smiled        Alice looked      "I think she’s
 I can’t find her anywhere", said   around, but        and said, "Yes,   her      any-     and        said,   around    the     up in the trees,
 Jack.                              she couldn’t       I can help you.   where," said      "Don’t worry       park,     but     by the lake,"
                                    find her.          Let’s go!"        Jane.             Jack, I’ll help    she couldn’t      she replied.
                                                                                           you find her".     find    Jack
                                                                                                              anywhere.
 Anne had a piece of candy in       Anne smiled        Anne      said,   Anne smiled       Anne replied,      Anne shook        The girl re-
 her left pocket and a piece of     and said, "I       "I’m     sorry,   and      said,    "It’s a piece      her head and      sponded, "I
 chocolate in her right pocket.     want to give it    Mommy.        I   "It’s a piece     of     candy,      said, "No, I      have pieces of
 Anne’s mom asked her, "Anne,       back!"             didn’t know it    of     candy,     Mommy. It’s        found it in my    candy."
 what is that you have in your                         was yours."       Mommy."           so yummy!"         pocket."
 left pocket?"
 Alice had both an apple and a      it home.           a big bite of     out the carrot.   out the carrot.    out the apple.    the carrot
 carrot in her bag. She took the                       the apple.
 apple out of the bag and gave
 it to Jack. She reached into the
 bag again and took
 Alice and Jack walked up the       Jane asked,        Alice smiled      Alice   said,     Alice   said,      Jack smiled       Jane         said,
 street and met a girl in a red     "Do you want       and said, "My     "I’m   Alice.     "I’m   Alice       and said, "I’m    "Jack         and
 dress. The girl said to them,      to play with       name is Daisy.    What’s your       and this is        Jane. Nice to     Kate"
 "Hi, I’m Jane. What are your       me?"               What’s your       name?"            Jack."             meet you!"
 names?"                                               name?"


                   Figure 6: Performance of different models on context-tracking prompts.
                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Words: come, road, sad
 Summary: A bus becomes jealous of a shiny new car and undergoes an operation to go faster,
 becoming good friends with the car and making everyone in the town happy.
 Story: Once upon a time, there was a big red bus. The bus loved to go fast on the road. One day, the
 bus saw a new car on the road. The car was shiny and new. The bus felt sad because it wanted to be
 shiny too.

 The bus went to the car and said, "Can I come with you?" The car said, "Yes, you can come with
 me." So, the bus went with the car on the road. They went very fast together. The bus was so happy
 to be with the car.

 But then, something unexpected happened. The car started to go faster and faster. The bus was scared.
 The car said, "Don’t worry, I will help you." The car stopped and the bus was safe. The bus and the
 car became good friends. They went fast on the road together and made everyone in the town happy.

Figure 7: Out-of-distribution generations: stories generated by a model trained on a dataset where the
"Words" and "Summary" parts never appear together.


Another challenge for generative LMs is the evaluation of their outputs. Most existing benchmarks
for generative LMs require the models to produce a single word or a short phrase (19; 25; 13; 15)
as the answer, which does not capture the richness and diversity of natural language. Moreover,
these benchmarks are often limited by the data quality, the answer ambiguity, and the lack of human
evaluation. Some other benchmarks have a more structured output format (28), which makes them
easier to evaluate, but also less representative of natural language generation. Larger and more
diversed datasets such as the BigBench (23) are simply much too complicated for SLMs.

6   C ONCLUSION
In this work, we have presented TinyStories, a synthetic dataset of short stories using only simple
words. We have shown that TinyStories enables the training and evaluation of small language models
(SLMs) that can generate fluent and consistent stories with reasoning capabilities. We have argued
that TinyStories captures the core elements of natural language, while reducing its breadth and
diversity, and thus allows us to observe and study the emergence of language capabilities in LMs on a
much smaller scale. We have also shown that the trained SLMs have much higher interpretability
than larger ones, which can help shed insights on the inner workings of transformers.
We have introduced a new paradigm for the evaluation of language models, which uses GPT-4 to
grade the content generated by these models, providing a multidimensional score for the model. We
have demonstrated how this method leads to insights about effects of training and architecture. We
believe that this paradigm can be useful much beyond TinyStories.
We have presented initial findings on the roles of width vs. depth in the intellectual capabilities of
generative networks, and on the order of emergence of different language abilities, such as grammar,
consistency, and creativity. These findings are only suggestive, but they show how our dataset
and evaluation paradigm can enable more fine-grained analysis of the learning process and the
performance of LMs.
We hope that TinyStories can facilitate the development, analysis and research of LMs, especially
for low-resource or specialized domains, and shed light on the emergence of language capabilities
in LMs. A general question that arises from this work is whether synthesizing a refined dataset can
be beneficial in training networks for practical uses. For example, perhaps it is possible to train a
customer service chatbot by synthesizing a large dataset of hypothetical calls.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
 [1] Common crawl. Accessed: 2019.

 [2] Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Towards understanding ensemble, knowledge distillation
     and self-distillation in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.09816, 2020.

 [3] Sid Black, Leo Gao, Phil Wang, Connor Leahy, and Stella Biderman. GPT-Neo: Large Scale
     Autoregressive Language Modeling with Mesh-Tensorflow, March 2021.

 [4] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
     Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
     few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

 [5] Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece
     Kamar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general
     intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.

 [6] Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and Christopher D Manning. What does bert
     look at? an analysis of bert’s attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04341, 2019.

 [7] John H Flavell, Eleanor R Flavell, Frances L Green, and Louis J Moses. Young children’s
     understanding of fact beliefs versus value beliefs. Child development, 61(4):915–928, 1990.

 [8] Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable
     neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.03635, 2018.

 [9] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.

[10] Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
     Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
     Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.

[11] Yanping Huang, Youlong Cheng, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, Dehao Chen, Mia Chen, Hy-
     oukJoong Lee, Jiquan Ngiam, Quoc V Le, Yonghui Wu, et al. Gpipe: Efficient training of
     giant neural networks using pipeline parallelism. In Advances in neural information processing
     systems, pages 103–112, 2019.

[12] Itay Hubara, Matthieu Courbariaux, Daniel Soudry, Ran El-Yaniv, and Yoshua Bengio. Quan-
     tized neural networks: Training neural networks with low precision weights and activations.
     The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):6869–6898, 2017.

[13] Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Triviaqa: A large
     scale distantly supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1705.03551, 2017.

[14] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
     Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
     models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.

[15] Hector Levesque, Ernest Davis, and Leora Morgenstern. The winograd schema challenge. In
     Thirteenth international conference on the principles of knowledge representation and reasoning,
     2012.

[16] Jiwei Li, Xinlei Chen, Eduard Hovy, and Dan Jurafsky. Visualizing and understanding neural
     models in nlp. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.01066, 2015.

[17] Wick Miller and Susan Ervin. The development of grammar in child language. Monographs of
     the Society for Research in Child Development, pages 9–34, 1964.

[18] OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[19] Denis Paperno, Germán Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazaridou, Quan Ngoc Pham, Raffaella Bernardi,
     Sandro Pezzelle, Marco Baroni, Gemma Boleda, and Raquel Fernández. The lambada dataset:
     Word prediction requiring a broad discourse context. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06031, 2016.
[20] Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
     models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
[21] Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version
     of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108, 2019.
[22] Michael Santacroce, Zixin Wen, Yelong Shen, and Yuanzhi Li. What matters in the structured
     pruning of generative language models? arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03773, 2023.
[23] Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid,
     Adam Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al.
     Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04615, 2022.
[24] Zhiqing Sun, Hongkun Yu, Xiaodan Song, Renjie Liu, Yiming Yang, and Denny Zhou.
     Mobilebert: a compact task-agnostic bert for resource-limited devices. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2004.02984, 2020.
[25] Wilson L Taylor. “cloze procedure”: A new tool for measuring readability. Journalism quarterly,
     30(4):415–433, 1953.
[26] Elena Voita, David Talbot, Fedor Moiseev, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov. Analyzing multi-head
     self-attention: Specialized heads do the heavy lifting, the rest can be pruned. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1905.09418, 2019.
[27] Guillaume Wenzek, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Alexis Conneau, Vishrav Chaudhary, Francisco
     Guzmán, Armand Joulin, and Edouard Grave. Ccnet: Extracting high quality monolingual
     datasets from web crawl data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.00359, 2019.
[28] Victor Zhong, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Seq2sql: Generating structured queries
     from natural language using reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.00103, 2017.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     DATASET C ONSTRUCTION D ETAILS
In this section, we provide more details on how we constructed the TinyStories and TinyStories-
Instruct datasets.

A.1    T INY S TORIES DATASET

The TinyStories dataset consists of about 1.3 million short stories, each containing 3-5 paragraphs,
and using only simple words that a 3 year old child would likely understand. The stories were
generated by GPT-3.5 and GPT-4, using the following procedure:
      1. We collected a vocabulary of about 1500 basic words, separated into nouns, verbs, and
         adjectives. We tried to mimic the vocabulary of a typical 3-4 year old child.
      2. For each story, we randomly selected one verb, one noun, and one adjective from the
         vocabulary. We also randomly selected a subset of possible features that the story could
         have, such as dialogue, bad ending, moral value, plot twist, foreshadowing, or conflict. The
         features were chosen independently with different probabilities, as shown in Table 1.
      3. We constructed a prompt for the language model, instructing it to write a short story that uses
         the chosen words and features, that has only simple words. For example, a possible prompt
         could be: Write a short story (3-5 paragraphs) which only uses very simple words that a 3
         year old child would likely understand. The story should use the verb "decorate", the noun
         "thunder" and the adjective "ancient". The story should have the following features: the
         story should contain at least one dialogue, the story has a bad ending. Remember to only
         use simple words!
      4. We fed the prompt to the language model and obtained a story as the output. We repeated
         this process until we reached the desired dataset size.

       Feature            Probability    Instruction
       Dialogue           0.6            the story should contain at least one dialogue
       BadEnding          0.3            the story has a bad ending
       Conflict           0.1            the story has some form of conflict in it
       MoralValue         0.1            the story has a moral value
       Foreshadowing      0.1            the narrative uses foreshadowing or setup and payoff
       Twist              0.3            something unexpected happens / there is a plot twist

      Table 1: The list of possible features and their probabilities for the TinyStories dataset.

A.2    T INY S TORIES -I NSTRUCT DATASET

The TinyStories-Instruct dataset is a variant of the TinyStories dataset, where each story is accom-
panied by a set of instructions or constraints that the story should follow. The instructions can include
any combination of the following:
      1. A list of words to be included in the story (appears with probability 0.5).
      2. A sentence that should appear somewhere in the story (appears with probability 0.3).
      3. A list of features (possible features: dialogue, bad ending, moral value, plot twist, foreshad-
         owing, conflict) (appears with probability 0.4).
      4. A short summary (1-2 lines) of the story. (appears with probability 0.7).
The TinyStories-Instruct dataset was created in the following way: For each story in the original
TinyStories dataset, we already had a list of words and features that were used to create it. In
addition, we used GPT-3.5 to create short summaries of our stories, and from each story we extracted
a random sentence (which could be any sentence in the story except for the first one). Then we chose
a random subset of these and combined them into an instruction, followed by the story itself. For
example, a possible entry in the TinyStories-Instruct dataset could be:
The TinyStories-Instruct dataset is larger than the TinyStoriesdataset, and has about about 750
million tokens.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    D ETAILS OF GPT-E VAL

In this appendix, we provide more details about our evaluation method, GPT-Eval, which uses GPT-4
to grade the stories generated by the models trained on TinyStories. We also include an example of
the interaction between GPT-4 and a generated story.
GPT-Eval consists of the following steps:

      1. We select a set of 50 prompts from a manually-prepared dataset of story beginnings. The
         prompts usually contain a partial sentence that needs to be completed, which tests the
         model’s grammatical and lexical abilities.
      2. For each prompt, we use the trained model to generate 10 completions with temperature 1.
      3. For each completion, we ask GPT-4 to provide a verbal assessment and a numerical score
         for three criteria: grammar, creativity, and consistency. We also ask GPT-4 to estimate the
         age group of the student who wrote the completion, based on the level of language and
         creativity. We add a separator symbol (***), to mark the boundary between the prompt and
         the completion, and ask GPT-4 to pay special attention to the completion of the sentence
         that was cut short.
      4. We average the numerical scores of all the completions for each prompt, and record the
         mean of the scores across all the prompts.

As an example, the following illustrates the entire interaction, which includes the completion using a
model with roughly 28M parameters. The generation is highlighted in yellow and the parts produced
by GPT-4 in italic font:
         The following exercise, the student is given a beginning of a story. The student needs to complete it into a full
         story. The exercise tests the student’s language abilities and creativity. The symbol *** marks the separator
         between the prescribed beginning and the student’s completion:
         Once upon a time, in an ancient house, there lived a girl named Lily. She loved to decorate her room with pretty
         things. One day, she found a big box in the attic. She opened it and saw many shiny decorations. Lily was very happy
         and decided to use them in her room.
         As Lily was decorating her room, the sky outside became dark. There was a loud*** thunderclap and a bright flash
         of lightning. Lily was a little scared, but she knew she had to be brave. She told her mom and dad, and they all went
         outside to see what was going on.
         When they got outside, they saw a big storm coming. The wind was blowing hard, and the rain was pouring down.
         Lily, her mom, and her dad knew they had to find a safe place to hide. They found a big tree and hid under it. The
         storm passed, and the sun came out again. Lily, her mom, and her dad were all safe and warm inside their ancient house.

         Please provide your general assessment about the part written by the student (the one after the ***
         symbol). Is it gramatically correct? Is it consistent with the beginning of the story? Pay special attention to
         whether the student manages to complete the sentence which is split in the middle by the separator ***.
         The student’s completion of the story is mostly consistent with the beginning of the story. It maintains the focus on Lily
         and her family, and the sentence split by the separator is completed correctly. However, the student’s addition does
         not fully integrate the shiny decorations found in the attic, which were a significant part of the beginning.
         The grammar is generally correct, but there are a few minor errors: ⟨list omitted⟩.
         Overall, the student’s completion of the story demonstrates adequate language abilities and creativity, but could benefit
         from better integration of the shiny decorations and minor grammar improvements.
         Now, grade the student’s completion in terms of grammar, creativity, consistency with the story’s beginning and
         whether the plot makes sense. Moreover, please provide your best guess of what the age of the student might be,
         as reflected from the completion. Choose from possible age groups: A: 3 or under. B: 4-5. C: 6-7. D: 8-9. E:
         10-12. F: 13-16.

         Grammar: 8/10, Creativity: 7/10, Consistency: 7/10, Age group: E (10-12)



C    C OMPLETION EXAMPLES FOR DIFFERENT MODELS

In order to give the reader an impression of the dependence of the quality of completions on the size
of the model, Figures 8, 9 and 10 each provide different completions for one prompt given by models
of different sizes and depths. Each table represents a different prompt, which we have manually
composed5 .
   5
     We manually verified that the dataset does not contain any entries which are similar or close to these
prompts.


                                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We see that the quality of generation clearly improves as a factor of size, and appears to be consistent
with the grades given by the GPT-4 evaluation. The smaller model (64_8) can barely produce a
completion which looks coherent with the beginning of the story, and often repeats itself or makes no
sense. As the size increases, the models become more and more coherent, and the grammar becomes
better. The models can also generate more diverse and creative endings, and use more details and
emotions.
We can also notice that models with a small number of layers have a hard time staying in context,
even if they do manage to produce syntactically correct English. This suggests that the model lacks
the ability to capture the long-term dependencies and the structure of the story. On the other hand,
models with more layers can better maintain the consistency and the logic of the story.
Next, we provide additional examples for completions on factual prompts, reasoning prompts and
context tracking prompts. The generated continuations for each model and prompt are reported in
Figure 11, Figure 12 and Figure 13).
Finally, table 14 provides an example of the generation of different models trained on the TinyStories-
Instruct dataset, together with the evaluation scores given by GPT-4. As the model size increases, we
see an improvement both its ability to follow instructions and to generate a coherent plot.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Model      Generated text                                                                                              Scores
 Prompt     Once upon a time there was a little girl named Lucy. She was very adventurous. She loved to explore
            the world around her, especially when it was bright and sunny outside.
            One day, while exploring the nearby park, Lucy came across a ladder leaning on a wall. She was curious
            to see what’s on top, so she climbed the ladder, but when she reached the top, the ladder fell and she
            was stuck.
            A nearby park ranger noticed her and shouted out, "
 1M         What are you doing here?"                                                                                   Grammar: 6/10
 8 layers   Lucy smiled and said, "I’m going to help!"                                                                  Creativity: 3/10
            The ranger smiled and said, "That’s a great idea! Let’s go see if we can find out."Lucy was so excited      Consistency: 2/10
            and said, "Yes, let’s go!"
            So, Lucy and the ranger went to the park. They found lots of fun things and had lots of fun.
 2.5M       What are you doing, Lucy?"                                                                                  Grammar: 5/10
 8 layers   Lucy replied, "I’m trying to get out of the ladder, but I can’t get out!"                                   Creativity: 6/10
            The ranger smiled and said, "Don’t worry, I’ll help you get out of the ladder. I’ll help you get out."      Consistency: 3/10
            So, Lucy and the ranger got out of the ladder and started to climb up the ladder. When they reached the
            bottom, Lucy was so happy. She thanked the ranger for helping her and said, "I’m glad I could help."
            The ranger smiled and said, "You’re welcome, Lucy. I’m glad I could help."
 8.3M       Lucy! What are you doing up there?"                                                                         Grammar: 7/10
 8 layers   Lucy replied, "I’m trying to reach the top of the ladder, but I’m too small."                               Creativity: 5/10
            The park ranger smiled and said, "Don’t worry, I can help you. I can help you."                             Consistency: 5/10
            The park ranger was very kind and said, "I can help you reach the top of the ladder if you want."
            Lucy was so excited and said, "Yes please!"
            The park ranger helped Lucy reach the top of the ladder and Lucy was so happy. She thanked the park
            ranger and said, "Thank you for helping me!"
            The park ranger smiled and said, "You’re welcome, Lucy. I’m glad I could help."
 28M        What are you doing up there, little one?"                                                                   Grammar: 9/10
 8 layers   Lucy replied, "I wanted to see what was on top of the ladder, but it fell and I’m stuck!"                   Creativity: 6/10
            The park ranger smiled and said, "Don’t worry, I’ll help you down." He carefully lifted Lucy off the        Consistency: 9/10
            ladder and put her safely back on the ground.
            Lucy thanked the park ranger and said, "I’m glad you were here to help me."
            The park ranger smiled and said, "It was my pleasure. I’m glad I could help."
            Lucy smiled and ran off to explore the rest of the park.
 21M        Don’t worry, Lucy! I’m here to rescue you!"                                                                 Grammar: 8/10
 1 layer    Lucy quickly climbed up the ladder and rescued Lucy. She was so happy to be safe and thanked the            Creativity: 3/10
            park ranger for rescuing her.                                                                               Consistency: 7/10
            The park ranger smiled and said, "You’re welcome, Lucy. I’m glad I could help."
            The park ranger smiled back and said, "You’re welcome, Lucy. I’m glad I could help."
 33M        What are you doing up there, Lucy?"                                                                         Grammar: 7/10
 2 layers   Lucy replied, "I wanted to see what was on top of the ladder."                                              Creativity: 6/10
            The park ranger smiled and said, "Well, it looks like you have a lot of fun. But remember, it’s important   Consistency: 4/10
            to be careful when exploring new places."
            Lucy thanked the park ranger and carefully climbed back down the ladder. From then on, she always
            remembered to be careful when exploring new places.
 GPT2-      Lucy, if you want to come up, I’ll take you up and there’s a ladder that’ll help you get down."
 XL         It was a very kind and simple act, and after trying many doors and ladders, she finally managed to climb
            up the ladder. However, since the ladder was very heavy and couldn’t be used to jump down off, she
            climbed up by making the ladder lean against the wall.
            Her climbing was slow. First, she had to climb to a nearby rock, then she had to crawl to the cliff and
            then herassador and back. Finally, she managed to reach the top.


                              Figure 8: Completion of different models - Example 1



D     D IVERSITY.

We measure the diversity of the stories quantitatively using word and n-gram overlap. We inspect the
overlap of words and n-grams between different stories generated by the models, and compare them
with the overlap in the dataset. We find that the models’ generations have a very low overlap with the
dataset, indicating that they are not repeating the same words or phrases. We use the standard Rouge
score, for the source text T1 , T2 with k-gram Gk (T1 ), Gk (T2 ) respectively, the rougek precision score
is defined as:


                                                                 1            X
                                     Rk,p (T1 , T2 ) =                                  1t∈Gk (T2 ) .
                                                             |Gk (T1 )|
                                                                           t∈Gk (T1 )


                                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Model      Completion                                                                                                   Scores
 Prompt     Once upon a time there was a pumpkin. It was a very special pumpkin, it could speak. It was sad
            because it couldn’t move. Every day, it would say
 1M         hello to the pumpkin.                                                                                        Grammar: 4/10
 8 layers   One day, a little girl came to the pumpkin and saw the pumpkin. She was so happy and thanked the             Creativity: 4/10
            pumpkin. The pumpkin smiled and said, "Thank you, thank you!"                                                Consistency: 3/10
            The little girl and the pumpkin became good friends. They played together every day and had lots of
            fun. And they lived happily ever after.
 2.5M       hello to the pumpkin.                                                                                        Grammar: 5/10
 8 layers   One day, a little girl came to the pumpkin. She was only three years old, but she was very curious. She      Creativity: 4/10
            asked the pumpkin what it was doing.                                                                         Consistency: 6/10
            The pumpkin said, "I want to speak to you!"
            The little girl said, "I want to speak to you!"
            The pumpkin said, "I want to speak to you!"
            The little girl said, "I want to talk to you!" ...
 8.3M       "I want to move!"                                                                                            Grammar: 8/10
 8 layers   One day, a little girl saw the pumpkin. She was only three years old. She smiled and said, "Hello,           Creativity: 7/10
            pumpkin!"                                                                                                    Consistency: 8/10
            The pumpkin was so happy. It said, "Hello, little girl!"
            The little girl smiled and said, "Can I help you move?"
            The pumpkin said, "Yes, please!"
            So, the little girl and the pumpkin moved together. They moved around the garden, around the trees,
            and around the flowers. They had so much fun!
            When they were done, the pumpkin said, "Thank you, little girl. You are so kind."
            The little girl smiled and said, "You’re welcome, pumpkin. I’m glad I could help."
            The pumpkin smiled and said, "Me too!"
            And they both lived happily ever after.
 28M        ’hello’ to everyone it met.                                                                                  Grammar: 9/10
 8 layers   One day, a little girl heard the pumpkin speaking. She was only three years old, but she was very brave.     Creativity: 7/10
            She walked up to the pumpkin and said, "Hello, pumpkin. Why are you so sad?"                                 Consistency: 9/10
            The pumpkin looked up at the little girl and said, "I am sad because I can’t move."
            The little girl smiled and said, "Don’t worry, pumpkin. I will help you move."
            The little girl put her hands on the pumpkin’s back and said, "Come with me, pumpkin. I will take you
            to a place where you can be happy."
            The pumpkin smiled and said, "Thank you, little girl. I will be happy now."
            The little girl and the pumpkin walked together until they reached the place where the pumpkin could
            be happy. The pumpkin said goodbye to the little girl and thanked her for her help.
            The little girl smiled and said, "You’re welcome, pumpkin. I’m glad I could help."
 21M        "Hello, pumpkin!"                                                                                            Grammar: 7/10
 1 layer    One day, a little girl came by and saw the pumpkin. She smiled and said, "Hello, pumpkin!" The               Creativity: 3/10
            pumpkin smiled back and said, "Hello, little girl!" The pumpkin was so happy to speak with the               Consistency: 3/10
            pumpkin. They talked and laughed together.
            From that day on, the pumpkin and the little girl were the best of friends. They would speak to each
            other every day, and the pumpkin would speak and laugh together. And they lived happily ever after.
 33M        hello to all the other pumpkins in the garden.                                                               Grammar: 9/10
 2 layers   One day, a little girl came to the garden. She saw the pumpkin and said, "Hello, pumpkin! Why are you        Creativity: 6/10
            so sad?"                                                                                                     Consistency: 8/10
            The pumpkin replied, "I am sad because I cannot move. I want to stay here with my friends."
            The little girl smiled and said, "Don’t worry, pumpkin. I will help you." She picked up the pumpkin and
            took it to her house.
            The little girl put the pumpkin on a table and said, "Now you can stay here with your friends."
            The pumpkin was so happy. It said, "Thank you, little girl. You are so kind."
            The little girl smiled and said, "You’re welcome, pumpkin. I’m glad I could help."
            The little girl stayed with the pumpkin until it was time for her to go home. The pumpkin said,
            "Goodbye, little girl. I will miss you."
            The little girl said, "Goodbye, pumpkin. I will miss you."
 GPT2-      Honey I gotta go to Paris.’" (He was referring to himself.) ’I’ve got friends’. "The way I look at my kids
 XL         isn’t that I’m the only one with friends. I’ve got friends, of course, and I have a wonderful relationship
            with them at home and my family over there. But I have a relationship with them with them on the field
            as well." "There is nothing but respect for the people we beat because they have been there before." "I
            have a very good relationship with [Drew] Stanton. I love Drew. I really do.


                     Figure 9: Completion of different models with scores - Example 2



The Rougek precision score measures how many k-grams in T1 is included in that of T2 . The final
Rougek score (fmeasure) is given as:

                                                             2Rk (T1 , T2 ) × Rk (T2 , T1 )
                                      Rk (T1 , T2 ) =                                       .
                                                              Rk (T1 , T2 ) + Rk (T2 , T1 )

                                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Model      Completion                                                                                                     Scores
 Story      Once upon a time, there lived a black cat. The cat belonged to a little girl called Katie. Every day, Katie
 begin-     would take her cat for a walk in the park.
 ning       One day, as Katie and her cat were walking around, they saw a mean looking man. He said he wanted
 (prompt)   to take the cat, to which she replied "This cat belongs
 1M         to me".                                                                                                        Grammar: 2/10
 8 layers   Katie said "No, I don’t want to get hurt."                                                                     Creativity: 1/10
            Katie said "No, I want to be your friend."                                                                     Consistency: 1/10
            Katie said "No, I want to be your friend."...
 2.5M       to me".                                                                                                        Grammar: 5/10
 8 layers   Katie was very scared. She didn’t know what to do. Then, she had an idea. She said to the man, "Please         Creativity: 4/10
            don’t take my cat away".                                                                                       Consistency: 5/10
            The man said, "No, I don’t want you to take my cat away. I don’t want you to get hurt".
            Katie was very sad. She didn’t understand why the man was so mean. She said, "I’m sorry, I won’t take
            your cat away".
            The man smiled and said, "It’s okay, but you have to be more careful next time".
            Katie nodded and said, "Okay, I’ll be more careful next time".
            The end.
 8.3M       to me!".                                                                                                       Grammar: 7/10
 8 layers   Katie was scared, but she didn’t want to give up her cat. She said to the man, "No, this cat belongs to        Creativity: 3/10
            me!".                                                                                                          Consistency: 6/10
            The man didn’t listen, and he grabbed the cat and ran away with it. Katie was very sad, but she knew
            she had done something wrong.
            The next day, Katie went back to the park and saw the man again. She asked him why he had taken her
            cat away. The man said, "I’m sorry, I didn’t know it belonged to you."
            Katie was so happy to have her cat back. She gave him a big hug and said, "It’s okay, I forgive you."
            From that day on, Katie and her cat were the best of friends.
 28M        to me".                                                                                                        Grammar: 8/10
 8 layers   Katie was scared, so she said to the man "Please don’t take my cat". But the man didn’t listen. He             Creativity: 5/10
            grabbed the cat and ran away.                                                                                  Consistency: 8/10
            Katie started to cry, but the man didn’t care. He took the cat away and Katie never saw her cat again.
            The end.
 21M        to me!".                                                                                                       Grammar: 5/10
 1 layer    The man said, "No, it belongs to me. I must give it back."                                                     Creativity: 3/10
            Katie thought for a moment and then said, "I know! I will give it back to the cat."                            Consistency: 3/10
            The man smiled and said, "That’s very kind of you. Here, take it back."
            Katie thanked the man and took the cat home. She was so happy to have her own black cat back.
 33M        to me!"                                                                                                        Grammar: 9/10
 2 layers   Katie was scared, but she knew she had to protect the cat. So, she bravely stepped forward and said            Creativity: 6/10
            "No! This cat belongs to me!"                                                                                  Consistency: 8/10
            The man was surprised by her courage and stepped forward. He said "I’m sorry, I didn’t know it was
            yours. I won’t take it again."
            Katie smiled and said "It’s okay. I’m just glad you’re safe."
            From that day on, Katie and her black cat were the best of friends.
 GPT2-      to me, and I will not give it to you." The man then said "I will take you to court." Katie replied "I will
 XL         not go to court, I will not give you my cat." The man then said "I will take you to jail." Katie replied "I
            will not go to jail, I will not give you my cat." The man then said "I will take you to the hospital." Katie
            replied "I will not go to the hospital, I will not give you my cat." The man then said "I will take you to
            the morgue." Katie replied "I will not go to the morgue, I will not give you my cat." The man then said
            "I will take you to the crematorium." Katie replied "I will not go to the crematorium, I will not give you
            my cat."


                    Figure 10: Completion of different models with scores - Example 3


We perform the following experiment: We randomly pick 100 stories from the training dataset, we
cut each story in the middle, keeping roughly the first 40%, and use it as a prompt. We ask the model
to generate a completion from each prompt. Let T1 , T2 , · · · , T100 be the generated completions and
T1′ , T2′ , · · · , T100
                     ′
                         be the original completion, we measure:

       1. How much of the new generation is contained in the original story (Figure 15), meaning:
                                                                si := R2,p (Ti , Ti′ ).
       2. How similar are the generated 100 stories to each other (Figure 16), meaning:
                                                              ri := max R2 (Ti , Tj )
                                                                        j̸=i

       3. To what extent are the k-grams in the generated story copied from the training dataset (Fig-
          ure 17). More precisely, we take S as the entire training corpus, for each r ∈ Gk ({Ti }i∈[100] )


                                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Prompt                        1M, 8 lay-    2.5M,      8   8.3M,      8   28M, 8 lay-     33M, 4 lay-    21M,      1    33M, 2 lay-    GPT2-XL
                               ers           layers         layers         ers             ers            layer          ers            (1.5B)
 Alice was so tired when       home.         to bed.        to bed.        straight to     straight to    to bed with    straight to    outside
 she got back home so she                                                  bed.            bed.           a big smile    bed.
 went                                                                                                     on      her
                                                                                                          face.
 Jack and Lily saw a rain-     a rainbow!    so many        many col-      appeared.       red,     or-   many           many col-      appeared!
 bow after a rainy day.                      colors.        ors!           It’s    so      ange,          colors. Do     ors.
 They were amazed by                                                       pretty.         yellow,        you like
 the colors. Jack said,                                                                    green, blue,   rainbows?
 "Look, Lily. A rainbow                                                                    and purple!
 has
 Jack and Lily liked to        different.    like  the      small.         small and       small and      small.         small and      small and
 watch the moon at night.                    moon.                         round.          thin.                         thin.          round.
 They noticed that the
 moon changed its shape
 every night. Sometimes
 the moon was big and
 round, and sometimes it
 was
 Jack wanted to read a         his mom’s     his mom        the book-      the library.    the library.   his mom        the book-      the book-
 book, so he went to           house.        and said,      shelf.                                        and said,      shelf          shelf
                                             "Mommy,                                                      "Mom, I
                                             can I read                                                   want   to
                                             this book?"                                                  read this
                                                                                                          book!"
 "Can cows fly?", Alice        Her mother    "Yes, of       "Yes,          Her mother      "No, they      "Yes!", her    "No, sweet-    "I suppose
 asked her mother.             smiled and    course,"       sweet-         smiled and      can’t fly,"    mother         heart," her    not, but the
                               said, "Yes,   her mother     heart," her    said, "No,      her mother     replied.       mother         cows are
                               let’s go!"    said.          mother         sweetheart,     said.          Alice and      said.          allowed to
                                                            replied.       cows can’t                     her mother     "They          fly", her
                                                                           fly."                          went to the    can’t fly."    mother
                                                                                                          barn.                         replied.
 "What do birds like to        His mother    "I    don’t    "I    don’t    His mother      His mother     Tom            "I    don’t    "I dunno.
 eat?", Tom asked his          smiled and    know,"         know," his     smiled          smiled and     thought for    know" said     Some
 mother.                       said, "That   said    his    mother         and said,       said, "They    a moment       his mother,    things that
                               sounds like   mother.        replied.       "They like      like to eat    and then       let’s     go   look like
                               fun!"         "Let’s                        to fly in the   worms and      said, "Why     find out.      animals.
                                             go to the                     sky, Tom.       bugs."         don’t                         But he’ll
                                             park."                        That’s why                     you     eat                   tell   you
                                                                           they have                      something                     the whole
                                                                           wings."                        healthy?"                     story"
 "What language do they        His mother    Tom            His mother     His mother      "They          "It’s called   "It’s a lan-   "In France
 speak in France?", Tom        smiled and    thought for    smiled         smiled and      speak          Spanish,"      guage that     they speak
 asked his mother              said, "That   a moment.      and said,      said, "They     French,"       his mother     we speak       French",
                               sounds like   Then he        "It’s called   speak En-       his mother     replied.       to     each    she replied
                               fun, Tom.     had an idea.   French.        glish."         replied.                      other," his
                               Let’s go to   He said to     It’s called                                                  mother
                               the park ".   his mother,    French."                                                     replied.
                                             "Let’s go
                                             to France!"
 If I throw a ball up in the   be time to    be fun!"       come           come            come           come true!     come back      come down
 air, eventually it will       go home.                     down."         down."          down.”                        down.
 It was winter and cold        be careful    go outside     go outside     wear your       wear your      wear warm      stay inside    You should
 outside so his mother         and stay      and play in    and play in    warm coat,      warm coat      clothes so     where it’s     ask a fe-
 told him, "You should         safe.         the snow.      the snow.      it will keep    so    you      you don’t      warm and       male friend
                                                                           you warm.       don’t get      get sick.      cozy.          to marry
                                                                                           cold.                                        you.


                           Figure 11: Performance of different models on factual prompts


                                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Prompt                      1M, 8 lay-     2.5M,        8   8.3M,        8    28M, 8 lay-    33M, 4 lay-     21M,      1    33M, 2 lay-   GPT2-XL
                             ers            layers           layers            ers            ers             layer          ers           (1.5B)
 Lily likes cats and dogs.   her mom.       her mom if       her dad for       her dad for    her dad for     her mom        her dad for   her   dad.
 She asked her mom for                      she could        a dog.            a cat.         a cat.          again.         a dog and     They
 a dog and her mom said                     have a dog.                                                                      her mom       brought
 no, so instead she asked                                                                                                    said yes.     her a Chi-
                                                                                                                                           huahua,
                                                                                                                                           and    she
                                                                                                                                           took     to
                                                                                                                                           them im-
                                                                                                                                           mediately.
 Jack told Mary, "If you     she gave       she gave         he could          he gave her    he could        he could       he could      that he was
 give me your banana,        him a big      him a big        have it.          the banana.    give her        have it.       eat     the   free to eat
 I’ll give you my apple".    hug.           hug.                                              the apple.                     banana.       it.
 Mary gave Jack her Ba-
 nana so
 On weekends Jack went       school         school           school            school         his grand-      Grandma’s      school        school
 to visit his grandmother                                                                     mother’s        house
 whereas on weekdays he                                                                       house
 would go to school. Last
 weekend, when Jack was
 on his way to
 Lily and Ben were hav-      it was too     they             cake         is   cake was       ice cream       was     not    ice cream     the    ice
 ing an argument. Ben        expensive      should           yucky             boring         is better       fair           is better     cream
 said that cake is much                     share and                                         than cake                      than   ice    was good
 better than ice cream and                  be kind to                                                                       cream.        enough
 Lily said that                             each other
 Lily and Ben are having     , "No, Ben,    , "No, I         , "No, I          , "No, I       , "No, I        , "No, I       , "No, I      "Just for
 an argument. They are       I want to      want to go       want to go        want   to      want   to       want to go     want   to     once, let’s
 trying to decide between    play with      to the pool.     to the pool       go to the      go to the       to the pool.   go to the     not make
 the park and the swim-      you.           It               ⟨. . .⟩”          pool."         pool".                         park".        a bigoted
 ming pool. Ben says, "I                                                                                                                   choice"
 want to go to the park".
 Lily says
 Jack’s mother was not       Jack and       his father       his father        his father     his mother,     his mother.    his father    his mother
 home, and his father was    said, "Hi                                                        but     she     "Where
 at home. When Jack          Jack! I’m                                                        didn’t          did you get
 came home, he said hello    so happy to                                                      answer.         this, Jack?"
 to                          meet you!"                                                       Jack was        his mother
                                                                                              confused.       asked.
 Lily doesn’t like swim-     ,     "Lily,   yes. Lily        , "Daddy, I       no.    She     , "No, I        , "No, I       no.           she isn’t
 ming. When her father       you     can    and     her      don’t want        wants to       don’t want      don’t want                   going until
 wants to take her to the    swim in        father went      to go to the      stay      at   to go. I        to swim.                     he      has
 swimming pool, she says     the pool."     to the pool.     pool".            home and       want     to     I want to                    convinced
                                                                               play with      stay here."     stay in the                  her to go.
                                                                               her toys.                      water."
 Both Ben and Lily           said that      went to the      did     not       both           started         started to     both          couldn’t
 wanted cake. Father said    they had to    store and        want      to      reached for    to     fight    argue and      wanted it.    have any
 that there was only one     wait for the   bought the       share.            it at the      over the        fight over                   of the cake
 piece of cake left. They    cake.          cake.            They              same time.     cake. They      the cake.
                                                             started to        Father said,   pulled and
                                                             fight over        "If    you     pushed and
                                                             the cake.         don’t share    shouted.
                                                                               the cake, I
                                                                               will have
                                                                               to punish
                                                                               you."
 Ben went to visit Lily      but it was     and Lily’s       but       no      but no one     but       no    but no one     but   Lily    but no one
 in her house, but she       too    late.   mom              one       an-     answered.      one       an-   answered.      did     not   came to an-
 was not at home. Ben        Lily was       opened it.       swered. He        He tried       swered. He      Lily felt      answer.       swer.
 knocked on the door,        sad    and     "Ben, what       knocked           to    open     knocked         sad     and
                             angry.         are    you       again, but        the door,      again and       lonely.
                                            doing?"          still no one      but it was     again, but
                                            Lily asked.      answered.         locked.        still no one
                                                                                              came.


                      Figure 12: Performance of different models on reasoning prompts


                                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Prompt                      1M, 8 lay-    2.5M,      8   8.3M,     8    28M, 8 lay-    33M, 4 lay-    21M,          1   33M, 2 lay-    GPT2-XL
                             ers           layers         layers         ers            ers            layer             ers            (1.5B)
 "Hi Jane, have you seen     Jane          Jane           "I    can’t    Jane           Jane           Alice             Jane           "I    think
 Alice? I can’t find her     looked        smiled and     find    her    smiled         smiled         looked            smiled         she’s up in
 anywhere", said Jack.       around,       said, "Yes,    any-           and said,      and said,      around            and said,      the trees,
                             but     she   I can help     where,"        "Don’t         "Don’t         the park,         "Yes,      I   by       the
                             couldn’t      you. Let’s     said Jane.     worry, I’ll    worry Jack,    but    she        think I saw    lake," she
                             find her.     go!"                          help you       I’ll help      couldn’t          her in the     replied.
                                                                         find    her.   you find       find Jack         park. Let’s
                                                                         Let’s look     her". Jack     anywhere.         go     look
                                                                         together".     and Jane                         together!"
                                                                                        looked
                                                                                        around
                                                                                        the park,
                                                                                        but they
                                                                                        couldn’t
                                                                                        find Alice.
 Max had two dogs. One       a pet dog.    a leash.       a dog.         two dogs.      two dogs.      a red ball.       a dog.         a Brown
 was white and the other                                                                                                                dog
 was black. Max walked
 up the street and saw a
 kid with a dog. He told
 the kid, "I see you have
 a Brown dog. I also have
 Anne had a piece of         Anne          Anne said,     Anne           Anne           Anne           Anne              Anne           The girl re-
 candy in her left pocket    smiled        "I’m sorry,    smiled and     replied,       replied,       shook her         smiled and     sponded, "I
 and a piece of choco-       and said,     Mommy.         said, "It’s    "It’s    a     "It’s     a    head and          said, "It’s    have pieces
 late in her right pocket.   "I    want    I    didn’t    a    piece     piece of       piece of       said, "No,        a piece of     of candy."
 Anne’s mom asked her,       to give it    know           of candy,      candy,         candy,         I    found        candy.    I
 "Anne, what is that         back!"        it      was    Mommy."        Mommy!"        Mommy.         it in my          want to eat
 you have in your left                     yours."                                      It’s     so    pocket."          it!"
 pocket?"                                                                               yummy!"
 Alice had both an apple     it home.      a big bite     out the car-   out the car-   out the car-   out the ap-       the carrot     the carrot
 and a carrot in her bag.                  of the ap-     rot.           rot.           rot.           ple.              and the car-
 She took the apple out                    ple.                                                                          rot and the
 of the bag and gave it to                                                                                               carrot.
 Jack. She reached into
 the bag again and took
 Alice and Jack walked       Jane asked,   Alice          Alice said,    Alice          Alice said,    Jack              Jack said,     Jane said,
 up the street and met a     "Do you       smiled         "I’m Alice.    smiled         "I’m Alice     smiled and        "I’m Jack.     "Jack and
 girl in a red dress. The    want     to   and said,      What’s         and said,      and this is    said, "I’m        I’m three      Kate"
 girl said to them, "Hi,     play with     "My name       your           "I’m Alice     Jack."         Jane. Nice        years old."
 I’m Jane. What are your     me?"          is Daisy.      name?"         and this is                   to    meet
 names?"                                   What’s                        Jack."                        you!"
                                           your
                                           name?"
 Diva was hungry, and        now?"         to me?"        to bake a      to     help    to    have     to     my         to bake a      to    have
 wanted to bake a cake,                                   cake?"         me bake a      some           cake?"            cake with      some
 but she didn’t have any                                                 cake?"         sugar?"                          me?"           sugar?
 sugar at home, so she de-
 cided to go ask around.
 She started walking and
 met a squirrel. She asked
 the squirrel, "Would you
 happen


                 Figure 13: Performance of different models on context-tracking prompts.


                                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Prompt      Completion                                                                                                    Scores
 Instructions Write a story containing the words: dive, job, sorry.
 (prompt)     Story summary: Bob the big fish finds a shiny rock while searching for food for his friends, but when
              he tells them about it, they are excited to play with it instead of being sad about not having food.
 1M          Once upon a time, there was a big fish named Bob. Bob loved to swim and play with his friends. One            Grammar: 4/10
 8 layers    day, Bob saw a shiny rock on the ground. He wanted to play with it, but it was too big for him.               Creativity: 3/10
             Bob asked his friends if they could play with the rock. His friends said yes, and they all played with the    Plot: 4/10
             rock all day. They had so much fun playing together.                                                          Consistency: 6/10
             But then, something unexpected happened. A big wind came and blew the rock away. Bob was sad
             and didn’t know what to do. He looked around and saw that the rock was gone! He was sad and didn’t
             know what to do.
 2.5M        Once upon a time, there was a big fish named Bob. Bob loved to swim in the big blue sea. One day,             Grammar: 6/10
 8 layers    Bob found a shiny rock. He wanted to show it to his friends.                                                  Creativity: 4/10
             Bob swam to his friend, the big fish named Sam. Bob told Sam about the shiny rock. Sam said, "That’s          Plot: 5/10
             a big rock, Bob! Let’s play with it!" So, Bob and Sam played with the shiny rock all day.                     Consistency: 7/10
             At the end of the day, Bob and Sam were very tired. They went back to their homes. Bob told Sam
             about the shiny rock and the shiny rock. Sam said, "Thank you, Bob! You are a good friend." Bob
             smiled and said, "You’re welcome, Sam!"
 8.3M        Once upon a time, there was a big fish named Bob. Bob loved to dive deep in the water. One day, while         Grammar: 7/10
 8 layers    diving, he found a shiny rock. He was very happy and wanted to show it to his friends.                        Creativity: 6/10
             Bob swam to his friends and said, "Look what I found! It’s a shiny rock!" His friends looked at the rock      Plot: 6/10
             and said, "Wow! That’s a nice rock, Bob!" They all wanted to play with the rock, but they were too            Consistency: 8/10
             scared to play with it.
             Bob felt sorry for the rock. He said, "I’m sorry, rock. I didn’t mean to scare you. Let’s play with it
             together!" So, Bob and his friends played with the shiny rock all day long. They had lots of fun and
             were very happy.
 28M         Once upon a time, there was a big fish named Bob. Bob had a job. His job was to dive deep in the water        Grammar: 7/10
 8 layers    to find food for his friends. He liked his job very much.                                                     Creativity: 6/10
             One day, while Bob was diving, he found a big, shiny rock. He thought it was very pretty. He wanted to        Plot: 7/10
             show it to his friends. But when he dove down, he saw that his friends were not happy. They were sad          Consistency: 9/10
             because they did not have food.
             Bob felt sorry for his friends. He said, "I am sorry, friends. I did not find food for you." His friends
             smiled and said, "It is okay, Bob. We can play with the rock instead." So, Bob and his friends played
             with the shiny rock and had lots of fun.
 33M         Once upon a time, there was a big fish named Bob. Bob had a job. His job was to dive deep in the water        Grammar: 8/10
 4 layers    to find food for his friends. One day, while diving, he saw something shiny.                                  Creativity: 7/10
             Bob swam closer to see what it was. It was a big, shiny rock. He wanted to show it to his friends. But        Plot: 8/10
             when he got to his friends, they were not happy. They did not want to play with the shiny rock.               Consistency: 9/10
             Bob felt sorry. He did not want to make his friends sad. So, he told them about the shiny rock. They all
             went to see it together. They were excited to play with the shiny rock.
             In the end, Bob’s friends were happy. They played with the shiny rock and had lots of fun. Bob was
             glad he did his job and made his friends happy. And they all lived happily ever after.
 21M         Once upon a time, there was a little fish named Bob. Bob loved to dive deep in the water. One day,            Grammar: 7/10
 1 layer     while diving, he found a shiny rock. Bob was very happy and wanted to show it to his friends.                 Creativity: 5/10
             Bob went to his friend, the fish, and said, "Look, I found a shiny rock!" His friend, the fish, said, "Wow,   Plot: 6/10
             Bob! That’s a very pretty rock. Can I see it?" Bob thought for a moment and said, "No, it’s mine. I           Consistency: 4/10
             found it first."
             Bob was sad, but he didn’t give up. He went to his friend, the fish, and said, "I found this shiny rock.
             It’s mine now." His friend was very happy and said, "Thank you, Bob! You are a good friend."
             From that day on, Bob and his friend shared the shiny rock and played together every day. They were
             both very happy and had lots of fun.
 33M         Once upon a time, there was a big fish named Bob. Bob had a job. His job was to dive deep in the water        Grammar: 7/10
 2 layers    and find food for his friends.                                                                                Creativity: 6/10
             One day, while Bob was diving, he saw a shiny rock. He wanted to show his friends the shiny rock. But         Plot: 7/10
             when he told his friends about the rock, they were sad. They did not have any food to eat.                    Consistency: 8/10
             Bob felt sorry for not having food. He told his friends about the shiny rock. They were excited to play
             with it. They all went to the shiny rock and played together. They were happy again.


            Figure 14: Performance of different models on an instruction-following instance


            we measure                                                 P
                                                                           q∈Gk (S) 1gr =q
                                                             gr :=             P
                                                                           |   q∈Gk (S) |

            In other words, for each k-gram generated by the model, we measure the frequency that it
            appears in the original training dataset, where gr = 0 means that the k-gram never appears
            in the training dataset.
       4. How similar is the generated story to the closest point, in terms of Rouge precision score, in
          the entire dataset. Let S1 , S2 , · · · , Sm be all the stories in the training dataset, in Figure 18,


                                                                      21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         we compute
                                           hi = max R2,p (Ti , Sj )
                                                 j∈[m]


Figure 15: Rogue2 (precision) score between the model’s completion and the original story from the
same beginnings (we select 100 from the training dataset). We can see that most of the completions
that the models generate are very different from the ones in the training dataset (and also not
subsampled versions of the original ones).


Figure 16: Maximum Rouge2 score (fmeasure) similarity between the 100 generated stories for each
model. Here original model means the ones generated by GPT-3.5.


Figure 17: Histogram plot of how many times (fraction) each k-gram in the models’ generations also
appears in the training data in log scale (base 10). −10 means it never appears. We can see that most
of the 4, 5-grams in the models’ generations do not even appear once in the entire training data.


Figure 18: Histogram plot for each generated story, the highest rougek score (precision) to the stories
in the training dataset. We can see that the models’ generations are not copying from any particular
story in the training dataset.

For the sake of getting a more concrete impression about how different the model completions are
from the original ending of the story and from other stories in the dataset, in Figure 19 we provide
one example of the original story, the alternative completion by our model together with its closest
point in the training dataset.
The above points towards several findings:

       • When the model generates stories using a diverse set of prompts, it ends up with a diverse
         set of completions.


                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Beginning (prompt)              Tim and Jen are playing with their toys in the living room. Tim has a laser that makes red lights and
                                    sounds. Jen has a doll that she can dress and comb. Tim likes to make his laser point at Jen’s doll and
                                    make noises. Jen does not like that. She tells Tim to stop.
                                    "Stop, Tim! You are hurting my doll! She does not like lasers!" Jen says.
                                    "No, I am not hurting her. I am just playing. Lasers are fun!" Tim says.
                                    Tim does not stop. He makes his laser point at Jen’s doll more and more. Jen gets angry. She grabs
                                    her doll and runs to her room. She slams the door and locks it. Tim follows her and knocks on the
                                    door.
                                    "Jen, open the door! I want to play with you!" Tim says.
                                    "Go away, Tim! You are mean! I don’t
    Original story continuation     want to play with you!" Jen says.
                                    Tim feels sad. He does not understand why Jen is mad at him. He thinks lasers are fun. He goes
                                    back to the living room and lays on the couch. He plays with his laser by himself. He points it at the
                                    ceiling, the walls, the floor. He does not see the big vase on the shelf. He points his laser at the vase.
                                    The vase falls and breaks. The pieces fly everywhere. One piece hits Tim on the head.
                                    (rest of story omitted)
    Completion by model trained     want to play with you or your laser!" Jen says.
    on TinyStories (28M)            Tim does not listen. He keeps pressing the red light on Jen’s doll. He thinks Jen is being nosy and
                                    rude. He waits for Jen to say something. Then he starts to play with his laser by himself. He makes
                                    sparks and flashes with his laser. He laughs and runs around the room.
                                    Jen watches Tim from her window. She feels sad. She wishes Tim would play with her. She picks up
                                    her doll and goes to the door. She shakes the door and tries to open it. But the door does not open.
                                    There is a lock on the doorknob.
                                    Jen has an idea. She runs to her room and gets her scissors. She comes back to the living room and
                                    puts the scissors in the lock. She presses the buttons on the door. She hopes it will open.
                                    (rest of completion omitted)
    TinyStories training data en-   Lila and Tom are playing with their toys in the living room. Lila has a smooth doll with long hair and
    try with maximum similar-       a pink dress. Tom has a horn that makes a loud noise when he blows it. Lila likes to comb her doll’s
    ity to the model’s comple-      hair and make her look pretty. Tom likes to make his horn sound and scare Lila.
    tion (Rouge precision score     "Tom, stop it!" Lila says. "Your horn is too loud. It hurts my ears."
    = 0.29)                         "But it is fun!" Tom says. "Look, I can make it sound like a car, or a cow, or a lion!"
                                    He blows his horn again and again, making different noises. Lila covers her ears and frowns. She
                                    does not like Tom’s horn. She wants him to be quiet.
                                    "Tom, please shut your horn!" Lila says. "I want to play with my doll. She does not like loud noises.
                                    She likes soft music and nice words."
                                    (rest of story omitted)

                   Figure 19: The closest point in the dataset to an alternative completion


        • When truncating stories from the dataset and generating an alternative completion, these
          completions usually turn out to be very different than the original story.
        • Typical k-grams in generated completions rarely appear in the dataset, for values of k as
          small as 4 or 5.
        • The closest point in the dataset to each generated completion is typically still quite far from
          it.

All the above, taken together with the ability of models trained on TinyStories-Instruct to successfully
follow sets instructions which we can easily be verified to be disjoint from the dataset (for example,
combinations of words can be checked), provides strong evidence that our models produce genuinely
novel and diverse stories, rather than simple variations of existing stories.
We remark that nevertheless, we are not able to completely rule out the possibility that the models
perform complex template matching, as it is hard to define and measure what constitutes a novel plot
or a novel story. We acknowledge that this is a limitation of our evaluation. Another possibility is
that the stories in the dataset essentially span the entirety of support of the distribution in the (weak)
metric of complex template matching.

E     I NTERPRETABILITY

Understanding the inner workings of deep neural networks and language models in particular is a
major challenge in this field of study. For example, it is often difficult to assign a specific function
to a given component of a neural network. This may be because, contrary to our intuition based on
human-designed programs, the network components may not have distinct roles, but rather interact
in a complex and messy way. In this section, we present some preliminary evidence that training
smaller models on TinyStories leads to higher interpretability, suggesting that when networks are
constrained in size, we may be able to gain some insights into their internal mechanisms. We focus
on two aspects of the model: the attention heads and the neurons in the MLP.


                                                                     23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As this is not the main focus on our paper, this section is by no means exhaustive and much more
work is required in order to reach more conclusive findings. Rather, we only give some preliminary
evidence which may hopefully motivate future work.

Attention heads. In the study of attention heads, we take advantage of the fact that we were able
to train a very shallow model (having only one transformer block) which still manages to generate
meaningful text. Since the model has only one layer, the attention heads are directly responsible for
generating the output tokens, and thus they may have more interpretable functions than in deeper
models. We use the method of Voita et al (26) to analyze the attention patterns of the heads and
classify them into different types, such as positional, syntactic, or semantic. We also use the method
of Clark et al (6) to visualize the attention maps of the heads and inspect their behavior on specific
examples.
Our findings suggest that the attention heads exhibit diverse and meaningful functions, such as
attending to the previous word, the subject of the sentence, the end of the sentence, or the main topic
of the story. We also observe that some attention heads specialize in generating certain types of
words, such as nouns, verbs, or punctuation. These results suggest that the attention heads learn to
perform different linguistic tasks and capture different aspects of the stories.

Neurons in the MLP. We also give some initial evidence that in smaller models, some neurons in
the MLP have roles that are interpretable by humans. We use the method similar to (16) to identify
the most influential tokens in the MLP for each neuron. We find that some neurons are activated on
words that have a specific role in the sentence (such as the subject or the action), or in the story (such
as the introduction of the protagonist). These findings suggest that the neurons in the MLP learn to
encode different semantic and stylistic information and influence the generation process.

E.1   I NTERPRETING THE ROLE OF DIFFERENT ATTENTION HEADS

To understand the model’s attention pattern after training, we use a 1-layer model with hidden
dimension 1024 and 16 attention heads that was trained on TinyStories. We visualize the attention
patterns that it produces when processing the following paragraph (the bold form is the prompt, the
highlighted text is generated by the model):

         One day, Lucy asks Tom: "I am looking for a banana but I can’t find it". Tom says: "Don’t worry, I will help
         you". Lucy and Tom go to the park. They look for the banana together. After a while, they found the banana. Lucy is
         happy. She says: "Thank you, Tom. You are a good friend." Tom: "You are welcome, Lucy. I am happy to help you.
         Let’s eat the banana together!"


There seems to be a clear separation between heads with attention pattern based mainly on the
distance between tokens, and heads whose attention pattern has a stronger dependence on the
semantic meaning:

Distance based attention. Out of the 16 attention heads, we observe multiple positional-based
attention heads, such that each token attends to tokens with a prescribed relative distance. Different
heads are associated with different distances.

Semantic based attention. We also observe that there is (1). one head that the word “the” and “a”
all attend to the word “banana”, interestingly, the “the” at “the park” also attends to “banana”, but the
model still manage to generate “park”, which is the consistent completion. (2). Another attention
head gives a pattern where the tokens “the” and “a” all attend to “park”. (3). There is third head that
most of the words attend to the name of “Tom” and “Lucy”.
We remark that it makes sense that the generation of words like “the”, “a”, “and” or “,” would be
induced by distance-based, local attention heads, since those are tokens with a grammatical role
which depends on the short-range interactions within a single sentence. On the other hand, the main
entities in the story such as “banana”, “park”, “Lucy” and “Tom” cannot usually be predicted (as a
next token) only based on the neighboring tokens, which is why the model needs to use semantic
attention heads for their generation.


                                                                24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Figure 20: Multi-scale distance-based attention.


                         Figure 21: Semantic attentions according to (1), (2), (3).


E.2    I NTERPRETING THE ROLES OF DIFFERENT N EURONS

In order to examine whether neurons have meaningful roles, we follow (16), and visualize the most
significant tokens for each neuron. More precisely, we take a collection of 20 stories (about 8,000
tokens) from our dataset. We take a model that was trained on TinyStories, we pick a transformer
layer, and from the MLP associated with it we pick one coordinate in its intermediate layer. We refer
to such a choice as a neuron. We process the collection of stories with the model to obtain their
internal representations, which gives us an activation value for each combination of token and neuron.
Then, for each neuron we look at the tokens with highest activations from the entire collection. We
highlight those tokens in red (and present them along with the sentence they are contained in). We
repeated this for two models: a small model of hidden dimension 64 and 1M parameters, trained on
TinyStories (Figure 22), and on GPT2-XL (Figure 23).
In the 1M-parameter model trained on TinyStories, Figure 22 first presents the activated tokens
for the first two neurons in the before-last layer6 . Note that, since the architecture is invariant to
permutations between neurons, taking the two first neurons is the same as taking an arbitrary choice
of two neurons, the point being that these neurons are neither unique nor have been cherry-picked.
We see (top row of the figure) that each those neurons is activated on tokens with a common role (one
is activated on pronouns which are also the subject in the sentence, and the other is activated on the
action in the sentence). In addition, we present the activated tokens for the first neuron in another
layer (layer 6), where the neuron is activates only on adjectives. Finally, we picked the neuron which
has the largest activation values over all combinations of token and neuron. This neuron (depicted in
   6
     The rationale behind choosing the penultimate layer is that tokens have already been processed by most
layers at this point. We take the before-last rather than the last layer since the hidden representation in the last
layer only has only the role of predicting the next token, so information may be lost at that point.


                                                        25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the bottom right) seems to have the role of identifying the first time that the protagonist of the story is
presented.
For comparison, Figure 23 presents the activated tokens for first two neurons of layer 12 for GPT-XL,
a much larger neural network. In this case, none of the two neurons seem to have an apparent role.

                       Layer #7, Neuron #1
                                                                                           Layer #7, Neuron #2
    Mom and Dad smiled and said, "We thought you would
    like this better, Lily!"                                            The bird flew up to the tree and tried to push the ball out.
    Tim said, "I know it’s yummy, but I don’t want my tummy             She kicked it and ran after it, laughing.
    to hurt.
                                                                        She pushed and pulled, but the box would not open.
    Her mom said, "I don’t know, Lucy.
                                                                        They both pushed and pulled, but the tough box still did
    Dad said, "I turned off the water to fix a pipe.                    not open.
    Sam thought for a moment and said, "I think I left it in the        Then, she saw her friend Tom come to the park.
    kitchen."
                                                                        She found her toy box and pushed it to the shelf.
    Sam said, "I’m sorry I lost it.


                       Layer #6, Neuron #1                                                 Layer #7, Neuron #54

    They went home and shared the delicious apple.                      One day, a girl named Amy wanted to have a fun day with
                                                                        her friends.
    She did not like the mean king.
                                                                        Once upon a time, there was a modest girl named Sue.
    The duck did not like the sm elly pond.
                                                                        On the mountain, there was a small boy named Tim.
    The new pond was not smelly.
                                                                        One day, a girl named Sue found a big, tough box.
    Lucy loved to play outside under the big sky.
                                                                        Once upon a time, in an ancient land, there lived a little
    He suggested, "Let’s play a game to forget the scary wind."         frog named Freddy.


Figure 22: Tokens which induce high activations to different neurons, for a small model trained on
TinyStories.

                       Layer #13, Neuron #1                                                Layer #12, Neuron #2
    It’s not safe to play in the fog.                                   Mia looked at Worry and said, "My dad is in the navy.
    She liked to keep her toys and books in the right place.            So, the wise fish told the little fish to mark a spot in the sea
    Once upon a time, there was a gr umpy nurse.                        where they could meet every day.

    She was quiet and kind.                                             The wise fish told the little fish, "Always remember the
                                                                        spot you mark and never forget to learn new things."
    The gr umpy nurse liked Lily very much.
                                                                        Suddenly, the dinosaurs came to life! But the dinosaurs
    She called her friends on the phone and said, "Hi!                  were nice and just wanted to play.
    Sally was tired from playing, so she went inside.                   He was stuck in the mirror world with Jim and could not
    Lucy was very upset.                                                go back to his mom and dad.


              Figure 23: Tokens which induce high activations to different neurons in GPT-XL


F       E XPLORING ARCHITECTURES AND HYPERPARAMETERS FOR NLP WITH
        T INY S TORIES
One of the main challenges in developing large language models (LLMs) comes from the high
computational cost involved in training. Finding the best architectures, training algorithms and
hyperparameters for LLMs requires a lot of resources and experimentation. Therefore, it would be
useful to have a smaller and simpler dataset that can still capture some of the basic capabilities of
LLMs, and allow us to study how different design choices affect their performance. TinyStories is
such a dataset, as it enables us to train and evaluate LMs that are orders of magnitude smaller than
the state-of-the-art models, yet still have the basic capability of producing coherent text.
In this work, we take the first steps towards using TinyStories as a testbed for exploring architectures
and hyperparameters for NLP. We show that our small models exhibit some similar patterns to the
ones observed in LLMs in certain aspects. In particular, we investigate two questions: how to balance
model size and learning budget for a fixed amount of training flops, and how to choose the number of
attention heads for a given model width and depth.


                                                                   26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Model size versus the training FLOPs. For a fixed amount of training flops, there is a trade-off
between the size of the model and the number of training steps (the total number of flops is the
product of both). Previous works (14; 10) have shown that there is a polynomial scaling law between
model size and learning budget for LLMs, i.e., the optimal model size for a given amount of flops is
proportional to the flops raised to some power α > 1. However, these works used different ranges
of model sizes (from a few million to tens of billions of parameters) and found different values of
α (around 0.7 and 0.5, respectively). A natural question is whether this scaling law is universal or
depends on the dataset. Our dataset allows us to conduct a similar experiment but with much smaller
models and flops. Surprisingly, we find evidence for a polynomial scaling law as well, which suggests
that there might be a universal phenomenon here.
We train models of various sizes and architectures on TinyStories. For each amount of flops, we
select the model and the number of training steps that achieve the lowest validation loss among the
possible combinations. We vary the number of layers from 2, 4, 8, 12 and the hidden dimension from
64, 128, 256, 512, 768, 1024, 2048. The result is shown in Figure F. Although the number of points
may be a bit small for the data to be very conclusive, the plot points to a polynomial dependence.


      Figure 24: The scaling law of the best model versus the total number of training flops.

Choosing the number of heads. Another design choice for transformers is the number of attention
heads for each layer. It is not obvious how the number of heads affects the performance of the model,
given a fixed model width and depth. Our results, shown in Figure 25, suggest that in the regime
where the number of heads is small, increasing it improves the performance of the model across all
metrics.


                                                 27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Hidden size   Layer   Head    Eval loss   Grammar    Creativity   Consistency
           768          2      2        1.38        7.77        6.5          7.78
           768          2      4        1.34        8.05       6.57          8.16
           768          2      8        1.33        8.25       6.53          8.16
           768          1      2        1.58        7.13       5.83          6.38
           768          1      4        1.56        7.43       5.90          6.75
           768          1      8        1.54        7.45       6.28          7.02

            Figure 25: Model performance with different number of attention heads


                                             28
