Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A RE LLM S AWARE THAT
S OME Q UESTIONS ARE NOT O PEN - ENDED ?
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown the impressive capability of answering
         questions in a wide range of scenarios. However, when LLMs face different types of
         questions, it is worth exploring whether LLMs are aware that some questions have
         limited answers and have to respond more deterministically but some do not. We
         refer to the ability as question awareness that LLMs know to adjust the determinacy
         of the answers according to the questions. The lack of question awareness leads
         to two contradictory issues: (1) Too casual to answer non-open-ended questions.
         (2) Too boring to answer open-ended questions. In this paper, we first evaluate the
         question awareness ability of LLMs. The experimental results show that LLMs
         have the above issues of lacking the awareness of questions in certain domains, e.g.
         factual knowledge. To mitigate these issues, we propose a method called Question
         Awareness Temperature (QAT) sampling. This method enhances the question
         awareness ability of LLMs by dynamically adjusting the answer distributions
         based on question features. The automatic adjustment in QAT eliminates the need
         for manual temperature tuning in text generation. These findings underscore the
         potential of QAT sampling to enhance LLMs’ question-awareness capabilities,
         thereby advancing their performance in various LLM benchmarks.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2022;
2023; Anthropic, 2023) have emerged as
groundbreaking innovations in the field of             A football team played 22
                                                       games. They won 8 more
artificial intelligence, achieving a remarkable
                                                       than they lost. How many
level of fluency and comprehension in question-        did they win?
answering using the human language (Taori
et al., 2023; Chiang et al., 2023; Xu et al.,
2023). Though LLMs can answer enormous                Write a long essay on
questions with their knowledge base, we are           philosophical views of
hard to tell if the LLMs are aware of what kinds      being and becoming.
of questions they are answering. In other words,
do LLMs understand that, open-ended questions
encourage more casual and creative answers,
but non-open-ended questions, e.g. problems Figure 1: Are LLMs aware that some questions are
about calculations and factual knowledge, need not open-ended?
more accurate answers? We refer to this ability
question awareness that one knows which type of questions requires deterministic answers and which
does not.
The question awareness of LLMs indicates LLMs can identify which questions need more accurate
answers and choose to act more deterministic. It is significant to explore that the question awareness
of LLMs has a relationship to the model hallucinations and how to improve it because LLMs may be
more likely to generate hallucinated answers when they are not sure.
In this paper, we first explore whether LLMs have the ability of question awareness across different
types (open-ended/non-open-ended) of questions. Because LLMs sample the answer tokens from
output distribution, we can examine the degree of the determinacy of LLMs from the steepness of


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the output distributions. We can explore question awareness by checking if there is a difference in
the output distribution when LLMs are asked different types of questions. We do the evaluation
across different types of non-open-ended questions and open-ended questions. The experimental
results show that LLMs have a certain degree of question awareness ability but lack the awareness
of questions in some scenarios, e.g., factual knowledge, thus giving more casual and hallucinated
answers in some cases.
To alleviate the influence of lacking question awareness ability, we propose Question Awareness
Temperature (QAT) sampling, a method that enables LLMs to have question awareness to some
extent and adjust the output distributions through temperature according to the different questions. In
other words, when facing different questions, LLMs attain the ability to adaptively choose to be more
deterministic or not by themselves avoiding the tedious process of temperature tuning.
To sum up, our contributions are stated as follows:

       • We evaluate the question awareness ability of the LLMs and observe that LLMs have the
         fundamental ability to identify open-ended and non-open-ended questions but lack effective
         awareness of questions in some domains.
       • We propose Question Awareness Temperature (QAT) sampling. It enables LLMs to choose
         to be deterministic or not when answering different questions by adaptively adjusting the
         sampling temperature.
       • Our experimental results show that the QAT sampling enhances the question awareness
         ability of the LLMs and improves the performance on various LLM benchmarks.


2     P RELIMINARY E XPERIMENT: Q UESTION AWARENESS E VALUATION

In this section, we evaluate the ability of question awareness that LLMs know which type of question
needs to be answered more carefully in preliminary experiments. We first give a simple formulation
of supervised fine-tuning (SFT) / instruction fine-tuning (Cobbe et al., 2021). Following the SFT
formulation, we define the metric of question awareness using the steepness (kurtosis) of SFT output
distributions as the indicator. Finally, we evaluate the question awareness ability on two widely
used open-source LLMs, namely Llama 2 (Touvron et al., 2023) and Falcon (Penedo et al., 2023),
across different question types. It is noted that we do not evaluate question awareness ability on
GPT-3.5-turbo (OpenAI, 2022) and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) because we can not obtain the output
distributions from the APIs.

2.1   F ORMULATION OF S UPERVISED F INE - TUNING

Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) serves as a bridge that leverages the foundational language compre-
hension gained during pre-training and then tailors it for general conversational purposes. For an
auto-regressive language model, denoted as ϕ, given a joint sequence s = (x1 , x2 , . . . , y1 , y2 , . . . , yT )
of a question x and an answer y of length T , we minimize the SFT training objective only on the
answer sequence y in the teacher forcing fashion (Lamb et al., 2016):

                                                     T
                                                                               !
                                                     X
                               LSF T (ϕ) = E −              log pϕ (ŷt |x, y<t ) .                           (1)
                                                      t=1

During inference after supervised fine-tuning, we sample token from the output distribution
pϕ (ŷt |x, y<t ) to generate the token at step t.

2.2   M ETRIC

Following the formulation of supervived fine-tuning in Eq 1, the steepness of the output distribution
pϕ (ŷt |x, y<t ) = (p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ) indicates how LLMs are confident on the next token to predict
among the entire token vocabulary with size n. A steeper distribution tends to be more like a one-hot
vector, which means LLMs are more sure to predict the tokens with larger probabilities. We use the
kurtosis to reflect how steep the distribution is. If the distribution is steeper, the kurtosis will get larger.


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We use the average kurtosis of the distribution over the whole answer to reflect the determinacy of
the answer. We calculate the average kurtosis K over the entire output distributions as follows:
                           1
                             Pn            4                   T
                          n    i=1 (pi − p)                1X
                  κt =         n              2 − 3,   K =        (κt /κone−hot ),               (2)
                          1                                T t=1
                             P
                                  (pi − p)2           n           i=1
where pi is the probability of the token to predict at step t and κt is the kurtosis of the distribution of
the token at step t. We normalize the average kurtosis to (0, 1) by dividing the kurtosis of the one-hot
distribution κone−hot .

2.3   E VALUATION P ROCESS

In order to test the question awareness, we need to construct a question awareness evaluation dataset,
where questions have distinctions in terms of the determinacy required to answer them. Therefore,
we collect the questions of mainly two types, non-open-ended and open-ended questions. The
non-open-ended questions have only fixed/limited answers: (1) TRU: commonsense knowledge that
needs good understanding to answer, (2) SMW: diverse grade school math word problems, (3) WDK:
memorization of world knowledge about histories, celebrities, places, books, movies, music, and etc.
The open-ended questions are encouraged to have more creative answers about: (1) CCR: content
creation including written articles, emails, and so on, (2) DSC: discussion on a certain topic, (3)
SUG: suggestions offering. More details of this evaluation dataset are illustrated in Sec 4.3.
Using the evaluation dataset, we investigate two open-source LLMs with different sizes, including
Llama 2-Chat 7b/13b/70b (Touvron et al., 2023), Falcon-instruct 7b/40b (Penedo et al., 2023). All of
them are official chat versions, which have been fine-tuned for conversational usage in advance.
                                                     Non-open-ended                                                                    Open-ended

                                                                                    llama2-7b              llama2-13b            llama2-70b



                                                                          0.983
                                                                  0.973
                                                          0.964
                                             0.960                                                                                                       0.957                   0.960
                                                                                                  0.949                        0.951
          Average Kutosis


                                     0.945
                                                                                          0.936                                                                          0.939
                             0.932                                                                                                               0.933
                                                                                                                       0.927
                                                                                  0.917                                                                          0.918
                                                                                                                                         0.913

                                                                                                               0.896


                                     TRU                      SMW                     WDK                              CCR                       DSC                     SUG
                                                                                                          Task


                                                                                                   ｆａｌｃｏｎ－７ｂ           ｆａｌｃｏｎ－４０ｂ


                                                                     0.854


                                        0.788                                                                                                                               0.787
                                                           0.773                             0.774                                                  0.765
                              0.748                                                                                       0.746
          Average Kurtosis


                                                                                                                                                                  0.730
                                                                                   0.706                         0.702                    0.708


                                     TRU                      SMW                     WDK                              CCR                       DSC                     SUG
                                                                                                          Task

Figure 2: The result of question awareness evaluation of different LLMs. The figure above is of
Llama 2 7b/13b/70b and the figure below is of Falcon 7b/40b. These dotted lines are the trend lines
of the kurtosises, which are linearly fitted.


                                                                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.4   R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

LLMs lack a strong sense of question awareness. From the experimental results in Figure 2,
we observe that the kurtosises of the non-open-ended questions are not significantly higher than the
kurtosises of the open-ended questions in all models. For non-open-ended questions, though the
LLMs have relatively high kurtosis in SMW and TRU, LLMs do not show more determinacy in the
output distribution in the WDK, where the kurtosises are close to the average of open-ended questions.
This shows that LLMs fail to recognize some questions about world knowledge are required to be
answered carefully. For open-ended questions, similar problems can be found: Most LLMs have
relatively lower kurtosis in CCR, but fail to be more creative and casual in DSC and SUG.
In conclusion, LLMs have fundamental question awareness on some scenarios, e.g. SMW and CCR
but lack question awareness in some other scenarios, which means in some cases LLMs do not know
when to choose to be more deterministic, thus leading casual and hallucinated answers to open-ended
questions, and vice versa.

Larger models have more confidence in text generation. Though we do not observe an emergence
of question awareness in larger models, we find that models with larger sizes tend to be more
deterministic and focused in the generation. It means they are more confident in the generated answer
and have higher accuracy.


3     Q UESTION -AWARENESS T EMPERATURE S AMPLING

Based on the findings in the preliminary experiments about question awareness, we want to further
improve the performance of LLMs by enhancing the question awareness ability of the LLMs in more
scenarios. Therefore, we propose the Question-Awareness Temperature (QAT) Sampling, which
adaptively adjusts the sampling temperature according to given questions. We first illustrate how
sampling temperature affects the output distributions in text generation. Then we will introduce the
mechanism of our QAT sampling step by step.

3.1   M ETHOD

The steepness of the output distribution can be adjusted by setting the temperature in the Softmax
function as follows:

                                                    lϕ,t (x, y<t )
                      pϕ (ŷt |x, y<t ) = Softmax                    , T ≥ 0,                   (3)
                                                          T
where the lϕ,t (x, y<t ) is the output logit of the token at the step t. We can consider the naive
Softmax function as a Softmax function with a temperature of 1. The lower the temperature is, the
output distribution will get steeper and tend to be a one-hot vector, and vice versa. When the LLMs
face different questions, we want the LLMs themselves to decide the determinacy of the answer
by adjusting the temperature to change the steepness of output distributions. However, there is a
challenge that temperature is a hyperparameter that needs tuning. Though we do not know the optimal
temperature for generation, we can infer the tendency of how temperature changes according to the
determinacy.
Therefore, in QAT sampling, we have two phases. In the first phase of continual fine-tuning, we
first continue fine-tuning the LLMs of the chat version to predict how deterministic and focused
they should be based on the given questions. In the second phase of inference with QAT sampling,
we convert the predicted determinacy score to the sampling temperature and adaptively adjust the
temperature on the fly during inference.

Continual Fine-tuning Phase We first continue fine-tuning the LLMs to have the ability to predict
the determinacy. Therefore, we construct a dataset where questions are rated by a determinacy score.
To be specific, we leverage the GPT-4 to rate the questions by the rules we make, which illustrate how
deterministic the answers should be. For example, we let the GPT-4 rate the open-ended questions
like CCR and DSC with lower scores and non-open-ended questions like TRU and WDK with
higher scores. We use the questions as the input and the determinacy scores as the training labels.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We add a tiny network to the model to predict the determinacy score. This network consists of an
attention layer and a small MLP with 1 hidden layer. The attention layer is initialized by the weights
of the last layer of the original model. We collect the hidden states of the question sequence x,
denoted as the hϕ (x). We feed the hϕ (x) to the attention layer to get a new hidden states h′ϕ (x). We
use the average pooling to get a global feature vector and feed the vector into the MLP. The network
tries to predict the target τ by minimizing the Mean Square Error (MSE) loss as follows:
                 τ̂ = Sigmoid(MLP(AvgPool((h′ϕ (x))),              h′ϕ (x) = Attn(hϕ (x)),              (4)


                                                        1
                                         LQAT (ϕ) =       (τ − τ̂ )2 .                                  (5)
                                                        2
During the continual fine-tuning, we freeze the weights of the model and only fine-tune the weights
of the additional network, avoiding the degradation in the original SFT performance.
Besides that, we need to record the mean and standard deviation of the kurtosis of the output
distributions during training, denoted as Kavg and Kstd . We record these values for the inference
phase later. We calculate the Kavg and Kstd using the exponential moving average as follows:

                              Kavg,s = β · Kavg,s−1 + (1 − β) · K̂avg,s ,
                                                                                                        (6)
                               Kstd,s = β · Kstd,s−1 + (1 − β) · K̂std,s ,

where the K̂avg,s and K̂std,s are calculated by averaging the means and standard deviations of kurtosis
of the whole batch at training step s.

Inference Phase In QAT sampling, before starting the inference, we will first use LLMs to predict
the determinacy score τ̂ from the hidden states of the question tokens x in Eq 4. If the determinacy
score is close to 1 (getting higher), it means the LLMs are required to be more deterministic to
answer the question. The prediction of the determinacy score will be done only once at the start of
the generation.
Though we can simply rescale the determinacy score to get the temperature, it is noted that predicting
the temperature in this way does not take into account the output distributions of the generated
answer. From the findings in question awareness evaluation in Sec 2, we observe that LLMs have
the fundamental question awareness ability in some cases, which means some output distributions
are steep/flat enough to give a deterministic/creative answer. What we need to do is to revise
the unawareness cases and avoid overcorrection. Thus we need to take into account the question
awareness ability which is inherent to the LLMs themselves.
In order to avoid overcorrection, we transfer the original kurtosis of the output distributions to a
target kurtosis we set. The target kurtosis takes the value from the kurtosis interval [Klower , Kupper ],
which is calculated below:
                                      Kupper = Kavg + λ · Kstd ,
                                                                                                     (7)
                                      Klower = Kavg − λ · Kstd ,
where the Kavg and Kstd are recorded in Eq 6 during the continual fine-tuning phase. The kurtosis
interval represents the range that normally kurtosis of the model output distribution can reach.
According to the kurtosis interval, we use the predicted determinacy score τ̂ to calculate a target
kurtosis Ktarget proportionately from the interval as follows:
                      Ktarget = τ̂ · (Kupper − Klower ) + Klower ,        0 ≤ τ̂ ≤ 1,                   (8)
The target kurtosis Ktarget lies in the kurtosis interval, which constrains the range of the kurtosis of
adjusted output distributions. It avoids overcorrection that the adjusted distributions are too steep or
too flat. Therefore, next our goal is to adjust the output distributions thus we can transfer the ’original
kurtosis’ to the target kurtosis. Before that, we use the mean of the kurtosis of the generated token
distributions to represent the ’original kurtosis’:
                                                         t
                                                      1X
                                           κavg,t =         κi ,                                        (9)
                                                      t i=1


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The κavg,t is a running mean which is updated as the number of generated tokens increases. It can be
inferred that as the step t increases, the running mean κavg,t will be approximate to the true average
kurtosis of the output distributions. By changing the temperature of the Softmax function, we can
adjust the temperature T̂t to transfer the average kurtosis κavg,t to approximate the target kurtosis
Ktarget :

                                        T̂t = 1 + η · (κavg,t − Ktarget )t,                                   (10)



                                         T̂t = Clamp(T̂t , Tmin , Tmax ).                                     (11)


In Eq 10, the adjustment of temperature is decided by three factors: (1) the difference between the
κavg,t and Ktarget , (2) the number t of generated tokens, (3) a coefficient η to control the adjustment
speed. For the first factor, if κavg,t > Ktarget , it means the kurtosis of output distributions is higher
than the target kurtosis, thus we need to increase the temperature to flatten the output distributions,
and vice versa. For the second factor, as the number of generated tokens increases, the κavg,t
tends to approach the true average kurtosis of the output distributions. Thus as the t increases, the
(κavg,t − Ktarget ) exerts a greater impact on the temperature adjustment. Finally, we need to clamp
the temperature between an interval to avoid being too high or too low in Eq 11.
To sum up QAT sampling, we realize it in two phases. In the continual fine-tuning phase, we
construct a training dataset to train a determinacy score predictor. In the inference phase as shown in
Algorithm 1, we adjust the temperature mainly according to the difference between current average
kurtosis and target kurtosis. Essentially, QAT sampling does not predict the temperature but uses the
temperature to revise the steepness of output distributions to where it should be while in the constraint
of the kurtosis interval. The key difference is that simply changing the temperature may lead to
overcorrection ignoring the LLM inherent question awareness ability. By contrast, QAT sampling
adjusts the temperature based on the original kurtosis interval to avoid these situations.


Algorithm 1 QAT Sampling in the inference phase
 Input: hiddent states hϕ (x) of question x, output logits lϕ,t (x, y<t ), kurtosis mean Kavg and
kurtosis standard deviation Kstd recorded in the continual fine-tuning phase.
 Output: answer sequence y
  h′ϕ (x) = Attn(hϕ (x))
  τ̂ = Sigmoid(MLP(AvgPool(h′ϕ (x)))                         ▷ Determinacy score prediction in Eq 4
  Kupper = Kavg + λ · Kstd , Klower = Kavg − λ · Kstd                     ▷ Kurtosis interval in Eq 7
  Ktarget = τ̂ · (Kupper − Klower ) + Klower                                ▷ Target kurtosis in Eq 8
  t = 1, T0 = 1.0, y = [ ]                                                            ▷ Initialization
  repeat
                                     l (x,y )
       pˆϕ (ŷt |x, y<t ) = Softmax ϕ,tTt−1<t
                1
                  Pn            4
                    i=1 (pi −p)
      κt =     n
                 Pn             −32                                    ▷ Calculate kurtosis over pˆϕ (ŷt |x, y<t )
            ( 1
              n             )
                   i=1 (pi −p)
                              2     )
                     t
      κavg,t = 1t i=1 κi
                  P

      T̂t = 1 + η · (κavg,t − Ktarget )t                                    ▷ Adjust the temperature in Eq 10
      T̂t = Clamp(T̂t , Tmin , Tmax
                                   )
                                         lϕ,t (x,y<t )
      pϕ (ŷt |x, y<t ) = Softmax              Tt
      yˆt = Sample(pϕ (ŷt |x, y<t ))                    ▷ Sample next token from adjusted output distribution
      y = Append(y, yˆt )                                           ▷ Append new generated token to answer
      t=t+1
  until yˆt == < |endoftext| >                                              ▷ Exit when meeting the eos token
  return y


                                                             6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1     C ONTINUAL F INE - TUNING

4.1.1    QAT T RAINING DATASET

We carefully filter 3.5k high-quality dialogues with different question types from ShareGPT
dataset(Dom Eccleston, 2023). We leverage the GPT-4 to label the questions with the determinacy
scores according to how deterministic the answers should be. We rate the questions for 4 levels from
most creative (level 1) to most deterministic (level 4). We let GPT-4 label each question twice and
average the two ratings as the final level, as shown in Figure 4. We rescale the level score to (0, 1) as
the final determinacy score. The detailed rating criteria and how we prompt GPT-4 to label the data
can be checked in Appendix A.

4.1.2    T RAINING D ETAILS

We continue fine-tuning two widely used LLMs of different sizes, namely Llama 2-Chat 7b/13b/70b
(Touvron et al., 2023), Falcon-instruct 7b/40b (Penedo et al., 2023). All these models have been
supervisedly fine-tuned in advance by the official publishers. We continue fine-tuning these LLMs on
our training dataset. We observe that the QAT loss LQAT quickly converges in approximately 100
steps thus we train for only 1 epoch on the training dataset with a global batch size of 32. We train the
7b models with a learning rate of 2e-5, the 13b model with 1e-5, and the 40b/70b models with 5e-6.

4.2     E VALUATION

In order to verify the effectiveness of the QAT sampling. We use our question awareness evaluation
dataset in Section 2 to evaluate if the LLMs with QAT sampling have a better awareness of different
question types and have better performance than the LLMs with naive temperature sampling. Besides
that, we choose two comprehensive LLM benchmarks, namely AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2023) and
MT-Bench (Zheng et al., 2023), to verify the general performance of the LLMs with QAT sampling.
We set the original LLMs using the naive temperature sampling of temperature 1.0 as the baselines.

4.3     E VALUATION DATASETS

Question Awareness Evaluation Dataset The question awareness evaluation dataset consists of
two types of questions, open-ended and non-open-ended questions. This dataset can also be used to
evaluate the performance of LLMs on different question types except for the evaluation of question
awareness ability in Sec 2.
The open-ended type has three subsets: (1) TRU: We select 100 hard questions about commonsense
knowledge from the TruthfulQA dataset (Lin et al., 2022). (2) SMW: We select 100 school math
word problems of diverse grades from the GSM8k dataset (Cobbe et al., 2021), where each question
needs a certain amount of reasoning besides calculations. (3) WDK: We select 100 questions about
word knowledge from RefGPT-Fact dataset (Yang et al., 2023). RefGPT-Fact is a multi-turn dialogue
dataset adaptively constructed from Wikipedia, including knowledge of histories, celebrities, places
and so on. The non-open-ended type also has three subsets: (1) CCR: content creation like writing
something according to the human’s instruction, (2) DSC: discussing or being asked for perspectives
on a certain topic, (3) SUG: offering some useful suggestions including traveling, studying, and so
on. All these subsets of non-open-ended type have 100 questions each and are carefully selected by
humans from ShareGPT datasets (Dom Eccleston, 2023).

AlpacaEval The AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2023) evaluation set has about 800 single-turn questions
covering a wide range of scenarios to evaluate chat assistants.

MT-Bench MT-bench Zheng et al. (2023) contains a set of 80 challenging multi-turn questions for
evaluating chat assistants, including writing, roleplay, reasoning, math, coding, and so on.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.4            E VALUATION P ROCESS

Considering the huge amount of work of checking whether the model’s answers are correct or not, we
leverage the GPT-4 as the automatic evaluator, where the effectiveness has been verified in AlpacaEval
and MT-Bench. For the question awareness dataset, TRU and SMW both have unique standard
answers, we use the accuracy to measure the performance of these two tasks. WDK about world
knowledge has the references for GPT-4 to check if the model’s answers contain hallucination. We let
GPT-4 score the answers according to the degree of hallucination in WDK. Other three open-ended
tasks of CCR, DSC and SUG do not have standard answers, thus we use the judgment prompt
from MT-bench to score the answers according to the criteria in the prompt. For the AlpacaEval
and MT-bench, similar to the open-ended tasks, the models’ answers are scored by GPT-4 using the
MT-bench judgment prompt.


5      R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

From Figure 3, we evaluate the question awareness ability of the Llama 2 models using QAT sampling.
The descending trend lines have shown a distinction in the awareness between the non-open-ended
questions and open-ended questions. The models with QAT sampling choose to be more deterministic
in answering the non-open-ended questions, thus we can observe higher kurtosises in non-open-ended
tasks. Similar findings can be seen in open-ended questions.
In table 1, we can see that QAT sampling largely improves the LLM performance in the various tasks,
especially in the non-open-ended questions. It means that a better awareness of non-open-ended
questions can reduce the hallucination to some extent.
For the results of two comprehensive LLM benchmarks, both Llama 2 and Falcon have significant
improvements over the baselines, which shows the QAT sampling is useful for different models with
different sizes. We observe that smaller models like Llama 7b and Falcon 7b have more performance
gains than larger models. It can be inferred that the distribution of larger models originally has more
appropriate tokens with high probabilities thus the effectiveness of additional adjustment on the
steepness of the distribution tends to be smaller.

                                                                        llama2-7b              llama2-13b           llama2-70b


                                                               0.984
                                                       0.974
                                               0.970
                                       0.964
      Average Kurtosis


                         0.956 0.956
                                                                                       0.951
                                                                               0.943
                                                                       0.939                                                                0.936
                                                                                                                                    0.931
                                                                                                                            0.921                                   0.921
                                                                                                                                                            0.916
                                                                                                                                                    0.906
                                                                                                                  0.899
                                                                                                          0.893
                                                                                                  0.883


                              TRU                  SMW                     WDK                            CCR                       DSC                     SUG
                                                                                               Task

Figure 3: The result of question awareness evaluation of different LLMs using the QAT sampling.



6      R ELATED W ORK

The methods of controlling text generation in LLMs have seen significant advancements in recent
years. Sampling methods play a crucial role in controlling the output quality, diversity, and creativity
of generated text. This section provides an overview of the key techniques related to sampling in
text generation with LLMs. The development in this area can be broadly categorized into three main
themes: 1) Naive Sampling Strategies, 2) Temperature Scaling, and 3) Post-processing Techniques.


                                                                                           8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Evaluating the performance of LLMs using QAT sampling on various LLM benchmarks.
Acc represents the accuracy and Sco represents the score (1 to 10).

                    TRU     SMW       WDK      CCR      DSC      SUG     AlpacaEval     MT-Bench
    Model
                    Acc      Acc       Sco     Sco      Sco      Sco        Sco           Sco
    Llama 2 7b      50.0     21.0      5.15     9.19    9.35     9.40        8.51           6.88
      + QAT         55.0     29.0      5.61     9.07    9.35     9.43        8.71           7.19
    Llama 2 13b     62.0     43.0      5.78     9.22    9.27     9.45        8.81           7.35
      + QAT         63.0     46.0      6.07     9.25    9.30     9.51        8.96           7.56
    Llama 2 70b     59.0     62.0      6.65     9.33    9.48     9.49        9.20           7.78
      + QAT         61.0     64.0      6.85     9.29    9.50     9.47        9.24           7.83
    Falcon 7b       26.0      2.0      2.79     6.21    6.28     6.61        5.45           4.50
      + QAT         32.0      2.0      3.28     6.41    6.58     6.72        5.82           5.11
    Falcon 40b      50.0     13.0      4.66     7.33    7.91     8.21        7.26           6.30
      + QAT         53.0     15.0      4.98     7.57    8.01     8.16        7.42           6.59


Naive Sampling Strategies Greedy sampling selects the token with the highest predicted probability
at each step, resulting in deterministic and often repetitive text. Beam search (Freitag & Al-Onaizan,
2017) maintains a beam of top-k candidates at each step, expanding multiple possibilities in parallel.
It improves diversity compared to greedy sampling but may still produce repetitive or ungrammatical
text. Random sampling selects tokens based on their predicted probabilities, introducing randomness
into the generation process. It enhances diversity but can produce inconsistent or nonsensical text.


Temperature Scaling The naive sampling strategies only consider the original output distributions.
The temperature in the Softmax function can control the distribution of token probabilities.
Temperature scaling can be adjusted to tune the trade-off between creativity and coherence in
the generated text. In this paper, the QAT sampling can adaptively adjust the temperature to control
the steepness of output distributions.


Post-processing Techniques Because the tokens with higher probabilities are probably appropriate
choices, we can choose only to select these tokens, avoiding sampling nonsensical tokens. Top-k
sampling (Fan et al., 2018) narrows down the token selection to the top-k most probable tokens,
increasing the likelihood of coherent text and balancing diversity and quality. Similar to the
motivation of top-k sampling, nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al., 2020), also known as top-p
sampling, dynamically selects the top-p fraction of tokens with the highest probabilities. Locally
typical sampling (Meister et al., 2023) posits the abstraction of natural language generation as a
discrete stochastic process and samples tokens according to conditional entropy. Entmax sampling
(Martins et al., 2020) leverages entmax transformation to train and sample from a natively sparse
language model. Keyword-based sampling (au2 & Akhtar, 2023) uses knowledge distillation
techniques to extract keywords and samples using these extracted keywords. It is noted that these
post-processing techniques are capable with the QAT sampling, as QAT sampling directly adjusts the
output distribution of LLMs.


7   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we highlight the question awareness ability of LLMs, which receives little attention from
previous studies. While LLMs exhibit a fundamental awareness of open-ended and non-open-ended
questions, they do falter in certain domains, often leading to casual or inaccurate responses. To
bridge the gap, we introduce Question Awareness Temperature (QAT) sampling, enabling LLMs to
autonomously adapt their response determinacy based on question type. Our experiments showcased
the efficacy of QAT, significantly enhancing LLM performance across various benchmarks.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Anthropic.   Introducing claude.   https://www.anthropic.com/index/introducing-claude,
  2023.
Jyothir S V au2 and Zuhaib Akhtar. Keyword based sampling (keys) for large language models, 2023.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna:
 An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //vicuna.lmsys.org.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems, 2021.
Steven Tey Dom Eccleston. Share your wildest chatgpt conversations with one click. https:
  //github.com/domeccleston/sharegpt, 2023.
Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. Hierarchical neural story generation, 2018.
Markus Freitag and Yaser Al-Onaizan. Beam search strategies for neural machine translation. In
 Proceedings of the First Workshop on Neural Machine Translation. Association for Computational
 Linguistics, 2017. doi: 10.18653/v1/w17-3207. URL https://doi.org/10.18653%2Fv1%
 2Fw17-3207.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration, 2020.
Alex Lamb, Anirudh Goyal, Ying Zhang, Saizheng Zhang, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.
  Professor forcing: A new algorithm for training recurrent networks, 2016.
Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following
  models. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca eval, 2023.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human
  falsehoods, 2022.
Pedro Henrique Martins, Zita Marinho, and André F. T. Martins. Sparse text generation, 2020.
Clara Meister, Tiago Pimentel, Gian Wiher, and Ryan Cotterell. Locally typical sampling, 2023.
OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt, 2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Guilherme Penedo, Quentin Malartic, Daniel Hesslow, Ruxandra Cojocaru, Alessandro Cappelli,
  Hamza Alobeidli, Baptiste Pannier, Ebtesam Almazrouei, and Julien Launay. The refinedweb
  dataset for falcon llm: Outperforming curated corpora with web data, and web data only, 2023.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford alpaca, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, and Daxin
  Jiang. Wizardlm: Empowering large language models to follow complex instructions, 2023.
Dongjie Yang, Ruifeng Yuan, YuanTao Fan, YiFei Yang, Zili Wang, Shusen Wang, and Hai Zhao.
  Refgpt: Reference -¿ truthful customized dialogues generation by gpts and for gpts, 2023.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric. P Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena, 2023.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    QAT T RAINING DATASET
The QAT training dataset consists of 3.5k high-quality questions, which are carefully filtered from
the ShareGPT dataset (Dom Eccleston, 2023). We leverage the GPT-4 to label the questions with
the determinacy scores according to how deterministic the answers should be. The prompt and our
criteria are shown in Table 2. We rate the questions for 4 levels from most creative (level 1) to
most deterministic (level 4), as shown in Figure 4. We rescale the level score to (0, 1) as the final
determinacy score.


                                                                                 635
                                                                 623
                                               579
                                540


                                                          500
                    Quantitiy


                                       328


                                                                         303
                                1      1 .5     2         2 .5   3      3 .5         4
                                                     Level

                 Figure 4: The allocation of each level in the QAT training dataset.

                          Table 2: The prompt for collecting QAT training dataset.

 System prompt:
 You need to assess which user inquiries/instructions require a more precise response
 from the AI assistant based on the Judgment Criteria and assign scores according to the
 Judgment Criteria.

 User prompt:
 Judgment Criteria:

- Highly Accurate (4 points): Questions/instructions that have a unique answer, including
 mathematical calculations, factual knowledge inquiries (such as history, medicine,
 biology, physics, astronomy, law, geography, economics, chemistry, general knowledge,
 etc.). These require the most precise responses.

- Fairly Accurate (3 points): Questions/instructions related to logical reasoning, code
 modification and creation, text rewriting and summarization, text translation, reading
 comprehension (answering questions based on provided text), etc. These have relatively
 consistent answers but might involve some interpretation.

- Moderately Accurate (2 points): Questions/instructions related to code discussions and
 creative inquiries that require a certain level of expertise. These involve creativity
 but still require accuracy to some extent.

- Not Very Accurate (1 points): Creative and open-ended questions/instructions (e.g.,
"What do you think about...?" "How do you see...?"). These do not require precision but
 emphasize creativity and viewpoints.

 According to the judgment criteria, considering the type of questions/instructions
 from the user, the AI assistant’s responses need varying degrees of accuracy.
 Questions/instructions with multiple possible answers and lacking a single correct
 response require lower precision and receive lower scores. Provide ratings for the
 question (1-4 points) in the format: "Question: x points". Explain first and then
 present the score.


                                                     11
