Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING OF D IVERSE S KILLS US -
ING M IXTURE OF D EEP E XPERTS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         Agents that can acquire diverse skills to solve the same task have a benefit over
         other agents. Unexpected environmental changes for example may prohibit exe-
         cuting a learned behavior such that a complete retraining is necessary if the agent
         can not discard the invalid skill and rely on previously acquired, different ones.
         However, Reinforcement Learning (RL) policies mainly rely on Gaussian param-
         eterization, preventing them from learning multi-modal, diverse skills. In this
         work, we propose a novel RL approach for training policies that exhibit diverse
         behavior. To this end, we propose a highly non-linear Mixture of Experts (MoE)
         as the policy representation, where each expert formalizes a skill as a contextual
         motion primitive. The context defines the task, which can be for instance the
         goal reaching position of the agent, or changing physical parameters like friction.
         Given a context, our trained policy first selects an expert out of the repertoire of
         skills and subsequently adapts the parameters of the contextual motion primitive.
         To incentivize our policy to learn diverse skills, we leverage a maximum entropy
         objective combined with a per-expert context distribution that we optimize along-
         side each expert. The per-expert context distribution allows each expert to focus
         on a context sub-space and boost learning speed. However, these distributions
         need to be able to represent multi-modality and hard discontinuities in the envi-
         ronment’s context probability space. Moreover, the distributions should not rely
         on environmental pre-knowledge such as context boundaries, as they are usually
         not given. We solve these requirements by leveraging energy-based models to rep-
         resent the per-expert context distributions and show how we can efficiently train
         them using the standard policy gradient objective. We show that our approach can
         learn precise and diverse skills of challenging robot simulation tasks.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent advances in supervised policy learning have demonstrated the potential of training high-
capacity policies capable of capturing multi-modal behaviors, as evidenced in recent studies (Shafi-
ullah et al., 2022; Blessing et al., 2023; Chi et al., 2023). These policies have exhibited remarkably
diverse skills and outperformed state-of-the-art methods. However, Reinforcement Learning (RL)
policies usually rely on Gaussian parameterization that are able to discover only a single-mode so-
lution to a task. While this limitation may suffice for tasks where environmental changes are not
expected as for instance in production lines, achieving robustness in the face of dynamic environ-
ments, or learning adversarial strategies, such as playing table tennis against an opponent, requires
agents to acquire diverse skills akin to human adaptability.
In this work, we propose a new approach for training policies that exhibit multi-modality within
the behavioral space in the realm of RL. Our trained agents possess a diverse repertoire of skills
from which they can select to tackle a specific task in different ways. We consider Contextual Rein-
forcement Learning in which a continuous-valued context defines the task (Kupcsik et al., 2013). A
context can represent various scenarios, such as the location a robot needs to reach or varying physi-
cal parameters like friction or the desired position of an object or robot. Our method employs highly
non-linear mixtures of expert policies to capture multi-modality within the action/behavior space of
the agent. We also use automatic curriculum learning, enabling each expert to focus on a specific
sub-region of the context space it favors. We introduce this curriculum shaping by optimizing for an
additional per-expert context distribution that is used to sample contexts from the preferred regions


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to train the corresponding expert. Automatic curriculum learning has proven to increase perfor-
mance by improving the exploration of agents, particularly in sparse-rewarded environments (Klink
et al., 2022). In the case of continuous context spaces, these distributions are often parameterized as
Gaussian (Klink et al., 2020a; Celik et al., 2022). However, the agent is usually unaware of the con-
text bounds, which makes additional techniques necessary to constrain the distribution updates to
stay within the context region (Celik et al., 2022). Instead, we employ energy-based per-expert con-
text distributions, which can be evaluated for any context and effectively represent multi-modality
in the context space. Importantly, our model is trained solely using context samples from the envi-
ronment that are inherently valid and within the defined bounds. This approach eliminates the need
for additional regularization of the context distribution and does not require prior knowledge about
the environment. Due to the overlapping probability distributions of different per-expert contexts,
our resulting mixture policy offers diverse solutions for the same context. Recent research in RL has
explored mixture of experts policies, but often these methods either train the mixture in unsuper-
vised RL settings and then select the best-performing expert in the downstream task (Laskin et al.,
2021; Eysenbach et al., 2019) or train linear experts, limiting their performance (Daniel et al., 2012;
Celik et al., 2022). Our inspiration draws from recent advancements that have achieved diverse skill
learning with a similar objective to ours. However, their approach involves linear expert models with
Gaussian context distributions and requires prior knowledge of the environment to design a penalty
term when the algorithm samples contexts outside of predefined bounds. These factors restrict the
algorithm’s performance and even its applicability if defining the context bounds need knowledge
such as forward kinematics in robotics.
To summarize, in this paper, we introduce Di-SkilL – Diverse Skill Learning, a novel RL method
for learning a mixture of experts model. Our method is able to generalize to the continuous range
of contexts defined by the environment’s context distribution while learning multi-modal, and non-
linear behaviors for solving a task defined by a specific context. Importantly, our approach operates
without any assumption about the environment. To this end, we show how we can learn multi-modal
context distributions by training an energy-based model solely on context samples obtained from the
environment. Additionally, we demonstrate that we can learn high-performing and diverse behaviors
on sophisticated simulated robotic tasks.


2   P RELIMINARIES AND R ELATED W ORK

Contextual episode-based Policy Search (CEPS). CEPS is a black-box approach to reinforcement
learning (RL). In this framework, the search distribution is the agent’s policy that is optimized for
the mapping of contexts c to policy parameters, typically represented as motion primitives (Schaal,
2006; Paraschos et al., 2013; Li et al., 2023) parameterized by θ. The policy π(θ|c) is optimized by

                                    max Ep(c) Eπ(θ|c) [R(c, θ)] ,                                 (1)
                                   π(θ|c)

where R(c, θ) is the return. Given context samples from the environment’s context distribution p (c),
the policy π(θ|c) chooses the controller’s parameters θ once in the beginning of the episode. One of
the noteworthy advantages of contextual episode-based RL lies in the independence of assumptions
such as the Markovian property in common MDPs. This characteristic renders it a versatile method-
ology, particularly well-suited for addressing a diverse array of intricate tasks where the formulation
of a Markovian reward function proves elusive. For instance, it demonstrates particular efficacy in
scenarios demanding the retrospective evaluation of an agent’s performance, such as in tasks involv-
ing the rewarding of an agent based on its maximum achieved height, as encountered in jumping
tasks (Otto et al., 2023). CEPS has been explored by researchers who have applied various opti-
mization techniques, including Policy Gradients (Sehnke et al., 2010), Natural Gradients (Wierstra
et al., 2014), stochastic search strategies (Hansen & Ostermeier, 2001; Mannor et al., 2003; Ab-
dolmaleki et al., 2019), and trust-region optimization techniques (Abdolmaleki et al., 2015; Daniel
et al., 2012; Tangkaratt et al., 2017), particularly in the non-contextual setting. Researchers have
expanded the scope of these settings by incorporating linear contextual adaptation (Tangkaratt et al.,
2017; Abdolmaleki et al., 2019) as well as non-linear adaptation (Otto et al., 2023), leveraging the
recently introduced trust-region layers for neural networks (Otto et al., 2021). All of the previously
mentioned methods focus on learning single-mode policies and do not address acquiring diverse
skills leveraging automatic curriculum learning, which are key aspects that distinguish our research.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Curriculum Reinforcement Learning. CRL has the potential to increase the performance of RL
agents, especially in sparse-rewarded environments in which exploration is fundamentally difficult.
Adapting the environment based on the agent’s learning process has been proposed by several works
already, e.g. automatically generating sets of tasks or goals to increase the learning speed of the
agent (Florensa et al., 2017; Sukhbaatar et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020; Florensa et al., 2018),
or generating a curriculum by interpolating an auxiliary and a known distribution of target tasks
(Klink et al., 2022; 2020a;b). Other works propose sampling a training level from a prespecified set
of environments (Jiang et al., 2021b), or design an environment in an unsupervised manner (Jiang
et al., 2021a; Dennis et al., 2020) based on the agent’s learning process. None of the aforementioned
methods apply automatic curriculum learning on a RL problem with an MoE policy, except for the
work in (Celik et al., 2022). They, however, parameterize the curriculum distribution as a Gaussian
where we consider an energy-based model which has many benefits as we show in Section 3.
Mixture of Experts (MoE) Policy for Curriculum Learning. The MoE policy is formalized as
                                        X
                              π(θ|c) =      π(o|c)π(θ|c, o),                            (2)
                                                o

where the gating distribution π(o|c) assigns an expert o to the given context c. The expert π(θ|c, o)
adapts the parameters θ of the motion primitive for c. The corresponding motion primitive is then
executed in the environment. While this form of the MoE is suitable in inference time where the
context is assigned by the environment and the agent needs to propose a skill, it does not allow to
automatically learn a curriculum during training. This drawback is caused by the lack of a param-
eterized distribution π (c) that is part of the MoE and allows to explicitly choose and set context
samples for the model itself such that each expert can decide on which contexts it favors training.
Introducing a generative model in the context space is a small, but necessary distinction to enable au-
tomatic curriculum learning for each single expert o. We can easily reparameterize the MoE without
any assumption by using Bayes’ rule as Celik et al. (2022)
                                            X π(c|o)π(o)
                                 π(θ|c) =                  π(θ|c, o).                               (3)
                                              o
                                                  π (c)
The per-expert context distribution π(c|o)P can now be optimized and allows the expert o to choose
contexts c it favors. Note that π (c) = o π(c|o)π(o). We model each π(c|o) as an energy-based
model and each π(θ|c, o) as a Gaussian parameterized as a neural network (see also Fig. 1). The
prior π(o) is set to be a uniform distribution throughout this work.
Self-Paced Diverse Skill Learning with Mixture of Experts (MoE). Discovering different skills
in the same context-defined task is called learning diverse skills. MoE models (see Eq. 3) are specif-
ically suitable for skill discovery due to their ability to represent multi-modality and the per-expert
context distribution π(c|o) for automatic curriculum learning which allows the experts to specialize
in a sub-set of the context space. For explicit optimization of the aforementioned properties, the
KL-regularized Maximum Entropy Reinforcement Learning objective (Celik et al., 2022)

                 max Eπ(c) Eπ(θ|c) [R(c, θ)] + αH [π(θ|c)] − βKL (π (c) ∥ p (c))                    (4)
               π(θ|c),π(c)

is a natural choice. The KL-term in the objective allows for curriculum learning in which the con-
text distribution π (c) is optimized to match the environment’s distribution p (c). This part of the
objective can be prioritized during optimization by choosing the scaling parameter β appropriately.
The entropy of the mixture model incentivizes learning versatile solutions (Celik et al., 2022) and
can be prioritized with a high scaling parameter α. Inserting π(θ|c), π (c) from Eq. (3) into Eq. (5)
and applying Bayes theorem leads to

     max Eπ(o),π(c|o) Eπ(θ|c,o) [R(c, θ) + α log π(o|c, θ)] + β log p (c) + (β − α) log π(o|c)
    π(c,θ)

             + αEπ(o),π(c|o) [H [π(θ|c, o)]] + βEπ(o) [H [π(c|o)]] + βH [π(o)]                       (5)


It is well-known that this objective is difficult to optimize for MoE policies and requires further steps
to obtain a per-component lower-bound Celik et al. (2022)
               max Eπ(c|o),π(θ|c,o) [R(c, θ) + α log π̃(o|c, θ)] + αEπ(c|o) [H [π(θ|c, o)]]          (6)
              π(θ|c,o)



                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for the expert updates and a per-component lower-bound for the per-expert context updates
                    max Eπ(c|o) [Lc (o, c) + (β − α) log π̃(o|c)] + βH (π(c|o)) ,                     (7)
                    π(c|o)

where Lc (o, c) = Eπ(θ|c,o) R(c, θ) + α log π̃(o|c) + αH [π(θ|c, o)]. The variational distributions
π̃(o|c, θ) = πold (o|c, θ) and π̃(o|c) = πold (o|c) arise through the decomposition and are respon-
sible for learning diverse solutions and concentrating on context regions with small, or no support
by π (c). Every iteration, the variational distributions are updated to tighten the bounds. The exact
derivations can be found in (Celik et al., 2022).
Diverse Skill Learning. Ren et al. (2021) proposes using MoE policy representation and presents a
novel gradient estimator to calculate the gradients w.r.t. the MoE parameters. (Huang et al., 2023)
presents a model-based RL approach to train latent variable models. The work presents a novel
lower bound for training the multi-modal policy parameterization. These methods differ to our
work in that they are not categorized in the CEPS framework and do not use automatic curriculum
learning techniques. In the CEPS framework, Diverse Skill Learning with MoE models has also been
explored in the works by Daniel et al. (2012); End et al. (2017). They, however, consider learning
an MoE model with linear experts without automatic curriculum learning and need to add additional
constraints to enforce diversity in the experts. The work by Celik et al. (2022) also relies on the
maximum entropy objective as we do, however, their method only considers linear experts with
Gaussian per-expert distributions which limits the performance and consequently requires many
experts to solve a task. Moreover, it requires environment knowledge to hand-tune a punishment
term to keep the optimization of the per-expert context distributions within the context bounds.
Unsupervised Reinforcement Learning. Another field of research that considers learning diverse
policies is unsupervised reinforcement learning (URL). In URL the agent is first trained solely with
an intrinsic reward to acquire a diverse set of skills from which the most appropriate is picked
to solve a downstream task. More related to our work is a group of algorithms that obtain their
intrinsic reward based on information-theoretic formulations (Laskin et al., 2021; Eysenbach et al.,
2019; Campos et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2019; Liu & Abbeel, 2021). However, their resulting objective
is based on the mutual-information and differs from the objective we maximize. The learned skills
in the pre-training aim to cover distinct parts of the state-space during pre-training in the absence of
an extrinsic task reward which implies that skills are not explicitly trained to solve the same task in
different ways. Those methods operate within the step-based RL setting which differs from CEPS.

3     D IVERSE S KILL L EARNING
In this section, we present Di-SkilL. We provide a high-level overview of our method, discuss emerg-
ing issues and show how we address them. In particular, we show how we can use energy-based
models for automatic curriculum learning.

3.1   H IGH -L EVEL OVERVIEW OF D I -S KIL L

The common Contextual Episodic Policy Search (CEPS) (Kupcsik et al., 2013) with a Mixture of
Experts (MoE) policy representation learning loop observes a context c, selects an expert o that
subsequently adjusts the controller parameters θ given (c, o). We consider the same process during
testing time as shown in blue color in Fig. 1 and in the corresponding graphical model in Fig.
2a. However, the procedure changes during training for Di-SkilL as automatic curriculum learning
requires that the agent can determine which context regions it prefers to focus on. In this case, we
observe a batch of context samples from the environment’s context distribution p (c). For each of
these samples, every per-expert context distribution π(c|o) calculates a probability, which results in
a categorical distribution. We use these probabilities to sample contexts for each expert π(θ|c, o)
resulting in (c, o) samples since this sampling is repeated for each expert o. The training is illustrated
in orange color in Fig. 1 and shown in the graphical model in Fig. 2b. Each chosen expert o provides
a Gaussian distribution over the motion primitive parameters θ by mapping the context c to a mean
vector µθ and a covariance matrix Σθ . A trajectory τ is generated and subsequently executed by
a trajectory following controller on the environment by providing the motion primitive generator a
sampled parameter θ. The trajectory generation and execution process is visualized in green color
in Fig. 1. For each (c, o) sample, the agent observes an episode return R(c, θ) which is used for


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  During Inference                                                              During Training                  o = 1, ..., K

                                                                                  π(c|o)


                                                    o ∼ π(o|c)



                                                                     c ∼ π(c|o)
                                        π(o|c)


                                                                                                                    c ∼ p(c)
                         c ∼ p(c)


                                                                                                      Softmax
         (o, c)

             (o, c)                                                                                                            (c)        (c)


                                    o                                                      Trajectory Generation
                                         µθ
                                                 θ ∼ N (µθ , Σθ )                      θ·                       =
                                         Σθ



Figure 1: The Sampling procedure for Di-SkilL. During Inference the agent observes contexts c
sampled from the environment’s unknown context distribution p (c). The agent calculates the gating
probabilities π(o|c) for each context and samples an expert o resulting in (o, c) samples marked in
blue. During Training we first sample a batch of contexts c from p (c). We use this batch to calculate
the distribution π(c|o) for each individual expert o = 1, ..., K. The per-expert context distribution
π(c|o) provides higher probability for contexts that are preferred by the expert π(θ|c, o). To enable
curriculum learning, we provide each expert the contexts sampled from its corresponding π(c|o),
resulting in the samples (o, c) marked in orange. For both procedures, the chosen π(θ|c, o) samples
motion primitive parameters θ for each c resulting in a trajectory τ that is subsequently executed on
the environment. Before execution, the corresponding context c, e.g., goal position of a box needs
to be set in the environment. This is illustrated by the dashed arrows with the corresponding context
in blue for inference and orange for training.
updating the MoE as we show in Section 3.3. Yet, there exist several issues for a stable overall
training of the MoE model, which requires special treatment for each π(c|o) and π(θ|c, o). We
showcase and address them in the following sections.

3.2   E NERGY-BASED M ODEL F OR AUTOMATIC C URRICULUM L EARNING

Fig. 2d illustrates a two-dimensional environment’s context distribution p(c). Even though only a
uniform distribution, it is challenging for the Reinforcement Learning (RL) agent to automatically
learn its curriculum π(c|o) within the valid context space due to the following reasons. Hard dis-
continuities such as steps often naturally arise in p (c) due to the environment’s finite support. For
instance, in an environment where the agent’s task is to place an object to specific positions on a
table, the probability of observing a goal position outside the table’s surface is zero. This implies
that a large subset of the context space has no probability mass. Therefore, exploration in these
regions might be difficult if there is no guidance encoded in the reward. Even if it is guaranteed that
π(c|o) only samples valid contexts, it still needs to be able to represent multi-modal distributions,
such as illustrated in Fig. 2d. Multi-modality can easily occur if experts π(θ|c, o) prefer contexts in
spatially apart regions. Because of these reasons we require π(c|o) to be able to represent i) complex
distributions, ii) multi-modality and iii) only explore within the valid context bounds of p (c). We
propose parameterizing π(c|o) as an energy-based model (EBM)
                                                                                     exp(ϕo (c))
                                                                 π(c|o) =                                                                        (8)
                                                                                         Z
to address the issues i) and ii). EBMs have shown to be capable of representing sharp discontinued
functions and multi-modal distributions (Florence et al.,R2022). Yet, they are hard to train and sample
from due to the intractable normalizing constant Z = c exp(ϕo (c))dc. We can easily circumvent
these issues and additionally address issue iii) by approximating the normalizing constant with con-
                               PN
texts c ∼ p (c) as Z ≈ N1 i=1 exp(ϕo (ci )). This approximation is justified as we can easily
sample from p (c) by simply resetting the environment without execution. Additionally, by resam-
pling a large enough batch of contexts c ∼ p (c) in each iteration, the EBM will encounter important
parts of the context space during the training. Each expert can therefore sample preferred contexts
from the current batch of valid contexts by simply calculating the probability for each of the contexts
using π(c|o) as parameterized in Eq. 8. Note that this sampling procedure is not straightforwardly


                                                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                  0.162                          0.2025
                                                                  0.144                          0.1800

      c                     o                                     0.126                          0.1575
                   o                  c                           0.108                          0.1350
                                                                  0.090                          0.1125
                                                                  0.072                          0.0900
                                                                  0.054                          0.0675
                                                                  0.036                          0.0450
                                                                  0.018                          0.0225
            θ                    θ
                                                                  0.000                          0.0000


           (a)                  (b)                    (c)                             (d)

Figure 2: Probabilistic Graphical Models (PGMs) during inference a) and training b). During
a)) the model observes the contexts c from the environment. An expert o is sampled from π(o|c),
which subsequently leads to an adjustment of the motion primitive parameters by π(θ|c, o). We
iterate over each expert during (b), sample the contexts c and the motion primitive parameter θ from
the per-expert distribution π(c|o) and π(θ|c, o) respectively. Sampling from π(c|o) allows shaping
the expert’s curriculum. c) illustrates the environment’s context distribution p (c) (c)) and a possibly
optimal π(c|o) (d)) in two-dim. space. Yellow areas indicate high and purple zero probability.
The illustrations show that optimizing π(c|o) requires dealing with i) step-like non-linearities, ii)
multi-modality, iii) bounded within the red rectangle support of p (c), complicating exploration.
applicable to explicit models such as Gaussians, or Normalizing Flows (Papamakarios et al., 2021).
Those methods would need additional techniques like importance sampling that might destabilize
learning if not carefully calibrated by enforcing overlapping support regions of the sampling and the
actual distribution. In our case, updating the parameters of the EBM can easily be addressed by the
standard RL objective for diverse skill learning, as we show in the next sections.

3.3      U PDATING THE M IXTURE OF E XPERTS M ODEL

We update each expert π(θ|c, o) and its corresponding per-expert context distribution π(c|o) by
maximizing the objectives in Eq. 6 and in Eq. 7 respectively. These decomposed objectives allow
to independently update both distributions and to retain the properties of diverse skill learning from
the objective in Eq. 5. However, updating the distributions is not straightforward due to the bi-level
optimization that leads to a dependency of both terms. This is in particular problematic for the
expert π(θ|c, o) as the sampled contexts c can drastically change from one iteration to another if
π(c|o) changes too aggressively. The same applies for updating π(c|o) as calculating the objective
requires calculating an integral over θ under the expectation of π(θ|c, o). For a stable update for
both distributions, we employ trust-region updates to restrict the change of both distributions from an
iteration to another. Trust-Region updates have shown to considerably improve the learning progress
recently (Otto et al., 2021; Schulman et al., 2015; 2017).

Expert Update. We parameterize each expert π(θ|c, o) with a single neural network and update
them by a trust-region constrained optimization
             max Eπ(c|o),π(θ|c,o) [R(c, θ) + α log π̃(o|c, θ)] + αEπ(c|o) [H [π(θ|c, o)]]
                 π(θ|c,o)

                    s.t.            KL (π(θ|c, o) ∥ πold (θ|c, o)) ≤ ϵ ∀ c ∈ C,                   (9)
where the KL-bound ensures that the expert π(θ|c, o) does not differ too much from the expert
πold (θ|c, o) from the iteration before. We efficiently update the experts using trust region layers
Otto et al. (2021; 2023). The entropy bonus incentivizes π(θ|c, o) to fully cover the parameter
space, while avoiding (θ, c) regions that are covered by other experts o. The latter is guaranteed by
π̃(o|c, θ) which rewards (θ, c) regions that can be assigned to expert o with high probability.

Per-Expert Context Distribution Objective. We consider the objective with the augmented re-
wards as shown in Eq. 7 for updating each π(c|o) distribution. We can not apply the trust region
layers (Otto et al., 2021) in this case, as π(c|o) is a discrete distribution parameterized by the EBM.
Yet, we can still use PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) for updating π(c|o) and simplify our objective, as
we can now calculate many terms in closed form. For this, we rewrite the objective as
                                                                                      !               !
       X                       X                                           X
 max       π(c|o)Lc (o, c) +       π(c|o) (β − α) log π̃(o|c) − log            π̃(o|c) − β log π(c|o)
π(c|o)
                                 i                                        o
                                                                                                     (10)


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              Init. Box Pos.                        1
    5Link-Reacher              Obstacle
                                                                                                                                                        0
                       Tip                                                         0.8


                                                               Mean Success Rate


                                                                                                                                    IQM Mean Return
     Goal
                                                                                   0.6
                                                                                                                                                      −10
                               Target Pos. & Orientation
                                                                                   0.4
                                          Racket
                                                                                                             Di-SkilLwoCurrV2
            Obstacle                                                                                         Di-SkilL                                 −20
                        Ball                                                       0.2                       Di-SkilLwoCurrV1
    Goal                         Goal Landing Pos.                                                           SVSL                                                                 Di-SkilL
                                                                                                             BBRL            ·106                                                 BBRL ·105
                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                      −30
              Changes in
                                                                                           0      1       2       3       4     5                           0   1         2         3        4
              each episode
                                                                                               Number of Episodic Samples                                       Number of Episodic Samples

 (a) Visualization of Environments                                                       (b) Ablation on the-TT                     (c) Mean Return on RT Environment

Figure 3: a) (left top) Reacher Task (RT). In RT, a 5-Link Reacher has to reach a goal with its tip.
The context space is the 2-dim. position of the goal in the XY-surface. (Top right) Box Pushing
(BP). In (BP) a 7DoF robot has to push the red box to the target position (green) while avoiding the
obstacle (blue), where the blue sides of the boxes need to align. (Bottom Left) mini golf (MG). In
(MG) a 7DoF robot has to hit the ball such that it passes through the tight goal while avoiding the
obstacles. The context space is the 2-dim. position of the obstacle, the X-positions of the ball and
the goal (total 4dim.). (Bottom right) table tennis (TT). In the (TT) environment a 7DoF robot has
to return a ball to a desired ball landing position. The context consists of the 2-dim. ball serving
position and the 2-dim. desired goal position. In the more complex version we increase the context
dim. to five by including varying initial ball velocities. b) Ablation studies, showcasing the need
of automatic curriculum learning for Di-SkilL. BBRL and Di-SkilL can solve the four-dim. TT,
where its variants without curriculum learning (Di-SkilLwoCurV1, Di-SkilLwoCurrV2) struggle
to achieve a good performance. SVSL needs more samples to achieve around 80% success rate,
suffering under the linear experts. c) Performance of Di-SkilL and BBRL on RT.
and observe that all terms in the second sum can be calculated in closed-form. Note that the first term
is approximated by samples from π(c|o) since it requires                              over θ under the
                                                             calculating the integral
expectation of π(θ|c, o) because of Lc (o, c) = Eπ(θ|c,o) R(c, θ) + α log π̃(o|c) + αH [π(θ|c, o)].
The entropy bonus in Eq. (10) incentivizes to cover the context space, while focusing on context
regions that are not, or only partly coverd by other options. The latter is guaranteed by π̃(o|c) which
assigns a high probability if expert o can be assigned to the context c.

4          E XPERIMENTS

In our empirical evaluations, we compare our method against the baselines BBRL (Otto et al., 2023)
and SVSL (Celik et al., 2022). Both methods are suitable baselines as they are state of the art al-
gorithms in the field of Contextual Episode-Based Policy Search (CEPS). BBRL is able to learn
highly non-linear policies leveraging trust region updates. SVSL learns linear Mixture of Experts
(MoE) models and is able to capture multi-modality in the behavior space. We aim to clarify how
important the automatic curriculum learning for Di-SkilL is and whether Di-SkilL is able to learn
high-performing and diverse skills. We consider challenging robotic environments with continu-
ous context and parameter spaces. The considered environments either have a non-markovian, i.e.
requires retrospect data for calculation, or temporally sparse reward functions which additionally in-
creases the learning complexity. Note that we use ProDMPs (Li et al., 2023) to generate trajectories
throughout our environments. Experimental details can be found in the Appendix C.

4.1         D O WE NEED AUTOMATIC C URRICULUM L EARNING ?

An important feature of Di-SkilL is that each expert is able to shape its own curriculum by explicitly
sampling from preferred context regions and gradually increasing the covered context space with
increasing performance. We show the importance of this feature by disabling the automatic cur-
riculum learning, by setting log π̃(o|c) = 0 in Eq. 10 and setting the entropy scaling parameter
β = 2000 to a very high value such that π(c|o) is uniformly distributed over the context space. Set-
ting log π̃(o|c) = 0 eliminates the intrinsic motivation of each π(c|o) to focus on sub-regions in the
context space that are not, or only partially, covered by any other per-expert distribution. We evaluate
two variants of Di-SkilL. The variational distribution is set to zero and beta is to β = 2000 in both


                                                                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                     0.8                                                                0.6
                     0.6


                                                                                                                                     IQM Success Rate
  IQM Success Rate


                                                                  IQM Success Rate
                                                                                     0.6
                     0.4                                                                                         Di-SkilL                               0.4
                                                                                                                 BBRL
                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                 LinDi-SkilL
                     0.2                     Di-SkilL                                                            PPO                                    0.2
                                                                                     0.2
                                             BBRL                                                                                                                                   Di-SkilL
                      0
                                             LinDi-SkilL ·106                                                                ·106                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                    BBRL ·106
                                                                                      0
                           0   0.5     1      1.5      2    2.5                            0   0.5     1       1.5       2     2.5                            0    0.5       1        1.5      2
                               Number of Episodic Samples                                      Number of Episodic Samples                                         Number of Episodic Samples


                     (a) IQM Success Rate-TT                                         (b) IQM Success Rate-BP                                            (c) IQM Success Rate-MG


                     (d) Strike from left to right.                                  (e) Forehand counter strike.                        (f) Backhand backspin strike.

Figure 4: Performance on the extended a) TT, b) BP and c) MG tasks. a) While BBRL converges
faster, Di-SkilL achieves a higher success rate eventually. b) The multi-modality introduced by the
obstacle in the box pushing task leads to around 65% for BBRL and around 85% succes rate for
Di-SkilL. Di-SkilL is able to represent multi-modality in the context c and parameter θ space. c)
Di-SkilL achieves around 20% higher success rate on the MG task.
variants. For Di-SkilLwoCurV1, we provide the same number of 50 context-parameter samples per
expert as in Di-SkilL, whereas Di-SkilLwoCurV2 receives 260 samples per expert in each iteration.
All variants of Di-SkilL consist of five experts. Note that β = 0.5 for Di-SkilL as it showcases our
method with all its inherent features. We run all methods on the table tennis environment, in which
a 7DoF robot has to learn fast and precise motions to smash the ball on the desired position on the
opponent’s side (see Fig. 3a and Appendix C) (Otto et al., 2023). A strike is considered as success-
ful if the distance of the ball’s landing position and the goal is smaller than 0.2m. The table tennis
environment requires good exploratory behavior and has a non-markovian reward structure, which
makes state of the art step-based approaches infeasible to learn useful skills (Otto et al., 2023). Fig.
3b shows the mean success rates and the 95% confidence interval for each method on at least four
seeds. BBRL and Di-SkilL achieve a very high success rate. However, we can clearly see that Di-
SkilLwoCurV1 converges to a much smaller success rate and Di-SkilLwoCurV2 needs much more
samples to reach the level of Di-SkilL. Interestingly, SVSL also shows worse performance, even
though the model has 20 experts. The results show that automatic curriculum learning is a necessary
feature for Di-SkilL to solve the task and that linear experts are not capable of achieving a satisfying
performance. SVSL requires desing a punishment function to guide the context samples in the valid
context region, which makes its application difficult, especially if the context influences the objects’
physics. We therefore propose comparing to BBRL and LinDi-SkilL instead of SVSL. LinDi-SkilL
benefits from Di-SkilL’s energy-based π(c|o) and hence does not require additional treatment, but
has linear expert parameterizations as SVSL.

4.2                    A NALYZING THE P ERFORMANCE AND D IVERSITY OF S KILLS

We consider more complex variants of the 5-Link Reacher, table tennis and the box pushing en-
vironment introduced by (Otto et al., 2023). Additionally, we benchmark on the robot minigolf
environment (see Fig. 3a and Appendix C for details). We report the performances of Di-SkilL,
Lin-DiSkill and BBRL, and analyze the learned diverse solutions of Di-SkilL. We have conducted
24 seeds for each environment and algorithm and report the interquartile mean (IQM) with a 95%
stratified bootstrap confidence interval as suggested by Agarwal et al. (2021).
5-Link Reacher Environment (5LRE). Initially in (Otto et al., 2023) only the first and second
quadrant were considered as goal reaching position to avoid multi-modal solutions. We consider
all quadrants and compare to BBRL in Fig. 3c. Di-SkilL converges a bit slower than BBRL, but
eventually achieves a higher return.


                                                                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Di-SkilL’s Diverse Skills for the BP Task. The figures visualize diverse solutions to the
same contexts c on a table (black rectangle). The red, thick rectangle represents the obstacle. The
7DoF robot is tasked to push the box (shown in different colors for each solution found) to the goal
box position (red rectangle with a green dot) and align the blue edges to match the orientation. We
visualized successful box trajectories for each sampled skill. The diversity learned in the parameter
space results in different box trajectories ranging in the position and the orientations.

Table Tennis Environment (TTE). We extend the TTE by varying the initial ball velocity in the
agent’s direction during the serve. This additionally increases the learning complexity, as the agent
now needs to reason about the physical effects of changed velocity ranges. The performance can be
seen in Fig. 4a. Di-SkilL achieves similar performance as BBRL, but eventually surpasses BBRL’s
success rate slightly. Both methods show less success rate than for the easier variant (Section 4.1).
Yet, Di-SkilL is able to learn diverse skills to the same or similar contexts, as visualized in Fig. 4.
Box Pushing Environment (BPE). The 7DoF Robot has to push a box to a target position and rota-
tion on a table while avoiding an obstacle in an increased context region. A box push is considered
successful if the distance of the box’ and the target box position is smaller than 5cm and the z-axis
orientation error is smaller than 0.5rad. Fig. 4b shows the success rate of BBRL and Di-SkilL.
Di-SkilL outperforms BBRL with a success rate of around 70% to 50%. The obstacle introduces
multi-modality in the behavior space which can not be captured by a single-mode policy, explaining
BBRL’s low success rate. Fig. 5 shows different box trajectories learned by Di-SkilL.
Robot Minigolf Environment (MGE). In the MGE the robot has to hit the ball in a wall-surrounded
environment with two obstacles, such that it passes through the tight goal by at least 0.75m. Note that
one of the obstacles’ position is resampled in each episode. The MGE is a challenging environment
as the agent has to infer the ball’s trajectory and possible collisions with the obstacles and the walls
while precisly hitting the ball through the tight whole. Fig. 4c shows the performances of Di-SkilL
and BBRL. Di-SkilL achieves a success rate of around 70% while BBRL converges to around 50%,
showing that Di-SkilL is able to learn precise solutions and overcome possible multi-modalities.


5   C ONCLUSION

We proposed a novel method for learning diverse skills using contextual Mixture of Deep Experts.
Each expert automatically learns its curriculum by optimizing for a per-expert context distribution
π(c|o). We have demonstrated major challenges which arise through enabling automatic curriculum
learning (ACR) and proposed parameterizing π(c|o) as energy-based models (EBMs) to address
these challenges. Additionally, we provided a methodology to efficiently optimize these EBMs. We
also proposed using trust-region updates for the deep experts for stabilizing our bi-level optimization
problem. In an ablation we have shown that ACR is necessary for efficient and performant learn-
ing. Moreover, on sophisticated robot simulation environments, we have shown that our method
outperforms the baselines and learns diverse skills. Currently, the major drawback of our approach
is that it is not able to replan, causing failures in the tasks if the robot even has small collisions
with objects. We intend to address this issue in future research. Additionally, techniques such as
intra-option learning might reduce the sample-complexity.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Abbas Abdolmaleki, Rudolf Lioutikov, Jan R Peters, Nuno Lau, Luis Pualo Reis, and Gerhard
  Neumann. Model-based relative entropy stochastic search. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 28, 2015.
Abbas Abdolmaleki, David Simoes, Nuno Lau, Luı́s Paulo Reis, and Gerhard Neumann. Contextual
  direct policy search: With regularized covariance matrix estimation. Journal of Intelligent &
  Robotic Systems, 96:141–157, 2019.
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 34:29304–29320, 2021.
Denis Blessing, Onur Celik, Xiaogang Jia, Moritz Reuss, Maximilian Xiling Li, Rudolf Lioutikov,
  and Gerhard Neumann. Information maximizing curriculum: A curriculum-based approach for
  training mixtures of experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15349, 2023.
Victor Campos, Alexander Trott, Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher, Xavier Giró i Nieto, and Jordi
  Torres. Explore, discover and learn: Unsupervised discovery of state-covering skills. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July
  2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1317–1327.
  PMLR, 2020. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/campos20a.html.
Onur Celik, Dongzhuoran Zhou, Ge Li, Philipp Becker, and Gerhard Neumann. Specializing ver-
  satile skill libraries using local mixture of experts. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1423–
  1433. PMLR, 2022.
Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shuran
  Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. In Proceedings of
  Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2023.
Christian Daniel, Gerhard Neumann, and Jan Peters. Hierarchical relative entropy policy search. In
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 273–281. PMLR, 2012.
Michael Dennis, Natasha Jaques, Eugene Vinitsky, Alexandre Bayen, Stuart Russell, Andrew Critch,
 and Sergey Levine. Emergent complexity and zero-shot transfer via unsupervised environment
 design. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:13049–13061, 2020.
Felix End, Riad Akrour, Jan Peters, and Gerhard Neumann. Layered direct policy search for learning
  hierarchical skills. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
  pp. 6442–6448. IEEE, 2017.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need:
  Learning skills without a reward function. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SJx63jRqFm.
Pete Florence, Corey Lynch, Andy Zeng, Oscar A Ramirez, Ayzaan Wahid, Laura Downs, Adrian
  Wong, Johnny Lee, Igor Mordatch, and Jonathan Tompson. Implicit behavioral cloning. In
  Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 158–168. PMLR, 2022.
Carlos Florensa, David Held, Markus Wulfmeier, Michael Zhang, and Pieter Abbeel. Reverse cur-
  riculum generation for reinforcement learning. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 482–495.
  PMLR, 2017.
Carlos Florensa, David Held, Xinyang Geng, and Pieter Abbeel. Automatic goal generation for
  reinforcement learning agents. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1515–1528.
  PMLR, 2018.
Nikolaus Hansen and Andreas Ostermeier. Completely derandomized self-adaptation in evolution
  strategies. Evolutionary computation, 9(2):159–195, 2001.
Zhiao Huang, Litian Liang, Zhan Ling, Xuanlin Li, Chuang Gan, and Hao Su. Reparameterized
  policy learning for multimodal trajectory optimization. ICML, 2023.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Minqi Jiang, Michael Dennis, Jack Parker-Holder, Jakob Foerster, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim
 Rocktäschel. Replay-guided adversarial environment design. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 34:1884–1897, 2021a.
Minqi Jiang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. Prioritized level replay. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4940–4950. PMLR, 2021b.
Pascal Klink, Hany Abdulsamad, Boris Belousov, and Jan Peters. Self-paced contextual reinforce-
  ment learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 513–529. PMLR, 2020a.
Pascal Klink, Carlo D’Eramo, Jan R Peters, and Joni Pajarinen. Self-paced deep reinforcement
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:9216–9227, 2020b.
Pascal Klink, Haoyi Yang, Carlo D’Eramo, Jan Peters, and Joni Pajarinen. Curriculum reinforce-
  ment learning via constrained optimal transport. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 11341–11358. PMLR, 2022.
Andras Kupcsik, Marc Deisenroth, Jan Peters, and Gerhard Neumann. Data-efficient generalization
  of robot skills with contextual policy search. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, volume 27, pp. 1401–1407, 2013.
Misha Laskin, Denis Yarats, Hao Liu, Kimin Lee, Albert Zhan, Kevin Lu, Catherine Cang,
 Lerrel Pinto, and Pieter Abbeel. Urlb: Unsupervised reinforcement learning benchmark.
 In J. Vanschoren and S. Yeung (eds.), Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing
 Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks, volume 1. Curran, 2021. URL https:
 //datasets-benchmarks-proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
 2021/file/091d584fced301b442654dd8c23b3fc9-Paper-round2.pdf.
Lisa Lee, Benjamin Eysenbach, Emilio Parisotto, Eric Xing, Sergey Levine, and Ruslan Salakhutdi-
  nov. Efficient exploration via state marginal matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05274, 2019.
Ge Li, Zeqi Jin, Michael Volpp, Fabian Otto, Rudolf Lioutikov, and Gerhard Neumann. Prodmp:
  A unified perspective on dynamic and probabilistic movement primitives. IEEE Robotics and
  Automation Letters, 8(4):2325–2332, 2023.
Hao Liu and Pieter Abbeel. Aps: Active pretraining with successor features. In Marina Meila
  and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 6736–6747. PMLR, 18–24 Jul
  2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/liu21b.html.
Shie Mannor, Reuven Y Rubinstein, and Yohai Gat. The cross entropy method for fast policy search.
  In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-03), pp. 512–
  519, 2003.
Fabian Otto, Philipp Becker, Ngo Anh Vien, Hanna Carolin Ziesche, and Gerhard Neumann. Dif-
  ferentiable trust region layers for deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.09207,
  2021.
Fabian Otto, Onur Celik, Hongyi Zhou, Hanna Ziesche, Vien Anh Ngo, and Gerhard Neumann.
  Deep black-box reinforcement learning with movement primitives. In Conference on Robot
  Learning, pp. 1244–1265. PMLR, 2023.
George Papamakarios, Eric Nalisnick, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Balaji Lak-
  shminarayanan. Normalizing flows for probabilistic modeling and inference. The Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 22(1):2617–2680, 2021.
Alexandros Paraschos, Christian Daniel, Jan R Peters, and Gerhard Neumann. Probabilistic move-
  ment primitives. Advances in neural information processing systems, 26, 2013.
Jie Ren, Yewen Li, Zihan Ding, Wei Pan, and Hao Dong. Probabilistic mixture-of-experts for
   efficient deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09122, 2021.
Stefan Schaal. Dynamic movement primitives-a framework for motor control in humans and hu-
  manoid robotics. In Adaptive motion of animals and machines, pp. 261–280. Springer, 2006.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1889–1897. PMLR,
  2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Frank Sehnke, Christian Osendorfer, Thomas Rückstieß, Alex Graves, Jan Peters, and Jürgen
  Schmidhuber. Parameter-exploring policy gradients. Neural Networks, 23(4):551–559, 2010.
Nur Muhammad Shafiullah, Zichen Cui, Ariuntuya Arty Altanzaya, and Lerrel Pinto. Behavior
  transformers: Cloning k modes with one stone. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 35:22955–22968, 2022.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Zeming Lin, Ilya Kostrikov, Gabriel Synnaeve, Arthur Szlam, and Rob Fer-
  gus. Intrinsic motivation and automatic curricula via asymmetric self-play. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=SkT5Yg-RZ.
Voot Tangkaratt, Herke Van Hoof, Simone Parisi, Gerhard Neumann, Jan Peters, and Masashi
  Sugiyama. Policy search with high-dimensional context variables. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 31, 2017.
Daan Wierstra, Tom Schaul, Tobias Glasmachers, Yi Sun, Jan Peters, and Jürgen Schmidhuber.
  Natural evolution strategies. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1):949–980, 2014.
Yunzhi Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Lerrel Pinto. Automatic curriculum learning through value dis-
  agreement. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:7648–7659, 2020.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     T HE PARAMETERIZATION OF THE M IXTURE OF E XPERTS (M O E) M ODEL
In the following we provide details on the parameterization of the MoE model.
Parametrization of the expert π(θ|c, o). We parameterize each expert π(θ|c, o) as a Gaussian
policy N (µγ (c), Σγ (c), where the mean µγ (c) and the covariance Σγ (c) are functions of the
context c and parameterized by a neural network with parameters γ. Although the covariance Σγ (c)
is formalized as a function of the context c, we have not observed any advantages in doing so. In
our experiments we therefore parameterize the covariance as a lower-triangular matrix L and form
the covariance matrix Σ = LLT .
Parameterization of the per-expert context distribution π(c|o). The reader is referred to Section
3 for details on the parameterization of π(c|o)
Parameterization of the prior π(o). We fix the prior π(o) to a uniform distribution over the number
K of available components and do not further optimize this distribution. This is a useful definition
to increase the entropy of the mixture model.
                                                                                    P
Parameterization of the context distribution π (c). Due to the relation π (c) = o π(c|o)π(o),
π (c) is defined by π(c|o) and does not need explicit modelling.
Parameterization of the gating distribution π(o|c). Due to the relation π(o|c) = π(c|o)π(o)
                                                                                     π(c)     we
do not need an explicit parameterization of π(o|c) and can easily calculate the probabilities for
choosing the expert o given a context c.



B     U SING M OTION P RIMITIVES IN THE C ONTEXT OF R EINFORCEMENT
      L EARNING
Motion Primitives (MPs) are a low-dimensional representation of a trajectory. For instance, instead
of parameterizing a desired joint-level trajectory as the single state in each time step, MPs intro-
duce a low-dimensional parameter vector θ which concisely defines the trajectory to follow. The
generation of the trajectory depends on the method that is used. Probabilistic Movement Primi-
tives (ProMPs) Paraschos et al. (2013) for example define the desired trajectory as a simple linear
function τ = ΦT θ, where Φ are time-dependent basis functions (e.g. normalized radial basis
functions). Dynamic Movement Primitives (DMPs) Schaal (2006) rely on a second order dynamic
system which provides smooth trajectories in the position and velocity space. Recently Probabilistic
Dynamic Movement Primitives (ProDMPs) were introduced by Li et al. (2023) and combines the
advantages of both methods, that is the easy generation of trajectories and smooth trajectories. We
therefore rely on ProDMPs througout this work.
In the context of reinforcement learning, the policy π(θ|c), or in our case an expert π(θ|c, o) defines
a distribution over the paremeters θ of the MP depending on the observed context c. This allows the
policy to quickly adapt to new tasks defined by c.
C     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
C.1     H YPERPARAMETERS AND E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS

C.1.1    A BLATION S TUDIES
Environment. We use the same table tennis environment as presented in (Otto et al., 2023), in
which a 7 Degree of Freedom (DoF) robot has to return a ball to a desired ball landing position.
The context is the four dimensional space of the ball’s initial landing position ( x ∈ [−1, −0.2],
y ∈ [−0.65, 0.65]) on the robot’s table side and the desired ball landing position (x ∈ [−1.0, −0.2],
y ∈ [−0.6, 0.6]) on the opponent’s table side. The robot is controlled with torques on joint-level
in each time-step. The torques are generated by the tracking controller (PD-controller) that tracks


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the desired trajectory generated by the motion primitive. We consider three basis functions per
joint resulting in a 21 dimensional parameter (θ) space. We additionally allow the agent to learn
the trajectory length and the starting point of the trajectory. Note that the starting point allows the
agent to define when after the episode’s start the generated desired trajectory should be tracked.
Induced by the varying contexts, this is helpful to react to the varying time the served ball needs
to reach a positional space that is convenient to hit the ball with the robot’s racket. Overall the
parameter space is 23 dimensional. The task is considered successful if the returned ball lands on
the opponent’s side of table and within ≤ 0.2m to the goal location.
The reward function is unchanged from (Otto et al., 2023) and is defined as
                
                
                 0,                                                                 if cond. 1
                0.2 − 0.2 tanh (min ||pr − pb ||2 ),
                
                
                                                                                    if cond. 2
       Rtask = 3 − 2 tanh (min ||pr − pb ||2 ) − tanh (||pl − pgoal ||2 ),           if cond. 3
                                                                           2
                  6 − 2 tanh (min ||pr − pb ||2 ) − 4 tanh (||pl − pgoal || ),
                
                
                
                                                                                    if cond. 4
                                                                          2
                  7 − 2 tanh (min ||pr − pb ||2 ) − 4 tanh (||pl − pgoal || ),       if cond. 5
                

where pr is the executed trajectory position of the racket center, pb is the executed position trajectory
of the ball, pl is the ball landing position, pgoal is the target position. The different conditions are

       • cond. 1: the end of episode is not reached,
       • cond. 2: the end of episode is reached,
       • cond. 3: cond.2 is satisfied and robot did hit the ball,
       • cond. 4: cond.3 is satisfied and the returned ball landed on the table,
       • cond. 5: cond.4 is satisfied and the landing position is at the opponent’s side.

The episode ends when any of the following conditions are met

       • the maximum horizon length is reached
       • ball did land on the floor without hitting
       • ball did land on the floor or table after hitting

The whole desired trajectory is obtained ahead of environment interaction, making use of this prop-
erty we can collect some samples without physical simulation. The reward function based on this
desired trajectory is defined as
                                 X
                                      d
                      rtraj = −     |τij | − |qjb |, (i, j) ∈ {(i, j) | |τij
                                                                          d
                                                                             | > |qjb |}
                                 (i,j)

where τ is the desired trajectory, i is the time index, j is the joint index, q b is the joint position
        d

upper bound. The desired trajectory is considered as invalid if rtraj < 0, an invalid trajectory will
not be executed on the robot. The overall reward is defined as:

                                            r    , rtraj < 0
                                     r = traj
                                            rtask , otherwise

SVSL. SVSL requires designing a guiding punishment term for context samples that are not in a
valid region. For the four dimensional context space in table tennis this can be easily done using
quadratic functions (as proposed in the original work (Celik et al., 2022)):


                                          Rc (c) = −20 · d2c ,
where d2c is the distance of the current context c to the valid context region.

SVSL Hyperparameters All hyperparameters are summarized in the Table 1.

Di-SkilL and BBRL Hyperparameters All hyperparameters are summarized in the Table 2.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             add component every iteration                  1000
                       fine tune all components every iteration              50
                                number component adds                         1
                               number initial components                      1
                                number total components                      20
                    number traj. samples per component per iteration         200
                                            α                              0.0001
                                            β                                0.5
                                    expert KL-bound                         0.01
                                   context KL-bound                         0.01

                                Table 1: Hyperparameters for SVSL

                                                                  Di-SkilL       BBRL
                            critic activation                        tanh          tanh
                          hidden sizes critic                       [8,8]       [32, 32]
                             initialization                      orthogonal    orthogonal
                                 lr critic                         0.0003        0.0003
                            optimizer critic                        adam          adam
                             ciritc epochs                           100           100
                   activation context distribution                   tanh            –
                     epochs context distribution                     100             –
                      hidden sizes context distr                   [16,16]           –
                             initialization                      orthogonal          –
                        lr context distribution                    0.0001            –
                       optimizer context distr                      adam             –
                      batch size per component                         50          209
            number samples from environment distribution            5000             –
                  number samples per component                         50          209
                        normalize advantages                        True          True
                           expert activateion                        tanh          tanh
                                 epochs                              100           100
                          hidden sizes expert                        [64]          [32]
                                lr policy                          0.0003        0.0003
                            covariance type                           full          full
                                  alpha                             0.001            –
                                   beta                               0.5            –
                         number components                              5            –
                           covariance bound                         0.005         0.001
                              mean bound                             0.05          0.05
                            projection type                           KL            KL
                       trust region coefficient                      100             25

                Table 2: Hyperparameters for Di-SkilL and BBRL for the ablations.


C.1.2    E XTENDED TABLE T ENNIS TASK .
Environment. We extend the table tennis environment described in Appendix C.1.1 by addi-
tionally including the ball’s initial velocity into the context space. We define the initial velocity
vx ∈ [1.5 m     m
           s , 4 s ]. Note that every single constellation within the resulting context space is a valid
context. There exist ball landing positions which can not be set along with a subset of the initial
velocity range. This makes designing a guiding punishment term for SVSL especially difficult.
We adopt the parameter space and the reward function as defined in the standard table tennis
environment as described in Appendix C.1.1.

Di-SkilL and BBRL Hyperparameters All hyperparameters are summarized in the Table 3.



                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                     Di-SkilL      BBRL
                             critic activation                          tanh         tanh
                           hidden sizes critic                         [8,8]      [32, 32]
                              initialization                        orthogonal   orthogonal
                                  lr critic                           0.0003       0.0003
                             optimizer critic                          adam         adam
                              ciritc epochs                             100          100
                    activation context distribution                     tanh           –
                      epochs context distribution                       100            –
                       hidden sizes context distr                     [16,16]          –
                              initialization                        orthogonal         –
                         lr context distribution                      0.0001           –
                        optimizer context distr                        adam            –
                       batch size per component                           50         209
             number samples from environment distribution              5000            –
                   number samples per component                           50         209
                         normalize advantages                          True         True
                            expert activateion                          tanh         tanh
                                  epochs                                100          100
                           hidden sizes expert                         [128]       [32,32]
                                 lr policy                            0.0003       0.0003
                             covariance type                             full         full
                                   alpha                               0.001           –
                                    beta                                 0.5           –
                          number components                               10           –
                            covariance bound                           0.005       0.0005
                               mean bound                               0.05         0.05
                             projection type                             KL           KL
                        trust region coefficient                        100            25

        Table 3: Hyperparameters for Di-SkilL and BBRL for the extended Table Tennis Task.


C.1.3     E XTENDED B OX P USHING TASK

Environment. We adapt the box pushing environment as presented in (Otto et al., 2023), by chang-
ing major parts of the context space. The goal of the box pushing task is to move a box to a specified
goal location and orientation using the seven DoF Franka Emika Panda. The newly context space
(compared to the original version in (Otto et al., 2023)) are described in the follown. We increase the
box’ goal position range to xg ∈ [0.3, 0.6], yg ∈ [−0.7, 0.45], and keep the goal orientation angle
ϕ ∈ [0rad, 2πrad]. Additinally, we include an obstacle in between the initial box and the box’ goal.
The range of the obstacles position is xo ∈ [0.3, 0.6], yo ∈ [−0.3, 0.15]. note that we guarantee a
distance of at least 0.15m between the obstacle’s position and the initial position as well as at least
0.15m between the obstacle’s position and the box’ goal position.
The robot is controlled via torques on joint level. We use four basis functions per DoF, resulting
in a parameter space of 28 dimensions. We consider an episode successful if the box’ orientation
around the z-axis error is smaller than 0.5 rad and the position error is smaller than 0.05m.
The sparse-in-time reward function is up to a scaling parameter the same as presented in (Otto
et al., 2023). We describe the whole reward function in the following.
The box’ distance to the goal position is

                                        Rgoal = ∥p − pgoal ∥,

where p is the box position and pgoal is the goal position. The rotation distance is defined as

                                                 1
                                   Rrotation =     arccos |r · rgoal |,
                                                 π

                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where r and rgoal are the box orientation and goal orientation quaternion respectively. The incentive
to keep the rod within the box is defined as
                                       Rrod = clip(||p − hpos ||, 0.05, 10),
where hpos is the position of the rod tip. Similarly, to incentivize to maintain the rod in a desired
rotation, the reward
                                                2
                           Rrod rotation = clip( arccos |hrot · h0 |, 0.25, 2)
                                                π
is defined, where hrot and h0 = (0, 1, 0, 0) are the current and desired rod orientation in quaternion
respectively. To incentivize the robot to stay within the joint and velocity bounds, the error
                                         X                                          X
                    err(q, q̇) =                        (|qi | − |qib |) +                          (|q̇j | − |q̇jb |)
                                   i∈{i||qi |>|qib |}                        j∈{j||q̇j |>|q̇jb |}

is used, where q, q̇, qb , and q̇b are the robot’s joint positions and velocities as well as their respective
bounds. To learn low-energy motions, the per-time action (torque) cost
                                                               K
                                                               X
                                                        τt =         (ait )2 ,
                                                                i

is used. The resulting temporal sparse reward is given as

                    −Rrod − Rrod rotation − 0.02τt − err(q, q̇),                            t < T,
       Rtot =
                    −Rrod − Rrod rotation − 0.02τt − err(q, q̇) − 350Rgoal − 200Rrotation , t = T,
where T = 100 is the horizon of the episode. The reward gives relevant information to solve the ask
only in the last time step of the episode, which makes exploration hard.

Di-SkilL and BBRL Hyperparameters All hyperparameters are summarized in the Table 4.


                                                                17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      Di-SkilL      BBRL
                             critic activation                           tanh         tanh
                           hidden sizes critic                         [32,32]     [32, 32]
                              initialization                         orthogonal   orthogonal
                                  lr critic                            0.0003       0.0003
                             optimizer critic                           adam         adam
                              ciritc epochs                              100          100
                    activation context distribution                      tanh           –
                      epochs context distribution                        100            –
                       hidden sizes context distr                      [16,16]          –
                              initialization                         orthogonal         –
                         lr context distribution                       0.0001           –
                        optimizer context distr                         adam            –
                       batch size per component                           50          399
             number samples from environment distribution               5000            –
                   number samples per component                           50          399
                         normalize advantages                           True         True
                            expert activateion                           tanh         tanh
                                  epochs                                 100          100
                           hidden sizes expert                         [32,32]      [64,64]
                                 lr policy                             0.0003       0.0003
                             covariance type                          diagonal     diagonal
                                   alpha                                 0.01           –
                                    beta                                  64            –
                          number components                               10            –
                            covariance bound                            0.001        0.005
                               mean bound                                0.05         0.05
                             projection type                              KL           KL
                        trust region coefficient                          25           25

        Table 4: Hyperparameters for Di-SkilL and BBRL for the extended Box Pushing task.


C.2     E XTENDED 5-L INK R EACHER TASK

Environment. In the 5-Link Reacher task, a 5-link planar robot has to reach a goal position with
its tip. The reacher’s initial position is straight to the right. This task is difficult to solve especially
for episodic RL methods, as it introduces multi-modality in the behavior space. (Otto et al., 2023)
avoided this multi-modality by constraining the y coordinate of the goal position to y ≥ 0, i.e. the
first two quardants. We adapt the 5Link-Reacher task by increasing the context space to the full
space, i.e. all four quadrants. We consider 5 basis functions per joint leading to a 25 dimensional
parameter space. We consider the sparse reward function presented in (Otto et al., 2023) as

                                        −τt                           t < T,
                              Rtot =
                                        −τt − 200Rgoal − 10Rvel t = T,
where
                                         Rgoal = ∥p − pgoal ∥2
and
                                                    K
                                                    X
                                             τt =        (ait )2 ,
                                                     i

. The sparse reward only returns the task reward in the last time step T and additionally adds a
                          PK i 2
velocity penalty Rvel =      i (q̇T ) . The joint velocities are denoted asq̇. This velocity penalty
avoids overshooting in the last time step.

Di-SkilL and BBRL Hyperparameters All hyperparameters are summarized in the Table 5.


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                Di-SkilL       BBRL
                            critic activation                      tanh          tanh
                          hidden sizes critic                    [32,32]      [32, 32]
                             initialization                    orthogonal    orthogonal
                                 lr critic                       0.0003        0.0003
                            optimizer critic                      adam          adam
                             ciritc epochs                         100           100
                   activation context distribution                 tanh            –
                     epochs context distribution                   100             –
                      hidden sizes context distr                 [16,16]           –
                             initialization                    orthogonal          –
                        lr context distribution                  0.0001            –
                       optimizer context distr                    adam             –
                      batch size per component                       50          240
            number samples from environment distribution          5000             –
                  number samples per component                       50          240
                        normalize advantages                      True          True
                           expert activateion                      tanh          tanh
                                 epochs                            100           100
                          hidden sizes expert                    [32,32]       [64,64]
                                lr policy                        0.0003        0.0003
                            covariance type                         full          full
                                  alpha                          0.0001            –
                                   beta                              16            –
                         number components                           10            –
                           covariance bound                       0.001         0.005
                              mean bound                           0.05          0.05
                            projection type                         KL            KL
                       trust region coefficient                    100             25

      Table 5: Hyperparameters for Di-SkilL and BBRL for the extended 5-Link Reacher task.


C.3    ROBOT M INI G OLF TASK

Environment. In the robot mini golf task the agent needs to hit a ball while avoiding the two
obstacles, such that it passes the tight goal to achieve a bonus. The context space consists of
the ball’s initial x-position xball ∈ [0.25m, 0.6m], the XY positions of the green obstacle xobs ∈
[0.3, 0.6] and yobs ∈ [−0.5, −0.1] and the x positions of the goal xball ∈ [0.25, 0.6]. The parameter
space is 29 dimensional resulting from the 4 basis functions per joint and an additional duration
parameter which allows the robot to learn the duration of the trajectory. The robot starts always at
the same position. The reward function consists of three stages:
                     −0.0005 · τt ,
                   
                                                                                    if cond. 1
                   
                     0.2 − 0.2 tanh (min ||pr − pb ||),                              if cond. 2
                   
         Rtask =
                   
                    2 −  2 tanh (min ||pb − pg ||) − tanh (||pb,y − p thresh,y ||), if cond. 3
                   
                     6,
where the individual conditions are
       • cond. 1: the end of episode is not reached,
       • cond. 2: the end of episode is reached and robot did not hit the ball,
       • cond. 3: the end of episode is reached and robot has hit the ball, but ball didn’t pass the
         goal
       • cond. 4: the end of episode is reached, robot has hit the ball and the ball has passed the
         goal for at least 0.75m
The episode ends when the maximum horizon length T = 100 is achieved. We again make use of
the advantage that we obtain the whole desired trajectory ahead of the environment interaction, such


                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that we can collect some samples without physical simulation. The reward function based on this
desired trajectory is defined as
                                X
                                    d
                       rtraj =    |τij | − |qjb |, (i, j) ∈ {(i, j) | |τij
                                                                        d
                                                                           | > |qjb |}
                               (i,j)

where τ d is the desired trajectory, i is the time index, j is the joint index, q b is the joint position
upper bound. The desired trajectory is considered as invalid if rtraj < 0, an invalid trajectory will
not be executed on the robot. Additionally, we provide a punishment, if the agent samples invalid
duration times
                    rdur = −3 (max(0, td − td, max) + max(0, td,mint − td )) ,
where td,max = 1.7s, td,min = 0.45s and td is the duration in seconds chosen by the agent. The
overall reward is defined as:

                     r    , −20(rtraj + rdur ) − 5 if invalid duration, or trajectory
             r = traj
                     rtask , otherwise

Di-SkilL and BBRL Hyperparameters All hyperparameters are summarized in the Table 6.

                                                                  Di-SkilL        BBRL
                            critic activation                        tanh           tanh
                          hidden sizes critic                      [32,32]       [32, 32]
                             initialization                      orthogonal     orthogonal
                                 lr critic                         0.0003         0.0003
                            optimizer critic                        adam           adam
                             ciritc epochs                           100            100
                   activation context distribution                   tanh             –
                     epochs context distribution                     100              –
                      hidden sizes context distr                   [16,16]            –
                             initialization                      orthogonal           –
                        lr context distribution                    0.0001             –
                       optimizer context distr                      adam              –
                      batch size per component                         50           500
            number samples from environment distribution            5000              –
                  number samples per component                         50           500
                        normalize advantages                        True           True
                           expert activateion                        tanh           tanh
                                 epochs                              100            100
                          hidden sizes expert                      [64,64]      [128,128]
                                lr policy                          0.0003         0.0003
                            covariance type                           full           full
                                  alpha                            0.0001             –
                                   beta                                 2             –
                         number components                             10             –
                           covariance bound                         0.005          0.001
                              mean bound                             0.05           0.05
                            projection type                           KL             KL
                       trust region coefficient                      100              25

              Table 6: Hyperparameters for Di-SkilL and BBRL for the mini golf task.


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  0.12

                                                                       0.11
                  0.11


       π(o)


                                                           π(o)
                   0.1
                                                                        0.1

                   −2
              9 · 10

                                                                  9.5 · 10−2
              8 · 10−2

                         0   2    4         6   8                              0   2    4         6   8
                                 Expert o                                              Expert o

      (a) π(o) for the extended table tennis task.        (b) π(o) for the extended box pushing task.

Figure 6: Marginal distributions   (π(o)±std) on the extended a) table tennis and b) box pushing
task. We calculate ≈(o) N1 i π(o|ci ) for N = 1e6 context samples drawn from the environment’s
                            P
context distribution p (c). The probabilities are approximately uniformly distributed over the num-
ber of experts, which shows that all of them are used by the mixture of experts model.


D    A NALYZING THE M IXTURE OF E XPERTS M ODEL T RAINED WITH
     D I -S KIL L
In this section we are going to analyze the learned mixture models w.r.t. the usage of the individual
experts. A good indicator, whether the experts are effectively used is to calculate the marginal prob-
ability
R       of the gating distribution π(o|c). We calculate this entity by marginalizing out the context
  c
    π(o|c)p (c). We sample N = 1 million contexts from the environment’ context distribution p (c)
leading to the monte carlo estimate π(o) ≈ N1 i π(o|ci ). We repeat this calculation for all 24
                                                  P
seeds in each environment and report the mean and the standard deviation of the probabilities for
each expert.
Additionally, to analyze the usage of the experts on the context level, we use the N context samples
to calculate how many contexts have at least two experts with higher probability than 5%. Given
that we use 10 experts in our experiments this is a good threshold. Please note that it is difficult
to determine whether there exist several solutions/skills for every context as this highly depends
on the task. For example, for the table tennis agent, most experts might be invalid, if the initial
ball velocity is very small, as the experts that hit the ball at the height of the robot itself won’t be
able to hit those as they require completely different motions. Similarly, for the box pushing task
several solutions, e.g. going right and left of the obstacle, might not be feasible because the obstacle
is not far enough from the table’s edge, or the robot itself such that the box can not be dragged
to the goal. Yet, to obtain a measurement of the diversity, we report the aforementioned metrics.
  The calculated marginal distributions can be seen in Fig. 6. For both environments we obtain
approximately uniform distributions indicating that we all experts are used. Additionally, for the
extended table tennis task, 42% ± 4.5% of the contexts have at least two experts that have a higher
probability than 5% for π(o|c). For the extended box ushing task, For the TT task, 42% ± 4.5%
of the contexts have at least two experts that have a higher probability than 5% for π(o|c). The
marginal gating distribution is calculated to 60% ± 5% of the contexts have at least two experts that
have a higher probability than 5% for π(o|c).


                                                     21
