Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P OLY S KETCH F ORMER : FAST T RANSFORMERS                                                              VIA
S KETCHES FOR P OLYNOMIAL K ERNELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                A BSTRACT
          The quadratic complexity of attention in transformer architectures remains a big
          bottleneck in scaling up large foundation models for long context. In fact, recent
          theoretical results show the hardness of approximating the output of softmax at-
          tention mechanism in sub-quadratic time assuming Strong Exponential Time Hy-
          pothesis. In this paper, we show how to break this theoretical barrier by replacing
          softmax with a polynomial function and polynomial sketching. In particular we
          show that sketches for Polynomial Kernel from the randomized numerical lin-
          ear algebra literature can be used to approximate the polynomial attention which
          leads to a significantly faster attention mechanism without assuming any sparse
          structure for the attention matrix that has been done in many previous works.
          In addition, we propose an efficient block-based algorithm that lets us apply the
          causal mask to the attention matrix without explicitly realizing the n × n attention
          matrix and compute the output of the polynomial attention mechanism in time
          linear in the context length. The block-based algorithm gives significant speedups
          over the cumulative sum algorithm used by Performer to apply the causal mask
          to the attention matrix. These observations help us design PolySketchFormer, a
          practical linear-time transformer architecture for language modeling with provable
          guarantees.
          We validate our design empirically by training language models with long context
          lengths. We first show that the eval perplexities of our models are comparable to
          that of models trained with softmax attention. We then show that for large context
          lengths our training times are significantly faster than FlashAttention.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) based models are state-of-the-art for many Natural Language
tasks and led to breakthroughs in tasks such as machine translation, language understanding (De-
vlin et al., 2019) and language modeling (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; OpenAI,
2023; Anil et al., 2023). Due to the quadratic time complexity of the attention mechanism, trans-
former based models have been limited to short context lengths. Numerous variants of the vanilla
transformer have been proposed to address the quadratic time complexity (Wang et al. (2020);
Katharopoulos et al. (2020); Choromanski et al. (2020) and many more). These variants are col-
loquially referred to as “Efficient Transformers”. A recent survey by Tay et al. (2022) provides a
broad overview of different techniques that have been employed to obtain approximations1 of the
attention mechanism. While many of the efficient transformer constructions have a theoretical per
step training latency that is linear in the context length, the survey observes that the training la-
tency improvements provided by many of these constructions in practice have been disappointing
and also at a loss in model quality. They also note that most state-of-the-art models still use the
vanilla transformer. In this work, we focus on improving the training latency of transformer models
in the decoding-only tasks such as language modeling trained via next word prediction objective.
Our techniques generalize to the encoding-only and encoder-decoder transformers as well.
Another line of work (Dao et al., 2022; Dao, 2023), termed as FlashAttention and FlashAttention-
2, towards enabling the training of transformers on large context lengths, looked at more efficient
    1
      Here, the word approximation is to be treated informally. Many “efficient transformer” constructions devi-
ate significantly from the vanilla transformer.


                                                       1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                          Figure 1: The plot compares attention latency per
                                                          token during training of a model at different con-
                                                          text lengths (512, 1k, 2k, 4k, 8k, 16k). We can see
                                                          that the while the attention latency of PolySketch-
                                                          Former remains in a small window irrespective
                                                          of the context length, the attention latencies of
                                                          vanilla softmax attention and flash attention grow
                                                          linearly with the context length. Our model with
                                                          vanilla softmax attention runs out of memory for
                                                          context lengths greater than 4k.


implementations of the standard attention mechanism. Using techniques such as blocking and rema-
terialization, they showed that vanilla attention mechanism can be implemented without realizing
the full n × n (here n denotes the context length, i.e., the number of input tokens) attention matrix in
the High-Bandwidth Memory (HBM) of ML accelerators (such as GPUs/TPUs). Along with other
techniques such as operator fusion and more efficient work partitioning, they showed that transform-
ers up to a context length as large as 16k can be trained efficiently. The fact that O(n2 ) memory is
not required to train transformers has also been noted in an earlier work of Rabe & Staats (2021).
While FlashAttention and FlashAttention-2 reduce the amount of High-Bandwidth Memory (HBM)
required to train a transformer model, the amount of computation per training step still scales as
O(n2 ) (see Figure 1) and hence scaling to large context lengths is hard even with a very efficient
implementation of the vanilla transformer model. Thus, it is imperative to obtain an efficient linear
transformer2 that improves upon the training latency of efficient implementations of vanilla trans-
formers in practice while not losing on the performance of vanilla transformers.
Recently Hua et al. (2022) proposed a variant of Transformer which uses a Gated Attention Unit in-
stead of the usual Multi-head Softmax Attention + Feed Forward layers. They argue that previously
proposed efficient transformers suffer from inferior quality (as compared to suitably augmented
vanilla transformers), have overheads in practice and are inefficient during auto-regressive training
because of an RNN-style sequential dependence of linear transformers which essentially renders
the linear attention implementation to be memory-bandwidth bound. They propose a mixed-chunk
based mechanism which at a high-level works as follows: (i) They first chunk the input sequence
into segments of length C each, (ii) within each chunk, apply quadratic attention using relu2 in-
stead of normalized softmax to obtain the attention matrix (appropriately masked for decoding-only
transformers), and (iii) across chunks, apply a global linear transformer (causal for decoding-only
transformers). They then add up the outputs of the local and global attention matrices and then use
the result to gate the output of a dense layer that applies a linear transformation to each token. They
show that this local + global attention mechanism has comparable performance to an augmented
version of Transformer they refer to as Transformer++3 . While they show that the perplexities of
Transformer++ can be matched with their model, it is unclear how successful the “linear global
attention” mechanism is in capturing the long range dependence. Since the chunk size they use in
their experiments (256) is large enough and they locally use a strong attention mechanism (relu2 ),
the perplexities in language modeling can be extremely good even while failing to capture long range
dependencies (Rae & Razavi, 2020). Thus we seek to explore efficient transformers that uniformly
apply a strong attention mechanism to all the tokens in the context window.
The starting point to our work is the Performer (Choromanski et al., 2020), a kernel based Trans-
former that provably approximates the softmax attention matrix. The kernel based view of attention
matrix was also taken by other earlier works (Tsai et al., 2019; Katharopoulos et al., 2020). We
will briefly review the softmax attention mechanism in vanilla transformers and explain how Per-
former works. Let X ∈ Rn×d be the pre-projection input to the attention mechanism, where each
row corresponds to a token in the context. Let Wq , Wk and Wv ∈ Rd×h be the weight matrices
corresponding to the query, key and value projections. The vanilla attention mechanism
                                                                               √       defines the
attention-weights matrix A ∈ Rn×n as A = softmax(mask(XWq (XWk )T )/ h) and the output
   2
    Linear transformers denote models that have a training latency that scales linearly in the context length.
   3
    Concretely, Transformer++ refers to a vanilla Transformer + RoPE (Su et al., 2021) as position embeddings
before the application of attention block + Gated Linear Units instead of MLPs as the FeedForward layer


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of the attention mechanism is defined as A · V ∈ Rn×h , where V = XWv . Here mask(·)4 denotes
a causal mask in the case of decoding-only transformersP and the softmax(·) refers to applying the
                                             .
softmax operator, defined as [softmax(x)]i = exp(xi )/ j exp(xj ), on each row x of the matrix
                                               .           .                 .
independently. From now on, we define Q = XWq , K = XWk and V = XW                  √v so that the
attention weights matrix A can be succinctly written as A = softmax(mask(QKT )/ h).
Let qi and kj denote the i-th and j-th rows of the matrices Q and K respectively. By definition, we
have that the (i, j)-th entry of matrix A is given by
                                                                    √
                                         mask(i, j) exp(hqi , kj i/ h)
                              Ai,j = P                                 √ .
                                                     0
                                        j 0 mask(i, j ) exp(hqi , kj i/ h)
                                                                    0



In the training of decoding-only transformers, we have mask(i, j) = 1 if i ≥ j and 0 otherwise.
Hence the attention matrix A is lower-triangular. Choromanski et al. (2020) propose FAVOR+ (Fast
Attention Via Positive Orthogonal Random features) mechanism showing that the query key vectors
qi and kj can be mapped using a random non-linear mapping to nonnegative vectors q̃i and k̃j each
of a dimension m = Θ(h log h) such that with any constant probability over the random mapping,
                                 mask(i,j)hq̃i ,k̃j i
with Ãi,j defined as Ãi,j := P           0
                                                      , maxi,j |Ãi,j − Ai,j | is small. Using associativity
                                  j 0 mask(i,j )hq̃i ,k̃j 0 i

of matrix multiplication, one can show that Ã · V can be computed in time linear in the context
length for both causal and non-causal masks. We note the following important qualifications on FA-
VOR+ attention results: (i) The result assumes bounded `2 norms of the query and key vectors. The
dimension m has to grow exponentially in the squared `2 norm of the query and key vectors to obtain
that |Ãi,j − Ai,j | is small. (ii) The result only holds for a given fixed set of query and key vectors.
In particular, a single randomized mapping does not preserve the attention matrix for all possible in-
puts even under the bounded norm assumption. Nevertheless, the experiments in Choromanski et al.
(2020) show that FAVOR+ works well in practice and show that the attention computation using
FAVOR+ scales linearly in the context length when used in the context of non-causal attention.
A major goal of FAVOR+ is to approximate the softmax attention matrix but the restriction to only
queries and key vectors with bounded `2 norms can be a severe drawback. A recent work of Alman
& Song (2023) shows that it is not possible to (entry-wise) approximate the output of the attention
mechanism in o(n2 ) time assuming Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis √       (SETH) unless the mag-
nitudes of the entries of the Q, K, V matrices are bounded by Θ( log n) for h = O(log n). While
this negative-result does not say that attention approximation is hard when using other forms of error
metrics, it does show that there are significant barriers to be overcome to approximate the output of
the attention mechanism in o(n2 ) time without further assumptions on the query and key vectors.
Motivated by the barriers present in obtaining fast algorithms to approximate the output of softmax
attention mechanism, we explore the use of polynomials instead of softmax in the definition of
attention mechanism. Concretely, for even degree p, we define the attention weights matrix A(p) as
                                                         mask(i, j)hqi , kj ip
                                (A(p) )i,j = P                       0
                                                                                   .
                                                                               0 p
                                                        j 0 mask(i, j )hqi , kj i

We use an even degree p to ensure that the entries of the attention matrix A(p) are nonnegative and
retain the interpretation of rows of the matrix A(p) defining probability distributions over the tokens.
For a causal mask, which is the focus of our work, the polynomial attention weights matrix A(p) can
be written as
                  A(p) = D−1 · lt ((QKT )p ) where D = diag(lt ((QKT )p ) · 1).                         (1)
In the above expressions, for a matrix M we use Mp to denote the matrix obtained by powering
each entry of M by degree p and lt (M) denotes the matrix obtained by only keeping the lower-
triangular entries of the matrix M and zeroing the rest of the entries. There is a simple algorithm that
can compute A(p) with only a linear dependence on n for both causal and non-causal masks. For a
vector q ∈ Rd , let q⊗p be the hp dimensional vector obtained by tensoring q with itself for p times.
Concretely, we index the coordinates of q⊗p with a p-tuple (i1 , . . . , ip ) ∈ 1, . . . , hp and define
  4
    For any matrix M, mask(M) indicates an matrix such that the (i, j)-th entry is mask(i, j) · Mi,j where
mask(i, j) ∈ {0, 1}.


                                                                3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

    Perplexities on Wiki-40B dataset                       Perplexities on PG19 dataset


  (a) Perplexities on Eval Split of Wiki-40B dataset       (b) Perplexities on Eval Split of PG-19 dataset

Figure 2: Perplexities attained by models trained using softmax attention and degree-4 polynomial
attention two datasets: (i) Wiki-40B and (ii) PG-19 at various context lengths (512, 1k, 2k, 4k). At
all context lengths, the polynomial attention achieves perplexities close to that of softmax attention.

(q⊗p )(i1 ,...,ip ) := qi1 · · · qip . Now, for any two vectors q and k, we have hq⊗p , k⊗p i = hq, kip .
Given matrices Q and K, define Q⊗p and K⊗p be the matrices obtained by tensoring each of the
rows of Q and K for p times respectively. We then have (QKT )p = Q⊗p (K⊗p )T . In the non-
causal case, we have D = diag((QKT )p · 1) = diag(Q⊗p (K⊗p )T 1). Clearly, we can compute
Q⊗p (K⊗p )T 1 using O(nhp ) operations. Similarly given another n × h matrix V, we can compute
Q⊗p (K⊗p )T V using O(nhp+1 ) operations. Hence, non-causal attention with degree-p polynomial
has a time complexity that is linear in the context length.
For the causal case, the cumulative sum algorithm presented in Choromanski et al. (2020) shows that
the matrix A(p) defined in (1) can be computed exactly using O(nhp+1 ) operations without having
to explicitly compute the matrix lt ((QKT )p ). Indeed, this does show that the computational com-
plexity barriers present in approximating the softmax attention matrix are not present in polynomial
attention and we can have an exact linear time algorithm (although impractical since hp can be quite
large even for p = 4 for reasonable values of h such as 64 or 128 used in today’s largest models).
The theoretical linear time complexity for exact polynomial attention motivates us to explore it
further. Polynomial has been previously explored to replace softmax in the context of multi-class
classification (De Brebisson & Vincent, 2015; Blanc & Rendle, 2018). Tsai et al. (2019) explore
polynomial attention mechanism using a degree-2 polynomial but mostly for the purpose of under-
standing the attention mechanism and not for efficiency. While works such as Schlag et al. (2021)
study the model capacity bounds presented by linear time transformers and show using a synthetic
model that the recall of tokens is worse compared to the quadratic softmax attention, it is unclear
how much of the limitations transfer to full fledged multi-head attention models that are in use today
since the simple argument of the necessity of n orthogonal vectors for perfect recall over n tokens is
not valid in the multi-head attention case. Our experiments show (see Figure 2) that the perplexities
achieved by polynomial attention with p = 4 nearly match that of the softmax attention models.
Though, perplexity may not capture all the good properties of softmax attention, the experiments do
show that polynomial attention is a promising candidate to be used in the attention mechanism.
While the theoretical time complexity of polynomial attention is linear in the context length, a major
issue in the linear time algorithm presented above to compute the polynomial attention matrix is
the multiplicative dependence on hp . To solve for this issue, we use sketches for the polynomial
kernel (Ahle et al., 2020) to approximate the attention-weights matrix. Concretely, given matrices
Q ∈ Rn×h and K ∈ Rn×h and degree parameter p, we compute Q̃ ∈ Rn×r and K̃ ∈ Rn×r using
the fast sketches presented in Ahle et al. (2020) so that Q̃K̃T ≈ Q⊗p (K⊗p )T . Importantly, we show
that using r much less than hp , we can obtain a good approximation to the matrix Q⊗p (K⊗p )T .
We call the parameter r as the sketch size and the sketch size required is only a function of the
multiplicative accuracy parameter ε. Replacing the matrices Q⊗p and K⊗p with Q̃ and K̃, we
get an algorithm that has a multiplicative dependence on the sketch size r instead of hp . However
the sketch sizes we use in our implementations are not very good at preserving the dot products for
vectors that have negative entries. Thus our implementations are essentially to be seen as an attention
mechanism that is inspired by polynomial attention.
Another important issue pointed out by Hua et al. (2022) in the cumulative sum algorithm of Per-
former in the case of decoding-only transformers is the RNN style sequential dependence, which
makes the training extremely slow. We show that a block-based linear time algorithm can be used
instead of the cumulative sum algorithm employed in Performer and that this leads to a signifi-


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


cant speedups. Our block-based lower triangular multiplication algorithm also recontextualizes the
chunk-based attention mechanism of works such as of Hua et al. (2022) as essentially applying a
causal mask to the simple linear transformer and additionally using a quadratic local attention.


2   S KETCHES FOR P OLYNOMIAL K ERNEL

We saw that given Q, K, V ∈ Rn×h , output of the polynomial attention mechanism can be exactly
computed using O(nhp+1 ) floating point operations. While the time complexity is linear in the
context length, the algorithm is very slow even for modest head sizes such as h = 64 or 128 when
p = 4. Thus, we resort to approximating the polynomial attention matrix using sketches for the
polynomial kernel, which we formally describe ahead. We first state the definition of a sketch that
has the “Approximate Matrix Multiplication (AMM)” guarantee.
Definition 2.1 (Approximate
                        p
                             Matrix Multiplication). Given parameters n, h and p, a randomized
sketching matrix S ∈ Rh ×r has the (ε, p)-AMM property if given any two n × h matrices A and
B, with probability ≥ 9/10 over the randomized sketching matrix S, we have that

                    k(A⊗p S)(B⊗p S)T − A⊗p (B⊗p )T kF ≤ εkA⊗p kF kB⊗p kF .

Here given a matrix A, kAkF denotes the Frobenius norm defined as ( i,j A2i,j )1/2 . The number
                                                                   P
of columns r is referred to as the sketch size.

In general, a sketch need not be limited to being a linear map of the hp dimensional vectors. Two
important properties of a sketching distribution are (i) the sketch size r as a function of the accuracy
parameter ε and (ii) the time required to compute A⊗p S given an arbitrary matrix A. Ideally, we
want the matrix S to have a structure such that A⊗p S can be computed without realizing the large
matrix A⊗p . Ahle et al. (2020) give constructions of different sketches that have both the properties
that the sketch size r is small and the matrix A⊗p S can be computed quickly. We describe the main
properties of one of their sketches below and and explain how to compute A⊗p S given a matrix A.
Theorem 2.2. Given degree p and an accuracy parameter ε, there is a sketch S with r ≤ Cp/ε2
columns such that S satisfies the (ε, p)-AMM property as defined above. Given an arbitrary matrix
A ∈ Rn×h , the matrix A⊗p S can be computed using O(pnm log m + pnh log h) operations.

We obtain the theorem by instantiating the construction in Ahle et al. (2020) with the base sketch
being the Subsampled Randomized Hadamard Transform (SRHT) and the internal sketches being
TensorSRHT. We will now explain how the sketch computation works for p = 2 and how it is
extended to general values of p that are powers of 2. First we define SRHT and TensorSRHT which
are used in the construction of the sketch S.
                           pa dimension parameter h that is a power of 2 and sketch size r, the h×
Definition 2.3 (SRHT). Given
r SRHT matrix is defined as 1/r · (DHP) where D is an h × h diagonal matrix with independent
±1 random variables, H is an h × h Walsh-Hadamard matrix and P is an h × r matrix where each of
the r columns is independently sampled from the uniform distribution over the coordinate vectors.
Definition 2.4 (TensorSRHT). Given a dimension parameter h that is a power of 2 and sketch size
r, the TensorSRHT sketch is defined to be the tuple (D1 , D2 , P1 , P2 ), where D1 , D2 are h × h
diagonal matrices where each diagonal entry is an independent ±1 random variable and P1 , P2 are
h × r matrices with each of the columns is independently sampled from the uniform distribution
over the coordinate vectors in Rh . Given matrices A1 , A2 ∈ Rn×h , the result of applying the
TensorSRHT defined by the tuple (D1 , D2 , P1 , P2 ) is the n × h matrix
                              p
                                1/r [(A1 D1 HP1 ) ∗ (A2 D2 HP2 )]
where ∗ denotes the entry-wise product (Hadamard product) of two matrices and H is the h × h
Walsh-Hadamard matrix.

Let SRHT1 and SRHT2 denote two independently sampled SRHT sketches and TensorSRHT1 be a
TensorSRHT sketch sampled independently from the SRHTs. Then the polynomial sketch for degree
2 is defined as TensorSRHT1 (SRHT1 (A), SRHT2 (A)). We describe the procedure and extension
to p = 4 in Figure 3. The construction extends to all p that are powers of 2 in a similar way.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                         TensorSRHT3


              TensorSRHT1                          TensorSRHT1                                 TensorSRHT2


      SRHT1                 SRHT2          SRHT1                 SRHT2                 SRHT3                 SRHT4


                       Figure 3: Sketches for polynomials of degrees p = 2 and p = 4.

2.1     N ON - NEGATIVE ATTENTION A PPROXIMATIONS

Given matrices n × h matrices Q and K, the polynomial sketch described above can be used to
approximate (QKT )p = Q⊗p (K⊗p )T with (Q⊗p S)(K⊗p S)T . One issue with the polynomial
sketches is that they do not preserve nonnegativity: while for p even, the entries of the matrix
(QKT )p are nonnegative, the entries of the matrix (Q⊗p S)(K⊗p S)T need not be nonnegative.
The rows of the attention-weights matrix have the natural interpretation of each defining a prob-
ability distribution. If we instead use the sketch-based approximations, the approximate attention-
weights matrix need not have nonnegative entries and hence present issues in the optimization of
the models. Choromanski et al. (2020) solve this issue by using a feature map that maps to only
nonnegative coordinates. Since the dot product of any two nonnegative vectors is nonnegative, their
approximate attention matrix has only nonnegative coordinates.
But it is not necessary for the vectors to have only nonnegative coordinates for the dot products
to be nonnegative. Consider arbitrary vectors q, k. The dot product hq⊗2 , k⊗2 i = hq, ki2 ≥ 0.
Thus, given matrices Q⊗p S and K⊗p S, consider the matrix (Q⊗p S)⊗2 ((K⊗p S)⊗2 )T . Since all the
entries of the matrix are of the form hq⊗2 , k⊗2 i for some vectors q, k, all the entries of the matrix
(Q⊗p S)⊗2 ((K⊗p S)⊗2 )T are nonnegative as well. The “tensoring” trick ensures that all the entries
in the approximate attention matrix are nonnegative at the cost of squaring the sketch size.
We now prove Theorem 2.5 which shows that a degree p polynomial sketch followed by “tensoring”
gives a degree 2p polynomial sketch.
Theorem 2.5. Let S ∈ hp × r be an arbitrary oblivious sketch that satisfies the (ε, δ, t)-JL moment
and (ε, δ, 2t)-JL moment properties for some even integer t. Given arbitrary matrices C and D with
hp columns, we have that with probability ≥ 1 − δ,
                                                             √
                  k(CS)⊗2 ((DS)⊗2 )T − C⊗2 (D⊗2 )T kF ≤ 5εkC⊗2 kF kD⊗2 kF .

Results from Section 4 of Ahle et al. (2020) can be used to show that degree-p polynomial sketch
as constructed in Figure 3 with sketch size r = Ω(ε−2 p log(1/εδ)) satisfies the requirements of the
above theorem thus giving a sketch that gives a nonnegative approximate attention matrix which
provably approximates the degree 2p attention matrix.
3     A FAST A LGORITHM FOR L OWER T RIANGULAR (LT) M ULTIPLICATION
Given query and key matrices Q and K, using the sketches described in previous section, we can
obtain matrices Q̃ and K̃ such that (QKT )2p ≈ Q̃K̃T by computing sketches for degree p polyno-
mial and tensoring the sketches with themselves. To compute the output of the approximate attention
mechanism in the causal setting (1), we need to compute the matrix lt (Q̃K̃T )V. Naively comput-
ing this matrix requires computing the n × n matrix Q̃K̃T , which is prohibitive. We now describe
the cumulative sum algorithm as used in Choromanski et al. (2020) that can compute lt (Q̃K̃T )V
without computing the n × n matrix Q̃K̃T .
Given arbitrary matrices A, B ∈ Rn×r and C ∈ Rn×d , the n × d matrix lt (ABT )C can be
                                                      Pi
computed as follows: For i = 1, . . . , n, define Di = j=1 (Bj,: )T Cj,: . Then the i-th row of the


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        lt                                                lt


Figure 4: Block wise Lower Triangular Multiplication. Each of the matrices Ai , Bi and Ci are
blocks of the matrices A, B and C respectively and each block has b = n/t rows.

matrix lt (ABT )C is given by Ai,: Di . We can first compute the matrices (Bj,: )T Cj,: using O(nrd)
operations and we can then compute the matrices D1 , . . . , Dn using another O(nrd) operations
using a simple cumulative sum algorithm. Overall, the matrix lt (ABT )C can be computed using
a total of O(nrd) operations. Choromanski et al. (2020) use this algorithm in the forward pass and
show that a similar algorithm can be used to compute gradients in the backward pass.
This algorithm is quite slow on ML accelerators such as TPUs/GPUs because it reads/writes n
matrices of size r × d from/to the HBM. We propose using a block-based algorithm to reduce the
number of read/write operations by a significant factor thereby improving the training latency by a
large factor. Our algorithm is described in Figure 4. As we increase the block size used, we decrease
the number of sequentially dependent steps. Now, it is clear that the following result holds.
Theorem 3.1. Given matrices A, B ∈ Rn×r and C ∈ Rn×d and a block size parameter b which
divides n, we can compute lt (ABT )C using O(nr(b + d)) operations.
While setting b to be 1 decreases the number of operations to be performed, the algorithm is slower
on GPUs/TPUs because of the RNN style sequential dependence that is introduced by the cumulative
sum. In our experiments, we set b as 256 similar to the chunk size used by Hua et al. (2022).
4   P OLY S KETCH F ORMER
Using the polynomial sketch we described in Section 2 and the block-based algorithm to implicitly
apply causal attention mask described in Section 3 we define a new fast attention mechanism for
decoder-only transformers. We call the attention mechanism polysketch and the transformer aug-
mented with polysketch attention as PolySketchFormer.
Consider a multi-layer Transformer model with each layer having multiple attention heads. In
PolySketchFormer, for each attention head in each layer, we independently sample a sketch-
ing matrix S for polynomial kernel as described in Section 2. We now describe the output of
the polysketch attention mechanism given the inputs Q, K, V ∈ Rn×h . We compute matri-
ces Q̃ := (Q⊗p S)⊗2 and K̃ := (K⊗p S)⊗2 . Now define Ṽ = [V 1]. Using the block-based
lower triangular multiplication algorithm from Section 3, we compute the matrix lt (Q̃K̃T )Ṽ =
[lt (Q̃K̃T )V lt (Q̃K̃T )1] and
                            h then the output
                                         i      of the polysketch attention mechanism is defined as
O := diag(lt (Q̃K̃T )1)−1 lt (Q̃K̃T )V . By the definition of the matrices Q̃, K̃, we can see that
                                        P        ⊗p      ⊗p   2
                                          j≤i hQi,: S, Kj,: Si Vj,:
                                Oi,: = P           ⊗p      ⊗p       .                           (2)
                                                                 2
                                            j≤i hQi,: S, Kj,: Si
We note that the above expression is similar to the output of the softmax
                                                                       √ attention mechanism    with
the major change being the replacement of the term exp(hQi,: , Kj,: i/ h) with hQ⊗pi,: S, K⊗p
                                                                                           j,: Si2
                                                                                                   .


                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We note some important details of our implementation of polysketch attention:
Degree of the polynomial. In all our experiments, we use polynomial of degree 4 since Figure 2
suggests a degree 4 polynomial attention mechanism has perplexities comparable to that of the soft-
max attention. Accordingly, for the polysketch attention mechanism, we use Polynomial Sketches
from Ahle et al. (2020) for degree 2 polynomials and by tensoring the sketches to obtain matrices
that can approximate the polynomial attention with degree 4.
Sketch Size. In all our experiments, we use the sketches from Ahle et al. (2020) for degree 2 polyno-
mial with a sketch size of 32. Since we square the sketch by tensoring the rows, we obtain matrices
Q̃ and K̃ that have 1024 columns each. Further increasing sketch size to larger values leads to a
slow-down in the algorithm since the time complexity of the lower triangular multiplication algo-
rithm depends on the number of columns in the matrices Q̃ and K̃.
Block Size in LT multiplication. In all our experiments, we implement the lower triangular ma-
trix multiplication algorithm of Section 3 with block size parameter b as 256. As mentioned earlier,
while using a small block size minimizes the number of floating point operations to be performed, it
increases the sequential dependence and the number of reads/writes from/to the HBM. Thus we do
not want to use a small value of b. On the flip side, a large block size b requires a larger number of
floating point operations to be performed and in the limit of b being n, the lower triangular multipli-
cation requires O(n2 ) time which is what we want to avoid. An additional important parameter in
determining the block size that is to be used is the size of the smallest matrices that can be efficiently
multiplied on the ML accelerator being used.
Rematerialization. We do not store the intermediate values that arise in the polysketch attention
computation procedure for the backward pass. Instead we rerun the attention computation during
the backward pass and compute the gradients. This lets us considerably decrease the amount of
memory required to train the models with a small loss in performance.


5    E XPERIMENTS

Datasets. We train all our language models separately on the Wiki-40B (Guo et al., 2020) and PG-
19 (Rae et al., 2019) datasets. We tokenize the datasets using SentencePiece vocabularies of size
32,000.
Model Description, Experiment Setup and Implementation. We train Transformer models that
have 12 layers that each have 12 attention heads. We use an embedding dimension of 768 so that the
head size is 768/12 = 64. We add sinusoidal position embeddings to the token embeddings at the start
of the model and use Rotary Position Embeddings (Su et al., 2021) as the relative position embedding
for each attention head in the model. We use Gated Linear Units (Dauphin et al., 2017; Shazeer,
2020) with an expansion factor of 4 as the FeedForward layer in the network. This configuration has
110M parameters. All models are trained for 125k steps using Adam optimizer with weight decay
and a peak learning rate of 7e-4. We use 10k warmup steps and a linear learning rate schedule.
We perform extensive experiments on this model using different attention mechanisms such as soft-
max, polynomial, Performer, FlashAttention, and our Polysketch attention and at various context
lengths. Finally, we run some experiments on models with more/fewer layers to test how polysketch
scales to deeper layers and even longer contexts. We stress that the only difference between the
models is the attention mechanism.
Our implementation of PolySketchFormer is written in JAX. In our experiments, we use a Pallas
implementation (JAX authors, 2023) of FlashAttention and a JAX implementation of Performer
open-sourced by the authors (Choromanski et al., 2020). All the experiments are conducted on 32
A100 GPUs with 40GB VRAM each.
Results. On the main model configuration of 12 layers, 12 attention heads per layer and an embed-
ding dimension of 768, we report the perplexities of the models in Table 1 and training steps per
second in Table 2. We note that we use a batch size of 8 per device for context length 512, 4 per
device for 1024, 2 per device for 2048 and 1 per device for context lengths 4096, 8192 and 16384.
We observe that in all the cases across both the datasets, degree-4 polynomial attention achieves per-
plexities that are close to that of the softmax attention and that perplexities achieved by the models
using Polysketch attention are close to the perplexities attained by softmax Transformer. Addition-


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    Wiki-40B                                              PG-19
                    512      1k     2k      4k      8k         16k    512       1k       2k   4k     8k     16k
 Softmax            16.5    16.0   15.6    15.2     -          -      15.5     14.5   14.5    12.8    -      -
 Polynomial         16.6    16.2   15.6    15.4     -          -      15.6     14.9   14.6    13.1    -      -
 Polysketch         18.2    17.6   17.2    17.6    18.2       17.7    16.5     17.6   16.2    14.8   15.4   15.8

Table 1: Perplexities on the eval splits of models separately trained on Wiki-40B and PG-19 datasets
at various context lengths. Softmax and Polynomial models go out of memory when the context
lengths are 8k and 16k. Using checkpointing to save memory for softmax and polynomial models,
the training latency becomes too high to obtain results in a reasonable amount of time.

ally, we note the general trend5 of better perplexities for models trained with longer contexts for all
the attention mechanisms. We do not report perplexities for Performer since we observe that there is
a data leak in the open-sourced version of Performer which inadvertently leads to information flow
from future tokens during training which violates the causal masking necessary for auto-regressive
language modeling. We note that in all our experiments, throughout the training, the perplexities of
Polysketch attention models on eval split remains within 2-3 points of softmax Transformer.
The training latency results from Table 2 show that Polysketch attention is slower than FlashAtten-
tion for all context lengths up to 4k and that Polysketch attention becomes significantly faster than
FlashAttention for context lengths 8k and beyond. We do note that our implementation of Polysketch
is not optimized to the extent of FlashAttention and it maybe possible to get better performance with
Polysketch at even smaller context lengths.
Longer Contexts/Larger Models. We train a 4-layer model, with otherwise same parameters as
above models, with a context length 32k to observe the steps/sec achieved by PolySketchFormer.
We observe that PolySketchFormer trains at 1.54 steps/sec and Transformer with FlashAttention
trains at 0.34 steps/sec i.e., a 4.5x-speedup in this case.
On the other hand, we train a larger model (730M parameters), with 24 layers and an embedding
dimension 1536, on Wiki-40B dataset to observe if deep PolySketchFormers track the performance
of deep softmax Transformers. We observe that softmax Transformer has a perplexity of 14.4 on eval
split and PolySketchFormer has a perplexity of 14.6 which provides evidence that PolySketchFormer
can be used for training large models.

          Context Length     Softmax      Polynomial         Polysketch      Performer    FlashAttention
                512            6.25          6.2                3.7            2.3            5.8
                1024            4.5          4.5                3.4             2.4            5.3
                2048            4.3          4.1                3.3             1.8            4.7
                4096             3           3.2                3.1             1.2            3.5
                8192           OOM          OOM                  2              0.7            1.4
               16384           OOM          OOM                 1.1            0.35           0.44

Table 2: Train Steps per Second on 32 A100 GPUs. We again stress that the batch size per device is
kept same across the 8k and 16k experiments which leads to smaller number of steps per second.


6       C ONCLUSIONS AND D IRECTIONS FOR F UTURE W ORK

As our experiments show, PolySketchFormer offers significant gains in training latency for large
context transformers. We note that a more careful implementation of our algorithm akin to FlashAt-
tention can present even more gains than what our experiments suggest. Our perplexity results sug-
gest that the performance of PolySketchFormer may not be too far away from the vanilla transformer
architecture with softmax. We note that there are a lot of avenues to be explored to bring the per-
plexities of PolySketchFormer closer to that of the vanilla softmax Transformer. Some directions
include (i) experimenting with higher degree polynomial sketches, (ii) training the network initially
for a few iterations using quadratic-time polynomial attention and then train using the linear-time
polysketch attention for rest of the iterations, etc. We leave these directions for future work.

    5
        Although with some exceptions in the case of PolySketchFormer


                                                         9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Thomas D Ahle, Michael Kapralov, Jakob BT Knudsen, Rasmus Pagh, Ameya Velingker, David P
  Woodruff, and Amir Zandieh. Oblivious sketching of high-degree polynomial kernels. In Pro-
  ceedings of the Fourteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pp. 141–160.
  SIAM, 2020. 4, 5, 6, 8, 12, 13
Josh Alman and Zhao Song.          Fast attention requires bounded entries.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.13214, 2023. 3
Rohan Anil, Andrew M Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, et al. Palm 2 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10403, 2023. 1
Guy Blanc and Steffen Rendle. Adaptive sampled softmax with kernel based sampling. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 590–599. PMLR, 2018. 4
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020. 1
Krzysztof Choromanski, Valerii Likhosherstov, David Dohan, Xingyou Song, Andreea Gane, Tamas
  Sarlos, Peter Hawkins, Jared Davis, Afroz Mohiuddin, Lukasz Kaiser, et al. Rethinking at-
  tention with performers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.14794, 2020. JAX implementation of
  Performer is available at https://github.com/google-research/google-research/blob/
  master/performer/fast_attention/jax/fast_attention.py. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022. 1
Tri Dao. Flashattention-2: Faster attention with better parallelism and work partitioning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.08691, 2023. 1
Tri Dao, Dan Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Flashattention: Fast and memory-
  efficient exact attention with io-awareness. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:16344–16359, 2022. 1
Yann N Dauphin, Angela Fan, Michael Auli, and David Grangier. Language modeling with gated
  convolutional networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 933–941. PMLR,
  2017. 8
Alexandre De Brebisson and Pascal Vincent. An exploration of softmax alternatives belonging to
  the spherical loss family. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05042, 2015. 4
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), 2019. 1
Mandy Guo, Zihang Dai, Denny Vrandečić, and Rami Al-Rfou. Wiki-40b: Multilingual language
 model dataset. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference,
 pp. 2440–2452, 2020. 8
Weizhe Hua, Zihang Dai, Hanxiao Liu, and Quoc Le. Transformer quality in linear time. In Inter-
 national Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9099–9117. PMLR, 2022. 2, 4, 5, 7
JAX authors. Implementation of FlashAttention in Pallas. https://github.com/google/jax/
  blob/main/jax/experimental/pallas/ops/attention.py, 2023. 8
Angelos Katharopoulos, Apoorv Vyas, Nikolaos Pappas, and François Fleuret. Transformers are
  rnns: Fast autoregressive transformers with linear attention. In International conference on ma-
  chine learning, pp. 5156–5165. PMLR, 2020. 1, 2


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023. 1
Markus N Rabe and Charles Staats. Self-attention does not need O(n2 ) memory. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2112.05682, 2021. 2
Jack Rae and Ali Razavi. Do transformers need deep long-range memory? In Proceedings of the
  58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 7524–7529, 2020. 2
Jack W Rae, Anna Potapenko, Siddhant M Jayakumar, Chloe Hillier, and Timothy P Lillicrap.
  Compressive transformers for long-range sequence modelling. arXiv preprint, 2019. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.05507. 8
Imanol Schlag, Kazuki Irie, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Linear transformers are secretly fast weight
  programmers. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9355–9366. PMLR, 2021.
  4
Noam Shazeer. Glu variants improve transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05202, 2020. 8
Jianlin Su, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Ahmed Murtadha, Bo Wen, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: En-
   hanced transformer with rotary position embedding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09864, 2021. 2,
   8
Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Dara Bahri, and Donald Metzler. Efficient transformers: A survey. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2009.06732, 2022. 1
Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Shaojie Bai, Makoto Yamada, Louis-Philippe Morency, and Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov. Transformer dissection: a unified understanding of transformer’s attention via
  the lens of kernel. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.11775, 2019. 2, 4
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 2017. 1
Sinong Wang, Belinda Z Li, Madian Khabsa, Han Fang, and Hao Ma. Linformer: Self-attention
  with linear complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04768, 2020. 1


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2.5
First, we define the (ε, δ, t)-JL moment property. In the following, given a scalar random variable X
and t ≥ 1, kXkLt is defined to be E[|X|t ]1/t . k · kLt defines a norm over random variables defined
over the same sample space and in particular satisfies kX + YkLt ≤ kXkLt + kYkLt .
Definition A.1. (JL-moment property) Given ε, δ ≥ 0 and t ≥ 1, a random matrix Sm×r has the
(ε, δ, t)-JL moment property if for any x ∈ Rm with kxk2 ,
                                             kkxT Sk22 − 1kLt ≤ εδ 1/t .

We first note the following fact: If S has (ε, δ, t)-JL moment property, then for any two arbitrary
vectors x and y, we have that khST x, ST yi−hx, yikLt ≤ εδ 1/t kxk2 kyk2 . For a proof see Lemma 9
from Ahle et al. (2020).

Proof of Theorem 2.5. Let ci denote the i-th row of C and dj denote the j-th row of D. Then the
(i, j)-th entry of the matrix C⊗2 (D⊗2 )T is equal to hci , dj i2 . Similarly, the (i, j)-th coordinate of
the matrix (CS)⊗2 ((DS)⊗2 )T is equal to hST ci , ST dj i2 and therefore
                                                       X
            k(CS)⊗2 ((DS)⊗2 )T − C⊗2 (D⊗2 )T k2F =          (hST ci , ST dj i2 − hci , dj i2 )2 .
                                                                     i,j

Recall that given an integer t ≥ 1, for a random variable X, we define kXkLt as E[|X|t ]1/t . Also
note that kXkLt is a norm over the random variables and in-particular satisfies the triangle inequality.
Now,
                                                                                                                 1/2
    kk(CS)⊗2 ((DS)⊗2 )T − C⊗2 (D⊗2 )T kF kLt = kk(CS)⊗2 ((DS)⊗2 )T − C⊗2 (D⊗2 )T k2F kLt/2
                                                                                        1/2
                                                X
                                             =k    (hST ci , ST dj i2 − hci , dj i2 )2 kLt/2
                                                                i,j
                                                              X
                                                        ≤(            k(hST ci , ST dj i2 − hci , dj i2 )2 kLt/2 )1/2
                                                               i,j

where we used the triangle inequality of k · kLt in the last inequality. Now consider a single term
k(hST ci , ST dj i2 − hci , dj i2 )2 kLt/2 . First, we have
     (hST ci , ST dj i2 − hci , dj i2 )2
      = (hST ci , ST dj i + hci , dj i)2 (hST ci , ST dj i − hci , dj i)2
      = (hST ci , ST dj i − hci , dj i + 2hci , dj i)2 (hST ci , ST dj i − hci , dj i)2
      ≤ (1 + C)(hST ci , ST dj i − hci , dj i)4 + 4(1 + 1/C)hci , dj i2 (hST ci , ST dj i − hci , dj i)2
with probability 1 for any C ≥ 1. Since both LHS and RHS are non-negative random variables, we
obtain that
k(hST ci , ST dj i2 − hci , dj i2 )2 kLt/2
≤ (1 + C)k(hST ci , ST dj i − hci , dj i)4 kLt/2 + 4(1 + 1/C)hci , dj i2 k(hST ci , ST dj i − hci , dj i)2 kLt/2 .
Now,
                  k(hST ci , ST dj i − hci , dj i)4 kLt/2 = khST ci , ST dj i − hci , dj ik4L2t
                                                            ≤ ε4 δ 2/t kci k42 kdj k42
assuming that S has (ε, δ, 2t)-JL moment property. We also have
                  k(hST ci , ST dj i − hci , dj i)2 kLt/2 = khST ci , ST dj i − hci , dj ik2Lt
                                                              ≤ ε2 δ 2/t kci k22 kdj k22
assuming that S has (ε, δ, t)-JL moment property. Overall, we get
               k(hST ci , ST dj i2 − hci , dj i2 )2 kLt/2
                ≤ (1 + C)ε4 δ 2/t kci k42 kdj k42 + 4(1 + 1/C)hci , dj i2 ε2 δ 2/t kci k22 kdj k22 .


                                                         12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Picking C = 1/ε and assuming ε ≤ 1/5, we get that
                          k(hST ci i2 − hci , dj i2 )2 kLt/2 ≤ 5ε2 δ 2/t kci k42 kdj k42 .
Thus, we have
                     ⊗2           ⊗2 T        ⊗2        ⊗2 T
                                                                       √         1/t
                                                                                       sX
            kk(CS)        ((DS)      ) −C          (D     ) kF kLt ≤       5εδ                  kci k42 kdj k42
                                                                                          i,j
                                                                       √
                                                                   ≤       5εδ   1/t
                                                                                       kC⊗2 kF kD⊗2 kF .
By using Markov’s inequality, we obtain that with probability ≥ 1 − δ,
                                                            √
               k(CS)⊗2 ((DS)⊗2 )T − C⊗2 (D⊗2 )T kF ≤ 5εkC⊗2 kF kD⊗2 kF .

B    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1
Proof. Let t = n/b be the number of blocks. We see that we perform t matrix multiplications of
the form [b, r, b] (which denotes a multiplication of matrices of shapes b × r and r × b), t matrix
multiplications of the form [r, b, d], a cumulative sum of t − 1 matrices of shape [r, d], t − 1 matrix
multiplications of the form [b, r, d] and finally t − 1 matrix additions of the shape [b, d]. Overall the
number of operations performed is O(tb2 r + tbrd + trd + tbrd + tbd) = O(nbr + nrd).

If S has the so-called strong (ε/e, δ 2 )-JL moment property (Ahle et al., 2020, Definition 19), then
it follows that S has both (ε, δ, log(1/δ))-JL moment and (ε, δ, 2 log(1/δ))-JL moment properties.
Results from Section 4 of Ahle et al. (2020) can be used to show that degree-p polynomial sketch
as constructed in Figure 3 with sketch size r = Ω(ε−2 p log(1/εδ)) satisfies the requirements of this
theorem.


                                                          13
