Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P ERTURBED  EXAMPLES  REVEAL                                                  INVARIANCES
SHARED BY LANGUAGE MODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         An explosion of work in language is leading to ever-increasing numbers of avail-
         able natural language processing models, with little understanding of how new
         models compare to better-understood models. One major reason for this difficulty
         is saturating benchmark datasets, which may not reflect well differences in model
         performance in the wild. In this work, we propose a novel framework for compar-
         ing two natural language processing models by revealing their shared invariance to
         interpretable input perturbations that are designed to target a specific linguistic ca-
         pability (e.g., Synonym-Invariance, Typo-Invariance). Via experiments on models
         from within the same and across different architecture families, this framework of-
         fers a number of insights about how changes in models (e.g., distillation, increase
         in size, amount of pre-training) affect multiple well-defined linguistic capabilities.
         Furthermore, we also demonstrate how our framework can enable evaluation of
         the invariances shared between models that are available as commercial black-box
         APIs (e.g., InstructGPT family) and models that are relatively better understood
         (e.g., GPT-2). Across several experiments, we observe that large language mod-
         els share many of the invariances encoded by models of various sizes, whereas
         the invariances encoded by large language models are only shared by other large
         models. Possessing a wide variety of invariances may be a key reason for the re-
         cent successes of large language models, and our framework can shed light on the
         types of invariances that are retained by or emerge in new models.


1   I NTRODUCTION
A key reason for the tremendous progress and adoption of natural language processing (NLP) models
has been the ready availability of models that can be effectively adapted to diverse downstream
tasks and datasets (Wolf et al., 2019). However, with the increasing number of new models, it is
difficult to know how new models compare to better-understood ones. This is complicated by the
fact that standard benchmark datasets are saturating (Dehghani et al., 2021; Owen, 2023), and small
differences on these datasets may in fact correspond to large differences in model performance in
the wild (Tay et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023).
To enable more comprehensive model comparisons, we propose a novel framework for comparing
two natural language processing models by investigating their shared invariance to specific input
perturbations. We focus specifically on evaluating invariances that are shared between models, as the
invariances encoded by a model implicitly define the features of data that the model deems important
and is consequently sensitive to, as well as delineate the features it finds irrelevant. Understanding
the shared invariances of two NLP models can reveal finer-grained similarities and differences of
the instance properties utilized by the two models for their predictions (Shah et al., 2023).
While evaluating shared invariance is important, not all invariances are created equal: some invari-
ances may be desirable (e.g., invariance to synonym substitution for machine translation systems)
while others may be undesirable (e.g., invariance to word order of image captioning systems). There-
fore, we enable the evaluation of specific shared invariances via interpretable input perturbations that
are designed to target a specific linguistic capability (e.g., Synonym-Invariance, Typo-Invariance).
A linguistic capability evaluates a model’s competence on a particular aspect of knowledge and
understanding required to solve an NLP task by validating its input-output behavior under the corre-
sponding scenario. For instance, the linguistic capability ‘Synonym-Invariance’ evaluates whether


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a sentiment analysis model changes its prediction if the positive verb is replaced by its synonym.
Hence, the generated perturbations along specific linguistic capabilities enable us to measure shared
model invariances along different linguistic capabilities.
We demonstrate the utility of our proposed framework in deriving novel insights about how changes
in models such as distillation and increase/decrease in size affect shared invariances along multiple
well-defined linguistic capabilities. We also show how our framework can be used to compare
how invariances along different linguistic capabilities evolve over the course of pre-training for
a particular model. Additionally, we also demonstrate how our framework can enable evaluation
of the invariances shared between models that are available as commercial black-box APIs (e.g.,
InstructGPT family) and models that are relatively better understood (e.g., GPT-2). Across several
experiments, we find that while larger language models share many of the invariances encoded by
models of varying scale, invariances encoded by large language models are only shared by other
large models of similar sizes.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows: (1) We propose a novel framework for defin-
ing linguistic capabilities w.r.t a reference NLP model to generate interpretable invariant pertur-
bations. (2) We propose two novel measures: Hard-SCoPE and Soft-SCoPE to measure the de-
gree of shared (behavioral) invariances between two models along a particular linguistic capability.
Both measures evaluate the extent to which a target model behaviorally aligns with the reference
model along linguistic capabilities. (3) Through experiments on two NLP tasks—text classifica-
tion and language modeling—we uncover several insights, such as: distilling BERT leads to loss of
shared-invariances along certain linguistic capabilities (such as Typo-Invariance) more than others
(Synonym-Invariance); models (within an architecture family) tend to have a higher (or similar) de-
gree of shared-invariances with models of larger sizes compared to other models of similar sizes.
Moreover, we also evaluate the shared invariances between task-specific finetuned models and gen-
eralist instruction-tuned models (from the InstructGPT family) that are available as black-box APIs.


2   R ELATED W ORKS

Representations: Numerous works have proposed methods for analyzing and comparing represen-
tations of NLP models (Morcos et al., 2018; Saphra & Lopez, 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Durrani et al.,
2021). Most notably, Wu et al. (2020) investigate the representational similarity of NLP models at
multiple levels (i.e., at both neuron and layer-level output) to quantify the effects of different de-
sign choices across models from both across and within architectural families. Along similar lines,
Phang et al. (2021) explore the effects of fine-tuning a neural language encoder by comparing rep-
resentations of a fine-tuned language encoder with its pre-trained counterpart across layers. Most
similar to our work, Nanda et al. (2022) proposed a novel measure (STIR) to quantify the similarity
between representations of two models via measuring their shared invariances. They achieve this
by first generating a set of perturbations that don’t change the representations of one model and
consequently measuring the extent to which the other model’s representations are invariant on them.
However, this setup is not directly applicable to NLP due to the discrete nature of language input,
where representation inversion would lead to perturbations along arbitrary directions in the input
space and consequently linguistically inconsistent samples (La Malfa & Kwiatkowska, 2022). We
address this by generating invariant perturbations (for a particular model) along well-characterized
and interpretable linguistic capabilities by using discrete optimization techniques. Finally, while
a central theme of our work is also comparing the similarities and differences between two NLP
models, we present an orthogonal approach that focuses on behavior instead of representations.
Behavior: Many works compare the behavioral similarity between two models (trained for a given
task) by evaluating the difference between their average performances on the held-out “test-set”
(e.g., IID accuracy, perplexity, etc). For example, previous work has used IID (Independent and
identically distributed) accuracy to evaluate the effect of well-defined design choices such as model
architecture and training scheme (Ding et al., 2021), training time constraints (Geiping & Goldstein,
2022), and latency and memory (Sanh et al., 2019). However, recently many researchers have high-
lighted the limitations of IID test-sets in identifying different failure modes (Hooker et al., 2019;
2020) and have consequently proposed alternative approaches for rigorous evaluation (Rychalska
et al., 2019; Prabhakaran et al., 2019; Ribeiro et al., 2020; Ribeiro & Lundberg, 2022). Most relevant
to our work, Ribeiro et al. (2020) proposed CheckList–a methodology for evaluating the behavior of


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


NLP models along general linguistic capabilities that are applicable for most NLP tasks. More re-
cently, La Malfa & Kwiatkowska (2022) defined linguistic capabilities as symbolic perturbations of
an input sentence for a particular task, and evaluated whether a model’s predictions for this sentence
align with human annotators. While the above approaches can highlight differences between the
two models’ ability to generalize under the perturbations introduced by a linguistic capability, they
perform an indirect behavioral comparison via the human annotators. In this work, we provide a
complementary approach that directly evaluates shared behavioral invariances between two models
by defining linguistic capabilities with respect to an NLP model instead of a human annotator.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
One way to evaluate a model’s linguistic capabilities is via perturbations i.e., perturbing the input
and evaluating whether the model’s prediction on the perturbed input aligns with human judgment.
However, in contrast to computer vision, where perturbed inputs can be optimized directly in an end-
to-end manner, constructing perturbations for discrete language inputs involves deciding on many
different factors (e.g., type of perturbation, constraints on perturbation, etc). Hence in this work,
we leverage key insights from the NLP adversarial robustness literature to decompose perturbations
corresponding to a linguistic capability C in terms of four independent components: transforma-
tion, constraints, goal function and search method. Thus, perturbations along each capability (e.g.,
Synonym-Invariance) attempt to manipulate an input text (‘I love watching movies.’) to produce its
perturbed counterpart (‘I love watching films.’) using well-defined transformations (WordNet syn-
onym swapping) and constraints (disallowing stopword modifications) to satisfy the goal function
(i.e., reference model m remains behaviorally invariant).

3.1   G OAL F UNCTION AND S EARCH M ETHOD

To effectively quantify measures such as shared invariances (defined in Sec. 3.3) between a ref-
erence and a target NLP model, we enforce that the reference model is invariant to the perturba-
tion introduced by the linguistic capability. The behavioral invariance serves as the goal function
while generating perturbations with respect to the reference NLP model, ensuring that the perturba-
tion generation process interacts with the reference NLP model. This formulation is important as
invariance-based measures are otherwise difficult to measure using purely observational data (Nanda
et al., 2022). Additionally, this also lends directionality to our shared-invariance measures as the per-
turbations generated w.r.t two different reference models would be different, allowing us to delineate
invariances unique to any model and measure their degree of overlap with others.
We define the goal of behavioral invariance at the level of the output softmax probabilities i.e., the
reference model m is behaviorally invariant if there is a negligible difference between the predicted
probability distribution on the base and perturbed sample. More formally, consider an NLP model
m that outputs probability distribution m(x) for an input text x. A linguistic capability C perturbs
x ∈ X s.t. m is invariant to the perturbed text x′
                       C(x; m) = argmin L(m(x), m(x′ )), subject to x ̸= x′                          (1)
                                      x′

where L is an objective function that guides the optimization process. Since x is a sequence of
tokens, we use discrete optimization techniques (e.g., greedy search) for finding x′ that minimizes
L(m(x), m(x′ )) in the finitely large transformation space. The optimization techniques can vary in
computational costs depending on the linguistic capability. For instance, we require ≈ 2.5× time
for generating perturbations for Synonym-Invariance compared to Typo-Invariance (refer supple-
mentary Sec. K for details). In our experiments, we define L(m(x), m(x′ )) = ∥m(x) − m(x′ )∥1 .
In practice, we observe that minimizing this objective leads to x′ that are at least invariant in argmax
predictions. We provide more details in the supplementary Sec. E. Note that the objective function
can take other forms as long as it captures differences in both direction and magnitude between
m(x) and m(x′ ). We present results for the same in supplementary Sec. I.

3.2   T RANSFORMATIONS AND C ONSTRAINTS

Once the goal function and search method are specified, we can fully formalize different linguis-
tic capabilities by specifying the corresponding transformations and constraints. In this work, we


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


primarily focus on two such linguistic capabilities: Synonym-Invariance and Typo-Invariance that
perform perturbations at multiple levels (i.e., character-level transformations to word-level substitu-
tions). Synonym-Invariance – Synonym-Invariance perturbs words in the input text by replacing
them with their synonyms. More specifically, we adopt the transformation strategy proposed by Ren
et al. (2019) that determines candidate synonyms for a particular word based on WordNet (e.g., A
man laughs out loud. → A man laughs out loudly.). Typo-Invariance – Typo-Invariance perturbs
a word in the input text by swapping their middle characters (i.e., all characters in a word except
the first and last one). Thus, while Synonym-Invariance perturbs input text at a word level, Typo-
Invariance produces transformations at a character level (e.g., A man laughs out loud. → A man
laughs out luod.). For both linguistic capabilities, we use a greedy search-based method to traverse
through candidate transformations and constrain modifications of words that are stopwords, have
lengths less than four, or are already perturbed. We focus on these two capabilities because there is
a rich literature studying them, albeit from an adversarial robustness perspective as they concern the
reliability of many real-world systems, such as spam detection, toxicity classification, and fake news
detection (Lee & Ng, 2005; Pruthi et al., 2019; Ren et al., 2019). We perform experiments along an
additional linguistic capability: Fairness and report our insights in the supplementary Sec. C due to
space constraints. We would like to emphasize that the list of linguistic capabilities (e.g., negation,
word order) can be easily expanded by defining the specific transformation and constraints.

3.3     M ETRICS FOR Q UANTIFYING B EHAVIORAL -S IMILARITY

We perform experiments with a number of popular metrics (such as accuracy and agreement-rates)
as well as propose novel ones (behavioral shared invariances). These metrics can be broadly
categorized into three classes: performance-based (Gap in IID accuracy), agreement-based (IID
and OOD (Out-of-Distribution) agreement), and invariance-based (Hard-SCoPE, Soft-SCoPE). The
invariance-based metrics offer a complementary lens on the behavioral similarity between two NLP
models as we empirically observe that the existing metrics often fail to adequately capture them for
many kinds of models one would want to investigate. While some of these metrics have been used
in the computer-vision literature, their role in determining behavioral similarity has been underex-
plored in NLP. Hence, we discuss all of them in detail below.

Notation: Consider a task T with an IID test set denoted as (Xtest , ytest ) ∼ Dtest . Models M =
{m1 , m2 } are fine-tuned on training samples for this task, where each model m maps an input x to
output a probability distribution m(x) ∈ Rn over n unique labels/vocabulary for T . The model’s
prediction ym (x) is defined as: ym (x) = argmax m(x)k where m(x)k denotes the probability
                                               k∈[n]
score for k th label. We aim to assess the behavioral similarity between m1 and m2 along a particular
linguistic capability C. Perturbations are applied to a set of base samples – X (typically Xtest ).

3.3.1    P ERFORMANCE - BASED M ETRICS
Comparing the gap between aggregate performance-based measures is one of the most common
ways to characterize behavioral similarity between two models as models with lower performance
gaps are generally thought of as more behaviorally similar (Ding et al., 2021; Klabunde et al., 2023).
Since we are primarily investigating text-classification tasks in the main paper, we choose accuracy
as the performance measure and consequently evaluate the gap between accuracies of two models
on the test-set. We present results on language modeling task in the supplementary Sec.- G.
The Gap in IID accuracy is simply the absolute difference in the accuracies of the reference and
target models, i.e., Gap in IID Accuracy: |acc(m1 ) − acc(m2 )|, where accuracy of a model m is
defined as acc(m) = Ex,y∼Dtest 1[y = ym (x)].

3.3.2    AGREEMENT- BASED M ETRICS
Instead of focusing on the average differences in performance, the agreement rates (between m1 &
m2 ) explore the behavioral similarity directly at the instance level. We calculate model agreements
on both base and perturbed samples.
                            IID Agreement:Ex∈X 1[ym1 (x) = ym2 (x)]
                  OOD Agreement:Ex∈X 1[ym1 (C(x; m1 )) = ym2 (C(x; m1 ))]


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                BERT   DistilBERT   GPT-2


        Class-A Probability


                                                    Class-A Probability


                                                                                                                            Soft-SCoPE
                              Class-B Probability                         Class-B Probability

                              Soft-SCoPE ~ 0.6                            Soft-SCoPE ~ 1
                              Hard-SCoPE: 1                               Hard-SCoPE: 1
                              IID-Agreement: 0                            IID-Agreement: 0
                              OOD-Agreement: 0                            OOD-Agreement: 0


Figure 1: Left: Probability vectors for three models (m1 , m2 , and m3 ) trained on a binary classifica-
tion task. For perturbation x → x′ , where x′ = C(x; m1 ), both m2 and m3 satisfy the Hard-SCoPE
criteria. However, the effect of the perturbation is more aligned for m1 & m3 (blue and purple)
compared to m1 & m2 (blue and brown). Right: 2-D Soft-SCoPE surface for a pair of base and
perturbed samples, where the reference model BERT is compared with DistilBERT and GPT-2.


Agreement rates between two models is akin to comparing the similarity between their decision
regions, especially for out-of-distribution (OOD) data, which represents points sampled along lin-
guistic capabilities in the data manifold (Somepalli et al., 2022).

3.3.3   P ROPOSED I NVARIANCE - BASED M ETRICS
While agreement rates quantify whether two models have similar behavior on a particular sam-
ple, shared invariances can reveal finer-grained similarities of the instance properties utilized by
the two models for their predictions. For instance, if a model becomes variant to perturbations
(e.g., synonym word substitution) that it was originally invariant to after a particular design choice
(e.g., distillation), it indicates heightened sensitivity towards perturbed aspects of data. Agreement
rates are ill-equipped for such investigations as they compare the similarity between predictions of
two models. However, measuring shared invariances requires evaluating the effect of a perturbation
within each model individually and subsequently comparing if both models exhibit invariance. Thus,
measuring behavioral shared invariances amounts to quantifying the extent to which a target model
is invariant on perturbations that do not cause any change in the reference model’s behavior (refer
Eq. 1). Since behavior itself can be measured at different granularity i.e., with respect to exact class
prediction or predicted softmax probabilities, we propose two novel notions (Hard and Soft) of mea-
suring behavioral shared-invariance: SHared-Capabilities-thrOugh-Perturbed-Examples (SCoPE)

Hard-SCoPE: We want to measure to what degree target model m2 ’s prediction remains invariant
to a change in the input i.e., x → x′ , where x′ = C(x; m1 ), for which the reference model m1 was
invariant. We label this quantity as Hard-SCoPE as it considers the ‘hard’ argmax predictions to
determine behavioral shared-invariances.


  Hard-SCoPE(m2 | m1 ) = Ex∈X 1[ym2 (x) = ym2 (C(x; m1 )) | ym1 (x) = ym1 (C(x; m1 ))]. (2)

Note that the Hard-SCoPE is not calculated between two models (like agreement-rates), but rather
between the base and perturbed samples for a particular target model m2 . For a binary-classification
setup, Hard-SCoPE can be seen as “agreement between agreement-rates” i.e., Hard-SCoPE would
be 1 if either both IID and OOD agreement are 0 or both are 1 for a particular base-perturbed sample
pair. We discuss the relationship between IID-, OOD-agreements and Hard-SCoPE in more detail
in the supplementary Sec. E.

Soft-SCoPE: A softer (and perhaps more informative) notion of shared-invariances is to look be-
yond argmax predictions and investigate whether the perturbation in input space produces the same
effect (change) in the output probability distributions of both models. The effect of the perturbation
x → x′ , where x′ = C(x; mref ) is generated with reference model mref , in the output probability


                                                                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


distributions for a model m is denoted by ∆m          ⃗ = m(x′ ) − m(x). We present an intuition
                                             ⃗ i.e., ∆m
of when a softer notion of shared invariance can be useful in Fig. 1 (left).
In Fig. 1 (left), we visualize the predicted probability distributions of three models m1 , m2 , and m3
trained on a binary classification task on both base – m1 (x), m2 (x), m3 (x) and perturbed samples
– m1 (x′ ), m2 (x′ ), m3 (x′ ), where the perturbation x′ is generated by a linguistic capability C and
reference model m1 i.e., x′ = C(x; m1 ). While the input perturbation qualifies as a (hard) shared
invariance for both (m2 | m1 ) and (m3 | m1 ) since both m2 and m3 remain invariant in their
argmax predictions; the effect (i.e., change in the predicted output probability distribution) of the
perturbation is much more aligned for one pair (i.e., ∆m   ⃗ 3 and ∆m⃗ 1 ) than the other (i.e., ∆m
                                                                                                  ⃗ 2 and
∆m ⃗ 1 ). Thus, the reliance on (argmax) predictions to quantify shared-invariances by Hard-SCoPE
could obscure key differences between the effect of the perturbation.
As motivated by this example, a desiderata for the soft shared-invariance metric is to obtain high-
values if the change in both models (∆m       ⃗ 1 , ∆m
                                                     ⃗ 2 ) is similar (in both direction and magnitude) and
low-values otherwise. Thus, we define Soft-SCoPE(m2 | m1 ) as:
  Ex∈X decay(dist(∆m      ⃗ 1 , ∆m  ⃗ 2 ))1[ym2 (x) = ym2 (C(x; m1 )) | ym1 (x) = ym1 (C(x; m1 ))], (3)
where decay(dist(∆m     ⃗ 1 , ∆m  ⃗ 2 )) is an additional term that weighs the contribution of each pair
of base and perturbed samples by a function of the corresponding changes in model probabilities
∆m ⃗ 1 and ∆m  ⃗ 2 . More specifically, the function is composed by two functions: a function dist that
computes the difference between the changes in model probabilities, and a decay function decay,
which has a range [0, 1] i.e., 0 ≤ decay(dist(∆m        ⃗ 1 , ∆m⃗ 2 )) ≤ 1 and is monotonically decreasing
to ensure lower dist values correspond to higher similarity, as in all the previous metrics. In our
experiments, we chose dist(∆m                ⃗ 2 ) = ∥∆m
                                      ⃗ 1 , ∆m             ⃗ 1 − ∆m   ⃗ 2 ∥1 and decay as a linear function.
In order to visualize the variation in Soft-SCoPE values between different model pairs i.e., (m2 |
m1 ) and (m3 | m1 ) we plot the 2-D plane spanned by vectors v⃗1 = ∆m                ⃗ 2 − ∆m  ⃗ 1 and v⃗2 =
∆m ⃗ 3 − ∆m  ⃗ 1 . Here, ∆m   ⃗ 1 corresponds to BERT (reference model), and ∆m          ⃗ 2 & ∆m  ⃗ 3 refer to
DistilBERT and GPT-2 respectively. We note that unlike Hard-SCoPE of two models that can only
take binary values i.e., either 0 or 1 for a particular base-perturbed sample pair, Soft-SCoPE varies
smoothly. We also observe that models from the same architectural family (BERT and DistilBERT)
have higher Soft-SCoPE compared to models from different architectural families (BERT and GPT-
2). We expand on the insight in supplementary Sec. F.

3.4   C ORRELATION BETWEEN METRICS
                          BERT-Base             BERT-Tiny              Figure 2: Correlation between proposed
                 0.8                                                   invariance-based metrics (Soft-SCoPE)
        Soft-SCoPE


                 0.7                                                   and existing metrics (OOD-Agreement)
                                                                       for different reference and target model
                 0.6
                                                                       pairs. Existing metrics poorly corre-
                 0.5                                                   late with invariance-based metrics as the
                         0.90         0.95     0.90         0.95
                       OOD-Agreement         OOD-Agreement             size of the reference model is reduced.

Here, we explore whether the proposed invariance-based measures are tightly coupled with metrics
previously explored in the literature such as agreement rates. We evaluate the Pearson correlation
between OOD-agreement and Soft-SCoPE for different reference and target model pairs from the
BERT architecture family and plot the results in Fig. 2. Each column consists of results for different
target-reference model pairs for a particular reference model – BERT-Base or BERT-Tiny. We ex-
periment with multiple different target models varying in size with BERT-Base being the largest and
BERT-Tiny the smallest. We find that OOD-agreement and Soft-SCoPE are poorly correlated when
using comparatively smaller models as reference models i.e., r=0.011 for BERT-Tiny, whereas they
are positively correlated when using relatively larger models as reference models i.e., r=0.97 for
BERT-Base. Thus, the invariances shared between two NLP models are not necessarily explained
by existing metrics. Importantly, the finding that existing metrics are especially poor at capturing
shared invariance when the reference model is smaller than the target model further highlights the
need for separately evaluating shared-invariances as smaller models are more amenable to controlled
analysis (such as circuit analysis (Wang et al., 2022)) and hence likely to be used as reference mod-
els. We present results for correlations with other metrics such as IID-agreement and Gap in IID
accuracy in the supplementary Sec. J.


                                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4      E FFECT OF M ODEL D ESIGN C HOICES ON S HARED -I NVARIANCES

In this section, we investigate the effect of different design choices on the invariances shared by
two models. Thus, we experiment with a range of NLP models varying in training (BERT Devlin
et al. (2019), DistilBERT (Sanh et al., 2019)), and size (BERT-Tiny, Mini, Small, Medium, Base).
Unless otherwise stated, we finetune all architectures for 5 epochs on Stanford Sentiment Treebank
(SST2 a binary sentiment classification dataset) (Socher et al., 2013). We present additional results
for different datasets (AG-News) and tasks (language modeling) in the supplementary Sec. B and
Sec. G. We build upon the ”textattack” library (Morris et al., 2020) to implement several linguistic
capabilities based on our requirements. For each capability and reference-model pair we generate
the perturbed examples three times and report the average results with standard errors.

4.1         D IFFERENT L INGUISTIC C APABILITIES

                       Synonym-Invariance   Typo-Invariance       Figure 3: [Reference Model: BERT, Target
      1.0                                                         Model: DistilBERT]. Comparing shared-
      0.8                                                         invariances between DistilBERT and BERT
                                                                  on Synonym-Invariance and Typo-Invariance
      0.6
                                                                  defined w.r.t BERT. Distillation hurts some
      0.4                                                         capabilities (Typo-Invariance) substantially
      0.2
                                                                  more than others (Synonym-Invariance).
      0.0
                  Hard-SCoPE                     Soft-SCoPE



In this section, we aim to investigate whether a design choice (i.e., distillation) that has a nomi-
nal impact on the IID accuracy, preserves shared invariances along different linguistic capabilities.
Specifically, we fix BERT as the reference model & DistilBERT as the target model and compare
shared capabilities along Synonym-Invariance and Typo-Invariance.

Gap in IID accuracy may overestimate the degree of shared invariances: Both BERT and Dis-
tilBERT achieve high accuracies on the SST2 test-set i.e., 93% and 89.45% respectively (3.55% Gap
in IID accuracy). However, in Fig 3, we note that a low gap in generalization performance on the
IID test-set doesn’t necessarily ensure high shared invariances. For instance, DistilBERT is substan-
tially less aligned to BERT along Typo-Invariance. Thus, Gap in IID accuracy may overestimate the
degree of shared invariances between two models along a linguistic capability.

Distilling BERT affects some linguistic capabilities more than others: In Fig. 3, we also ob-
serve that DistilBERT is significantly more similar to BERT along Synonym-Invariance compared
to Typo-Invariance. Thus not only is there a decrease in shared-invariances after distillation, but
distillation also affects different linguistic capabilities to varying degrees. We posit that this trend
can be attributed to the Masked Language Modelling (MLM) pre-training procedure that is common
to both BERT and DistilBERT. The MLM objective optimizes the model to predict masked words
in a sentence correctly, it’s plausible that during pre-training a model develops invariances to di-
verse in-context word-substitutions. Since, both DistilBERT and BERT are pre-trained on the same
corpus (i.e., concatenation of English Wikipedia and Toronto Book Corpus, Sanh et al. (2019)), it’s
highly likely that the learnt word-invariances are shared between them. Similarly, the lower values
for Typo-Invariance may be explained by the lack of misspelled words in the training corpus.

4.2         ROLE OF I NDUCTIVE B IASES

So far we have discussed the effect of a particular design choice (i.e., distillation) on shared-
invariances along different linguistic capabilities. In this section, we explore the effect of changes
in architectural inductive biases on a model’s behavior along a linguistic capability i.e., Synonym-
Invariance. Specifically, we investigate the role of increasing/decreasing the depth and width of
hidden-layers on the shared-invariances. To control for potential confounders we finetune a wide
array of models (released by Turc et al. (2019)) belonging to the same architecture family (BERT)
varying significantly in both number (L) and size (H) of the hidden layers. Specifically, we inves-


                                                              7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           a) Reference Model: BERT-Tiny      b) Reference Model: BERT-Base   c) Averaged over all possible Reference Models


Figure 4: [Linguistic-Capability: Synonym-Invariance] Analyzing the effect of size on shared-
invariances within the BERT architecture family. We observe that OOD-agreement is higher for
target models in similar size ranges as the reference model. However, shared-invariances are higher
for target models of larger size irrespective of the reference model.


tigate BERT-Tiny (L=2, H=128), BERT-Mini (L=4, H=256), BERT-Small (L=4, H=512), BERT-
Medium (L=8, H=512), and BERT-Base (L=12, H=768).
Different trends across different metrics: In Fig. 4-a, with BERT-Tiny (smallest model in our
investigation) as the reference model, we observe that the OOD agreement-rate indicate that models
in similar in size to BERT-Tiny (i.e., BERT-Mini, BERT-Small) have higher similarity with BERT-
Tiny than other larger models (i.e., BERT-Medium, BERT-Base). In contrast, the shared-invariances
metrics don’t follow the same trend as Hard-SCoPE values tend to increase for larger model sizes,
and there isn’t a substantial difference between the Soft-SCoPE values across different target models.
Larger models share more invariances with models of any size: In Fig. 4-b, we repeat the same
experiment with the largest model in our investigation–BERT-Base–as the reference model. Sur-
prisingly, we observe that all metrics indicate that models become less similar to BERT-Base as
their size decreases. This is in contrast to previous results with BERT-Tiny (smallest model) as
the reference model where larger models had poor OOD-agreement and higher (or similar) shared-
invariances. Thus, we hypothesize that even though larger models don’t agree with the behavior of
smaller models from an agreement perspective, they still share the invariances generated by smaller
models. Interestingly, the opposite is not true i.e., smaller models don’t necessarily share invariances
generated w.r.t larger models as well as other larger models. To understand this more generally, we
report the average results for all models (as target models) by marginalizing them over all the dif-
ferent reference models. We expect that metrics depending on model size (i.e., agreement rates)
should have uniform values across different target models. In contrast, metrics that are tied to larger
model sizes (i.e., shared-invariances) should peak for larger models even after averaging. We re-
port the result in Fig. 4-c, which are consistent with our proposition. It’s especially interesting that
larger models are able to share a more diverse set of invariances (both from other larger and smaller
models) even when they are pretrained/finetuned on the same corpus as the smaller models.

5   R ELATIONSHIP OF FAMILIAR M ODELS WITH B LACK B OX API S
In the previous sections we discussed specialist models that are tuned to perform well on a specific
task (e.g., sentiment analysis on SST2). However, in recent years the NLP community has shifted
focus towards building more generalist models that can perform a diverse set of tasks when prompted
with appropriate instructions and exemplars. Importantly, these models don’t need to update their
weights on downstream task-data as the instructions and exemplars can be directly provided in-
context during inference (Brown et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022). However, the state-of-the-art of
these models are primarily available in the form of black-box APIs released by industrial research
labs, with little information available about their training. We explore how one can quantify the
behavioral similarity between models released via black-box APIs (InstructGPT family) and models
that are widely adopted in practice (e.g. GPT-2). We follow the methodology of Cheng et al. (2023)
for estimating output probability distribution over the task-labels (positive and negative sentiment)
from InstructGPT models. Specifically, we sample the output multiple times for each input and take
the mode as the final prediction and its frequency as the probability score for that particular label.
Firstly, we explore the effect of the size of the target model on the behavioral similarity along
Synonym-Invariance defined w.r.t GPT-2 and report the results in Fig. 5 (left). We use InstructGPT


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: [Reference Model: GPT-2, Capability: Synonym-Invariance]. Comparing shared-
invariances between GPT-2 and various OpenAI models differing in size and finetuning along
Synonym-Invariance. Larger InstructGPT models (even with same IID accuracy) share more in-
variances with GPT-2. Also, state-of-the-art models finetuned with reinforcement learning (text-
davinci-003) share more invariances than their supervised finetuned counterparts (text-davinci-002).


models text-ada-001, text-babbage-001, text-curie-001, text-davinci-001 that roughly correspond to
model sizes: 350M, 1.3B, 6.7B, and 175B respectively (Gao et al., 2021). We perform all experi-
ments in a zero-shot manner. To reduce costs, we perform experiments on 100 randomly selected
samples from the SST2 test-set. The finetuned GPT-2 achieves 96% accuracy on this subset. It cost
us ≈ 55$ to compute all the results for this section.
Larger InstructGPT models share more invariances with GPT-2: We note that there’s a sub-
stantial difference in IID performance between the smaller models (text-ada-001) and larger models
(text-curie-001, text-davinci-001). Moreover, text-ada-001 is not only less agreeable to the GPT-2
model, but also seems to be substantially less invariant to perturbations that GPT-2 is invariant on i.e.,
low Hard-SCoPE and Soft-SCoPE. Interestingly, even though text-curie-001 and text-davinci-001
achieve similar IID accuracy (i.e., 94%) there’s substantial differences in their shared-invariances.
Thus, even though both models seem equivalent based on IID performance, using text-davinci-001
would ensure higher behavioral similarity from the perspective of shared-invariances. Also, this re-
sult ties back to our previous observations in Sec. 4.2 about larger models sharing more invariances.
RL based finetuning may retain more invariances: We explore the effect of different finetun-
ing methods for instruction following on shared-invariances in Fig. 5 (right). For this, we perform
experiments on text-davinci-001, text-davinci-002, and text-davinci-003 models released by Ope-
nAI. text-davinci-001 is finetuned using supervised learning on human and selected model written
demonstrations. While, text-davinci-002 utilizes the same objective function, it’s pretrained on a mix
of text and code. text-davinci-003 differs from text-davinci-002 by using reinforcement learning for
finetuning instead of supervised learning. We note that both text-davinci-002 and text-davinci-003
have similar performances across IID accuracy, agreement rates, and Hard-SCoPE. Interestingly,
there’s a substantial gap in their Soft-SCoPE values, indicating that even though both models re-
main invariant on an equivalent number of samples (similar hard-scope), text-davinci-003’s output
probability distribution is more invariant to perturbations generated along Synonym-Invariance.


6    C ONCLUSION

We propose a framework for evaluating interpretable shared-invariances between two NLP models
by evaluating the degree to which a target model shares behavioral similarity on a linguistic capa-
bility defined with respect to a reference model. We conduct extensive experiments to highlight
the implications of different design choices (e.g. distillation) and find that shared-invariances tend
to be affected more along certain linguistic capabilities than others. Furthermore, we also analyze
models of different sizes and find that larger target models in general tend to share more invariances.
Lastly, we demonstrate the use of our framework in analyzing relationships between black-box APIs
and familiar models. One limitation of our current work is inefficient search methods as they need
many queries to generate perturbations. Efficient search methods are necessary for generating per-
turbed samples with reference to a black box APIs. Additionally, while we adopt the approach of
Cheng et al. (2023) for estimating predicted probabilities for instruction-tuned models, it would be
interesting to evaluate whether our insights vary across different probability estimation methods.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Silei Cheng, Zhe Gan, Zhengyuan Yang, Shuohang Wang, Jianfeng Wang, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and
   Lijuan Wang. Prompting gpt-3 to be reliable. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
   tations (ICLR 23), May 2023. URL https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/
   publication/prompting-gpt-3-to-be-reliable/.

Mostafa Dehghani, Yi Tay, Alexey A Gritsenko, Zhe Zhao, Neil Houlsby, Fernando Diaz, Donald
 Metzler, and Oriol Vinyals. The benchmark lottery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07002, 2021.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and
  Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT
  2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–
  4186. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/n19-1423. URL
  https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/n19-1423.

Frances Ding, Jean-Stanislas Denain, and Jacob Steinhardt. Grounding representation similarity
  through statistical testing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:1556–1568,
  2021.

Nadir Durrani, Hassan Sajjad, and Fahim Dalvi. How transfer learning impacts linguistic knowl-
  edge in deep NLP models? In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-
  IJCNLP 2021, pp. 4947–4957, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.findings-acl.438. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  findings-acl.438.

Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster, Laurence
  Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muennighoff, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Eric
  Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. A framework for few-shot lan-
  guage model evaluation, September 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
  5371629.

Jonas Geiping and Tom Goldstein. Cramming: Training a language model on a single gpu in one
  day. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14034, 2022.

Sara Hooker, Aaron Courville, Gregory Clark, Yann Dauphin, and Andrea Frome. What do com-
  pressed deep neural networks forget? arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.05248, 2019.

Sara Hooker, Nyalleng Moorosi, Gregory Clark, Samy Bengio, and Emily Denton. Characterising
  bias in compressed models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03058, 2020.

Max Klabunde, Tobias Schumacher, Markus Strohmaier, and Florian Lemmerich. Similarity of
 neural network models: A survey of functional and representational measures. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2305.06329, 2023.

Emanuele La Malfa and Marta Kwiatkowska. The king is naked: on the notion of robustness for
  natural language processing. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 36, pp. 11047–11057, 2022.

Honglak Lee and Andrew Y Ng. Spam deobfuscation using a hidden markov model. In CEAS,
  2005.

Hong Liu, Sang Michael Xie, Zhiyuan Li, and Tengyu Ma. Same pre-training loss, better down-
  stream: Implicit bias matters for language models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 22188–22214. PMLR, 2023.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nelson F. Liu, Matt Gardner, Yonatan Belinkov, Matthew E. Peters, and Noah A. Smith. Linguistic
  knowledge and transferability of contextual representations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
  ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
  Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 1073–1094, Minneapolis, Min-
  nesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1112. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/N19-1112.
Ari Morcos, Maithra Raghu, and Samy Bengio. Insights on representational similarity in neural
  networks with canonical correlation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31,
  2018.
John Morris, Eli Lifland, Jin Yong Yoo, Jake Grigsby, Di Jin, and Yanjun Qi. Textattack: A frame-
  work for adversarial attacks, data augmentation, and adversarial training in nlp. In Proceedings
  of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demon-
  strations, pp. 119–126, 2020.
Vedant Nanda, Till Speicher, Camila Kolling, John P Dickerson, Krishna Gummadi, and Adrian
  Weller. Measuring representational robustness of neural networks through shared invariances. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 16368–16382. PMLR, 2022.
David Owen. Extrapolating performance in language modeling benchmarks. 2023.
Jason Phang, Haokun Liu, and Samuel R. Bowman. Fine-tuned transformers show clusters of sim-
  ilar representations across layers. In Proceedings of the Fourth BlackboxNLP Workshop on An-
  alyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 529–538, Punta Cana, Dominican Re-
  public, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.
  blackboxnlp-1.42. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.blackboxnlp-1.42.
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Ben Hutchinson, and Margaret Mitchell. Perturbation sensitivity anal-
  ysis to detect unintended model biases. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empir-
  ical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
  Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 5740–5745, Hong Kong, China, Novem-
  ber 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1578. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/D19-1578.
Danish Pruthi, Bhuwan Dhingra, and Zachary C. Lipton. Combating adversarial misspellings with
  robust word recognition. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, pp. 5582–5591, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1561. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  P19-1561.
Shuhuai Ren, Yihe Deng, Kun He, and Wanxiang Che. Generating natural language adversar-
  ial examples through probability weighted word saliency. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1085–1097, Florence, Italy, July
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1103. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/P19-1103.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro and Scott Lundberg. Adaptive testing and debugging of nlp models. In Pro-
 ceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
 Long Papers), pp. 3253–3267, 2022.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. Beyond accuracy:
 Behavioral testing of NLP models with CheckList. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
 ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4902–4912, Online, July 2020. As-
 sociation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.442. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.442.
Barbara Rychalska, Dominika Basaj, Alicja Gosiewska, and Przemysław Biecek. Models in the
  wild: On corruption robustness of neural nlp systems. In International Conference on Neural
  Information Processing, pp. 235–247. Springer, 2019.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version of
  bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108, 2019.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Naomi Saphra and Adam Lopez. Understanding learning dynamics of language models with
  SVCCA. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short
  Papers), pp. 3257–3267, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1329. URL https://aclanthology.org/N19-1329.
Thibault Sellam, Steve Yadlowsky, Ian Tenney, Jason Wei, Naomi Saphra, Alexander D’Amour, Tal
  Linzen, Jasmijn Bastings, Iulia Raluca Turc, Jacob Eisenstein, Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick.
  The multiberts: BERT reproductions for robustness analysis. In The Tenth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022. OpenReview.net,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=K0E_F0gFDgA.
Harshay Shah, Sung Min Park, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. Modeldiff: A framework for
  comparing learning algorithms. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 30646–
  30688. PMLR, 2023.
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Y Ng,
  and Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
  treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on empirical methods in natural language pro-
  cessing, pp. 1631–1642, 2013.
Gowthami Somepalli, Liam Fowl, Arpit Bansal, Ping Yeh-Chiang, Yehuda Dar, Richard Baraniuk,
  Micah Goldblum, and Tom Goldstein. Can neural nets learn the same model twice? investigating
  reproducibility and double descent from the decision boundary perspective. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13699–13708, 2022.
Anna Sotnikova, Yang Trista Cao, Hal Daumé III, and Rachel Rudinger. Analyzing stereotypes in
  generative text inference tasks. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  ACL-IJCNLP 2021, pp. 4052–4065, 2021.
Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Jinfeng Rao, William Fedus, Samira Abnar, Hyung Won Chung, Sharan
  Narang, Dani Yogatama, Ashish Vaswani, and Donald Metzler. Scale efficiently: Insights from
  pre-training and fine-tuning transformers. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2022.
Iulia Turc, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Well-read students learn better:
   On the importance of pre-training compact models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08962, 2019.
Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Inter-
  pretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in gpt-2 small. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.00593, 2022.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V
  Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.
  In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 24824–24837. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/9d5609613524ecf4f15af0f7b31abca4-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Huggingface’s transformers:
  State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.
John Wu, Yonatan Belinkov, Hassan Sajjad, Nadir Durrani, Fahim Dalvi, and James Glass. Sim-
  ilarity analysis of contextual word representation models. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
  nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4638–4655, Online, July
  2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.422. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.422.
Xiang Zhang, Junbo Jake Zhao, and Yann LeCun. Character-level convolutional networks for text
  classification. In NIPS, 2015.
Yi Zhang, Arturs Backurs, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Suriya Gunasekar, and Tal Wagner.
  Unveiling transformers with lego: a synthetic reasoning task. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04301,
  2022.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Appendix for:
      “Perturbed examples reveal invariances shared by
                    language models”



A     A DDITIONAL I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In this section, we provide an overview of our implementation details. For all our experiments, we
use two NVIDIA A40 GPUs with 48GB of memory each. We use the standard model implementa-
tions provided by the huggingface transformers library (Wolf et al., 2019). We finetune all models
for 5 epochs with a batch size of 64 using Adam optimizer and a linear-drop learning rate schedule
with initial value of 2e-5.


B     A DDITIONAL DATASET: AG’ S N EWS

In this section, we present results on an additional dataset – AG’s news topic classification dataset
(Zhang et al., 2015). It’s a multi-class text classification task, where the goal is to classify text from
an article into one of four categories i.e., World, Sports, Business, and Sci / Tech. It contains 120, 000
training samples and 7, 600 test samples. Due to compute and time constraints, we randomly sample
a subset of 2, 000 samples from the test-set and conduct our experiments on them as base samples
(instead of the full test-set). We train models using the same hyper-parameters (learning rate, epochs,
etc) as SST2 on the full training set. We repeat the experiments from the main paper and plot the
results in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7. We note that the results are qualitatively similar across both the datasets.

                         Synonym-Invariance   Typo-Invariance                          Figure 6: [Dataset: AG’s News,
1.0                                                                                    Reference Model: BERT, Target
                                                                                       Model: DistilBERT]. Comparing
0.8                                                                                    shared-invariances between Distil-
                                                                                       BERT and BERT on Synonym-
0.6                                                                                    Invariance and Typo-Invariance de-
                                                                                       fined w.r.t BERT trained on AG’s
0.4                                                                                    news dataset. Similar to our ob-
                                                                                       servations for SST2 in the main
0.2                                                                                    paper, we observe that distilla-
                                                                                       tion hurts some capabilities (Typo-
0.0
                 Hard-SCoPE                        Soft-SCoPE                          Invariance) substantially more than
                                                                                       others (Synonym-Invariance).

          a) Reference Model: BERT-Tiny                b) Reference Model: BERT-Base            c) Averaged over all possible Reference Models


Figure 7: [Dataset: AG’s News, Linguistic-Capability: Synonym-Invariance] Analyzing the effect
of size on shared-invariances within the BERT architecture family. Similar to results on the SST2
dataset in the main paper, we observe that larger target models tend to share higher invariances
irrespective of the reference model.



                                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Left: [Reference Model: BERT, Target Model: DistilBERT]. Comparing shared-
invariances between DistilBERT and BERT on Synonym-Invariance∗ , Typo-Invariance∗ , and Fair-
ness defined w.r.t BERT. While there isn’t a substantial difference between shared-invariances
along Synonym-Invariance∗ and Fairness, Typo-Invariance∗ is lower than both. Right: [Linguistic-
Capability: Fairness] Analyzing the effect of size on shared-invariances within the BERT archi-
tecture family. Similar to results on Synonym-Invariance in the main paper, we observe that larger
target models share more invariances irrespective of the reference model. Whereas OOD-agreement
is higher for models in similar size ranges.



C    A DDITIONAL L INGUISTIC C APABILITY: FAIRNESS

In the main paper, we performed experiments along two linguistic capabilities i.e., Synonym-
Invariance and Typo-Invariance. In this section, we explore an additional linguistic capability i.e.,
Fairness. Fairness perturbs the input text (“Men love sports.”) by substituting words correspond-
ing to protected categories (such as men) with protected categories (e.g. ‘women’ ≈ ”Women love
sports.”) from within the same stereotype domain (i.e. Gender). We use a greedy search approach
for efficiently finding suitable transformations. We do not adopt any additional constraints on this
linguistic capability.
Synonym-Invariance and Typo-Invariance are agnostic to the domain of base samples x ∈ X i.e.,
they can be evaluated on any arbitrary set of base samples. In contrast, Fairness is only well defined
if x contains words corresponding to different protected categories. Thus, we use the corpus released
by Sotnikova et al. (2021) containing sentences with words corresponding to 71 protected categories
from 6 different stereotype domains as base-samples X for experiments pertaining to evaluation of
Fairness capability. Note, previous work on evaluating linguistic capabilities for a particular model
(Ribeiro et al., 2020) also perform a change in base samples (i.e., use samples not necessarily from
the test-split) for evaluating certain capabilities in order to decouple testing from implementation.
Additionally, We control for the change in base samples (X) by conducting additional experiments
on previously studied capabilities, such as Synonym-Invariance and Typo-Invariance, using the new
set of base samples. We label them Synonym-Invariance∗ and Typo-Invariance∗ respectively. This
allows us to draw meaningful comparisons across different capabilities.
In Fig. 8 (left), we first investigate the differences between different linguistic capabilities for a
particular design choice. Thus, similar to Sec. 4.1 in the main paper, we fix BERT as the refer-
ence model and DistilBERT as the target model. We observe that while Fairness has lower OOD-
agreement rate compared to Synonym-Invariance∗ , there isn’t a substantial difference between the
shared-invariances (Hard-SCoPE & Soft-SCoPE). Thus, even though DistilBERT disagrees in its
predictions with BERT for Fairness more (compared to Synonym-Invariance∗ ), DistilBERT is in-
variant in its behavior on perturbations generated along Fairness to a similar degree as Synonym-
Invariance. Additionally, we also note that Typo-Invariance∗ shares invariances to a lower degree
compared to both Synonym-Invariance∗ and Fairness further highlighting the role of MLM based
training objective as word-substitution is a common perturbation in both Fairness and Synonym-
Invariance∗ . In Fig. 8 (right), we report the shared-invariances between models across different
sizes belonging to the same architecture family. Specifically, for each target model we report the av-
eraged results over all possible reference models. Similar to our observations in Sec. 4.2 and Sec. 5
in the main paper for Synonym-Invariance, we observe that larger target models seem to share more
invariances (with models of any size) on perturbations generated along Fairness.


                                                 14
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    1.0                                                    Figure 9: [Reference Model: final-checkpoint
                                                           i.e. 100% pre-training, Target Model: mt for t%
    0.8
                                                           pre-training, Linguistic-Capability: Synonym-
    0.6      IID-Agreement        Hard-SCoPE               Invariance] Comparing different metrics to ana-
value

             OOD-Agreement        Soft-SCoPE               lyze how intermediate-checkpoints share capabili-
    0.4
                                                           ties on Synonym-Invariance defined w.r.t the final-
    0.2                                                    checkpoint. Even though the initial-checkpoint
                                                           (0% pre-training) is not much better than a
        0
                                                           random-baseline, it shares a high-degree of Hard-
              0
              5
             10
             15
             20
             25
             30
             35
             40
             45
             50
             55
             60
             65
             70
             75
             80
             85
             90
             95
            100
                             Checkpoints                   SCoPE and IID/OOD-Agreements.            Whereas
                                                           Soft-SCoPE grows in a gradual manner over the
                                                           course of pre-training.


   D        P RETRAINING DYNAMICS
   In the main paper we focused on evaluating shared capabilities between two models differing in de-
   sign choices along different linguistic capabilities. Additionally, we can also utilize our framework
   to empirically understand the dynamics of these linguistic capabilities over the course of pre-training
   of a language model. This line of analysis can help us probe questions such as: Which linguistic
   capabilities are learnt earlier during pre-training?, How does a linguistic capability evolve over the
   course of pretraining?, etc. To probe such questions effectively, we utilize 21 (equally-spaced) inter-
   mediate pre-training checkpoints for BERT released by Sellam et al. (2022). Since, we are primarily
   interested in quantifying the effect of pre-training (up to a particular checkpoint) in capturing differ-
   ent linguistic capabilities, we refrain from finetuning the full model (on SST2) and rather only train
   the linear probe layer on top of the frozen base network.

   The curious case of 0% pretraining: In Fig. 9, we report values for all the checkpoints evaluated
   along Synonym-Invariance capability defined with the final-checkpoint (i.e., 100% pretraining) as
   the reference model (e.g. Soft-SCoPE (mt | m100% for tth timestamp). We note that the model cor-
   responding to 0% pre-training (finetuned using random initialization) behaves as a random baseline
   ≈ 0.5 (or 50%) IID accuracy. We find that even though the network is akin to a random baseline,
   during prediction it outputs only one label: ‘positive’ (in contrast to predicting both classes with
   equal probabilities) irrespective of the input. Surprisingly, this model has high IID and OOD agree-
   ment rates (≈ 0.8 or 80%) and the highest possible Hard-SCoPE value i.e. 1 with respect to the
   final-checkpoint. On a deeper look, we find that the prediction distribution for the final distribu-
   tion is also biased towards the ‘positive’ label. In contrast, the Soft-SCoPE measure increases in a
   monotonically sublinear fashion over the course of pre-training, indicating that even though the pre-
   dictions in both IID and OOD states might be similar (high IID/OOD-Agreement rates) and invariant
   (high Hard-SCoPE) the change in output probability vectors between the IID and OOD predictions
   varies significantly for the 0% and 100% (final) checkpoints. These observations further reinforce
   the importance of evaluating a wide range of metrics to gain a holistic understanding of the behav-
   ioral similarities between models as certain metrics can be especially deceptive in the low-accuracy
   regime due to larger possible variance in the underlying model structure.

   Invariances for some capabilities are acquired earlier than others: Next in Fig. 10 we look at
   differences in evolution of different linguistic-capabilities over the course of pre-training. Firstly, in
   Fig. 10 (left), we observe that Soft-SCoPE (shared-invariances) along Synonym-Invariance is signif-
   icantly higher compared to Typo-Invariance for the major chunk of pre-training. Note, both of them
   converge to 1 at 100% pretraining as the Soft-SCoPE of a model with itself is 1 (irrespective of the
   linguistic-capability). Similar to our observations in Sec. 4.1, we posit that the shared pre-training
   objective (i.e. MLM) and training corpus leads to a higher degree of shared invariances much earlier
   in the pre-training for Synonym-Invariance compared to Typo-Invariance, which remains stagnant
   during most of the pretraining, with a sudden increase towards the end.

   Retaining previously accquired invariances: Till now our discussions have revolved around an-
   alyzing shared-invariances across different metrics (for a particular capability) and different capa-
   bilities (for a particular metric) with the final-checkpoint (i.e. 100% pre-training) as the reference-
   model. Thus, the central question for previous experiments has been: How (behaviorally) similar


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                       1.0
                      1.0   Synonym-Invariance                                              Synonym-Invariance
                            Typo-Invariance                                                 Typo-Invariance


                                                                       0.8
                      0.8



                                                                       0.6
                      0.6
         Soft-SCoPE


                                                          Soft-SCoPE
                      0.4                                              0.4


                      0.2                                              0.2



                       0
                                                                        0
                              0
                              5
                             10
                             15
                             20
                             25
                             30
                             35
                             40
                             45
                             50
                             55
                             60
                             65
                             70
                             75
                             80
                             85
                             90
                             95
                            100


                                                                               5
                                                                              10
                                                                              15
                                                                              20
                                                                              25
                                                                              30
                                                                              35
                                                                              40
                                                                              45
                                                                              50
                                                                              55
                                                                              60
                                                                              65
                                                                              70
                                                                              75
                                                                              80
                                                                              85
                                                                              90
                                                                              95
                                                                             100
                                           Checkpoints                        Checkpoints

Figure 10: Left: [Reference Model: final-checkpoint i.e. 100% pre-training, Target Model: mt
for t% pre-training, Metric: Soft-SCoPE] Comparing the evolution of soft shared-invarinces (i.e.
Soft-SCoPE) for different linguistic-capabilities (i.e. Synonym-Invariance, Typo-Invariance) during
pre-training. While all trends grow at a monotonically sub-linear pace, invariances for some are
acquired earlier than others. Right [Reference Model: mt−1 for t% pre-training, Target Model:
mt for t% pre-training, Soft-SCoPE] Investigating the retention of previously acquired shared-
invariances for different linguistic-capabilities (i.e. Synonym-Invariance, Typo-Invariance) during
pre-training. Mild values indicate that many invariances are not retained during the first-half of pre-
training, whereas checkpoints become more similar to the final-checkpoint as well as their previous
counterparts during the end of pre-training.


is an intermediate checkpoint to the final checkpoint? (w.r.t a particular metric along a particular
linguistic capability). However, this setup provides little insight regarding whether the models retain
their behavioral similarity w.r.t their previous counterparts as well (e.g. Soft-SCoPE (mt | mt−1
for t% pre-training). Thus to probe questions such as: How (behaviorally) similar is an intermedi-
ate checkpoint to its previous counterpart?, we calculate values of Soft-SCoPE for each checkpoint
with the previous checkpoint as the reference-model and report the results in Fig. 10 (right). A low
value for a particular checkpoint indicates that the model has changed a lot w.r.t its predecessor
while a high value would indicate that the model has retained the previously acquired behavioral
invariances. We observe that the Soft-SCoPE values remain centered around mild values for most
of the pre-training, indicating that while models are becoming more similar to the final-checkpoint
they are only retaining a minor extent of their previously acquired behavioral shared invariances. We
note that the shared invariances show a linear increase only towards the very end of the pre-training.


E     A DDITIONAL E XPLANATION FOR S HARED -I NVARIANCES

E.1   G ENERATING I NVARIANT P ERTURBATIONS

In this section, we analyze properties of perturbations generated along different linguistic capabil-
ities. While the primary goal of generated perturbations is to maintain behavioral invariance with
respect to the reference model, it is possible that the search method is unable to find candidates
that fulfill this criterion in the finitely large transformation space. Thus, in order to verify whether
the generated perturbations are truly behaviorally invariant for the reference model we visualize the
distribution of L(m(x), m(x′ )) – refer Fig. 11. Note, L(m(x), m(x′ )) = ∥m(x) − m(x′ )∥1 is an
objective function that penalizes the difference between reference model’s output softmax probabil-
ities (behavior) on base and perturbed inputs i.e., lower L(m(x), m(x′ )) implies more behavioral
invariance (refer Eq. 1).


                                                         16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    a) Capability: Synonym-Invariance                     b) Capability: Typo-Invariance



Count


Figure 11: [Reference Model: BERT] Distribution of L(m(x), m(x′ )) for x′ = C(x; m1 ) gen-
erated along Synonym-Invariance and Typo-Invariance. We note that the distribution is skewed
towards lower L(m(x), m(x′ )) values and most samples generated are at least invariant in predic-
tions (argmax-invariant).


In Fig. 11 (left) we note that for Synonym-Invariance, the distribution is highly skewed towards
lower L(m(x), m(x′ )) values indicating that most generated perturbations have minimal difference
between the predicted probability distribution on the base and perturbed samples for the reference
model and all of them are argmax-invariant i.e., have same prediction on each base-perturbed sample
pair. While, for Typo-Invariance (Fig. 11 right), the L(m(x), m(x′ ) values are higher and there are
a few argmax-variant samples as well. Note, the argmax-variant samples would be ignored while
evaluating measures such as Hard-SCoPE and Soft-SCoPE (refer Eq. 2 & Eq. 3).

E.2     R ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AGREEMENT-R ATES AND S HARED -I NVARIANCES

In this section, we delve deeper into the relationship between agreement-based metrics i.e., IID-
agreement & OOD-agreement and invariance-based measures i.e., Hard-SCoPE & Soft-SCoPE.
While, Hard-SCoPE doesn’t solely depend on any one of IID-agreement or OOD-agreement, look-
ing at both of them together can give indications about the Hard-SCoPE value. For instance, consider
a binary classification setup with labels ‘Class-A’ and ‘Class-B’ and two models m1 and m2 that
have predictions ym1 (x) & ym1 (x′ ) and ym2 (x) & ym2 (x′ ) for a particular base-perturbed sample
pair (x, x′ ), where x′ = C(x; m1 ).
In such a setup, the Hard-SCoPE can be seen as “agreement between agreement-rates” i.e., Hard-
SCoPE is 1 only when both agreement-rates are either 0 or both are 1. Hard-SCoPE reaches a
value of 1 when m2 has consistent predictions for both IID and OOD inputs (ym2 (x) = ym2 (x′ )),
on samples where m1 ’s predictions are invariant (ym1 (x) = ym1 (x′ )). In a binary classification
scenario where only two predictions are possible (Class-A or Class-B), achieving a Hard-SCoPE
value of 1 requires either both m1 and m2 to predict the same label, resulting in IID-Agreement and
OOD-Agreement both being 1, or they exhibit different predictions, leading to both IID-Agreement
and OOD-Agreement being 0 (row 1 and 4 in Tab. 1). In cases where m2 agrees with m1 for
IID(OOD) inputs but disagrees on OOD(IID) inputs, the Hard-SCoPE would be 0 as m2 must have
changed its prediction after the perturbation, given that m1 is invariant to the perturbation by design
(row 2 and 3 in Tab. 1). Importantly, this behavior does not hold for multi-class classification as it’s
possible for m2 to change its prediction even when both IID and OOD agreement are 0 (row-5 and
6 in Tab. 1).
We also discuss the relationship between Hard-SCoPE and Soft-SCoPE. Soft-SCoPE weighs the
contribution of each base-perturbed pair by a function of similarity in their changes in the ouput
softmax probability under a perturbation. Importantly, this weight lies between [0, 1]. Thus, Soft-
SCoPE is upper-bounded by Hard-SCoPE i.e., 0 ≤ Soft-SCoPE ≤ Hard-SCoPE.

F       S HARED -I NVARIANCES ACROSS A RCHITECTURE FAMILIES
In this section, we aim to investigate how differences in the architecture family of the reference
and target models affect their shared-invariances. Intuitively, one would expect a higher degree of
shared-invariances for models having similar architectures, courtesy of common inductive biases


                                                        17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  m1 ’s prediction          m2 ’s prediction
           Setup                                                                  IID-Agreement        OOD-Agreement   Hard-SCoPE
                                                       ′
                                ym1 (x)       ym1 (x )     ym2 (x)    ym2 (x′ )
                                Class-A       Class-A      Class-B    Class-B          0                         0         1
                                Class-A       Class-A      Class-B    Class-A          0                         1         0
    Binary Classification
                                Class-A       Class-A      Class-A    Class-B          1                         0         0
                                Class-A       Class-A      Class-A    Class-A          1                         1         1
                                Class-A       Class-A      Class-B    Class-B          0                         0         1
 Multi-class Classification
                                Class-A       Class-A      Class-B    Class-C          0                         0         0

Table 1: Relationship between IID-agreement & OOD-agreement (agreement-rates) and Hard-
SCoPE (shared-invariance). In a binary classification scenario, Hard-SCoPE can be seen as “agree-
ment between agreement-rates” as it’s 1 when either IID- and OOD- agreement are both 0 or both
1. However, this relationship doesn’t hold for multi-class classification setup.


induced by the architectural family. Thus, to validate this intuition we fix the reference model as
BERT and compare shared-invariances of target models both from the same architecture family
(DistilBERT) and a different one (GPT-2). We report the results in Fig. 12.

Models from same architecture family share higher behavioral similarity & invariances: We
observe that the difference between the IID-Accuracies (Gap in IID-Accuracy) is higher for Distil-
BERT compared to GPT-2 indicating that when evaluated conventionally, the gap between general-
ization ability of GPT-2 and BERT would perceived to be smaller than DistilBERT and BERT. How-
ever across both linguistic capabilities i.e., Synonym-Invariance and Typo-Invariance, DistillBERT
achieves higher IID and OOD agreement rates compared to GPT-2 highlighting when compared
at an instance level DistilBERT behaves more similarly to BERT. Interestingly, even though Dis-
tilBERT only slightly edges GPT-2 in Hard-SCoPE, there is a substantial difference between their
Soft-SCoPE values. This implies that DistilBERT is not only invariant on a large number of samples
(that BERT is invariant on), but also the change in the output probability between base and perturbed
predictions for DistilBERT is quite similar to that of BERT compared to GPT-2 and BERT.

                   a) Capability: Synonym-Invariance                                  b) Capability: Typo-Invariance


Figure 12: [Reference Model: BERT, Linguistic-Capability (left): Synonym-Invariance,
Linguistic-Capability (right): Typo-Invariance] Even though the IID performance gap is smaller
between GPT-2 & BERT compared to DistilBERT & BERT. For Synonym-Invariance & Typo-
Invariance defined w.r.t BERT, DistilBERT (model from same architecture family) has a higher
degree of shared capabilities than GPT-2 (model from different architecture family)


G     A DDITIONAL TASK : L ANGUAGE M ODELLING

In the main paper, we presented results across multiple linguistic-capabilities for different reference
and target model combinations for one particular task i.e., sentiment classification. In this section,
we present results on an additional task i.e., language modeling. More specifically, rather than fine-
tuning the pre-trained language models on a downstream task and defining a linguistic-capability


                                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


w.r.t them, we treat language modeling as a task in itself and define linguistic-capabilities w.r.t
the pre-trained language models. We use cosine-similarity for computing agreements as language
models have a large vocabulary with many tokens repeating with minor variations. We repeat the
experiments presented in the main paper with models from the GPT-2 language modeling architec-
ture family on the SST-2 dataset and plot the results in Fig. 13 and Fig. 14. We note that the results
are qualitatively similar to those observed with the BERT model in a classification setup in the main
paper highlighting that the effects design choices on linguistic-capabilities investigated in this paper
are beyond task-specificities.

                               Synonym-Invariance   Typo-Invariance                   Figure 13: [Dataset: SST-2, Refer-
         1.0
                                                                                      ence Model: GPT-2, Target Model:
         0.8                                                                          DistilGPT-2, Task: Language Mod-
         0.6                                                                          eling] Similar to results on sentiment-
         0.4
                                                                                      classification, we note that distillation
                                                                                      affects shared-invariances across some
         0.2
                                                                                      linguistic-capabilities more than others.
         0.0
                         Hard-SCoPE                      Soft-SCoPE



           a) Reference Model: GPT-2                                  b) Reference Model: GPT-2 XL         c) Averaged over all possible Reference Models


Figure 14: [Dataset: SST-2, Linguistic-Capability: Synonym-Invariance, Task: Languag Mod-
eling] Similar to results on sentiment-classification, we find that larger target models tend to share
higher invariances irrespective of the size of the reference model.


H    S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY FOR F RAMEWORK E FFECTIVENESS

In this section, we examine the impact of “number of base samples” on our proposed metrics and
report the results in Fig. 15. Specifically, we report the mean metric values and the 95% confidence
interval of this estimate computed over 100 trials for many values of base-samples count. We find
that our metrics provide tight confidence intervals for as low as 50 base samples. Please note that
for the previous experimental results in the main paper and the supplementary we utilize ≈ 1000
samples.


Figure 15: [Reference Model: BERT, Target Model: DistilBERT]. Examining the impact of base-
samples / instances (X) count on the proposed metrics i.e., Hard-SCoPE (left) and Soft-SCoPE
(right). We report an estimate of the mean metric values and the 95% confidence-interval (y-axis)
around this estimate computed over 100 trials for each base-sample count (x-axis). We find that the
both the metrics are stable for as low as 50 base-samples with tight confidence-intervals.



                                                                                 19
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   I           A DDITIONAL G OAL F UNCTION R ESULTS

  In the main paper we performed experiments with the L1 norm as the objective function described
  in Eq. 1. However, it can take other forms as well as long as it captures differences in both direction
  and magnitude between the reference model’s output on base and perturbed samples i.e., m(x) and
  m(x′ ). In this section, we explore whether our insights are sensitive to the choice of the objective
  function by employing KL-divergence as the objective function instead. We report the results for
  one of the analyses in Fig. 16 and observe that there are minimal effects on the overall takeaway
  when using different objective functions.


  Figure 16: [Reference Model: BERT, Target Model: DistilBERT]. Analyzing the effect of different
  objective functions (L) that guide the optimization process of the goal function while generating
  perturbations for a given reference model. We observe that different objective functions (L1 norm
  on the left, KL-divergence on the right) have minimal effect on the overall takeaway, i.e., distilling
  BERT affects some capabilities more than others.


   J           A DDITIONAL C ORRELATION R ESULTS

                    BERT-Base              BERT-Medium               BERT-Small                BERT-Mini                BERT-Tiny
         0.8
Soft-SCoPE


         0.7
         0.6
         0.5
                0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08     0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08      0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08      0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08      0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08
                     Gap in                  Gap in                    Gap in                   Gap in                   Gap in
                  IID-Accuracy            IID-Accuracy              IID-Accuracy             IID-Accuracy             IID-Accuracy

  Figure 17: Correlation between proposed invariance-based metrics (Soft-SCoPE) and existing met-
  rics (Gap in IID-Accuracy) for different reference and target model pairs. Similar to results noted int
  he main paper with OOD-Agreement, Gap in IID-Accuracy also poorly correlate with invariance-
  based metrics as the size of the reference model is reduced.

                    BERT-Base              BERT-Medium               BERT-Small                BERT-Mini                 BERT-Tiny
         0.8
Soft-SCoPE


         0.7
         0.6
         0.5
           0.84 0.86 0.88 0.90 0.92 0.84 0.86 0.88 0.90 0.92 0.84 0.86 0.88 0.90 0.92 0.84 0.86 0.88 0.90 0.92 0.84 0.86 0.88 0.90 0.92
                 IID-Agreement           IID-Agreement             IID-Agreement            IID-Agreement            IID-Agreement

  Figure 18: Correlation between proposed invariance-based metrics (Soft-SCoPE) and existing met-
  rics (IID-Agreement) for different reference and target model pairs. Similar to results noted int he
  main paper with OOD-Agreement, IID-Agreement also poorly correlate with invariance-based met-
  rics as the size of the reference model is reduced.



                                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


K    C OMPUTE C OSTS

                         Linguistic Capability   Time (seconds per sample)
                          Synonym-Invariance                  1.2
                           Typo-Invariance                   0.48

Table 2: [Reference Model: BERT-Base, Dataset: SST2] Time taken in seconds, required to gen-
erate a perturbed sample on a NVIDIA-A100 GPU. The duration varies depending on distinct lin-
guistic capabilities, as certain capabilities are more amenable to the search techniques in generating
invariant perturbations than others.


L    P ERTURBATION E XAMPLES

 Original Sample                   Synonym-Invariance                 Typo-Invariance
 a fast, funny, highly             a fast, funny, highly enjoyable    a fsat, funny, highly enjoyable
 enjoyable movie.                  film.                              movie.
 my reaction in a word:            my response in a word: disap-      my reaction in a word:
 disappointment.                   pointment.                         disappointemnt.
 allows us to hope that nolan      allows us to trust that nolan is   allows us to hpoe that nolan
 is poised to embark a major       poised to embark a major ca-       is poised to embark a major
 career as a commercial yet        reer as a commercial yet in-       career as a commercial yet
 inventive filmmaker.              ventive filmmaker.                 inevntive filmmaker.
 too slow, too long, and too       too tiresome, too long, and too    too solw, too long, and too
 little happens.                   little happens.                    liltte happens.
 a warm, funny, engaging film.     a warm, comic, engaging film.      a warm, fnuny, engaging film.

Table 3: [Reference Model: BERT-Base, Dataset: SST2] Examples of perturbed sentences that
are invariant w.r.t the reference model BERT-Base for multiple linguistic capabilities i.e., Synonym-
Invariance and Typo-Invariance.


                                                 21
