Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NFORMATION BASED EXPLANATION METHODS FOR
DEEP LEARNING AGENTS – WITH APPLICATIONS ON
LARGE OPEN - SOURCE CHESS MODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         With large chess-playing neural network models like AlphaZero contesting the
         state of the art within the world of computerised chess, two challenges present
         themselves: The question of how to explain the domain knowledge internalised
         by such models, and the problem that such models are not made openly available.
         This work presents the re-implementation of the concept detection methodology
         applied to AlphaZero in McGrath et al. (2022), by using large, open-source chess
         models with comparable performance. We obtain results similar to those achieved
         on AlphaZero, while relying solely on open-source resources. We also present
         a novel explainable AI (XAI) method, which is guaranteed to highlight exhaus-
         tively and exclusively the information used by the explained model. This method
         generates visual explanations tailored to domains characterised by discrete input
         spaces, as is the case for chess. Our presented method has the desirable property
         of controlling the information flow between any input vector and the given model,
         which in turn provides strict guarantees regarding what information is used by the
         trained model during inference. We demonstrate the viability of our method by
         applying it to standard 8 × 8 chess, using large open-source chess models.

1   I NTRODUCTION
The methodology for training chess-playing models presented in Silver et al. (2018) constituted a
significant departure from the methodology used to develop many of the strongest chess-playing
programs. It combined deep neural networks trained using reinforcement learning through self-play
with the standard procedure of exhaustive and enumerative search, where the trained neural networks
provide a means of learning heuristics used by standard chess-playing programs. However, due to
the nature of neural networks, these learned heuristics are notoriously opaque. For chess, this means
that it is difficult to know what models with superhuman chess playing abilities, like AlphaZero, have
learned. The explainable AI (XAI) method of concept detection (Kim et al., 2018) was applied and
discussed in McGrath et al. (2022) for explaining what AlphaZero has learned about chess. While
this work presents many interesting insights and avenues for exploring what neural network models
learn about chess, it is critically based on a model that is not publicly available. This has several
drawbacks. Firstly, this means that the results presented in McGrath et al. (2022) are fundamentally
non-reproducible for other researchers, a problem exacerbated by the fact that the computing power
necessary to train similar models on standard 8 × 8 chess is substantial. Secondly, not having access
to the models used in McGrath et al. (2022) means that it is difficult to create and evaluate techniques
beyond those already presented. There have been attempts to circumvent this by training models on
smaller variants of chess, as discussed in Hammersborg & Strümke (2022), but there is considerably
more interest for chess-playing programs as a whole for standard 8 × 8 chess. Finally, as the model
is not available to the general public, it is difficult to sufficiently showcase the strengths and the
subtleties of play generated by such models to the world outside of AI research, for instance the
chess community.
Since the creation of AlphaZero, there have been efforts to create open-source variants of the train-
ing pipeline presented in Silver et al. (2018) for chess. Among the largest efforts is Leela Chess
Zero (Leela Zero Chess Development Community, 2018), a community driven initiative to produce
superhuman chess-playing models trained through deep reinforcement learning, Monte Carlo Tree
Search and self-play. Models created through such initiatives can serve as “stand-in alternatives” for


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the closed-source model used in McGrath et al. (2022). This means that it is possible to use them as
a basis for exploring existing and creating new explanation methods in this domain.
While there exist many XAI methods capable of providing explanations for large neural network
models, most of them are not directly applicable to chess. We therefore believe that having access
to large chess models would greatly facilitate the development of novel explanatory methods for
these. While such methods need not be applicable only to chess, providing the ability to both verify
and develop such methods directly on large chess models would mean that they could provide great
utility for both XAI as a field, but also for chess enthusiasts in general. Based on this, it is desirable to
use state of the art chess playing models for developing novel XAI methods specifically addressing
the problem of chess, while still being applicable to other problem spaces.
Creating visual explanatory methods for chess requires overcoming the perturbation-based nature of
it as a problem space: Removing or adding a single piece on a chess board is likely to drastically
alter the nature of any given position, meaning that it is difficult to isolate the “contribution” of any
single piece. However, this manner of thinking is still useful, both when evaluating, but also when
playing chess. Deciding what pieces of a given position are necessary for correctly assessing, or
predicting, in machine learning terms, the best move is a form of explanation that would be intu-
itively useful for a human observer. If such an explanation is supported by the given chess-playing
model not being allowed to observe pieces that the explanation deems unimportant, this would mean
that the explanatory method has an inherent correctness: it is guaranteed to be representative of the
information that the model uses to make its predictions.
Based on the aforementioned challenges, this work makes the following two contributions:
           • Demonstrate that it is possible to replicate the results presented in McGrath et al. (2022)
             using publicly available, open source models.
           • Develop a method for generating visual explanations that provide guaranteed complete
             enumerations of which pieces of information a given model uses to make its predictions,
             and that the module for generating these explanations is trainable and interlinked with the
             model itself.

2       BACKGROUND
2.1 L EELA C HESS Z ERO
Leela Chess Zero is an open source, community initiative for training superhuman chess models
through self-play, in the same style as AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2018). Resulting models have proven
to be capable chess players. The project solves the main bottleneck of training AlphaZero-like chess
agents, namely generating training data by self-play, by generating such self-play games through
community-wide distributed computing.1 This circumvents the need for large, co-located clusters of
computing power, since it only requires the maintenance of a central server for receiving self-play
games, and fitting the models to the gathered data.
The Leela Chess Zero project has produced many iterations of strong chess playing models. The
project has also evaluated model architectures beyond those discussed in McGrath et al. (2022), pro-
ducing models that are believed to be stronger than the models presented in Silver et al. (2018) and
McGrath et al. (2022). The project also produced a family of models2 using the same architecture
as AlphaZero presented in Silver et al. (2018). The fully-trained models, in addition to checkpoints
taken during training, are made available by the Leela Chess Zero initiative. It is therefore interest-
ing to investigate if the results with regards to explainability and presence of information from this
“open-source AlphaZero” are comparable to the results presented in McGrath et al. (2022), produced
using AlphaZero.
2.2 T RAINING CHESS MODELS WITH M ONTE C ARLO T REE S EARCH
Chess models like AlphaZero are trained by a combination of Monte Carlo Tree Search Coulom
(2007), and deep reinforcement learning by self-play. For a given position s, the models are trained
to predict a policy vector p(s), a probability distribution over all possible moves from s, and v(s),
the predicted outcome from s. The procedure generates self-play games by using p(·) and v(·) from
    1
        This is conceptually similar to initiatives such as Folding@home (Larson et al., 2009).
    2
        Numbered as model(s) T30


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: The architecture of the described AlphaZero-like model. The structure is the same as
described in McGrath et al. (2022).


the current model iteration to guide a Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) procedure. This means that
the current model iteration is implicitly responsible for choosing which moves are selected in each
such self-play game. However, as discussed in Silver et al. (2018), this also means that the produced
games are of higher quality than if no such search procedure was to be used.

2.3    M ODEL ARCHITECTURE
The architecture of the models used for this work is almost identical to those used in McGrath
et al. (2022). A singular chess position is encoded as a (8, 8, 21)-dimensional tensor, where each
such channel contains a (8, 8) “plane” of relevant information from the position. As described in
McGrath et al. (2022), the first 12 input planes are binary maps separately representing the presence
or absence of each type of piece for each player. Additionally, the remaining planes encode auxiliary
information about the position, such as which player is the player to move, castling rights for both
players, and the total number of turns taken thus far.
For a given position, the models also require the h − 1 preceding positions, meaning that a complete
training sample has a dimensionality of (h, 8, 8, 21).3 For the models used in this work, h = 8. The
models are implemented as standard residual networks He et al. (2015), and in this case consist of
20 residual blocks. This is illustrated in Fig. 1.

3     M ETHOD
3.1    R EPLICATION OF CONCEPT DETECTION
Concept detection, as first described in Kim et al. (2018), is an XAI method that aims to investigate
what information a given neural network model learns to represent in the course of training. More
specifically, this method aims to provide a way of detecting the presence of densely represented
concepts in the intermediate space of a neural network model by using logistic probes. Given a
model M : I → O from a input space I to a output space O, with an intermediary model function
Li (s) that produces the intermediate activations of the i-th layer in M , and a concept function
f (s) that describes the presence or absence of a given concept in s, one looks to see if there is a
simple mapping between Li (s) and f (s), i.e. if the model learns to find f (s) as a part of its internal
representation.
Binary concept detection for the i-th layer of M is performed by gathering a set of samples
(Li (sj ), f (sj )) for a given set of states sj ∈ S. A subset of S is withheld as a validation set.
    3
      The utility of including previous positions as a part of any such input sample is quite interesting, since only
including the current state includes all relevant information for producing an evaluation or move prediction in
terms of pure informational content. McGrath et al. (2022) report that this provides an empirical increase in
performance. However, this introduces the possibility that a model might produce differing predictions for the
same state, solely depending on the positions leading up to it.


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Table 1: Concept functions used for concept detection. Adapted for use from Hammers-
      borg (2023).

            Name                                    Description
            has mate threat                         Checkmate is available
            in check                                Is in check
            material advantage                      Has more pieces than opponent
            threat opp queen                        Opponent’s queen can be captured
            has own double pawn                     Has two pawns on the same file
            has opp double pawn                     Opponent has two pawns on the same file
            has contested open file                 Both players have rooks in an open file
            threat my queen                         Own queen can be captured
            random                                  Data set with random labels


One then aims to fit a logistic probe to approximate the map Li (s) → f (s), by minimising
                                                             2
                           ∥σ (w · Li (sj ) + b) − f (sj )∥2 + λ∥w∥1 + λ |b| ,                              (1)
for each pair (Li (sj ), f (sj )) from the training set of S, where w and b are the trainable parameters
of the probe, and σ is the standard sigmoid function. The detected presence of a concept is then
defined to be binary accuracy of the trained probe on the validation set of S corrected for guessing,
                                                                         
                            2 X
                                      H (w · Li (sj ) + b − 0.5) − f (sj ) − 1 ,                    (2)
                           N       j

where H(·) is the Heaviside-function.
This work applies concept detection to the Leela Chess Zero models described in Secs. 2.1 and 2.2,
with the intention of replicating relevant results from McGrath et al. (2022). Model iterations were
chosen such that the amount of iterations between each subsequent model becomes larger as the
model progresses.4 This was done in order to highlight interesting developments in the model’s
progress early in the training procedure. The concepts used are listed and described in Table 1. λ
was chosen such that λ ∈ {0.01, 0.001}, and the reported values are the maximum value for these
selections of λ. This is the same procedure as used in McGrath et al. (2022).

3.2    FAITHFUL REPRESENTATION OF INFORMATION USAGE
3.2.1 M OTIVATION
While saliency based explanations, (see e.g. Simonyan et al. (2013); Zeiler & Fergus (2014); Sprin-
genberg et al. (2014); Sundararajan et al. (2017); Patro et al. (2019)), can be viable for a variety of
problem spaces, most existing methods for generating such explanations are not suitable for applica-
tion to the domain of chess. Perturbation based methods (e.g. ImageSHAP Lundberg & Lee (2017))
are not viable since it is not obvious how to perturb a given state while assuring that the perturbation
remains “close” in the model’s input space, i.e., the chess board. That is, while a position can be
visually similar in terms of the placement of pieces, the nature of any given position is more often
than not significantly changed by even a small perturbation, such as moving a single piece on the
board.
Similarly, we also found that the usefulness of existing gradient based methods, such as the widely
used GradCAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017), is limited for our case of chess. While the model architec-
ture described in Sec. 2.2 allows for direct application of GradCAM, it lacks the features that would
make it ideal for a saliency map based explanation approach. We present GradCAM saliency maps
applied to a set of positions for the models presented in Sec. 2.2 in Fig. 2, which highlight our main
concern, namely that the generated saliency maps do not necessarily apply to the entire position.
Here, while the saliency map correctly highlights pieces and squares that are important for the given
    4
      Since each the amount of games for each iteration varies for the models used in this work, there is no way
of creating a direct mapping between these models and the models used in McGrath et al. (2022).


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   (a)                             (b)                             (c)

Figure 2: Saliency maps generated for a set of positions for the models described in Sec. 3.2.3 by
using GradCAM. We use a color-map that maps lower values towards red, and higher values towards
blue.


position, it is safe to assume that the model is not in fact indifferent to the pieces that are not high-
lighted. Additionally, there have been several inquires challenging the accuracy and dependability
of GradCAM, as discussed in Adebayo et al. (2018).
We therefore aim to present an alternative method for generating saliency maps that provide strong
guarantees regarding what information the model uses to make its predictions. In broad terms, we
achieve this by appending a structure providing direct control over what parts of a given input sample
is made available to the model during training. This structure is also trainable, meaning that it learns
which parts of a given input sample are relevant for the chess playing model. We call such a saliency
map an “information importance map”, abbreviated II-map.
3.2.2 OVERVIEW
The objective behind the presented method is to allow saliency map generation for neural network
models. For a given model M : I → O as a model from its input space I to its output space O,
and s ∈ O, the main contribution of our method is to add a trainable reductive operation R(s) as a
pre-step for M , which constitutes a saliency map over the state s.
The intention behind representing a state s by using R(s) is that R(·) should remove information
from s that is not relevant when performing inference with the model M (s). Since R(·) is trainable,
it can be trained along with M (·), meaning that the information needed by M (·) is accommodated
by R(·). A high-level illustration of this is shown in Fig. 3. The apparent benefit of this strategy
wrt. other methods for generating saliency maps, is that it provides strong guarantees that the infor-
mation indicated to be irrelevant by R(·) is never used by M (·). That is, if R(·) has learned that
some piece of information from s is irrelevant for the prediction, then M (·) has no way of obtaining
it.
3.2.3 I MPLEMENTATION
The reductive operation R(s) is implemented as a trainable neural network that produces a stochastic
binary mask over a input tensor s. This is done by training the model to predict a probability tensor
P with a corresponding probability for each element of s. The function that produces P given s
is the only trainable part of R(·). P is then used to produce a binary mask over s by sampling
Xi ∼ U (0, 1) for each element si in s, evaluated as
                                      Pbin (s) = H(P (s) − X) ,                                      (3)
where H is the standard Heaviside function. This means that the i-th element in Pbin (s) is 1 with
probability Pi . Finally, R(s) is produced by using Pbin (s) as a binary mask over s. While training, a
small L1-penalty is also applied to the sum of each element in P , meaning that the training procedure
should also seek to minimise the amount of non-zero elements in each produced P . The result of
training a function to produce a minimal P for a given state s, and the usage of Pbin (s) to produce
R(s) means that P can be used as a saliency map over s, where each element in P indicates the
importance of the corresponding element in s wrt. the main model M . The practical interpretation
of P and Pbin (s) is that P should contain a probability for each element in s, and that each element


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             (a) An illustration of the module stochastically producing a mask H(x) for a given posi-
             tion, and the process of binarizing it.


             (b) An illustration of how the binary mask produced by the masking module is applied to
             a given position.


Figure 3: A sample of how the masking module produces a reductive mask during training for a
single input channel (a), and how that reductive mask is applied to the given training sample (b).


in P designates the probability that the corresponding element in s is not removed before being
passed to the main model M .
To make the described method viable for use with backpropagation while training neural networks, a
gradient estimation strategy for R(·) is needed. In this case, the only point of contention is estimating
H(·), as all other parts of R(·) can be treated as standard operations for neural networks. We use
the straight-through estimator, first described in Bengio et al. (2013), for estimating the gradient of
H, implemented by the larq-library (Geiger & Team, 2020) for Python.
While the method provides strong guarantees regarding what information is given to the model, the
main drawback is that the reductive model R(·) has to be trained along with M (·). This is fine
for smaller models, but for large, chess-playing models such as those described in Sec. 2.2, this
poses a challenge. McIlroy-Young et al. (2020) estimates that a chess-playing model trained on
actual games requires about 12, 000, 000 games to be accurate to an acceptable degree, which is a
substantial learning task. We approach this problem by creating a strategy for duplicating a trained
model Mtrained (·) with R(·).5 Given a trained model Mtrained (·) that produces a policy vector
p(s) over all possible moves from s, we first create a dataset (s, p(s)) for all states s for all available
games in the training set. Then, we train a model M (·) with a reductive step R(·) to predict p(s)
from s. The main assumption is that the amount of information in p(s) is higher than if one were to
train directly on played moves from games directly, since the policy-vector p(s) should consider all
moves from s, while a training sample from an actual game only presents a single candidate move
per position. This means that we can reduce the training task wrt. the number of games required.
We apply R(·) to the first 12 input planes of our model, meaning that we only seek to reduce the
information in the planes containing positional information.6 This means that we only seek to reduce
the information in the planes containing positional information. The training of M (·) andP  R(·) is
done through a standard supervised learning procedure. We additionally aim to minimise          P (s)
   5
       This is often referred to as “distilling” the model.
   6
       The full input structure of our model is described in Appendix A.1.


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 (a)                                 (b)                                (c)

Figure 4: Select concepts modelled by the 8x8 chess agent, showing the model’s ability to detect
(a) whether the player to move has a material advantage, (b) whether the opponent’s queen is under
threat, and (c) whether it has a double-pawn. Additional concepts are shown in Appendix A.2.


for all states s in the training set. This is done by adding a standard L1-penalty to P (s) as a term in
the loss function used for training R(·) and M (·). When training, the weighting of the L1-penalty
can be tweaked to change how important it should be to reduce the amount of information in any
given input state. This is usually at the cost of model accuracy, as there is likely to be an inverse
relationship between regularisation strength for the masker and prediction performance.7 R(·) is
configured to produce a binary mask with dimensions (8, 8, 12), meaning that the produced mask
has one channel per corresponding input channel type, i.e., one channel per combination of piece
and colour. Since the produced mask has multiple channels, we devise the following strategy for
visualising it. The presented visualisation of a produced mask Pbin (s) for state s is given by

                           Pbin (s)i,j,p          if square (i, j) occupied by piece type p
                Oi,j =                                                                               (4)
                           max Pbin (s)i,j,: ,    otherwise.

In practical terms: if a square is occupied, we show the predicted importance for the type and colour
of the piece occupying the square. If a square is not occupied, we show the maximum predicted
importance over all combinations of piece and colour.

4    R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.1 C ONCEPTS
The strategy presented in Sec. 3.1 is applied to the nine concepts listed in Table 1, and we present
the binary accuracy corrected for random guessing as specified in Eq. 2 for each residual block for
each of the 12 sampled model iterations. Selected results are shown in Fig. 4, and results for all
concepts are shown in Appendix A.2.
For all the presented concepts, we see a striking similarity to the corresponding concept-results as
presented in McGrath et al. (2022). We see that the model first learns to strongly represent whether
it is in check. After this, the model quickly learns to represent threats on its own and the opponent’s
queen. We additionally observe that pawn-centric concepts are given a stronger representation in
earlier layers.
4.2 C HESS PUZZLES
We apply our trained model to a set of chess puzzles retrieved from Lichess (2020). Each sample
consists of a position, and the first move for the given position that gives a significant advantage for
the player to move. These positions are guaranteed to only have a single candidate move to provide
the given advantage.
    7
      It is also worth mentioning that many of the model-masker combinations were very unstable during train-
ing. We believe this is mainly caused by the binarisation-procedure discussed in Sec. 3.2.3. Our empirical
remedy was reducing the size of the masker, and by reducing the learning rate of our gradient descent proce-
dure.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  (a)                             (b)                             (c)

Figure 5: Masks generated for a set of puzzle-positions for the models described in Sec. 3.2.3.
We use a color-map that maps lower probability values towards red, and higher probability values
towards blue. The move that “solves” the puzzle is shown by a white arrow.


                                  (a)                             (b)

Figure 6: Masks generated for two positions, where (b) is a variation of the position shown in (a)
with a more unusual position of the Black king. Observe that the Black king now has larger predicted
importance in the more unusual position.


We observe that most of the generated masks for the puzzles shown in Fig. 5 capture the essence of
what is necessary to solve the given puzzle. For Fig. 6a, a simple mate-in-one puzzle, we however
see that the king (which has to be mated) has a relatively low predicted importance. We hypothesise
that this is due to the model predicting it likely for the king to be in the shown position, as combi-
nation of rook and king on the upper-right side is a common configuration of pieces. We underpin
this by looking at Fig. 6, where we see that moving the king to a less likely square causes it to be
predicted with a significantly higher importance.
Additionally, Fig. 5c appears to show the model and masker not finding the optimal move. This
is mainly because the bishop that is tasked with carrying out the correct move is predicted with a
very low importance, in addition to there being seemingly no other way to infer the presence of this
bishop without observing this square directly.

4.3   VARIOUS POSITIONS
We also apply our trained model to a set of positions from well known chess games. In contrast to
the positions described in Sec.4.2, the main intention is here to observe the produced masks when
applying the method to more typical chess situations. We choose three positions from the “Game
of the Century”, three positions from the first game of the first match between Garry Kasparov
and Deep Blue, and three positions from the sixth game in the 2021 World Championship match.
Selected positions are shown in Fig. 7.
For the various positions shown in Fig. 7, we see that they capture most immediate threats in almost
all positions, (E.g. the threat on Black’s knights in Figs. 7a and 7b), in addition to correctly identi-
fying seemingly irrelevant pieces. We also see a mask that resembles being able to verify that the


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    (a)                               (b)                               (c)

Figure 7: Masks generated for a set of positions from well-known chess games for the models
described in Sec. 3.2.3. We use the same color-mapping as used in Fig. 5. The position in Fig. (a) is
from “The Game of the Century”, Fig. (b) is from the first game between Garry Kasparov and IBM’s
DeepBlue, and Fig. (c) shows a position from the sixth game from the 2021 World Championships.
Additional positions for each game are shown in Appendix A.3.


player to move is in check (Fig. 7c). While the king of the player to move is not masked, we believe
this to be the same phenomenon as discussed in Sec. 4.2.
4.4 P ROPERTIES OF II- MAP
While our proposed method can guarantee the control over the information that reaches the model,
its potential as a pure explanatory method can be said to be limited by the fact that it seems to
cause the model to learn somewhat adversarial representations. Creating incentives for the model to
remove the amount of pieces from the input state might in fact be more a obfuscation of information,
rather than the removal of information.
However, this is not to say that the method is without benefit. It is likely that any neural network
model, even without the utilisation of an II-map module, learns representations that seem counter-
intuitive and adversarial-like. The main benefit of the presented method is in this case to be able to
observe and visualise these representations, and in some cases, intepret them, at the computational
cost of including an additional masker model in the training loop.

5    O NGOING AND FUTURE WORK
The masker model used in this work is available online, with a simple, dynamic user interface that
allows for the input of any chess position, available at https://solid-state-survivor.
github.io/ii-map/. This repository also contains code used for training the models described
in Sec. 3.2.3, and is planned to receive updates and further maintenance.8
While we have limited our investigations to chess-based models, the II-map method is generally
agnostic towards the input space of the model. As an example, our preliminary investigations show
that it is possible to train image-based models using a II-map module. However, this training pro-
cedure was significantly more unstable than with chess as the input space. Therefore, a significant
challenge remains to investigate how to make this training procedure more stable. Additionally, it
remains to be seen how large the range of acceptable values for the weight of the L1-penalty used for
the masker for all such input spaces, and how the architecture chosen for the masker model affects
the rest of the training procedure.


    8
      The code hosting the user interface and for training our models is contained within an anonymised reposi-
tory, available at https://github.com/solid-state-survivor/ii-map.


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   R EPRODUCIBILITY
Due to the inherent randomness of our proposed training procedure, it is not possible to guarantee
that a model trained from scratch would be identical to the model produced for this work. However,
but we expect any such reproduction to yield sufficiently similar models and results. We provide
a a streamlined set of instructions for use of our repository, described in Sec. 5, to train models as
presented in Sec. 3.2.3, on how to obtain the required data, and how to use the model to produce all
results presented in Figs. 2, 5, 6 and 7. We also provide our code for preparing the neural networks
described in Sec. 2.1 for use in concept detection, in addition to the concept detection code itself.
We additionally believe our code for training models as described in Sec. 3.2.3 to be sufficiently
modular for reuse on other problem cases.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Julius Adebayo, Justin Gilmer, Michael Muelly, Ian J. Goodfellow, Moritz Hardt, and Been Kim.
  Sanity checks for saliency maps. CoRR, abs/1810.03292, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1810.03292.
Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas Léonard, and Aaron C. Courville. Estimating or propagating gradients
  through stochastic neurons for conditional computation. CoRR, abs/1308.3432, 2013. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1308.3432.
Rémi Coulom. Efficient selectivity and backup operators in monte-carlo tree search. In H. Jaap
   van den Herik, Paolo Ciancarini, and H. H. L. M. (Jeroen) Donkers (eds.), Computers and Games,
   pp. 72–83, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-75538-8.
Lukas Geiger and Plumerai Team. Larq: An open-source library for training binarized neural net-
  works. Journal of Open Source Software, 5(45):1746, January 2020. doi: 10.21105/joss.01746.
  URL https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.01746.
Patrik Hammersborg. Explainable AI approaches for deep reinforcement learning agents in
  a high performance chess environment, 2023. URL https://ntnuopen.ntnu.no/
  ntnu-xmlui/handle/11250/3078482.
Patrik Hammersborg and Inga Strümke. Reinforcement learning in an adaptable chess environ-
  ment for detecting human-understandable concepts, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2211.05500.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. CoRR, abs/1512.03385, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda Viegas, and Rory
  sayres. Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept activation
  vectors (TCAV). In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  2668–2677. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018.
Stefan M. Larson, Christopher D. Snow, Michael Shirts, and Vijay S. Pande. Folding@home and
  genome@home: Using distributed computing to tackle previously intractable problems in com-
  putational biology, 2009.
Leela Zero Chess Development Community. Leela zero chess, 2018. https://lczero.org/,
  Last accessed on 2023-12-09.
Lichess. Lichess puzzle database, 2020. https://database.lichess.org/#puzzles,
  Last accessed on 2023-12-09.
Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee.         A unified approach to interpreting model predic-
  tions.   In I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vish-
  wanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30, pp.
  4765–4774. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
  7062-a-unified-approach-to-interpreting-model-predictions.pdf.
Thomas McGrath, Andrei Kapishnikov, Nenad Tomašev, Adam Pearce, Martin Wattenberg, Demis
  Hassabis, Been Kim, Ulrich Paquet, and Vladimir Kramnik. Acquisition of chess knowledge in
  AlphaZero. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 119(47):e2206625119, 2022. doi:
  10.1073/pnas.2206625119. URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.
  2206625119.
Reid McIlroy-Young, Siddhartha Sen, Jon M. Kleinberg, and Ashton Anderson. Aligning super-
  human AI and human behavior: Chess as a model system. CoRR, abs/2006.01855, 2020. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.01855.
Badri N Patro, Mayank Lunayach, Shivansh Patel, and Vinay P Namboodiri. U-cam: Visual explana-
  tion using uncertainty based class activation maps. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 7444–7453, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), Oct
  2017.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur
  Guez, Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap,
  Karen Simonyan, and Demis Hassabis. A general reinforcement learning algorithm that mas-
  ters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):1140–1144, 2018. doi: 10.1126/
  science.aar6404. URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.
  aar6404.
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks:
  Visualising image classification models and saliency maps. CoRR, abs/1312.6034, 2013. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:1450294.
Jost Tobias Springenberg, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Thomas Brox, and Martin A. Riedmiller. Striving
  for simplicity: The all convolutional net. CoRR, abs/1412.6806, 2014. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:12998557.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In
 International conference on machine learning, pp. 3319–3328. PMLR, 2017.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12,
 2014, Proceedings, Part I 13, pp. 818–833. Springer, 2014.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1    I NPUT STRUCTURE FOR TRAINED MODEL
      Table 2: Input description of each input plane used for training our custom model with
      appended II-map module. Adapted for use from Hammersborg (2023).

           Plane number    Description
                           One plane for each piece-type for the player to move.
           0−5
                           (in the order of pawn, knight, bishop, rook, queen, king)
                           One plane for each piece-type for the opposing player.
           6 − 11
                           (in the order of pawn, knight, bishop, rook, queen, king)
                           Kingside, queenside castling rights for both players
           12 − 15
                           (not used in the presented variants)
           16              If Black is the player to move.
                           Counter of the amount of moves since the last of
                           capturing- or pawn-move. Used for the 50 move rule.
           17
                           (When no capturing- or pawn-moves have been
                           made during the last 50 moves, any player can claim a draw.)
           18              All zeros.
           19              All ones.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2   S UPPLEMENTARY CONCEPT DETECTION RESULTS


                (a)                              (b)                              (c)


                (d)                              (e)                              (f)


                (g)                              (h)                              (i)

Figure 8: Concepts modelled by the 8x8 chess agent, showing the model’s ability to detect (a)
whether the player to move is in check, (b) whether the opponent’s queen is under threat, (c) whether
it has a double-pawn, (d) whether the player to move has a material advantage, (e) whether the
opponent is currently presenting a mate-threat, (f) whether the opponent has a double-pawn, (g)
whether both players contest an open file on the board, and (h) whether the player to move’s queen
is threatened, and (i) being a sanity check performed on a data set of random labels.


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3   S UPPLEMENTARY II- MAP RESULTS FOR VARIOUS CHESS POSITIONS


                 (a)                          (b)                          (c)


                 (d)                          (e)                          (f)


                 (g)                          (h)                          (i)

Figure 9: Masks generated for a set of positions from well-known chess games for the models
described in Sec. 3.2.3. The positions in Figs. (a) to (c) show positions from “The Game of the
Century”, Figs. (d) to (f) show positions from the first game between Garry Kasparov and IBM’s
DeepBlue, and Figs. (g) to (i) show positions from the sixth game from the 2021 World Champi-
onships.


                                              15
