Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P RE -T RAINING AND                            F INE -T UNING                 G ENERATIVE
F LOW N ETWORKS
 Ling Pan1,2 , Moksh Jain2,3 , Kanika Madan2,3 , Yoshua Bengio2,3,4
 1
   Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
 2
   Mila - Québec AI Institute 3 Université de Montréal 4 CIFAR AI Chair
 {penny.ling.pan}@gmail.com



                                            A BSTRACT

         Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) are amortized samplers that learn
         stochastic policies to sequentially generate compositional objects from a given
         unnormalized reward distribution. They can generate diverse sets of high-reward
         objects, which is an important consideration in scientific discovery tasks. How-
         ever, as they are typically trained from a given extrinsic reward function, it re-
         mains an important open challenge about how to leverage the power of pre-
         training and train GFlowNets in an unsupervised fashion for efficient adaptation
         to downstream tasks. Inspired by recent successes of unsupervised pre-training in
         various domains, we introduce a novel approach for reward-free pre-training of
         GFlowNets. By framing the training as a self-supervised problem, we propose an
         outcome-conditioned GFlowNet (OC-GFN) that learns to explore the candidate
         space. Specifically, OC-GFN learns to reach any targeted outcomes, akin to goal-
         conditioned policies in reinforcement learning. We show that the pre-trained OC-
         GFN model can allow for a direct extraction of a policy capable of sampling from
         any new reward functions in downstream tasks. Nonetheless, adapting OC-GFN
         on a downstream task-specific reward involves an intractable marginalization over
         possible outcomes. We propose a novel way to approximate this marginalization
         by learning an amortized predictor enabling efficient fine-tuning. Extensive exper-
         imental results validate the efficacy of our approach, demonstrating the effective-
         ness of pre-training the OC-GFN, and its ability to swiftly adapt to downstream
         tasks and discover modes more efficiently. This work may serve as a foundation
         for further exploration of pre-training strategies in the context of GFlowNets.

1    I NTRODUCTION
Unsupervised learning on large stores of data on the internet has resulted in significant advances in a
variety of domains (Howard & Ruder, 2018; Devlin et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2019; Henaff, 2020).
Pre-training with unsupervised objectives, such as next-token prediction in auto-regressive language
models (Radford et al., 2019), on large-scale unlabelled data enables the development of models that
can be effectively fine-tuned for novel tasks using few samples (Brown et al., 2020). Unsupervised
learning at scale allows models to learn good representations, which enables data-efficient adaptation
to novel tasks, and is central to the recent development towards larger models.
On the other hand, in the context of amortized inference, Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets;
Bengio et al., 2021) enable learning generative models for sampling from high-dimensional distribu-
tions over discrete compositional objects. Inspired by reinforcement learning (RL), GFlowNets learn
a stochastic policy to sequentially generate compositional objects with a probability proportional to
a given reward, instead of reward maximization. Therefore, GFlowNets have found success in ap-
plications to scientific discovery problems to generate high-quality and diverse candidates (Bengio
et al., 2021; Jain et al., 2023a;b) as well as alternatives to Monte-Carlo Markov chains and variational
inference for modeling Bayesian posteriors (Deleu et al., 2022; van Krieken et al., 2022).
As a motivating example, consider the drug discovery pipeline. A GFlowNet can be trained to
generate candidate RNA sequences that bind to a target using as reward the binding affinity of the
RNA sequence with the target (Lorenz et al., 2011; Sinai et al., 2020) (which can be uncertain and
imperfect based on the current understanding of the biological system and available experimental
data). However, there is no way to efficiently adapt the GFlowNet to sample RNA sequences binding


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to a different target of interest that reflects new properties. Unlike human intelligence, GFlowNets
currently lack the ability to leverage previously learned knowledge to efficiently adapt to new tasks
with unseen reward functions, and need to be trained from scratch to learn a policy for matching
the given extrinsic reward functions for different tasks. Inspired by the success of the unsupervised
pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm in vision, language, and RL (Jaderberg et al., 2016; Sekar
et al., 2020) domains, it is natural to ask how can this paradigm benefit GFlowNets. As a step in this
direction, we propose a fundamental approach to realize this paradigm for GFlowNets.
In this paper, we propose a novel method for reward-free unsupervised pre-training of GFlowNets.
We formulate the problem of pre-training GFlowNets as a self-supervised problem of learning an
outcome-conditioned GFlowNet (OC-GFN) which learns to reach any outcome (goal) as a func-
tional understanding of the environment (akin to goal-conditioned RL (Chebotar et al., 2021)). The
reward for training this OC-GFN is defined as the success of reaching the outcome. Due to the inher-
ent sparse nature of this task-agnostic reward, it introduces critical challenges for efficient training
OC-GFN in complex domains, particularly with higher-dimensional outcomes and long-horizon
problems, since it is difficult to reach the outcome to get a meaningful reward signal. To tackle these
challenges, we introduce a novel contrastive learning procedure to train OC-GFN to effectively han-
dle such sparse rewards, which induces an implicit curriculum for efficient learning that resembles
goal relabeling (Andrychowicz et al., 2017). To enable efficient learning in long-horizon tasks, we
further propose a goal teleportation scheme to effectively propagate the learning signal to each step.
A remarkable result is that one can directly convert this pre-trained OC-GFN to sample proportion-
ally to a new reward function for downstream tasks (Bengio et al., 2023). It is worth noting that
in principle, this can be achieved even without re-training the policy, which is usually required for
fine-tuning in RL, as it only learns a reward-maximizing policy that may discard many useful in-
formation. Adapting the pre-trained OC-GFN model to a new reward function, however, involves
an intractable marginalization over possible outcomes. We propose a novel alternative by learn-
ing a predictor that amortizes this marginalization, allowing efficient fine-tuning of the OC-GFN to
downstream tasks. Our key contributions can be summarized as follows:

• We propose reward-free pre-training for GFlowNets as training outcome-conditioned GFlowNet
  (OC-GFN) that learns to sample trajectories to reach any outcome.
• We investigate how to leverage the pre-trained OC-GFN model to adapt to downstream tasks
  with new rewards, and we also introduce an efficient method to learn an amortized predictor to
  approximate an intractable marginal required for fine-tuning the pre-trained OC-GFN model.
• Through extensive experiments on the GridWorld domain, we empirically validate the efficacy of
  the proposed pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm. We also demonstrate its scalability to larger-
  scale and challenging biological sequence design tasks, which achieves consistent and substantial
  improvements over strong baselines, especially in terms of diversity of the generated samples.

2    P RELIMINARIES
Given a space of compositional objects X , and a non-negative reward function R : X 7→ R+ , the
GFlowNet policy π is trained towards sampling objects x ∈ X from the distribution defined by
R(x), i.e., π(x) ∝ R(x). The compositional objects are each sampled sequentially, with each step
involving the addition of a building block a ∈ A (action space) to the current partially constructed
object s ∈ S (state space). We can define a directed acyclic graph (DAG) G = {S, A} with the
partially constructed objects forming nodes of G, including a special empty state s0 . The edges are
s → s′ , where s′ is obtained by applying an action a ∈ A to s. The complete objects X are the
terminal (childless) nodes in the DAG. The generation of an object x ∈ X corresponds to complete
trajectories in the DAG starting from s0 and terminating in a terminal state sn = x, i.e., τ = (s0 →
· · · → x). We assign a non-negative weight, called state flow F (s) to each state s ∈ S. The forward
policy PF (s′ |s) is a collection of distributions over the children of each state and the backward policy
PB (s|s′ ) is a collection of distributions over the parents of each state. The forward policy induces a
distribution over trajectories PF (τ ), and the marginal likelihoodP  of sampling a terminal state is given
by marginalizing over trajectories terminating in x, PF⊤ (x) = τ =(s0 →···→x) PF (τ ). GFlowNets
solve the problems of learning a parameterized policy PF (· | ·; θ) such that PF⊤ (x) ∝ R(x).
Training GFlowNets. We use the detailed balance learning objective (DB; Bengio et al., 2023) to
learn the parameterized policies and flows based on Eq. (1), which considers the flow consistency
constraint in the edge level (i.e., the incoming flow for edge s → s′ matches the outgoing flow).

                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


When it is trained to completion, the objective yields the desired policy.
                        ∀s → s′ ∈ A,        F (s)PF (s′ |s) = F (s′ )PB (s|s′ ).                  (1)
As in reinforcement learning, exploration is a key challenge in GFlowNets. Generative Augmented
Flow Networks (GAFlowNets; Pan et al., 2023b) incorporate intrinsic intermediate rewards repre-
sented as augmented flows in the flow network to drive exploration, where ri (s → s′ ) is specified
by intrinsic motivation (Burda et al., 2018), yielding the following variant of detailed balance.
                 ∀s → s′ ∈ A,         F (s)PF (s′ |s) = F (s′ )PB (s|s′ ) + r(s → s′ ).           (2)

3     R ELATED W ORK
GFlowNets. While several learning objectives have been proposed for improving credit assignment
and sample efficiency in GFlowNets (Bengio et al., 2021; 2023) such as detailed balance (Bengio
et al., 2023), sub-trajectory balance (Madan et al., 2022) and forward-looking objectives (Pan et al.,
2023a), they need to be trained from scratch with a given reward function, which may limit its ap-
plicability to more practical problems. Owing to their flexibility, GFlowNets have been applied to
wide range of problems where diverse high-quality candidates are need, such as molecule genera-
tion (Bengio et al., 2021), biological sequence design (Jain et al., 2022), combinatorial (Zhang et al.,
2023a;b), and multi-objective optimization (Jain et al., 2023b). There have also been recent efforts
in generalizing GFlowNets to handle stochastic environments including Stochastic GFlowNets (Pan
et al., 2023c) and Distributional GFlowNets (Zhang et al., 2023c), which are effective in han-
dling stochasticity in transition dynamics and rewards; and also improving training efficiency of
GFlowNets inspired by reinforcement learning (Pan et al., 2020; Lau et al., 2024) and evolutionary
algorithms (Ikram et al., 2024).
Unsupervised Pre-Training in Reinforcement Learning. Following the progress in language
modeling and computer vision, there has been growing interest in pre-training reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) agents in an unsupervised stage without access to task-specific rewards for learning rep-
resentations. Agents typically learn a set of different skills (Eysenbach et al., 2018; Hansen et al.,
2019; Zhao et al., 2021; Liu & Abbeel, 2021), and then fine-tune the learned policy to downstream
tasks. Contrary to reward-maximization, GFlowNets learn a stochastic policy to match the reward
distribution. As we show in the next section, such a learned policy can be adapted to a new reward
function even without re-training (Bengio et al., 2023).
Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning. Different from standard reinforcement learning (RL)
methods that learn policies or value functions based on observations, goal-conditioned RL (Kael-
bling, 1993) also take goals into consideration by augmenting the observations with an additional
input of the goal and have been studied in a number of prior works (Schaul et al., 2015; Nair et al.,
2018; Veeriah et al., 2018; Eysenbach et al., 2020). Goal-conditioned RL is trained to greedily
achieve different goals specified explicitly as input, making it possible for agents to generalize their
learned abilities across different environments.

4     P RE - TRAINING AND FINE - TUNING GENERATIVE FLOW NETWORKS
In the original formulation, a GFlowNet need to
be trained from scratch whenever it is faced with
a previously unseen reward function (with consis-
tent state and action spaces, as motivated in Sec-
tion 1). In this section, we aim to leverage the
power of pre-training in GFlowNets for efficient
adaptation to downstream tasks. To tackle this im-
portant challenge, we propose a novel approach to
frame the problem of pre-training GFlowNets as a
self-supervised problem, by training an outcome- Figure 1: The unsupervised pre-training
conditioned GFlowNet that learns to reach any input phase of outcome-conditioned GFlowNet.
terminal state (outcome) without task-specific rewards. Then, we propose to leverage the power of
the pre-trained GFlowNet model for efficiently fine-tuning it to downstream tasks with a new reward
function.
4.1   U NSUPERVISED P RE -T RAINING S TAGE
As GFlowNets are typically learned with a given reward function, it remains an open challenge
for how to pre-train them in a reward-free fashion. We propose a novel method for unsupervised


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Reward-free Pre-training of Unsupervised GFlowNets.
Require: GAFlowNet F U (s), PFU (s′ |s), PBU (s|s′ ); fixed target network ϕ̄; predictor network ϕ;
    Outcome-conditioned GFlowNet (OC-GFN) F C (s|y), PFC (s′ |s, y), PBC (s|s′ , y)
 1: for each training step t = 1 to T do
 2:   Collect a trajectory τ + = {s+             +
                                    0 → · · · → sn } with PF
                                                            U

 3:   // Update the outcome-conditioned GFlowNet model
      y + ← f (s+ ), R(s+ n |y ) ← 1{f (sn ) = y } ≡ 1
                              +           +      +
 4:
 5:   Update OC-GFN towards minimizing Eq. (5) with τ + and R(s+           +
                                                                       n |y )
                             −      −            −
 6:   Collect a trajectory τ = {s0 → · · · → sn } with PF conditioned on y +
                                                            C

      y − ← f (s− ), R(s− n |y ) ← 1{f (sn ) = y }
                              +           −      +
 7:
 8:   Update OC-GFN towards minimizing Eq. (5) with τ − and R(s−           +
                                                                       n |y )
 9:   // Update the unconditional GAFlowNet model
10:   Update GAFlowNet towards optimizing Eq. (2) based on τ + and ri ← ||ϕ̄(s) − ϕ(s)||2
11:   Update the predictor network ϕ towards minimizing ||ϕ̄(s) − ϕ(s)||2


pre-training of GFlowNets without task-specific rewards. We formulate the problem of pre-training
GFlowNets as a self-supervised problem of learning an outcome-conditioned GFlowNet (OC-GFN)
which learns to reach any input target outcomes, inspired by the success of goal-conditioned rein-
forcement learning in generalizing to a variety of tasks when it is tasked with different goals (Fang
et al., 2022). We denote the outcome as y = f (s), where f is an identity function and s is a terminal
state, so the space of outcomes is the same as the state space X . What makes OC-GFN special is that,
when fully trained, given a reward R a posterior as a function r of the outcome, i.e., R(s) = r(y),
one can adapt the OC-GFN to sample from this reward, which can generalize to tasks with different
rewards.
4.1.1   O UTCOME -C ONDITIONED GF LOW N ETS (OC-GFN)
We extend the idea of flow functions and policies in GFlowNets to OC-GFN that can generalize
to different outcomes y in the outcome space, which is trained to achieve specified y. OC-GFN
can be realized by providing an additional input y to the flows and policies, resulting in outcome-
conditioned forward and backward policies PF (s′ |s, y) and PB (s|s′ , y), and flows F (s|y). The
resulting learning objective for OC-GFN for intermediate states is shown in Eq. (3).
                              F (s|y)PF (s′ |s, y) = F (s′ |y)PB (s|s′ , y).                    (3)

Outcome generation We can train OC-GFN by conditioning outcomes-conditioned flows and
policies on a specified outcome y, and we study how to generate them autotelically. It is worth
noting that we need to train it with full-support over y. We propose to leverage GAFN (Pan et al.,
2023b) with augmented flows that enable efficient reward-free exploration purely by intrinsic moti-
vation (Burda et al., 2018). In practice, we generate diverse outcomes y with GAFN, and provide
them to OC-GFN to sample an outcome-conditioned trajectory τ = (s0 , · · · , sn ). The effect of
the GAFN is studied in Appendix C.2, which is critical in large and high-dimensional problems as
it affects the efficiency of generating diverse outcomes. The resulting conditional reward is given
as R(sn |y) = 1{f (sn ) = y}. Thus, OC-GFN receives a zero reward if it fails to reach the target
outcome, and a positive reward otherwise, which results in learning an outcome-achieving policy.
Contrastive training However, it can be challenging to efficiently train OC-GFN in problems
with large outcome spaces. This is because it can be hard to actually achieve the outcome and obtain
a meaningful learning signal owing to the sparse nature of the rewards — most of the conditional
rewards R(sn |y) will be zero if f (sn ) ̸= y when OC-GFN fails to reach the target.
To alleviate this we propose a contrastive learning objective for training the OC-GFN. After sam-
pling a trajectory τ + = {s+               +
                             0 → · · · → sn } from unconditional GAFN, we first train an OC-GFN
based on this off-policy trajectory by assuming it has the ability to achieve y + = s+ n when condi-
tioned on y + . Note that the resulting conditional reward R(s+n |y ) = 1{f (sn ) = y } ≡ 1 in this
                                                                   +           +       +

case, as all correspond to successful experiences that provide meaningful learning signals to OC-
GFN. We then sample another on-policy trajectory τ − = {s−                 −
                                                             0 → · · · → sn } from OC-GFN by con-
ditioning it on y , and evaluate the conditional reward by R(sn |y ) = 1{f (s−
                 +                                              − +                     +
                                                                                n ) = y }. Although
              − +
most of R(sn |y ) can be zero in large outcome spaces during early learning, we provide sufficient
successful experiences in the initial phase, which is also related to goal relabeling (Andrychowicz
et al., 2017). This can be viewed as an implicit curriculum for improving the training of OC-GFN.


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Supervised Fine-Tuning of Outcome-Conditioned GFlowNets.
 1: Initialize the numerator network N (s′ |s) and the GFlowNet-like predictor network Q(y|s′ , s)
 2: Obtain the pre-trained outcome-conditioned state F (s|y) and forward policy PF (s′ |s, y)
 3: for each training step t = 1 to T do
 4:    Collect a trajectory τ = {s0 → · · · sn } with N (s′ |s)
 5:    Sample outcomes y from a tempered/ϵ-greedy version of Q(·|s′ , s)
 6:    Update N and Q towards minimizing Eq.    P (9)
 7: Compute the policy PFr (s′ |s) = N (s′ |s)/ s′ N (s′ |s)



Outcome teleportation The contrastive training paradigm can significantly improve learning ef-
ficiency by providing a bunch of successful trajectories with meaningful learning signals, which
tackles the particular challenge of sparse rewards during learning. However, the agent may still
suffer from poor learning efficiency in long-horizon tasks, as it cannot effectively propagate the
success/failure signal back to each step. We propose a novel technique, outcome teleportation, for
further improving the learning efficiency of OC-GFN as in Eq. (4), which considers the terminal
reward R(x|y) for every transition (noting the binary nature of the rewards R).
                          F (s|y)PF (s′ |s, y) = F (s′ |y)PB (s|s′ , y)R(x|y).                     (4)
This formulation can efficiently propagate the guidance signal to each transition in the trajec-
tory, which can significantly improve learning efficiency, particularly in high-dimensional outcome
spaces, as investigated in Section 5.2. It can be interpreted as a form of reward decomposition in
outcome-conditioned tasks with binary rewards. In practice, we train OC-GFN by minimizing the
following loss function LOC−GF N (τ, y) in log-scale obtained from Eq. (4), i.e.,
                                                                                                2
        X
              (log F (s|y) + log PF (s′ |s, y) − log F (s′ |y) − log PB (s|s′ , y) − log R(x|y)) . (5)
      s→s′ ∈τ

Theoretical justification. We now justify that when OC-GFN is trained to completion, it can suc-
cessfully reach any specified outcome. The proof can be found in Appendix B.1.
Proposition 4.1. If LOC−GF N (τ, y) = 0 for all trajectories τ and outcomes y, then the outcome-
conditioned forward policy PF (s′ |s, y) can successfully reach the target outcome y.

The resulting procedure for the reward-free unsupervised pre-training of OC-GFN is summarized in
Algorithm 1 and illustrated Figure 1.
4.2   S UPERVISED F INE -T UNING S TAGE
In this section, we study how to leverage the pre-trained OC-GFN model and adapt it for downstream
tasks with new reward functions.
A remarkable aspect of GFlowNets is the ability to demonstrate the adaptability in generating a
task-specific policy. By utilizing the pre-trained OC-GFN model with outcome-conditioned flows
F (s|y) and policies PF (s′ |s, y), we can directly obtain a policy that samples according to a new
task-specific reward function R(s) = r(y) according to Eq. (6), which is based on (Bengio et al.,
2023). A detailed analysis for this can be found in Appendix B.2.
                                                                 ′
                                            P
                                 r ′          y r(y)F (s|y)PF (s |s, y)
                               PF (s |s) =        P                                              (6)
                                                    y r(y)F (s|y)

Eq. (6) serves as the foundation for converting a pre-trained OC-GFN model to handle downstream
tasks with new and even out-of-distribution rewards. Intriguingly, this conversion can be achieved
without any re-training for OC-GFN on downstream tasks. This sets it apart from the typical fine-
tuning process in reinforcement learning, which typically requires re-training to adapt a policy, since
they generally learn reward-maximizing policies that may discard valuable information.
Directly estimating the above summation often necessitates the use of Monte-Carlo averaging for
making each decision. Yet, this can be computationally expensive in high-dimensional outcome
spaces if we need to calculate this marginalization at each decision-making step, which leads to
slow thinking. To improve its efficiency in complex scenarios, it is essential to develop strategies
that are both efficient while maintaining accurate estimations.

                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                     action
                                 extrinsic
                                  reward
                                                                     Amortized
                                                                     Predictor
                                         ∑!∈#
                                                                                 extrinsic reward
                    Outcome-
                   conditioned                     Policy                              state
                      GFN                                                  Outcome-conditioned GFN



Figure 2: Left: Convert the outcome-conditioned GFlowNet to downstream tasks without re-training
the networks. Right: An efficient amortized predictor in the supervised fine-tuning phase.


Learning an Amortized Predictor In this section, we propose a novel approach to approximate
this marginal by learning an amortized predictor.
Concretely, we proposeP to estimate the intractable  sums in the numerator in Eq. (6) by a numerator
network N (s′ |s) ≈                          ′
                         y r(y)F (s|y)PF (s |s, y). This would allow us to efficiently estimate the
intractable sum with the help of N (s′ |s) that directly estimates N (·|s) for any state s, which could
benefit from the generalizable structure of outcomes
                                                  P with neural networks. We can also obtain the
corresponding policy by PFr (s′ |s) = N (s′ |s)/ s′ N (s′ |s). For learning the numerator network
N (·|s), we need to have a sampling policy for sampling outcomes y given states s and next states
s′ , which can be achieved by
                                                       r(y)F (s|y)PF (s′ |s, y)
                                       Q(y|s′ , s) =                            .                        (7)
                                                              N (s′ |s)
Therefore, we have the following constraint according to Eq. (7)
                                 N (s′ |s)Q(y|s′ , s) = r(y)F (s|y)PF (s′ |s, y),                        (8)
based on which we derive the corresponding loss function by minimizing their difference by training
in the log domain, i.e.,
                                                                                                     2
   Lamortized = (log N (s′ |s) + log Q(y|s′ , s) − log r(y) − log F (s|y) − log PF (s′ |s, y)) .         (9)

Theoretical justification. In Proposition 4.2, we show that N (s′ |s) can correctly estimate the
summation when it is trained to completion and the distribution of outcomes y has full support.
Proposition 4.2. Suppose   that ∀(s, s′ , y), Lamortized (s, s′ , y) = 0, then the amortized predictor
N (s′ |s) estimates y r(y)F (s|y)PF (s′ |s, y).
                   P

The proof can be found in Appendix B.3. Proposition 4.2 justifies the use of the numerator network
as an efficient alternative for estimating the computationally intractable summation in Eq. (6).
Empirical validation. We now investigate the converted/learned sampling policy in the standard
GridWorld domain (Bengio et al., 2021), which has a multi-modal reward function. More details
about the setup is in Appendix C.1 due to space limitation. We visualize the last 2 × 105 samples
from different baselines including training GFN from scratch, OC-GFN with the Monte Carlo-based
estimation with Eq. (6) and the amortized marginalization approach with Eq. (9).
As shown in Figure 3(b), directly training GFN with trajectory balance (Malkin et al., 2022) can
suffer from the mode collapse problem and fail to discover all modes of the target distribution in
Figure 3(a). On the contrary, we can directly obtain a policy from the pre-trained OC-GFN model
that samples proportionally to the target rewards as shown in Figure 3(c), while fine-tuning OC-
GFN with the amortized inference could also match the target distribution as in Figure 3(d), which
validates its effectiveness in estimating the marginal.
Practical implementation. In practice, we can train the amortized predictor N (·|s) and the sam-
pling policy Q(·|s′ , s) in a GFlowNet-like procedure. We sample (s, s′ ) with N by interacting with
the environment. This can also be realized by sampling from the large and diverse dataset D ob-
tained in the pre-training stage. We then sample outcomes y from the sampling policy Q(·|s′ , s),
which can incorporate its tempered version or with ϵ-greedy exploration (Bengio et al., 2021) for ob-
taining rich distributions of y. We can then learn the amortized predictor and the sampling policy by

                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       (a)                                                            (b)                                                            (c)                                                         (d)
                                                              5
Figure 3: Distribution of 2 × 10 samples from different baselines. (a) Target distribution. (b) GFN
(from scratch). (c) OC-GFN (Monte Carlo-based). (d) OC-GFN (Amortizer-based).


one of these sampled experiences. Finally,
                                        P we can derive the policy that will be converted to down-
stream tasks by PFr (s′ |s) = N (s′ |s)/ s′ N (s′ |s). The resulting training algorithm is summarized
in Algorithm 2 and the right part in Figure 2.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct extensive experiments to better understand the effectiveness of our ap-
proach and aim to answer the following key questions: (i) How do outcome-conditioned GFlowNets
(OC-GFN) perform in the reward-free unsupervised pre-training stage? (ii) What is the effect of
key modules? (iii) Can OC-GFN transfer to downstream tasks efficiently? (iv) Can they scale to
complex and practical scenarios like biological sequence design?
5.1   G RIDW ORLD
We first conduct a series of experiments on GridWorld (Bengio et al., 2021) to understand the ef-
fectiveness of the proposed approach. In the reward-free unsupervised pre-training phase, we train
a (unconditional) GAFN (Pan et al., 2023b) and an outcome-conditioned GFN (OC-GFN) on a map
without task-specific rewards, where GAFN is trained purely from self-supervised intrinsic rewards
according to Algorithm 1. We investigate how well OC-GFN learns in the unsupervised pre-training
stage, while the supervised fine-tuning stage has been discussed in Section 4.2. Each algorithm is
run for 3 different seeds and the mean and standard deviation are reported. A detailed description of
the setup and hyperparameters can be found in Appendix C.1.
Outcome distribution. We first evaluate the quality of the exploratory data collected by GAFN, as
it is essential for training OC-GFN with a rich distribution of outcomes. We demonstrate the sample
distribution from GAFN in Figure 4(a), which has great diversity and coverage, and validates its
effectiveness in collecting unlabeled exploratory trajectories for providing diverse target outcomes
for OC-GFN to learn from.
                                           100                                                                               100                                                                                100


                                           80                                                                                80                                                                                 80
                        Success rate (%)


                                                                                                          Success rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                             Success rate (%)


                                           60                                                                                60                                                                                 60


                                           40                                                                                40                                                                                 40


                                           20                                      OC-GFN                                    20                                       OC-GFN                                    20                                      OC-GFN
                                                                                   OC-GFN w/o OT                                                                      OC-GFN w/o OT                                                                     OC-GFN w/o OT
                                            0                                      OC-GFN w/o OT & CT                         0                                       OC-GFN w/o OT & CT                         0                                      OC-GFN w/o OT & CT
                                                 0   2500   5000   7500   10000 12500 15000 17500 20000                            0   2500   5000    7500   10000 12500 15000 17500 20000                            0   2500   5000   7500   10000 12500 15000 17500 20000
                                                                          Update                                                                             Update                                                                            Update


             (a)                                                    (b)                                                                                (c)                                                                               (d)
Figure 4: Results in GridWorld in different with different scales of the task. (a) Outcome distribu-
tion. (b)-(d) Success rate of OC-GFN and its variants in small, medium, and large maps, respectively.

Outcome reaching performance. We then investigate the key designs in pre-training OC-GFN
by analyzing its success rate for achieving target outcomes. We also ablate key components to
investigate the effect of contrastive training (CT) and outcome teleportation (OT). The success rates
of OC-GFN and its variants are summarized in Figures 4(b)-(d) in different sizes of the map from
small to large. As shown, OC-GFN can successfully learn to reach specified outcomes with a success
rate of nearly 100% at the end of training in maps with different sizes. Disabling the outcome
teleportation component (OC-GFN w/o OT) leads to lower sample efficiency, in particular in larger
maps. Further deactivating the contrastive training process (OC-GFN w/o OT & CT) fails to learn
well as the size of the outcome space grows, since the agent can hardly collect successful trajectories
for meaningful updates. This indicates that both contrastive training and outcome teleportation are
important for successfully training OC-GFN in large outcome spaces. It is also worth noting that


                                                                                                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


outcome teleportation can significantly boost learning efficiency in problems with a combinatorial
explosion of outcome spaces (e.g., sequence generation in the following sections).
Outcome-conditioned behaviors. We visualize the learned behaviors of OC-GFN
in Figure 5, where the red and green squares denote the starting point and the goal,
respectively. We find that OC-GFN can not only reach different outcomes with
a high success rate, but also discover diverse trajectories leading to a specified
outcome y with the forward policy PF . OC-GFN is able to generate diverse tra-
jectories, which is different from typical goal-conditioned RL approaches (Schaul
et al., 2015) that usually only learn a single solution to the goal state. This ability Figure 5: Be-
can be very helpful for generalizing to downstream tasks with similar structure but haviors of OC-
subtle changes (e.g., obstacles in the maze) (Kumar et al., 2020).                      GFN.
Applicability to other objectives. We now investigate the versatility of our approach by building it
upon another recent GFlowNets learning objective with SubTB (Madan et al., 2022). We investigate
the outcome-reaching performance of OC-SubTB in the pre-training stage with a medium map as
in Figure 6(a), while the learned sample distribution by fine-tuning the outcome-conditioned flows
and policies of OC-SubTB with our amortized predic-                                                                                                                                                                             100



tor is shown in Figure 6(b). As shown, OC-SubTB can                                                                                                                                                                                 80


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Success rate (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60

successfully learn to reach target outcomes, where the                                                                                                                                                                              40

proposed contrastive training and outcome teleportation                                                                                                                                                                             20                        OC-SubTB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OC-SubTB w/o OT
method achieve consistent gains in efficiency. Fine-tuning                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0       500   1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OC-SubTB w/o OT & CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1500                            2000            2500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Update
OC-SubTB can also discover all the modes, as opposed to
training a GFN (Malkin et al., 2022) from scratch (Fig-                   (a)               (b)
ure 3). A more detailed discussion is in Appendix B.2.            Figure 6: OC-SubTB in GridWorld.
5.2                            B IT S EQUENCE G ENERATION
We study the bit sequence generation task (Malkin et al., 2022), where the agent generates sequences
of length n. We follow the same procedure for pre-training OC-GFN without task-specific rewards
as in Section 5.1 with more details in Appendix C.1.
Analysis of the unsupervised pre-training stage. We first analyze how well OC-GFN learns in the
unsupervised pre-training stage by investigating its success rate for achieving specified outcomes
in bit sequence generation problems with different scales including small, medium, and large. As
shown in Figures 7(a)-(c), OC-GFN can successfully reach outcomes, leading to a high success rate
as summarized in Figure 7(d). It is also worth noting that it fails to learn when the outcome telepor-
tation module is disabled due to the particularly large outcome spaces. In such highly challenging
scenarios, the contrastive training paradigm alone does not lead to efficient learning.

                         100                                                                100                                                                 95


                         80                                                                 80
                                                                                                                                                                85
                                                                                                                                                                75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Size                                                    Success rate
                                                                                                                                                                65
      Success rate (%)


                                                                         Success rate (%)


                                                                                                                                             Success rate (%)


                         60                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                55
                                                                                                                                                                45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Small                                                    98.37 ± 0.33%
                         40                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                                                35
                                                                                                                                                                25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Medium                                                    97.22 ± 1.70%
                         20                        OC-GFN                                   20                         OC-GFN                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                    OC-GFN
                                                   OC-GFN w/o OT                                                       OC-GFN w/o OT                                                                OC-GFN w/o OT
                          0                        OC-GFN w/o OT & CT                        0                         OC-GFN w/o OT & CT                       5                                   OC-GFN w/o OT & CT                                  Large                                                    93.75 ± 2.04%
                               0   0.2   0.4       0.6     0.8     1.0                            0    0.2   0.4       0.6     0.8     1.0                           0       1    2     3       4        5                      6            7
                                         Updates (×105)                                                      Updates (×105)                                                           Updates (×105)


                                   (a) Small.                                                         (b) Medium.                                                                (c) Large.                                                                                (d) Summary.
          Figure 7: Success rates in the bit sequence generation task with different scales of the task.

Analysis of the Supervised Fine-Tuning Stage. After we justified the          OC-GFN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.0

                                                                              GFN (from scratch)
effectiveness of training OC-GFN in the unsupervised pre-training stage,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Number of modes (normalized)


                                                                              MCMC                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.8
                                                                              DQN
we study whether fine-tuning the model with the amortized approach                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.6


can enable faster mode discovery when adapting to downstream tasks                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4


(as described in Appendix C.1). We compare the proposed approach                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2


against strong baselines including training a GFN from scratch (Bengio                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0          1.0   2.0   3.0   4.0   5.0
et al., 2023), Metropolis-Hastings-MCMC (Dai et al., 2020), and Deep                     Updates (×10 )                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5


Q-Networks (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2015). We evaluate each method in Figure 8: Results in bit
terms of the number of modes discovered during the course of training as sequence generation.
in previous works (Malkin et al., 2022). We summarize the normalized (between 0 and 1 to facilitate
comparison across tasks) number of modes averaged over each downstream task in Figure 8, while
results for each individual downstream task can be found in Appendix C.5 due to space limitation.


                                                                                                                                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We find that OC-GFN significantly outperforms baselines in mode discovery in both efficiency
and performance, while DQN gets stuck and does not discover diverse modes due to the reward-
maximizing nature, and MCMC fails to perform well in problems with larger state spaces.
5.3                             TF B IND G ENERATION
We study a more practical task of generating DNA sequences with high binding activity with tar-
geted transcription factors (Jain et al., 2022). We consider 30 different downstream tasks studied
in (Barrera et al., 2016), which conducted biological experiments to determine the binding proper-
ties between a range of transcription factors and every conceivable DNA sequence.
Analysis of the unsupervised pre-training stage. We analyze how well OC-GFN learns by evalu-
ating its success rate. Figure 9 shows that OC-GFN can successfully achieve the targeted goals with
a success rate of nearly 100% in the practical task of generating DNA sequences.
Analysis of the supervised fine-tuning stage. We investigate how well                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 100


OC-GFN can transfer to downstream tasks for generating TF Bind 8 se-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  80


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Success rate (%)
quences. We tune the hyperparameters on the task PAX3 R270C R1,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60


and evaluate the baselines on the other 29 downstream tasks. We inves-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40


tigate the learning efficiency and performance in terms of the number of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                     OC-GFN
modes and the top-K scores during the course of training. The results in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0                            0.2          0.4          0.6          0.8     1.0
                                                                                      Updates (×10 )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5
2 downstream tasks are shown in Figure 10, with the full results in Ap-
pendix C.6 due to space limitation. Figures 10(a)-(b) illustrate the number Figure 9: Success rate
of discovered modes while Figures 10(c)-(d) shows the top-K scores. We in TF Bind generation.
find that the proposed approach discovers more diverse modes faster and achieves higher top-K
(K = 100) scores compared to baselines. We summarize the rank of each baseline in all 30 down-
stream tasks (Zhang et al., 2021) in Appendix C.6, where OC-GFN ranks highest compared with
other methods. We further visualize in Figure 10(e) the t-SNE plots of the TF Bind 8 sequences
discovered by transferring OC-GFN with the amortized approach and the more expensive but com-
petitive training of a GFN from scratch. As shown, training a GFN from scratch only focuses on
limited regions while the OC-GFN has a greater coverage.
                                                                                       40                                                                                                                                               0.94
                  60                                                                                                                                    0.94

                  50                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.92
                                                                                       30
Number of modes


                                                                     Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                        0.92
                  40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Top-K score
                                                                                                                                          Top-K score


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.90
                  30                                                                   20                                                               0.90

                  20       OC-GFN                                                      10
                                                                                                OC-GFN                                                  0.88       OC-GFN                                                               0.88        OC-GFN
                           GFN (from scratch)                                                   GFN (from scratch)                                                 GFN (from scratch)                                                               GFN (from scratch)
                  10
                           MCMC                                                                 MCMC                                                               MCMC                                                                             MCMC                                                                                                                    OC-GFN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.86
                  0        DQN                                                         0        DQN                                                     0.86       DQN                                                                              DQN                                                                                                                     GFN (from scratch)
                       0   50     100     150      200   250   300                          0   50     100     150      200   250   300                        0     1000     2000      3000   4000    5000                                    0         1000         2000         3000         4000                    5000
                                         Updates                                                              Updates                                                            Updates                                                                                 Updates


                                        (a)                                                                  (b)                                                               (c)                                                                                    (d)                                                                                                                      (e)

                           Figure 10: Results in the TF Bind sequence generation task in different downstream tasks.

5.4                             RNA G ENERATION
We now study a larger task of generating RNA                                      OC-GFN
                                                                                  GFN (from scratch)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         100                                                                                                                               1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Number of modes (normalized)


                                                                                  MCMC
sequences that bind to a given target introduced                                  DQN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         80                                                                                                                                0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Success rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60                                                                                                                                0.6
in (Lorenz et al., 2011). We follow the same procedure                                                                                                                                                                   40                                                                                                                                0.4

as in Section 5.3, where details are in Appendix C.1.                                                                                                                                                                    20                                                                                                                                0.2

We consider four different downstream tasks from Vi-                     OC-GFN                                                                                                                                           0                                                                                                                                0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0          1.0          2.0          3.0          4.0                     5.0                                            0         1000         2000         3000    4000   5000
ennaRNA (Lorenz et al., 2011), each considering the                                                                                                                                                                                                             Updates (×105)                                                                                                             Updates


binding energy with a different target as a reward. The Figure 11: Results in RNA generation.
left part in Figure 11 shows that OC-GFN achieves Left: success rate. Right: number of
a success rate of almost 100% at the end of the pre- modes (normalized).
training stage. The right part in Figure 11 summarizes the averaged normalized (between 0 and 1
to facilitate comparison across tasks) performance in terms of the number of modes averaged over
four downstream tasks, where the performance for each individual task is shown in Appendix C.7.
We observe that OC-GFN is able to achieve much higher diversity than baselines, indicating that the
pre-training phase enables the OC-GFN to explore the state space much more efficiently.
5.5                             A NTIMICROBIAL P EPTIDE G ENERATION
To demonstrate the scalability of our approach to even more challenging and complex scenarios,
we also evaluate it on the biological task of generating antimicrobial peptides (AMP) with lengths
50 (Jain et al., 2022) (resulting in an outcome space of 2050 candidates). Figure 12(a) demonstrates

                                                                                                                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the success rate of OC-GFN for achieving target out-                         80
                                                                                                                                                         6000
                                                                                                                                                                     OC-GFN
                                                                                                                                                         5000        GFN (from scratch)
comes, which can still reach a high success rate in                          70
                                                                             60
                                                                                                                                                         4000
                                                                                                                                                                     MCMC
                                                                                                                                                                     DQN


                                                                                                                                       Number of modes
                                                          Success rate (%)
particularly large outcome spaces with our novel train-                      50
                                                                             40                                                                          3000


ing paradigm according to contrastive learning and fast                      30
                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                         2000


goal propagation. Figure 12(b) shows the number of                           10
                                                                             0                                             OC-GFN
                                                                                                                                                         1000

                                                                                                                                                           0

modes discovered, where OC-GFN provides consistent                                0     0.2   0.4     0.6    0.8
                                                                                                    Updates (×106)
                                                                                                                     1.0   1.2   1.4                            0   2500   5000   7500 10000 12500 15000 17500 20000
                                                                                                                                                                                      Updates

improvements, which validates the efficacy of OC-GFN                                  (a) Success rate.                                     (b) Number of modes.
to successfully scale to much larger-scale tasks.                            Figure 12: Results in AMP generation.
6   C ONCLUSION
We propose a novel method for unsupervised pre-training of GFlowNets through an outcome-
conditioned GFlowNet, coupled with a new approach to efficiently fine-tune the pre-trained model
for downstream tasks. Our work opens the door for GFlowNets to be pre-trained for fine-tuning
for downstream tasks. Empirical results on the standard GridWorld domain validate the effective-
ness of the proposed approach in successfully achieving targeted outcomes and the efficiency of the
amortized predictor. We also conduct extensive experiments in the more complex and challenging
biological sequence design tasks to demonstrate its practical scalability. Our method greatly im-
proves learning performance compared with strong baselines including training a GFlowNet from
scratch, particularly in tasks which are challenging for GFlowNets to learn.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge funding from CIFAR, Genentech, Samsung, and IBM.

E THICS S TATEMENT
We do not foresee any immediate negative societal impact of our work. Our work is motivated by
the need for ways to accelerate scientific problems. However, we do note that there is a potential
risk of dual use of the technology by nefarious actors (Urbina et al., 2022), as with all work around
this topic.

R EPRODUCIBILITY
All details of our experiments are discussed in Appendix C with a detailed description of the task,
network architectures, hyper-parameters for baselines, and setup. We implement all baselines and
environments based on open-source repositories described in Appendix C. The proofs of proposi-
tions can be found in Appendix B. Limitations are discussed in Appendix D.

R EFERENCES
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience re-
 play. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Luis A Barrera, Anastasia Vedenko, Jesse V Kurland, Julia M Rogers, Stephen S Gisselbrecht,
  Elizabeth J Rossin, Jaie Woodard, Luca Mariani, Kian Hong Kock, Sachi Inukai, et al. Survey
  of variation in human transcription factors reveals prevalent dna binding changes. Science, 351
  (6280):1450–1454, 2016.
Emmanuel Bengio, Moksh Jain, Maksym Korablyov, Doina Precup, and Yoshua Bengio. Flow net-
  work based generative models for non-iterative diverse candidate generation. Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Yoshua Bengio, Salem Lahlou, Tristan Deleu, Edward J. Hu, Mo Tiwari, and Emmanuel Bengio.
  Gflownet foundations. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(210):1–55, 2023. URL http:
  //jmlr.org/papers/v24/22-0364.html.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12894, 2018.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yevgen Chebotar, Karol Hausman, Yao Lu, Ted Xiao, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Jake Varley, Alex Irpan,
  Benjamin Eysenbach, Ryan Julian, Chelsea Finn, et al. Actionable models: Unsupervised offline
  reinforcement learning of robotic skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07749, 2021.
Hanjun Dai, Rishabh Singh, Bo Dai, Charles Sutton, and Dale Schuurmans. Learning discrete
  energy-based models via auxiliary-variable local exploration. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:10443–10455, 2020.
Tristan Deleu, António Góis, Chris Emezue, Mansi Rankawat, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Stefan Bauer,
  and Yoshua Bengio. Bayesian structure learning with generative flow networks. Uncertainty in
  Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2022.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need:
  Learning skills without a reward function. International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2018.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Sergey Levine. C-learning: Learning to achieve
  goals via recursive classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.08909, 2020.
Kuan Fang, Patrick Yin, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Planning to practice: Efficient online
  fine-tuning by composing goals in latent space. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
  Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 4076–4083. IEEE, 2022.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
Steven Hansen, Will Dabney, Andre Barreto, Tom Van de Wiele, David Warde-Farley, and
  Volodymyr Mnih. Fast task inference with variational intrinsic successor features. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1906.05030, 2019.
Olivier Henaff. Data-efficient image recognition with contrastive predictive coding. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 4182–4192. PMLR, 2020.
Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. Universal language model fine-tuning for text classification.
   In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
   (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 328–339, 2018.
Zarif Ikram, Ling Pan, and Dianbo Liu. Evolution guided generative flow networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.02186, 2024.
Max Jaderberg, Volodymyr Mnih, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Tom Schaul, Joel Z Leibo, David
 Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Reinforcement learning with unsupervised auxiliary tasks. In
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
Moksh Jain, Emmanuel Bengio, Alex Hernandez-Garcia, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Bonaventure F.P.
 Dossou, Chanakya Ekbote, Jie Fu, Tianyu Zhang, Micheal Kilgour, Dinghuai Zhang, Lena
 Simine, Payel Das, and Yoshua Bengio. Biological sequence design with GFlowNets. Inter-
 national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.
Moksh Jain, Tristan Deleu, Jason Hartford, Cheng-Hao Liu, Alex Hernandez-Garcia, and Yoshua
 Bengio. Gflownets for ai-driven scientific discovery. Digital Discovery, 2023a.
Moksh Jain, Sharath Chandra Raparthy, Alex Hernandez-Garcia, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Yoshua Ben-
 gio, Santiago Miret, and Emmanuel Bengio. Multi-objective gflownets. In International Confer-
 ence on Machine Learning, pp. 14631–14653, 2023b.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning to achieve goals. In IJCAI, volume 2, pp. 1094–8. Citeseer, 1993.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Saurabh Kumar, Aviral Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. One solution is not all you need:
  Few-shot extrapolation via structured maxent rl. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:8198–8210, 2020.
Elaine Lau, Stephen Zhewen Lu, Ling Pan, Doina Precup, and Emmanuel Bengio. Qgfn: Control-
  lable greediness with action values. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05234, 2024.
Hao Liu and Pieter Abbeel. Aps: Active pretraining with successor features. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6736–6747. PMLR, 2021.
Ronny Lorenz, Stephan H Bernhart, Christian Höner Zu Siederdissen, Hakim Tafer, Christoph
  Flamm, Peter F Stadler, and Ivo L Hofacker. ViennaRNA package 2.0. Algorithms for molecular
  biology, 6(1):26, 2011.
Kanika Madan, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Maksym Korablyov, Emmanuel Bengio, Moksh Jain, Andrei
  Nica, Tom Bosc, Yoshua Bengio, and Nikolay Malkin. Learning GFlowNets from partial episodes
  for improved convergence and stability. arXiv preprint 2209.12782, 2022.
Nikolay Malkin, Moksh Jain, Emmanuel Bengio, Chen Sun, and Yoshua Bengio. Trajectory balance:
  Improved credit assignment in GFlowNets. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2022.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Ashvin V Nair, Vitchyr Pong, Murtaza Dalal, Shikhar Bahl, Steven Lin, and Sergey Levine. Visual
  reinforcement learning with imagined goals. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  31, 2018.
Ling Pan, Qingpeng Cai, and Longbo Huang. Softmax deep double deterministic policy gradients.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:11767–11777, 2020.
Ling Pan, Nikolay Malkin, Dinghuai Zhang, and Yoshua Bengio. Better training of gflownets with
  local credit and incomplete trajectories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01687, 2023a.
Ling Pan, Dinghuai Zhang, Aaron Courville, Longbo Huang, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative aug-
  mented flow networks. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023b.
Ling Pan, Dinghuai Zhang, Moksh Jain, Longbo Huang, and Yoshua Bengio. Stochastic generative
  flow networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09465, 2023c.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Tom Schaul, Daniel Horgan, Karol Gregor, and David Silver. Universal value function approxima-
  tors. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1312–1320. PMLR, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint 1707.06347, 2017.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
  Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8583–8592. PMLR, 2020.
Sam Sinai, Richard Wang, Alexander Whatley, Stewart Slocum, Elina Locane, and Eric Kelsic.
  Adalead: A simple and robust adaptive greedy search algorithm for sequence design. arXiv
  preprint, 2020.
Fabio Urbina, Filippa Lentzos, Cédric Invernizzi, and Sean Ekins. Dual use of artificial-intelligence-
  powered drug discovery. Nature Machine Intelligence, 4(3):189–191, 2022.
Emile van Krieken, Thiviyan Thanapalasingam, Jakub M Tomczak, Frank van Harmelen, and An-
  nette ten Teije. A-nesi: A scalable approximate method for probabilistic neurosymbolic inference.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.12393, 2022.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vivek Veeriah, Junhyuk Oh, and Satinder Singh. Many-goals reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1806.09605, 2018.
David W Zhang, Corrado Rainone, Markus Peschl, and Roberto Bondesan. Robust scheduling with
  gflownets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05446, 2023a.
Dinghuai Zhang, Jie Fu, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Unifying likelihood-free inference
  with black-box optimization and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.03372, 2021.
Dinghuai Zhang, Hanjun Dai, Nikolay Malkin, Aaron Courville, Yoshua Bengio, and Ling Pan. Let
  the flows tell: Solving graph combinatorial optimization problems with gflownets. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.17010, 2023b.
Dinghuai Zhang, Ling Pan, Ricky TQ Chen, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Distributional
  gflownets with quantile flows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05793, 2023c.
Rui Zhao, Yang Gao, Pieter Abbeel, Volker Tresp, and Wei Xu. Mutual information state intrinsic
  control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.08107, 2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A DDITIONAL D ETAILS OF GF LOW N ETS
A.1   D ETAILS FOR THE TRAINING LOSSES
As introduced in Section 2, the flow consistency constraint for detailed balance (DB) (Bengio et al.,
2023) is F (s)PF (s′ |s) = F (s′ )PB (s|s′ ) for s → s′ ∈ A. In practice, we train DB in the log-scale
for stability (Bengio et al., 2021), i.e.,
                                                                                2
                                                             F (s)PF (s′ |s)

                       ∀s → s′ ∈ A, LDB (s, s′ ) = log                            ,               (10)
                                                             F (s′ )PB (s|s′ )
and terminal flows F (x) to match the corresponding rewards R(x). The learnable objects here are
the state flow F (s), forward policy PF (s′ |s), and backward policy PB (s|s′ ), which are parameter-
ized by neural networks. For GAFlowNets (Pan et al., 2023b) that consider intrinsic intermediate
rewards ri (s → s′ ) into the flow network, we also train the model in log-scale according to Eq. (2),
i.e.,                                                                                      2
                                                                 F (s)PF (s′ |s)

                    ′                          ′
             ∀s → s ∈ A, LGAFN (DB) (s, s ) = log                                            .    (11)
                                                         F (s′ )PB (s|s′ ) + ri (s → s′ )
The learnable objects are the same as in DB, except that ri (s → s′ ) is also learnable, which is
represented by intrinsic motivation by random network distillation (Burda et al., 2018)).

B     P ROOFS
B.1   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4.1
Proposition 4.1 If LOC-GFN (τ, y) = 0 for all trajectories τ and outcomes y, then the outcome-
conditioned forward policy PF (s′ |s, y) can successfully reach any target outcome y.

Proof. As LOC-GFN (τ, y) = 0 is satisfied for all trajectories τ = {s0 , · · · , sn = x} and outcomes y,
we have that
                             n−1
                             Y                        n−1
                                                       Y
                   F (s0 |y)     PF (st+1 |st , y) =       R(x|y)PB (st |st+1 , y).                (12)
                              t=0                          t=0

Since R(x|y) is either 1 or 0 in outcome-condition tasks, we get that
                              n−1
                              Y                              n−1
                                                             Y
                    F (s0 |y)     PF (st+1 |st , y) = R(x|y)     PB (st |st+1 , y).                (13)
                              t=0                                    t=0

Then, the probability of reaching the target outcome y is
                                                   X
                                   P (x = y|y) =          P (τ |y).                                (14)
                                                       τ,sn =y

By definition, we have that
                                                 n−1
                                                 Y
                                    P (τ |y) =         PF (st+1 |st , y).                          (15)
                                                 t=0

Therefore, we get that
                                                 X n−1
                                                   Y
                              P (x = y|y) =                    PF (st+1 |st , y).                  (16)
                                                τ,sn =y t=0

Combining Eq. (13) with Eq. (16), and due to the law of total probability, we obtain that
                                             X            n−1
                                                           Y
                   F (s0 |y)P (x = y|y) =          R(x|y)      PB (st |st+1 , y)
                                                 τ,sn =y             t=0

                                                            X n−1
                                                              Y
                                            = R(y|y)                       PB (st |st+1 , y)       (17)
                                                           τ,sn =y t=0

                                                  X n−1
                                                    Y
                                            =                    PB (st |st+1 , y) = 1,
                                                 τ,sn =y t=0


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where we note that R(y|y) = 1 according to the definition of the reward function (which is binary).
With the same analysis for the case where the agent fails to reach the target outcome y, i.e., x ̸= y
and R(x|y) = 0, we have that
                                     ∀x ̸= y,       F (s0 |y)P (x|y) = 0.                                     (18)

Combing Eq. (17) with Eq. (18), we have that P (x = y|y) = 1, i.e., the outcome-conditioned
forward policy PF (s′ |s, y) can successfully reach any target outcome y.


B.2   A NALYSIS OF THE C ONVERSION P OLICY
We now elaborate on more details about the effect of Eq. (6) in the text based on (Bengio et al.,
2023).
When the outcome-conditioned GFlowNet (OC-GFN) is trained to completion, the following flow
consistency constraint in the edge level is satisfied for intermediate states.
                             F (s|y)PF (s′ |s, y) = F (s′ |y)PB (s|s′ , y)                                    (19)

We define the state flow function as F r (s) = y r(y)F (s|y), and the backward policy as
                                                P

                                                         ′         ′
                                           P
                               r     ′        y r(y)F (s |y)PB (s|s , y)
                             PB (s|s ) =         P            ′
                                                                          ,                                   (20)
                                                    y r(y)F (s |y)
while the forward policy is defined in Eq. (6), i.e.,
                                                                   ′
                                           P
                                r ′           y r(y)F (s|y)PF (s |s, y)
                              PF (s |s) =         P                                                           (21)
                                                      y r(y)F (s|y)

Then, we have                                       X
                           F r (s)PFr (s′ |s) =           r(y)F (s|y)PF (s′ |s, y),                           (22)
                                                     y
and                                                 X
                          F r (s′ )PBr (s|s′ ) =          r(y)F (s′ |y)PB (s|s′ , y).                         (23)
                                                     y

Combining the above equations, we have that
                                    F r (s)PFr (s′ |s) = F (s′ )r PBr (s|s′ ),                                (24)
which corresponds to a new flow consistency constraint in the edge level. A more detailed proof can
be found in (Bengio et al., 2023).
Discussion about applicability It is also worth noting that OC-GFN should be built upon the
detailed balance objective (Bengio et al., 2023) discussed in Section 2 or other variants which learn
flows. Instead, the trajectory balance objective (Malkin et al., 2022), does not learn a state flow
function necessary for converting the pre-trained OC-GFN model to the new policy πr .
We obtain the learning objective for OC-GFN when built upon sub-trajectory balance
(SubTB) (Madan et al., 2022) for a sub-trajectory τi:j = {si , · · · , sj } as in Eq. (25) following
Section 4.1.1.
                           j−1
                           Y                                 j−1
                                                             Y
                 F (si |y)     PF (st+1 |st , y) = F (sj |y)     PB (st |st+1 , y).             (25)
                             t=i                                       t=i
Further incorporating our proposed outcome teleportation technique for OC-GFN (SubTB) results
in the training objective as in Eq. (26), which is trained in the log domain:
                                     X                                 j−1
                                                                       X
           LOC-GFN (SubTB) (τ ) =             wij   log F (si |y) +          log PF (st+1 |st , y)
                                    τi:j ∈τ                            t=i
                                                                                                     !2       (26)
                                                      j−1
                                                      X
                               − log F (sj |y) −               log PB (st |st+1 , y) − log R(x|y)         ,
                                                         t=i


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                          j−i
where wij = P λ             j−i denotes the weight for the sub-trajectory τi:j , and λ is a hyperparam-
                  0≤i<j≤n λ
eter for controlling the weights. Besides the performance of OC-SubTB studied in the GridWorld
task in Section 5.1, we also demonstrate its effectiveness in two TF Bind generation tasks by study-
ing the success rate of OC-SubTB in the unsupervised pre-training stage, and the number of modes
and top-K scores for fine-tuning OC-SubTB. Results are summarized in Figure 13, where we ob-
serve consistently high success rate (nearly 100% at the end of the pre-training stage) and improved
performance in the fine-tuning stage.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.95
                   100
                                                                                    60                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.935
                                                                                                                                                              40
                   80                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.94                                                                         0.930
                                                                                    50
                                                                  Number of modes


                                                                                                                                            Number of modes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.925
Success rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                              30
                   60                                                               40                                                                                                                                              0.93


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Top-K score
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Top-K score
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.920
                                                                                    30                                                                        20
                   40                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.92                                                                         0.915
                                                                                    20
                   20                                                                                                                                         10                                                                                                                                                 0.910
                                                                                    10                                                                                                                                              0.91
                                                                                                                     OC-SubTB                                                                  OC-SubTB                                                                  OC-SubTB                                0.905                                 OC-SubTB
                    0                                 OC-SubTB                      0                                SubTB (from scratch)                     0                                SubTB (from scratch)                                                      SubTB (from scratch)                                                          SubTB (from scratch)
                         0    0.2   0.4       0.6    0.8    1.0                                                                                                                                                                     0.90                                                                         0.900
                                                                                         0   1000   2000        3000        4000     5000                          0   1000   2000        3000        4000     5000                        0   250   500   750    1000     1250   1500   1750   2000                     0   250   500   750    1000     1250   1500   1750   2000
                                    Updates (×105)                                                         Updates                                                                   Updates                                                                     Updates                                                                       Updates


                                    (a)                                                              (b)                                                                          (c)                                                                       (d)                                                                           (e)
Figure 13: Results of OC-GFN when built upon SubTb in the TF Bind sequence generation task
in different downstream tasks (PAX3 R270C R1 and HOXB7 M190L R1). (a) Success rate of pre-
training OC-SubTB. (b)-(c) The number of modes discovered. (d)-(e) Top-K scores.


B.3                              P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4.2
Proposition 4.2 Suppose   that ∀(s, s′ , y), Lamortized (s, s′ , y) = 0, then the amortized predictor
N (s′ |s) estimates y r(y)F (s|y)PF (s′ |s, y).
                   P


Proof. As Lamortized (s, s′ , y) = 0 for all states s, next states s′ , and outcomes y, we have that
                                                                                     ∀s, s′ , y,                        N (s′ |s)Q(y|s′ , s) = r(y)F (s|y)PF (s′ |s, y).                                                                                                                                                                                               (27)

Therefore, by summing over all possible outcomes y on both sides, we obtain that
                          X                          X
                 ∀s, s′ ,     N (s′ |s)Q(y|s′ , s) =   r(y)F (s|y)PF (s′ |s, y).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (28)
                                                                                                       y                                                                                               y

                                     ′
                             P
As                            y Q(y|s , s) = 1, we get that
                                                                                                                                                                              X
                                                                                               ∀s, s′ ,                      N (s′ |s) =                                               r(y)F (s|y)PF (s′ |s, y).                                                                                                                                                       (29)
                                                                                                                                                                              y


Based on the above analysis, we get that the amortized predictor N (s′ |s) estimates the marginal
          (s|y)PF (s′ |s, y).
P
  y r(y)F



C                            E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
All baseline methods are implemented based on the open-source implementation,1 where we follow
the default hyperparameters and setup as in (Bengio et al., 2021). The code will be released upon
publication of the paper.
C.1                              E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
GridWorld We employ the same standard reward function for GridWorld from (Bengio et al.,
2021) as in Eq. (30), where the target reward distribution is shown in Figure 3(a) with 4 modes
located near the corners of the maze.
              1Y                                Y
     R(x) =        I (0.25 < |xi /H − 0.5|) + 2    I (0.3 < |xi /H − 0.5| < 0.4) + 10−6 .  (30)
              2 i                               i

                         1
                             https://github.com/GFNOrg/gflownet


                                                                                                                                                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The GFlowNet model is a feedforward network consisting of two hidden layers with 256 hidden
units per layer using LeakyReLU activation. We use a same network structure for the outcome-
conditioned GFlowNet model, except that we concatenate the state and outcome as input to the
network. For the unconditional GAFlowNet model, we follow (Pan et al., 2023b) and leverage
random network distillation as the intrinsic reward mechanism. The coefficient for intrinsic rewards
is set to be 1.0 (which purely learns from intrinsic motivation without task-specific rewards). We
also use a same network structure for the amortized predictor network. We train all models with the
Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) optimizer (learning rate is 0.001) based on samples from a parallel of
16 rollouts in the environment.
Bit Sequence Generation We consider generating bit sequences with fixed lengths based
on (Malkin et al., 2022). The GFlowNet model is a feedforward network that consists of 2 hid-
den layers with 2048 hidden units with ReLU activation. The exploration strategy is ϵ-greedy with
ϵ = 0.0005, while we set the sampling temperature to 1.0, and use a reward exponent of 3. The
learning rate for training the GFlowNet model is 5 × 10−3 with the Adam optimizer, with a batch
size of 16. We use a same network structure for the outcome-conditioned GFlowNet model and the
amortized predictor network. We train all models for 50000 iterations, using a parallel of 16 rollouts
in the environment.
TF Bind and RNA Generation For the TFBind-8 generation task, we follow the same setup as
in (Jain et al., 2022). The vocabulary consists of 4 nucleobases, and the trajectory length is 8 and 14.
The GFlowNet model is a feedforward network that consists of 2 hidden layers with 2048 hidden
units and ReLU activation. The exploration strategy is ϵ-greedy with ϵ = 0.001, while the reward
exponent is 3. The learning rate for training the GFlowNet model is 1e − 4, with a batch size of 32.
We train all models for 5000 iterations.
AMP Generation We basically follow the same setup for the antimicrobial peptide generation
task as in Malkin et al. (2022); Jain et al. (2022), where we consider generating AMP sequence
with length 50. The GFlowNet model is an MLP that consists of 2048 hidden layers with 2 hidden
units with ReLU activation. The exploration strategy is ϵ-greedy with ϵ = 0.01, while the sampling
temperature is set to 1, and uses a reward exponent of 3. The lr for training the GFlowNet model is
0.001, and the batch size is 16.
Metrics We use the same evaluation metrics as in the literature in GFlowNets (Bengio et al., 2021;
Malkin et al., 2022; Madan et al., 2022; Pan et al., 2023b;a). The number of modes is calculated
using a sphere-exclusion procedure. Specifically, the generated candidates are sorted by reward,
and then scanning down this sorted list, a candidate is added to the list of modes if it is above a
certain reward threshold and is further away than a distance threshold δ from all other modes. For
the normalized number of modes, we normalize the number of modes discovered in each task by
min-max normalization, and average this value across different tasks.
C.2   A DDITIONAL A BLATION S TUDY OF OC-GFN IN THE U NSUPERVISED P RE -T RAINING
      S TAGE
We now further investigate the impact of the GAFN (Pan et al., 2023b) in the unsupervised pre-
training stage as discussed in Section 4.1.1, based on the learning objective for OC-GFN presented
in Eq. (3). We investigate the influence of GAFN by ablating the model design and replacing it with
a random agent, and a GFlowNet agent that is trained with task-irrelevant rewards (i.e., R(x) =
1) in the unsupervised pre-training stage, while the GAFN is learned by pure intrinsic motivation
with random network distillation (Burda et al., 2018). We conduct this ablation study based on the
GridWorld environment as in Section 5.1. Please note that the experiments are run for about 2500
updates only due to time limitation in the rebuttal period (and therefore the success rate is not around
100% yet). It is also worth noting that the effect of completely removing the GAFN part has been
studied in Section 5.1, where OC-GFN w/ OT & CT in Figure 4 in the text examines the significance
of the contrastive training technique.
We compare the success rate of each method for reaching given outcomes following Section 5.1.
As shown in Figure 14, OC-GFN (GAFN) learns much more efficiently than the other two variants,
where the GAFN model is replaced with a GFN model trained with task-irrelevant rewards (OC-
GFN (GFN)) or a random agent (OC-GFN (random)), with a more significant margin in larger
maps.
We also study the generated outcome distribution by ablating this model design to gain a better un-
derstanding during the learning process. Figure 15 demonstrates the outcome distribution generated


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  70                                                    OC-GFN (Random)                                    80                                                             OC-GFN (Random)                                                                                       OC-GFN (Random)
                                                                                                        OC-GFN (GFN)                                       70                                                             OC-GFN (GFN)                                  40                                                      OC-GFN (GFN)
                                                  60                                                    OC-GFN (GAFN)                                                                                                     OC-GFN (GAFN)                                                                                         OC-GFN (GAFN)
                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                  50


                               Success rate (%)


                                                                                                                                        Success rate (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Success rate (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        30
                                                                                                                                                           50
                                                  40
                                                                                                                                                           40
                                                  30                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                           30
                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                           20                                                                                                           10
                                                  10                                                                                                       10
                                                  0                                                                                                        0                                                                                                            0
                                                             0          200        400            600                     800    1000                           0          500      1000        1500                      2000        2500    3000                           0     500          1000              1500          2000      2500       3000
                                                                                         Update                                                                                               Update                                                                                                          Update

                                                                              (a) Small.                                                                                         (b) Medium.                                                                                             (c) Large.

Figure 14: Ablation study of OC-GFN in the unsupervised pre-training stage in GridWorld in suc-
cess rate.

by each method at the same iteration (with 2500 updates) in GridWorld with a large map. As shown,
OC-GFN (GAFN) motivates the agent to explore unfamiliar regions, resulting in a more diverse out-
come distribution for training the OC-GFN and improving its learning efficiency. This observation
is consistent with Figure 14, demonstrating the importance of the GAFN model.


                                                        (a) OC-GFN (Random).                                                                                         (b) OC-GFN (GFN).                                                                                       (c) OC-GFN (GAFN).

Figure 15: Outcome distribution for variants of OC-GFN in the unsupervised pre-training stage in
GridWorld with a large map.
C.3                           A DDITIONAL R ESULTS OF A D IRECT P RE -T RAINING S CHEME
One can also pre-train a GFlowNet on task A and then fine-tune the model on task B. However,
this simple scheme for pre-training GFlowNets does not lead to a universally applicable strategy for
efficient transfer. This is because the GFlowNet learns to sample proportionally from the reward
function of task A during the pre-training stage, and thus, if there is not enough shared structure
between the rewards for task A and task B (or the goals are unrelated), the GFlowNet model pre-
trained on task A may not be beneficial for the fine-tuning stage on task B, and could potentially
even have a negative impact.

                                                                                                                  0.990                                                                                         1.0                                                                                    1.00
                   65.0
                                                                                                                  0.985
                   62.5                                                                                                                                                                                         0.9                                                                                    0.98
                                                                                                                  0.980
                   60.0
 Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                              Number of modes


                                                                                                                  0.975                                                                                                                                                                                0.96
                                                                                                    Top-K score


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Top-K score


                   57.5                                                                                                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                  0.970
                   55.0
                                                                                                                  0.965                                                                                         0.7                                                                                    0.94
                   52.5

                   50.0                                                 OC-GFN                                    0.960                                         OC-GFN                                                                               OC-GFN                                                                                      OC-GFN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6                                                                                    0.92
                   47.5
                                                                        GFN (from scratch)                        0.955                                         GFN (from scratch)                                                                   GFN (from scratch)                                                                          GFN (from scratch)
                                                                        GFN (from pre-trained)                                                                  GFN (from pre-trained)                                                               GFN (from pre-trained)                                                                      GFN (from pre-trained)
                   45.0                                                                                           0.950                                                                                         0.5                                                                                    0.90
                          0    50                      100        150      200   250       300                             0    1000          2000                  3000     4000      5000                           0          50     100    150          200              250   300                        0          1000          2000       3000      4000    5000
                                                                 Updates                                                                                   Updates                                                                             Updates                                                                                    Updates


                                                                 (a)                                                                          (b)                                                                                             (c)                                                                                      (d)
Figure 16: Comparison results of GFN (from pre-trained) in TF Bind generation tasks. (a)-(b)
Mode discovery and top-K scores in SIX6 T165A R1. (c)-(d) Normalized mode discovery and
normalized top-K scores averaged over 10 downstream tasks.
We now compare our proposed OC-GFN with fine-tuning this schema (which is pre-trained on
PAX3 R270C R1) on 10 TF Bind generation tasks (as described in Section 5.3). Figures 16(a)-
(b) demonstrate the results in terms of mode discovery and top-K scores on one downstream task
(SIX6 T165A R1) for demonstration, while Figures 16 summarize the normalized mode discovery
and top-K performance averaged over each downstream task. As shown, this GFN (from pre-
trained) schema does not provide universal effectiveness (which can lead to lower efficiency in mode
discovery and top-K performance), as it is sensitive to the reward structures of the downstream


                                                                                                                                                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tasks. It has also been highlighted in previous works (Bengio et al., 2021) that GFlowNets are prone
to overfitting on certain tasks, which could further result in worse performance compared to training
a GFlowNet from scratch on task B. On the contrary, we cast the problem of unsupervised pre-
training of GFlowNet with self-supervised learning, which learns to reach any outcome for learning
a functional understanding of the task. Therefore, it provides a universally effective strategy to
different downstream tasks, and is agnostic to the reward structures.
C.4                        A DDITIONAL R ESULTS OF C OMPARISON WITH RL M ETHODS
We include an additional comparison of OC-GFN with other two strong RL methods including
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) and SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) with automatic tuning of the entropy
coefficient, in the same two downstream tasks of TF Bind generation as in Figure 10 in Section 5.3
(PAX3 R270C R1 and HOXB7 M190L R1). Figure 17 demonstrates the comparison results in
terms of the number of discovered modes ((a)-(b)) during learning and the top-K scores ((c)-(d)).
As shown, the reward-maximization nature of RL approaches limits the resulting solution diver-
sity (Bengio et al., 2021; 2023), which underperforms GFN (from scratch) in the number of discov-
ered modes and top-K scores, and OC-GFN consistently outperforms baselines in the mode-seeking
ability.


                                                                                                                  40                                                                                                                                                                                     0.94
                  60
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.94
                  50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.92
                                                                                                                  30
Number of modes


                                                                                                Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.92
                  40


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Top-K score
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Top-K score


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.90
                                                                                                                  20
                  30                                                 OC-GFN                                                                                           OC-GFN                                   0.90                                          OC-GFN                                                                        OC-GFN
                                                                     GFN (from scratch)                                                                               GFN (from scratch)                                                                     GFN (from scratch)                                                            GFN (from scratch)
                  20                                                 MCMC                                         10
                                                                                                                                                                      MCMC                                     0.88                                          MCMC                                        0.88                              MCMC
                  10
                                                                     DQN                                                                                              DQN                                                                                    DQN                                                                           DQN
                                                                     PPO                                                                                              PPO                                                                                    PPO                                         0.86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PPO
                  0                                                  SAC                                          0                                                   SAC                                      0.86                                          SAC                                                                           SAC
                       0   1000   2000                        3000        4000          5000                           0         1000     2000                 3000        4000          5000                         0     1000    2000                3000            4000        5000                        0     1000    2000     3000      4000     5000
                                         Updates                                                                                                 Updates                                                                               Updates                                                                                   Updates


                                    (a)                                                                                                     (b)                                                                                      (c)                                                                                      (d)
Figure 17: Additional comparison results with other RL methods (PPO and SAC) in different down-
stream tasks in TF Bind generation. (a)-(b): Number of modes. (c)-(d): Top-K scores.
Computation cost We now compare the computation cost of each baseline method in Figure 17
in terms of memory and time (for collecting experiences and for training the model). As shown in
Figure 18, training OC-GFN only leads to marginal computation overhead.


                                                             1400                                                                                            0.016
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.05
                                                             1200                                                                                            0.014
                                                                                                                                                             0.012                                                                                    0.04
                                                             1000
                                          GPU memory (MiB)


                                                                                                                                                             0.010
                                                                                                                                                  Time (s)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Time (s)


                                                             800                                                                                                                                                                                      0.03
                                                                                                                                                             0.008
                                                             600
                                                                                                                                                             0.006                                                                                    0.02
                                                             400
                                                                                                                                                             0.004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.01
                                                             200                                                                                             0.002
                                                               0                                                                                             0.000                                                                                    0.00
                                                                     OC-GFN        GFN          DQN                        SAC      PPO                               OC-GFN        GFN          DQN                  SAC     PPO                              OC-GFN         GFN          DQN                  SAC     PPO
                                                                              (from scratch)                                                                                   (from scratch)                                                                            (from scratch)


                                                                                               (a)                                                                                              (b)                                                                                       (c)
Figure 18: Comparison of computation costs. (a) GPU Memory. (b) Collect experiences. (c) Train
models.

C.5                        A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON THE B IT S EQUENCE G ENERATION TASK
As shown in Figures 19(a)-(c), OC-GFN is more efficient at discovering modes and discovers more
modes, compared with baselines in different scales of the task, from small to large. DQN gets stuck
and does not discover diverse modes due to the reward-maximizing nature of regular reinforcement
learning algorithms, while MCMC fails to perform well in problems with larger state spaces. Besides
different scales of the problem, we also consider different downstream tasks as in Figures 19(d)-(e),
which further demonstrate the effectiveness of OC-GFN in the supervised fine-tuning stage.
C.6                        A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON THE TF B IND G ENERATION TASK
The full results in the TF Bind generation task are demonstrated in Figure 21 for the 30 downstream
from (Lorenz et al., 2011). The mean rank averaged over all tasks is summarized in Table 1, where
OC-GFN significantly outperforms baselines and is able to discover more modes in a more efficient
way.


                                                                                                                                                                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           40                                                                                            40
                  40       MCMC                                                                              17.5         MCMC                                                                                            MCMC                                                                                          MCMC                                                                                          MCMC
                                                                                                                                                                                                             12
                           DQN                                                                                            DQN                                                                                             DQN                                                                              35           DQN                                                                              35           DQN
                           GFN (from scratch)                                                                15.0         GFN (from scratch)                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GFN (from scratch)                                                               30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GFN (from scratch)                                                               30           GFN (from scratch)
Number of modes
                  30       OC-GFN                                                                            12.5         OC-GFN                                                                                          OC-GFN                                                                                        OC-GFN                                                                                        OC-GFN


                                                                                           Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                           Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Number of modes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           25                                                                                            25
                                                                                                                                                                                                             8
                                                                                                             10.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                  20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                                              7.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                              5.0                                                                                                                                                                                          10                                                                                            10
                  10
                                                                                                              2.5                                                                                            2                                                                                             5                                                                                             5

                  0                                                                                           0.0                                                                                            0                                                                                             0                                                                                             0
                       0      1.0      2.0                          3.0    4.0     5.0                                0      1.0         2.0                          3.0   4.0    5.0                               0       1.0      2.0                          3.0   4.0     5.0                               0       1.0      2.0                          3.0   4.0     5.0                               0       1.0      2.0      3.0    4.0   5.0
                                      Updates (×105)                                                                                 Updates (×105)                                                                                  Updates (×105)                                                                                Updates (×105)                                                                                Updates (×105)


                                       (a)                                                                                           (b)                                                                                              (c)                                                                                           (d)                                                                                           (e)
          Figure 19: Results in the bit sequence generation task in different with different scales of the task.
                                      Table 1: Mean rank of each baseline in all downstream tasks (the lower the better).

                                                                                                                                                                            DQN                                          MCMC                                            GFN (from scratch)                                                                                    OC-GFN
                                                                          Number of modes                                                                                   4.00                                          2.77                                                 1.97                                                                                             1.27
                                                                           Top-K reward                                                                                     4.00                                          2.80                                                 2.00                                                                                             1.20


C.7                                 A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON THE RNA G ENERATION TASK
The full results in the RNA sequence generation task are demonstrated in Figure 20 for the four
downstream from (Lorenz et al., 2011), where OC-GFN significantly outperforms baseline methods
achieving better diversity in a more efficient manner.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30                                                                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                 30
                                                               30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              25                                                                                            25
                                                                                                                                                                 25
                                                               25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20                                                                                            20
                                             Number of modes


                                                                                                                                               Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Number of modes
                                                               20                                                                                                20

                                                                                                                                                                 15                                                                                           15                                                                                            15
                                                               15

                                                               10                                                                                                10                                                                                           10                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                    OC-GFN                                                                                           OC-GFN                                                                                        OC-GFN                                                                                        OC-GFN
                                                               5
                                                                                                                    GFN (from scratch)                           5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GFN (from scratch)                       5                                                    GFN (from scratch)                       5                                                    GFN (from scratch)
                                                                                                                    MCMC                                                                                             MCMC                                                                                          MCMC                                                                                          MCMC
                                                               0                                                    DQN                                          0                                                   DQN                                      0                                                    DQN                                      0                                                    DQN
                                                                      0     1000    2000                       3000       4000     5000                                 0   1000    2000                          3000     4000     5000                             0    1000    2000                          3000     4000     5000                             0    1000    2000                          3000     4000     5000
                                                                                         Updates                                                                                         Updates                                                                                       Updates                                                                                       Updates


                                                                                    (a)                                                                                             (b)                                                                                           (c)                                                                                           (d)
                                                                                                                          Figure 20: Full Results in the RNA generation task.

D                            L IMITATIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
We address the potential challenge of sparse rewards in training outcome-conditioned GFlowNet
in the unsupervised pre-training stage with a contrastive learning procedure based on the concept
of goal relabeling. This work lays the foundation for further exploration of pre-training and fine-
tuning strategies in GFlowNets, enabling the transfer of pre-trained models to downstream tasks with
different reward functions. However, it is also worth noting that Eq. (6) assumes that the state and
action spaces remain consistent across many relevant problems. Extending our results to problems
with different state and action spaces would be an exciting direction for future research. It is an
interesting future direction for considering smoother rewards or other techniques for addressing this
problem. In addition, it is also promising to consider continuous outcomes in future works (which
has the potential to tackle even larger-scale problems), while our work mainly focuses on discrete
outcomes.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60                                                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                                     60
                   60                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                                                                                     50                                                                          50                                                                            25
                   50                                                                                    50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40
Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                     40                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                       Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                   Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Number of modes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Number of modes
                   40                                                                                    40
                                                                                                                                                                                     30                                                                          30                                                                            15
                   30                                                                                    30

                                                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                          20                                                                            10
                   20       OC-GFN                                                                       20

                   10
                            GFN (from scratch)                                                                                                OC-GFN                                 10                                   OC-GFN                                 10                                    OC-GFN                                   5                                             OC-GFN
                                                                                                         10
                            MCMC                                                                                                              GFN (from scratch)                                                          GFN (from scratch)                                                           GFN (from scratch)                                                                     GFN (from scratch)
                    0       DQN                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                              MCMC
                                                                                                                                              DQN                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MCMC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DQN                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MCMC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DQN                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MCMC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DQN
                        0   50      100          150       200   250        300                               0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                            0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                             0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                             0    1000         2000          3000     4000         5000
                                                 Updates                                                                        Update                                                                      Update                                                                       Update                                                                               Update


                                                                                                         70
                   50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            60                                                                            12
                                                                                                         60                                                                          50

                   40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            50                                                                            10
                                                                                                         50                                                                          40
 Number of modes


                                                                                       Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                   Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Number of modes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40                                                                            8
                   30                                                                                    40
                                                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30                                                                            6
                                                                                                         30
                   20                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                         20                                                                                                                                                      20                                                                            4
                   10                                             OC-GFN                                                                      OC-GFN                                 10                                   OC-GFN                                                                       OC-GFN                                                                                 OC-GFN
                                                                                                         10                                                                                                                                                      10                                                                            2
                                                                  GFN (from scratch)                                                          GFN (from scratch)                                                          GFN (from scratch)                                                           GFN (from scratch)                                                                     GFN (from scratch)
                                                                  MCMC                                                                        MCMC                                                                        MCMC                                                                         MCMC                                                                                   MCMC
                    0                                             DQN                                     0                                   DQN                                    0                                    DQN                                     0                                    DQN                                     0                                              DQN
                        0    1000         2000          3000     4000         5000                            0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                            0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                             0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                             0    1000         2000          3000     4000         5000
                                                  Update                                                                        Update                                                                      Update                                                                       Update                                                                               Update


                                                                                                         14                                                                          40
                   50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40
                                                                                                                                                                                     35
                                                                                                         12                                                                                                                                                      50
                   40                                                                                                                                                                30
                                                                                                         10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Number of modes
                                                                                                                                                                                     25                                                                          40
 Number of modes


                                                                                       Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Number of modes
                                                                                                                                                                   Number of modes


                   30                                                                                    8
                                                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                          30                                                                            20
                                                                                                         6
                   20                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                         4                                                                           10                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OC-GFN
                   10                                             OC-GFN                                                                      OC-GFN                                                                      OC-GFN                                 10                                    OC-GFN                                           GFN (from scratch)
                                                                  GFN (from scratch)                     2                                    GFN (from scratch)                     5                                    GFN (from scratch)                                                           GFN (from scratch)                               MCMC
                    0
                                                                  MCMC
                                                                  DQN                                    0
                                                                                                                                              MCMC
                                                                                                                                              DQN                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MCMC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DQN                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MCMC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DQN                                      0       DQN
                        0    1000         2000          3000     4000         5000                            0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                            0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                             0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                             0   50      100          150       200   250        300
                                                  Update                                                                        Update                                                                      Update                                                                       Update                                                                              Updates



                                                                                                                                                                                     60                                                                          60
                   70                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               50
                   60                                                                                                                                                                50                                                                          50
                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40
                   50                                                                                                                                                                40                                                                          40
                                                                                                         40
 Number of modes


                                                                                       Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                   Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Number of modes
                   40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                         30                                                                          30                                                                          30
                   30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                         20                                                                          20                                                                          20
                   20
                                                                  OC-GFN                                 10                                   OC-GFN                                 10                                   OC-GFN                                 10                                    OC-GFN                                  10                                             OC-GFN
                   10                                             GFN (from scratch)                                                          GFN (from scratch)                                                          GFN (from scratch)                                                           GFN (from scratch)                                                                     GFN (from scratch)
                                                                  MCMC                                                                        MCMC                                                                        MCMC                                                                         MCMC                                                                                   MCMC
                    0                                             DQN                                     0                                   DQN                                    0                                    DQN                                     0                                    DQN                                      0                                             DQN
                        0    1000         2000          3000     4000         5000                            0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                            0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                             0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                             0    1000         2000          3000     4000         5000
                                                  Update                                                                        Update                                                                      Update                                                                       Update                                                                               Update


                                                                                                         50                                                                          70
                   50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30                                                                            60
                                                                                                                                                                                     60
                                                                                                         40
                   40                                                                                                                                                                50                                                                          25                                                                            50
 Number of modes


                                                                                       Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                   Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Number of modes


                                                                                                         30                                                                          40                                                                          20                                                                            40
                   30
                                                                                                                                                                                     30                                                                          15                                                                            30
                   20                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                          10                                                                            20
                   10                                                                                    10
                                                                  OC-GFN                                                                      OC-GFN                                 10                                   OC-GFN                                  5                                    OC-GFN                                  10                                             OC-GFN
                                                                  GFN (from scratch)                                                          GFN (from scratch)                                                          GFN (from scratch)                                                           GFN (from scratch)                                                                     GFN (from scratch)
                                                                  MCMC                                                                        MCMC                                                                        MCMC                                                                         MCMC                                                                                   MCMC
                    0                                             DQN                                     0                                   DQN                                    0                                    DQN                                     0                                    DQN                                      0                                             DQN
                        0    1000         2000          3000     4000         5000                            0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                            0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                             0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                             0    1000         2000          3000     4000         5000
                                                  Update                                                                        Update                                                                      Update                                                                       Update                                                                               Update


                   16                                                                                    60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    50
                                                                                                                                                                                     35                                                                          120
                   14
                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                                     30                                                                          100                                                                           40
                   12
                                                                                                         40                                                                          25
                   10
 Number of modes


                                                                                       Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                   Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Number of modes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 80                                                                            30
                   8                                                                                     30                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                   6                                                                                                                                                                 15                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                         20                                                                                                                                                      40
                   4                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                  OC-GFN                                                                      OC-GFN                                                                      OC-GFN                                                                       OC-GFN                                  10                                             OC-GFN
                                                                                                         10                                                                                                                                                      20
                   2                                              GFN (from scratch)                                                          GFN (from scratch)                     5                                    GFN (from scratch)                                                           GFN (from scratch)                                                                     GFN (from scratch)
                                                                  MCMC                                                                        MCMC                                                                        MCMC                                                                         MCMC                                                                                   MCMC
                   0                                              DQN                                     0                                   DQN                                    0                                    DQN                                     0                                    DQN                                      0                                             DQN
                        0    1000         2000          3000     4000         5000                            0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                            0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                             0   1000   2000         3000   4000         5000                             0    1000         2000          3000     4000         5000
                                                  Update                                                                        Update                                                                      Update                                                                       Update                                                                               Update


                                                                                                              Figure 21: Full Results in the TF Bind generation task.


                                                                                                                                                                                                      21
