Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A NYTIME N EURAL A RCHITECTURE S EARCH ON TABU -
LAR DATA

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         The increasing demand for tabular data analysis calls for transitioning from manual
         architecture design to Neural Architecture Search (NAS). This transition demands
         an efficient and responsive anytime NAS approach that is capable of returning
         current optimal architectures within any given time budget while progressively
         enhancing architecture quality with increased budget allocation. However, the area
         of research on Anytime NAS for tabular data remains unexplored. To this end, we
         introduce ATLAS, the first anytime NAS approach tailored for tabular data. ATLAS
         introduces a novel two-phase filtering-and-refinement optimization scheme with
         joint optimization, combining the strengths of both paradigms of training-free and
         training-based architecture evaluation. Specifically, in the filtering phase, ATLAS
         employs a new training-free architecture evaluation metric specifically designed
         for tabular data to efficiently estimate the performance of candidate architectures,
         thereby obtaining a set of promising architectures. Subsequently, in the refinement
         phase, ATLAS leverages a fixed-budget search algorithm to schedule the training
         of the promising candidates, so as to accurately identify the optimal architecture.
         To jointly optimize the two phases for anytime NAS, we also devise a budget-aware
         coordinator that delivers high NAS performance within constraints. Experimental
         evaluations demonstrate that our ATLAS can obtain a good performing architecture
         within any predefined time budget and return better architectures as and when a
         new time budget is made available. Overall, it reduces the search time on tabular
         data by up to 82.75x compared to existing NAS approaches.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Tabular data analysis is increasingly pivotal in both industry and academia, supporting daily decision-
making processes in real-world applications such as click-through rate prediction, online recommen-
dation, and readmission prediction Gorishniy et al. (2022); Arik & Pfister (2021). In particular, Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs) have surpassed the performance of traditional tree-based approaches in
various applications Borisov et al. (2022); Cai et al. (2021), highlighting the increased need to design
better-performing DNNs for tabular data.
Much of the research to date has been focusing on manually designing architectures following certain
prior assumptions of tabular data Qin et al. (2021); Gorishniy et al. (2021); Xie et al. (2021); Popov
et al. (2019); Levin et al. (2023); Chen et al. (2023a). Nonetheless, designing DNNs in such a
trial-and-error manner is both labor/computation-intensive and time-consuming. In recent years,
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has been widely adopted to automate the architecture design for
other data types such as images, texts, and videos White et al. (2023); Shala et al. (2023); Lee et al.
(2023); Kadra et al. (2021); Wang et al. (2020b); Liu et al. (2019a), which employs various algorithms
to search for more efficient and effective DNN architectures. As illustrated in Figure 1, a typical
NAS approach Wistuba et al. (2019); Ren et al. (2021) comprises three integral components: a search
space, a search strategy, and an architecture evaluation component. The search space defines the
construction options for candidate architectures and the search strategy determines the architecture
exploration method within the search space. Finally, the architecture evaluation component evaluates
the performance of the architecture.
As with the growing demand for more effective and efficient NAS Yang et al. (2023); Zhang et al.
(2020); Zhao et al. (2022), an increasing number of applications also require a response-time-aware


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and cost-efficient NAS Demirovic et al. (2023); Li et al. (2023); Bohdal et al. (2023). Notably, small
businesses and individual users tend to utilize cloud resources to support NAS goo (2023). To manage
costs, these NAS users often need to allocate a predefined time budget for using cloud resources. In
light of this, we advocate the concept of Anytime Neural Architecture Search (Anytime NAS), which
refers to NAS approaches that can produce a suboptimal architecture within any given time budget
and find a higher-quality architecture as more time budget become available.
The development of an Anytime NAS approach
for tabular data presents several key challenges.
                                                          Search Space A                Search fs    Sampled
First, the lack of NAS benchmark datasets for                 DNN for                  Strategy     Architecture
tabular data impedes the evaluation of NAS ap-              tabular data

proaches, which requires repeated and expensive                            Performance


                                                                                                          output
                                                                               Metric p


                                                                                                input
architecture evaluations Ying et al. (2019); Dong


                                                                                       output
                                                                            to fit Search


                                                               input
& Yang (2020). Second, while training-based                                   Strategy

NAS approaches can accurately evaluate archi-
                                                                           Architecture Evaluation
                                                                       hidden layers
tecture performance, they need to laboriously                                         training-free
                                                                                            or
train numerous candidate architectures, each us-                                     training-based
ing hundreds to thousands of iterations Zoph &             𝒜


Le (2017). This computation-intensive process
makes the existing NAS approaches slow and                      Figure 1: The Overview of NAS.
not anytime-capable. Recently, several NAS ap-
proaches on vision tasks Krishnakumar et al. (2022); Chen et al. (2021); Shu et al. (2022a); Lee
et al. (2019); Tanaka et al. (2020) propose to reduce architecture evaluation costs via Training fRee
ArchItecture evaLuation mEtRics (TRAILERs), which quickly estimate the architecture performance
by calculating certain architecture statistics without expensive full training. However, to the best of
our knowledge, there is no research to date that investigates the effectiveness of such training-free
evaluation on tabular data, and no TRAILER has been specifically designed for tabular data. Further,
existing NAS approaches only introduce TRAILERs to enhance the conventional training-based
iterative search process, e.g., for pretraining the search strategy or proposing candidate architectures
for training-based evaluation Abdelfattah et al. (2021); Shu et al. (2022a); Lee et al. (2019). How to
combine the strengths of both training-based and training-free paradigms in a more principled way
and ensure improved architectures for an increased time budget remains unresolved.
To address the above challenges, we propose ATLAS, an AnyTime neuraL Architecture Search
that is tailored for tabular data. We first construct a comprehensive NAS tabular data benchmark,
which comprises more than 160,000 unique architectures over three real-world datasets. Using this
benchmark, we conduct an extensive analysis of nine state-of-the-art TRAILERs, evaluating their
performance in the context of tabular data. Second, we propose a new metric ExpressFlow based
on our in-depth theoretical analysis, which effectively evaluates architecture performance while
maintaining efficiency for tabular data applications. Third, to support anytime NAS, we propose to
restructure the conventional NAS process into two decoupled phases, i.e., the filtering phase and
the refinement phase, with joint optimization via a budget-aware coordinator. The filtering phase
efficiently explores a large set of candidate architectures using our proposed ExpressFlow to obtain
a set of promising architectures. Subsequently, the refinement phase employs the more expensive
training-based architecture evaluation to accurately identify the best-performing architecture from
the promising architectures. Following this two-phase optimization scheme, we propose our novel
anytime NAS approach ATLAS that can identify a high-performing architecture within any given
time budget and continue to refine the search results as more resources become available.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:


       • We construct a comprehensive search space tailored for tabular data, termed NAS-Bench-
         Tabular, which comprises an extensive collection of 160,000 architectures with detailed
         training and evaluation statistics for benchmarking various NAS approaches on tabular data.

       • We perform theoretical analysis and benchmark state-of-the-art TRAILERs initially pro-
         posed for vision tasks on real-world tabular datasets, and introduce the first TRAILER
         tailored for tabular data, ExpressFlow, which characterizes both the expressivity and train-
         ability of architectures for more effective architecture evaluation than existing metrics.


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • We propose ATLAS, the first NAS approach supporting anytime NAS on tabular data,
         which introduces a novel two-phase optimization scheme that combines the benefits of both
         training-free and training-based architecture evaluation.
       • We demonstrate that our ATLAS empirically outperforms existing NAS approaches by a
         wide margin, reducing the architecture search time by up to 82.75x, and achieves anytime
         NAS on tabular data.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the notations and terminology
used, Section 3 describes the methodology, and Section 4 provides experimental results. Related
work is summarized in Appendix A, and Section 5 concludes this paper.


2    N OTATION AND T ERMINOLOGY

Search Space, denoted as A, refers to a collection of possible architectures A = {a}, each of which
has a unique topology. Existing studies show that deep neural networks (DNNs) can already achieve
state-of-the-art performance on tabular data, and the main technical challenge is to configure DNNs
with the right number of hidden neurons for each layer, namely the layer sizes Cai et al. (2021);
Yang et al. (2022); Levin et al. (2023); Gorishniy et al. (2021). Therefore, we employ DNNs as the
backbone to construct the search space for tabular data. Specifically, for a DNN with L layers and a
candidate set of layer sizes H, the search objective is to determine layer sizes for the L hidden layers
from H, and the number of candidate architectures is |H|L . For example, a search space A defined
by L=6 and H={8, 16, 32, 64, 128} contains 56 =15,625 candidate architectures.
Search Strategy is responsible for proposing a candidate architecture ai+1 for evaluation from the
search space, denoted as ai+1 = fs (A, Si ), where Si represents the state of the search strategy
at the i-th iteration. The objective of the search strategy is to efficiently explore the search space
by evaluating promising architectures Bohdal et al. (2023); Cai et al. (2020); Yang et al. (2022).
Popular search strategies include random sampling Bergstra & Bengio (2012), reinforcement learn-
ing Zoph & Le (2017), evolutionary algorithm Real et al. (2019a), and Bayesian Optimization with
HyperBand Falkner et al. (2018), and etc.
Architecture Evaluation refers to the assessment of architecture performance, and can be either
training-based Zoph & Le (2017) or training-free Mellor et al. (2021); Li et al. (2023); Shu et al.
(2022a); Tanaka et al. (2020). The performance obtained by the training-based architecture evaluation
approaches is accurate, which however requires costly training. In contrast, training-free evaluation
efficiently estimates architecture performance by computing certain architecture statistics using only
a small batch of data for efficiency. Given an architecture a parameterized by θ and a batch of B data
samples XB , a TRAILER computes a score sa to quantify the performance p, formally described
as sa = ρ(a, θ, XB ), where ρ(·) is the assessment function of the TRAILER. A summary of all
notations and terminologies in the paper can be found in Appendix H.


3    M ETHODOLOGY

Unlike conventional NAS approaches, our ATLAS is structured into two distinct phases: the filtering
phase and the refinement phase, based on training-free and training-based architecture evaluation
respectively, and optimized jointly via a budget-aware coordinator to support anytime NAS. In the
filtering phase, ATLAS efficiently explores the search space, directed by a search strategy using our
new TRAILER. Next, in the refinement phase, ATLAS evaluates the most promising architectures
accurately via training-based evaluation. A coordinator is also introduced to guide the two phases,
ensuring that ATLAS can deliver a high-performing architecture given a specified time budget Tmax .
To ensure fair and consistent benchmarking for different NAS approaches, we first build NAS-Bench-
Tabular on real-world tabular datasets in Section 3.1. Next, we characterize TRAILERs on two key
properties, trainability and expressivity, and propose a more effective training-free metric for tabular
data to accelerate the filtering phase in Section 3.2. Then, we employ a scheduling algorithm for the
training-based architecture evaluation to optimize the refinement phase in Section 3.3. Finally, we
introduce the budget-aware coordinator for the two phases to support anytime NAS in Section 3.4.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   S EARCH S PACE D ESIGN AND NAS-B ENCH -TABULAR

Following prior studies Yang et al. (2022); Gorishniy et al. (2021); Chen et al. (2023b); Cai et al.
(2021), the search space is set to a DNN backbone with L layers and a set of candidate layer sizes H.
Each DNN layer comprises a linear transformation and a batch normalization layer, followed by a
ReLU activation function. To construct a comprehensive search space for benchmarking, we establish
L=4 and |H|=20 with candidate layer sizes ranging from 8 to 512, resulting in a total of 204 =160,000
unique architectures. The architecture search is then to determine the sizes of each of the L layers,
which can be encoded with L integers, denoting the number of neurons in corresponding layers.
The training procedure and hyperparameters are critical for NAS benchmarks, which can significantly
affect the architecture evaluation results Ying et al. (2019); Dong & Yang (2020). Therefore, we
examine key training hyperparameters for each benchmark dataset, including training iterations,
training epochs, and the batch size, and then select the best hyperparameters for each dataset and
conduct the full training of all candidate architectures on respective datasets.
We adopt three widely benchmarked tabular datasets Frappe, Diabetes, and Criteo Luo et al. (2023);
Yang et al. (2022), and record five performance indicators for each architecture evaluated on respective
datasets, i.e., training area under the curve (AUC), validation AUC, training time, training loss,
and validation loss. With these performance indicators, NAS approaches can directly query the
performance of each architecture without performing expensive training. More details, analysis, and
discussions of NAS-Bench-Tabular are provided in Section 4.1 and Appendix C.


3.2   A RCHITECTURE FILTERING VIA T RAINING - FREE A RCHITECTURE E VALUATION

TRAILERs are designed to efficiently estimate the architecture performance using only a batch of
data. Theoretically, TRAILERs characterize two key properties of the architecture that are related to
its performance: trainability Wang & Fu (2023); Shin & Karniadakis (2020); Chen et al. (2021) and
expressivity Hornik et al. (1989); Wang et al. (2023b); Raghu et al. (2017).
Trainability quantifies the degree to which the architecture can be effectively optimized through
gradient descent, and the trainability of an architecture at initialization is crucial for the final per-
formance. Particularly, parameters in DNNs store task-specific information, and their importance
in learning the task significantly influences the architecture’s performance. Therefore, an effective
characterization of an architecture’s trainability necessitates aggregating the importance of individual
parameters. Notably, synaptic saliency Tanaka etJ     al. (2020); Lee et al. (2019) quantifies the impor-
                                                 ∂L
tance
J     of respective parameters  by  Φ(θ)   = f ( ∂θ )    g(θ), where L represents the loss function and
    denotes the Hadamard product. Typically,
                                          P      the trainability of an architecture can be quantified by
aggregating the parameter importance: θi Φ(θi ) Tanaka et al. (2020); Mellor et al. (2021).
Expressivity refers to the complexity of the function that the architecture can represent, which is
strongly correlated with architecture’s performance. Expressivity relies heavily on the architecture
topology in terms of depth (how many layers) and width (number of neurons in a layer). Typically,
wider and deeper architectures represent more complex functions Zhang et al. (2021); Hanin &
Rolnick (2019). Further, parameters of the lower layers of architecture have more influence on the
expressivity. This observation can be effectively quantified by trajectory length ℓ(·) Raghu et al.
(2017), which increases exponentially with the depth of the architecture. Specifically, for the l-th layer,
                    l
ℓ(z l (t)) = t || dzdt(t) ||, where z l (t) is the trajectory of the l-th layer and t is a scalar to parameterize
            R

it. For simplicity, we denote z l (t) as z l . We provide more discussions of trainability and expressivity
in Appendix A.3. Analysis and comparisons of existing TRAILERs are in Appendix G.1.
ExpressFlow for enabling efficient architecture filtering for tabular data. To characterize the
architecture performance on both trainability and expressivity, we propose ExpressFlow which
is tailored for DNNs on tabular data. ExpressFlow is based on neuron saliency, a more effective
characterization of architecture performance. For the n-th neuron in the DNN, we quantify its saliency
in the architecture, denoted as νn . Specifically, this is computed as the product of the absolute value
of the derivativeJ  of L with respect to the activated output of the neuron zn , and the value of zn itself,
             ∂L
i.e., νn = | ∂z n
                  |    zn , where zn = σ(wx + b), and w represents the incoming weights of the neuron,
x is the neuron inputs,J    b is the bias, and σ is the activation function. Notably, for the ReLU activation
                    ∂L
function, νn = | ∂z   n
                        |     zn if zn > 0, otherwise νn = 0.


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Importantly, not all neurons contribute equally. Their respective depths and widths within the
architecture play critical roles in determining the architecture’s performance. As supported by Raghu
et al. (2017), we note that parameters at lower layers generally have a more significant impact on the
performance of the architecture. To account for this, we recalibrate νn for each neuron at the layer l
inversely proportional to the trajectory length of that layer, namely 1/ℓ(z l ). As ℓ(z l ) grows with layer
depth, this recalibration highlights the significance of neurons in the lower layers. Also, following Lu
et al. (2017); Zhang et al. (2021), to compensate for the varying impacts of layer width on neuron
saliency, we further recalibrate νn for each neuron at layer l in relation to the layer width, i.e. Kl .
                                                                                         Kl
Altogether, the recalibration weight for neuron saliency νn of neuron at layer l is ℓ(z     l ) . Then, we can

perform a weighted aggregation of neuron saliency to derive a score that depicts the performance of
the architecture a on a batch of data XB , as outlined below:

                                       B X N               B XL        Nl
                                      X        Kl         X      Kl X       ∂L K
          sa = ρExpressF low (a) =               l
                                                    νin =          l
                                                                     (    |    | zin )                    (1)
                                      i=1 n=1
                                              ℓ(z )       i=1
                                                                ℓ(z ) n=1 ∂zin
                                                                  l=1


where νin and zin is the neuron saliency and activated output of n-th neuron computed on i-th sample,
respectively. N denotes the total number of neurons in the entire architecture, while Nl represents
the number of neurons in the l-th layer.
ExpressFlow is specifically designed to accommodate both trainability and expressivity. First, neuron
saliency considers the activation value of neurons, i.e., the effects of neurons, which are the basic
units to extract features in a DNN Levin et al. (2023); Cai et al. (2021). By computing the activated
neuron output zn , neuron saliency captures the complex and non-intuitive relationships among input
features in tabular data. Second, neuron saliency calculates the derivatives of neurons. A larger
                                                               ∂L
gradient of the loss with respect to the activation zn , i.e., ∂zn
                                                                   , indicates higher importance of the
features extracted by this neuron, and therefore, demonstrates the greater significance of the neuron to
                                                                          Kl
the prediction task. Last, neuron saliency’s recalibration weight, i.e., ℓ(z l ) , is determined by the depth

and width of its layer. Neurons in lower and wider layers receive higher saliency values, highlighting
their larger influence on architecture performance. More in-depth theoretical analysis of ExpressFlow
regarding its trainability and expressivity is provided in Appendix G.3.
Architecture Filtering via ExpressFlow. ExpressFlow of a given architecture can be computed
within seconds and thus is highly efficient. Nevertheless, calculating ExpressFlow for all candidate
architectures to select the highest-scored architecture is computationally intensive, especially for
large search spaces. Therefore, a search strategy is required to further improve search efficiency,
which guides the search for architectures of higher ExpressFlow scores. To this end, we leverage
Regularized Evolution (RE) Real et al. (2019b), which maintains a diverse architecture population and
executes iterative architecture sampling, architecture evaluation (using training-free ExpressFlow),
and mutation (based on the current highest-scored architecture). RE offers several advantages.
First, its gradient-free computation delivers high efficiency, which ensures rapid exploration and is
well suited for anytime NAS on tabular data. Second, its aging mechanism facilitates diversified
exploration of architectures, preventing the search from trapping in local optima. Last, its fine-
grained mutation makes sure that promising candidate architectures within a local search space are
all explored and recorded. Therefore, with RE as the search strategy to guide the filtering phase,
ATLAS can efficiently and effectively explore and derive a set of promising architectures for further
training-based evaluation. More details and the pseudocode of the filtering phase are provided in
Appendix G.2.

3.3   A RCHITECTURE R EFINEMENT VIA T RAINING - BASED A RCHITECTURE E VALUATION

Only using ExpressFlow can not accurately indicate the actual performance of a given architecture
due to the approximated evaluation. To guarantee high-performing NAS, we further introduce an
architecture refinement phase. Specifically, instead of searching the architecture solely based on the
ExpressFlow scores, we rank the architectures by their scores in the filtering phase to filter out less
promising architectures and only keep the top K architectures with the highest scores. Then, we
adopt training-based architecture evaluation in the refinement phase to more accurately identify the
optimal architecture from the K most promising candidate architectures.


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since fully training each of the K architectures is costly, to expedite the refinement phase, we
design a budget-aware algorithm to schedule the training process. In particular, the scheduling
algorithm is based on successive halving (SUCCHALF) Jamieson & Talwalkar (2016). It begins
by allocating an equal, minimal budget for training each architecture. After each round, a fraction
(typically half) of the top-performing architectures are kept for further training, and the budgets for
the next round of training are doubled. This procedure is repeated until only one single architecture
remains. SUCCHALF offers two main benefits. First, it quickly identifies and discards unpromising
architectures using only a few training epochs, directing budgets to more promising architectures.
Second, it supports parallel training, enhancing efficiency as architectures to be evaluated in each
round can be trained in parallel. More details and the pseudocode of the refinement phase are provided
in Appendix G.2.

3.4     A NYTIME N EURAL A RCHITECTURE S EARCH

In ATLAS, the filtering phase offers more efficient, yet less effective, explorations of a vast set of
architectures, denoted as M , and the refinement phase enables more effective, yet less efficient,
exploitation of a small set of promising architectures, specifically denoted as K. To balance these
two phases and achieve anytime NAS for tabular data, we propose a novel budget-aware coordinator
to jointly optimize the two phases. A strategic objective function is introduced to optimize the
performance of the searched architecture. Particularly, we mathematically define constraints to ensure
strict adherence to the given time budget Tmax . These constraints collectively determine the time
allocation for both phases and the values of M , K, and U .
The two-phase optimization scheme is formalized in Equation 2. For clarity, we denote t1 as the
time required to score an architecture using ExpressFlow with a single batch of data, and t2 as
the time to train an architecture for a single epoch. T1 and T2 represent the time allocated to the
filtering and refinement phases respectively. To sequentially explore M architectures, the filtering
phase takes T1 = t1 · M . As for the refinement phase, the strategy SUCCHALF used only retains
the top 1/η architectures after each training round. Specifically, with K candidate architectures
retained, SUCCHALF allocates K · U · t2 time to evaluate these architectures during the initial
training round, where each architecture is trained for U epochs. This process iterates for ⌊logη K⌋
training rounds until one single architecture remains, with each round allocated an equal amount of
time, i.e., K · U · t2 . Hence, the total time for the refinement phase is T2 = K · U · t2 · ⌊logη K⌋.
              max                 p = ATLAS(filter(M, t1 ), refinemnet(K, U, t2 , η))
              s.t.                T1 + T2 ≤ Tmax                                                    (2)
              where               T1 = t1 · M ; K ≤ M
                                  T2 = K · U · t2 · ⌊logη K⌋
To strike a balance between the filtering and refinement phases, we assess the sensitivity of M/K and
U in relation to the performance of the final searched architecture. Empirical findings demonstrate
that setting M/K ≈ 30 and U = 2 yields consistently better search performance, which is detailed
in Appendix E. Based on these relationships, the coordinator can thus determine the value of M and
K for the filtering phase and refinement phase respectively for any predefined Tmax .

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1     NAS-B ENCH -TABULAR

4.1.1    S EARCH S PACE S TATISTICS
Figure 2 shows the empirical cumulative distribution function (ECDF) of training and validation AUC
recorded across all architectures. Architectures have median validation AUC values of 0.9772, 0.8014,
and 0.6269 on the Frappe, Criteo, and Diabetes datasets, while the globally optimal architecture
yields AUC values of 0.9814, 0.8033, and 0.6750 respectively. These findings are consistent with the
performance benchmarks reported in the state-of-the-art study Cai et al. (2021); Wang et al. (2023a),
confirming the validation of our training configurations.
Further, we examine the correlation between the parameter count of architecture and their validation
AUC across all three datasets. The results are shown in Figure 3. Notably, the architecture’s parameter


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         Training AUC          Validation AUC
       1.0                                         1.0                                                 1.0
ECDF


                                            ECDF


                                                                                                ECDF
       0.5                                         0.5                                                 0.5

       0.0                                         0.0                                                 0.0
                 0.90         0.95   1.00                  0.5   0.6       0.7 0.8    0.9                    0.795 0.800 0.805 0.810 0.815
                        Accuracy                                        Accuracy                                        Accuracy
   (a) Benchmarking with Frappe.             (b) Benchmarking with Diabetes.                       (c) Benchmarking with Criteo.

        Figure 2: The empirical cumulative distribution (ECDF) of the training and validation AUC.


   (a) Benchmarking with Frappe.             (b) Benchmarking with Diabetes.                       (c) Benchmarking with Criteo.

                          Figure 3: Validation AUC vs. the number of trainable parameters.


count does not strongly correlate with their validation AUC, highlighting the importance of topology
searching (sizes of each hidden layer in DNN) in finding high-performing architectures, and the
necessity of NAS for tabular data.

4.1.2         B ENCHMARKING T RAINING -BASED NAS A PPROACHES
In this section, we evaluate four representative searching strategies on NAS-Bench-Tabular, serving
as benchmarks for evaluating future NAS algorithms on our datasets. The four searching strategies
include Random Search (RS), Regularized Evolution (RE), Reinforcement Learning (RL), and
Bayesian Optimization with HyperBand (BOHB). For RE, we set the population size to 10 and the
sample size to 3. In the RL setup, we employ a categorical distribution for each hidden layer size and
optimize probabilities using policy gradient methods. All these searching strategies explore the same
search space and cooperate with the training-based evaluation that queries the validation AUC from
NAS-Bench-Tabular directly. With NAS-Bench-Tabular, NAS algorithms can significantly reduce
search times to seconds, e.g., each of the four searching strategies can explore over 1k architectures in
around 15 seconds, highlighting the benefits of using our NAS-Bench-Tabular. As shown in Figure 4,
RE targets the high-performing architecture upon exploring around 103 architectures and it is more
efficient as analyzed in Section 3.2. We therefore adopt RE as the search strategy in ATLAS.

4.2          T RAINING - FREE A RCHITECTURE E VALUATION M ETRICS

In this section, we empirically measure the effectiveness and efficiency of nine existing TRAILERs,
initially proposed for vision tasks, when applied to DNNs for tabular data. To evaluate the effective-
ness, we quantitatively measure the Spearman Rank Correlation Coefficient (SRCC) between the
scores computed by TRAILERs and the actual performance (e.g., AUC) of candidate architectures
across three datasets. The effectiveness of a TRAILER is then defined by its capacity to consistently
uphold a high correlation across various datasets.
Table 1 shows that NASWOT, SNIP, SynFlow, and ExpressFlow consistently achieve SRCC of above
0.6 across various datasets, demonstrating their effectiveness in approximating architecture perfor-
mance. In contrast, other TRAILERs present lower SRCC, suggesting a weaker correlation between
their score and the actual architecture performance. ExpressFlow outperforms all other TRAILERs,
with an average rank of 1.0. This minimal SRCC variation for ExpressFlow across datasets further
confirms its reliable architecture performance characterization and strong transferability. The superior
performance of ExpressFlow can be attributed to its capability to characterize both trainability and
expressivity, as theoretically analyzed in Section 3.2 and Appendix G.3. Appendix D provides further


                                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 Global Best AUC                          BOHB            RL          RS                        RE
                98.1                                                        67.5                                                      80.34


                                                          AUC on DIABETES
AUC on FRAPPE                                                                                                                         80.32
                                                                            66.0


                                                                                                                      AUC on CRITEO
                98.0
                97.9                                                        64.5                                                      80.30
                97.8                                                        63.0                                                      80.28
                97.7                                                        61.5                                                      80.26
                97.6      101          102         103                      60.0         101        102         103                   80.24       101         102          103
                       Number of explored architectures                            Number of explored architectures                           Number of explored architectures
                       (a) Frappe Dataset.                                         (b) Diabetes Dataset.                                      (c) Criteo Dataset.

Figure 4: Benchmarking of the four search strategies using NAS-Bench-Tabular. The x-axis denotes
the number of explored architectures, and the y-axis denotes the median value of the best AUC
achieved across 100 runs.

                                 Table 1: SRCC of TRAILERs measured on three benchmark datasets.

                              Grad NAS NTK NTK NTK
                                                         Fisher GraSP SNIP SynFlow ExpressFlow
                              Norm WOT Cond Trace TrAppx
     Frappe  0.45                        0.61 -0.77 0.54                              0.13        0.48      -0.27     0.68                     0.77              0.82
    Diabetes 0.39                        0.63 -0.56 0.37                              0.31        0.21      -0.23     0.62                     0.68              0.73
     Criteo  0.32                        0.69 -0.66 0.46                              0.01        0.41      -0.18     0.78                     0.74              0.90
    Avg Rank 7.3                          4.0  4.0   6.3                               9.3         8.0       9.0       3.3                      2.6               1.0


ablation study on initialization methods, batch size, recalibration weight, etc., and visualization
between AUC and the score of TRAILERs. More experiments about TRAILERs computational
efficiency, search cost, and transferability to other data types are provided in Appendix G.1.
To further investigate the effectiveness of ExpressFlow, we use the RE search strategy with Ex-
pressFlow as a performance estimator to identify higher-scored architectures, and then record their
AUC from NAS-Bench-Tabular. As shown in Figure 5, the search strategy continually explores
architectures with higher ExpressFlow scores as more time budget is provided. However, higher-
scored architectures do not necessarily promise higher AUC based on the observation that more
budgets result in higher-scored but lower-AUC architecture. Thus, solely relying on the filtering
phase cannot achieve anytime NAS on tabular data where a larger time budget should ideally lead
to better-performing architectures. We, therefore, design a refinement phase and a budget-aware
coordinator to jointly optimize two phases towards anytime NAS as analyzed in Sections 3.3 and 3.4.

4.3                    A NYTIME NAS ON TABULAR DATA

Last, we benchmark our approach ATLAS incorporating the filtering phase, the refinement phase,
and the budget-aware coordinator, against the training-based NAS utilizing RE as the search strategy
(referred to as RE-NAS) and TabNAS Yang et al. (2022).
To evaluate the anytime performance of different approaches, we adjust the Tmax to span from
seconds to hours, to investigate three primary questions: (1) How much time is required by each
approach to search for an architecture near the global best AUC? (2) Can the NAS approach be
completed within any Tmax ? (3) Does the performance of the searched architecture maintain stability
or exhibit improvement with an increased time budget?
The results are shown in Figure 6. First, regarding time usage in searching for the global best AUC,
ATLAS outperforms RE-NAS by speedup of 82.75x, 1.75x, and 69.44x across the Frappe, Diabetes,
and Criteo datasets, achieving AUCs of 0.9814, 0.6750, and 0.8033, respectively. Both RE-NAS and
TabNAS employ training-based architecture evaluation, slowing the exploration and identification of
the optimal-performing architecture. While ATLAS employs both efficient training-free and effective
training-based evaluations with a joint optimization, it can rapidly explore a vast of architectures,
filter out less-promising ones, and allocate more budgets to exploit high-potential architectures.
Consequently, ATLAS requires less time to search for the global best AUC.


                                                                                              8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                 AUC of searched architecture                               ExpressFlow score
                                                                                                                                           1e11                                                                            1e12 2.5
                                                         1e12
                 98.00                                          3.0                                    60.5


                                                                                                                                                  ExpressFlow score


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ExpressFlow score
                                                                                     AUC on DIABETES
                                                                                                                                                                                      80.26                                      2.0


                                                                 ExpressFlow score
                                                                                                                                                  3


                                                                                                                                                                      AUC on CRITEO
                                                                2.5
 AUC on FRAPPE
                 97.92                                                                                 60.0
                                                                2.0                                                                                                                   80.20                                      1.5
                 97.84                                                                                 59.5                                       2                                   80.14
                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0
                 97.76                                          1.0                                    59.0                                       1                                   80.08
                                                                0.5                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                 97.68                                                                                 58.5                                                                           80.02
                                                                0.0                                                                               0                                                                              0.0
                                 101         102         103                                                         101        102        103                                                       101        102        103
                          Number of explored architectures                                                    Number of explored architectures                                                Number of explored architectures
                           (a) Frappe Dataset.                                                                 (b) Diabetes Dataset.                                                              (c) Criteo Dataset.

      Figure 5: The relationship between the ExpressFlow score and the AUC of searched architecture.
                               Global Best AUC    TabNAS       RE-NAS      ATLAS
                 98.16                                                                                    67.5                                                                            80.32
                 98.08                                                                  AUC on DIABETES
AUC on FRAPPE


                                                                                                                                                                          AUC on CRITEO
                                                                                                          66.0                                                                            80.28
                 98.00                                                                                                                                                                    80.24
                                                                                                          64.5
                 97.92                                                                                                                                                                    80.20
                 97.84                                                                                    63.0                                                                            80.16
                         10 2          100         102          104                                           10 2 10 1 100 101 102                                                           10 2        100        102
                                 Time Budget Tmax (min)                                                            Time Budget Tmax (min)                                                             Time Budget Tmax (min)
                           (a) Frappe Dataset.                                                                   (b) Diabetes Dataset.                                                            (c) Criteo Dataset.

        Figure 6: Anytime performance of ATLAS compared with RE-NAS and TabNAS.
Second, in terms of completing within any Tmax , RE-NAS and TabNAS generally require 5 to 10
minutes to evaluate a single architecture, which violates the anytime NAS requirement when the
Tmax is small, e.g., less than 5 minutes. ATLAS shows strong anytime performance by consistently
completing NAS even when the Tmax is only a few seconds. This is attributed to the budget-aware
coordinator (Section 3.4), which decides the allocation of Tmax between the filtering and refinement
phases, with the mathematical constraints ensuring the total time usage is under Tmax .
Last, with regard to performance consistency for a larger time budget, all three NAS approaches
consistently identify equal or superior-performing architectures with incrementally larger Tmax .
ATLAS demonstrates consistently superior performances, which discover higher-performing archi-
tectures across all Tmax compared to RE-NAS and TabNAS. This is attributed to the design of our
strategic objective function as introduced in Section 3.4, which balances efficient exploration in
the filtering phase and effective exploitation in the refinement phase. Specifically, in the filtering
phase, ExpressFlow efficiently facilitates the evaluation of a larger number of architectures within
the same Tmax , thereby enabling a more extensive exploration of architectures towards the global
best AUC. Further, the refinement phase provides a comparatively precise performance assessment of
each architecture, thereby mitigating the inherent uncertainty in the filtering phase.
We further compare ATLAS with more baselines including various combinations of training-free and
training-based methods and one-shot NAS in Appendix F.

5                    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduce an anytime NAS approach ATLAS tailored for tabular data. ATLAS equips
machine learning practitioners with the capability of ascertaining high-performance architectures
within any given time budget and further refining these architectures as larger time budgets are
given. We first design a comprehensive search space, denoted as NAS-Bench-Tabular, to serve as a
benchmarking platform for diverse NAS algorithms. Then, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation of
several TRAILERs and propose a novel metric, ExpressFlow, which characterizes both the trainability
and expressivity of an architecture. Based on these foundations, we present ATLAS, which leverages
the advantages of efficient training-free and effective training-based architecture evaluation through a
novel filtering-and-refinement optimization scheme with joint optimization. Empirical results show
that ATLAS significantly accelerates the search for the globally optimal architecture and achieves
anytime NAS on tabular datasets.



                                                                                                                            9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Automl: Train high-quality custom machine learning models with minimal effort and machine
  learning expertise. 2023. URL https://cloud.google.com/automl.

Mohamed S. Abdelfattah, Abhinav Mehrotra, Lukasz Dudziak, and Nicholas Donald Lane. Zero-cost
 proxies for lightweight NAS. In International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR,
 2021.

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, and Zhao Song. A convergence theory for deep learning via over-
  parameterization. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, pp.
  242–252, 2019.

Sercan Ö Arik and Tomas Pfister. Tabnet: Attentive interpretable tabular learning. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI, volume 35, pp. 6679–6687, 2021.

Sanjeev Arora, Simon S Du, Wei Hu, Zhiyuan Li, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Ruosong Wang. On
  exact computation with an infinitely wide neural net. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, NeurIPS, 2019.

Bowen Baker, Otkrist Gupta, Nikhil Naik, and Ramesh Raskar. Designing neural network archi-
  tectures using reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR, 2017.

James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. Journal of
  machine learning research, 13(2), 2012.

Ondrej Bohdal, Lukas Balles, Martin Wistuba, Beyza Ermis, Cédric Archambeau, and Giovanni
  Zappella. PASHA: efficient HPO and NAS with progressive resource allocation. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2023.

Vadim Borisov, Tobias Leemann, Kathrin Seßler, Johannes Haug, Martin Pawelczyk, and Gjergji
  Kasneci. Deep neural networks and tabular data: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
  and Learning Systems, 2022.

Han Cai, Chuang Gan, Tianzhe Wang, Zhekai Zhang, and Song Han. Once-for-all: Train one network
  and specialize it for efficient deployment. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR, 2020.

Shaofeng Cai, Kaiping Zheng, Gang Chen, H. V. Jagadish, Beng Chin Ooi, and Meihui Zhang.
  Arm-net: Adaptive relation modeling network for structured data. In International Conference on
  Management of Data, 2021.

Jintai Chen, Kuanlun Liao, Yanwen Fang, Danny Z. Chen, and Jian Wu. Tabcaps: A capsule neural
   network for tabular data classification with bow routing. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations, ICLR, 2023a.

Kuan-Yu Chen, Ping-Han Chiang, Hsin-Rung Chou, Ting-Wei Chen, and Tien-Hao Chang. Trompt:
  Towards a better deep neural network for tabular data. In Proceedings of the International
  Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, volume 202, pp. 4392–4434, 2023b.

Wuyang Chen, Xinyu Gong, and Zhangyang Wang. Neural architecture search on imagenet in
 four GPU hours: A theoretically inspired perspective. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, ICLR, 2021.

Xiangxiang Chu, Bo Zhang, and Ruijun Xu. Fairnas: Rethinking evaluation fairness of weight
  sharing neural architecture search. In International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV, pp.
  12219–12228, 2021.

Emir Demirovic, Emmanuel Hebrard, and Louis Jean. Blossom: an anytime algorithm for computing
  optimal decision trees. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML, volume 202, pp. 7533–7562, 2023.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xuanyi Dong and Yi Yang. Nas-bench-201: Extending the scope of reproducible neural architecture
  search. In International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2020.

Romain Égelé, Prasanna Balaprakash, Isabelle Guyon, Venkatram Vishwanath, Fangfang Xia, Rick
  Stevens, and Zhengying Liu. Agebo-tabular: joint neural architecture and hyperparameter search
  with autotuned data-parallel training for tabular data. In International Conference for High
  Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, 2021.
Stefan Falkner, Aaron Klein, and Frank Hutter. BOHB: robust and efficient hyperparameter opti-
  mization at scale. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML,
  volume 80, pp. 1436–1445, 2018.
Manuel Fernández-Delgado, Eva Cernadas, Senén Barro, and Dinani Amorim. Do we need hundreds
 of classifiers to solve real world classification problems? The journal of machine learning research,
 15(1):3133–3181, 2014.
Nicoló Fusi, Rishit Sheth, and Melih Elibol. Probabilistic matrix factorization for automated machine
  learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS, pp. 3352–3361, 2018.
Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural
  networks. In Proceedings of the thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and
  statistics, pp. 249–256, 2010.
Yury Gorishniy, Ivan Rubachev, Valentin Khrulkov, and Artem Babenko. Revisiting deep learning
  models for tabular data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS, pp.
  18932–18943, 2021.
Yury Gorishniy, Ivan Rubachev, and Artem Babenko. On embeddings for numerical features in
  tabular deep learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS, 2022.
Boris Hanin and David Rolnick. Complexity of linear regions in deep networks. In Proceedings of
  the International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, volume 97, pp. 2596–2604, 2019.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing
  human-level performance on imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 1026–1034, 2015.
Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. Multilayer feedforward networks are
  universal approximators. Neural networks, 2(5):359–366, 1989.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and
  generalization in neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS,
  2018.
Kevin G. Jamieson and Ameet Talwalkar. Non-stochastic best arm identification and hyperparameter
  optimization. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, AISTATS, volume 51, pp. 240–248, 2016.
Arlind Kadra, Marius Lindauer, Frank Hutter, and Josif Grabocka. Well-tuned simple nets excel on
  tabular datasets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Günter Klambauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Andreas Mayr, and Sepp Hochreiter. Self-normalizing
  neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS, 2017.
Arjun Krishnakumar, Colin White, Arber Zela, Renbo Tu, Mahmoud Safari, and Frank Hutter. Nas-
  bench-suite-zero: Accelerating research on zero cost proxies. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, NeurIPS, 2022.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Genevieve B Orr, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Efficient backprop. In Neural
  networks: Tricks of the trade, pp. 9–50. Springer, 2002.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hayeon Lee, Sohyun An, Minseon Kim, and Sung Ju Hwang. Meta-prediction model for distillation-
  aware NAS on unseen datasets. In International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR,
  2023.
Namhoon Lee, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, and Philip H. S. Torr. Snip: single-shot network pruning
  based on connection sensitivity. In International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR,
  2019.
Roman Levin, Valeriia Cherepanova, Avi Schwarzschild, Arpit Bansal, C. Bayan Bruss, Tom Gold-
  stein, Andrew Gordon Wilson, and Micah Goldblum. Transfer learning with deep tabular models.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2023.
Guihong Li, Yuedong Yang, Kartikeya Bhardwaj, and Radu Marculescu. Zico: Zero-shot NAS via
  inverse coefficient of variation on gradients. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, ICLR, 2023.
Marius Lindauer and Frank Hutter. Best practices for scientific research on neural architecture search.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.02453, 2019.
Chenxi Liu, Liang-Chieh Chen, Florian Schroff, Hartwig Adam, Wei Hua, Alan L Yuille, and Li Fei-
  Fei. Auto-deeplab: Hierarchical neural architecture search for semantic image segmentation. In
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR, pp. 82–92, 2019a.
Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. DARTS: differentiable architecture search. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2019b.
Zhou Lu, Hongming Pu, Feicheng Wang, Zhiqiang Hu, and Liwei Wang. The expressive power of
  neural networks: A view from the width. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  NeurIPS, pp. 6231–6239, 2017.
Zhaojing Luo, Shaofeng Cai, Gang Chen, Jinyang Gao, Wang-Chien Lee, Kee Yuan Ngiam, and
  Meihui Zhang. Improving data analytics with fast and adaptive regularization. IEEE Trans. Knowl.
  Data Eng., 33, 2021.
Zhaojing Luo, Shaofeng Cai, Yatong Wang, and Beng Chin Ooi. Regularized pairwise relationship
  based analytics for structured data. Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD International Conference
  on Management of Data, 2023.
Joe Mellor, Jack Turner, Amos J. Storkey, and Elliot J. Crowley. Neural architecture search without
  training. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, volume
  139, pp. 7588–7598, 2021.
Randal S. Olson and Jason H. Moore. TPOT: A tree-based pipeline optimization tool for automating
  machine learning. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Automatic Machine Learning, volume 64,
  2016.
Hieu Pham, Melody Y. Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc V. Le, and Jeff Dean. Efficient neural architecture
  search via parameter sharing. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML, volume 80, pp. 4092–4101, 2018.
Sergei Popov, Stanislav Morozov, and Artem Babenko. Neural oblivious decision ensembles for deep
  learning on tabular data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06312, 2019.
Jiarui Qin, Weinan Zhang, Rong Su, Zhirong Liu, Weiwen Liu, Ruiming Tang, Xiuqiang He, and
   Yong Yu. Retrieval & interaction machine for tabular data prediction. In Proceedings of the ACM
   SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 1379–1389, 2021.
Maithra Raghu, Ben Poole, Jon M. Kleinberg, Surya Ganguli, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. On the
 expressive power of deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
 Machine Learning, ICML, volume 70, pp. 2847–2854, 2017.
Esteban Real, Alok Aggarwal, Yanping Huang, and Quoc V Le. Regularized evolution for image
  classifier architecture search. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  AAAI, volume 33, pp. 4780–4789, 2019a.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Esteban Real, Alok Aggarwal, Yanping Huang, and Quoc V. Le. Regularized evolution for image
  classifier architecture search. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  AAAI, pp. 4780–4789, 2019b.
Pengzhen Ren, Yun Xiao, Xiaojun Chang, Po-Yao Huang, Zhihui Li, Xiaojiang Chen, and Xin Wang.
  A comprehensive survey of neural architecture search: Challenges and solutions. ACM Computing
  Surveys (CSUR), 54(4):1–34, 2021.
Gresa Shala, Thomas Elsken, Frank Hutter, and Josif Grabocka. Transfer NAS with meta-learned
  bayesian surrogates. In International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2023.
Yeonjong Shin and George Em Karniadakis. Trainability of relu networks and data-dependent
  initialization. Journal of Machine Learning for Modeling and Computing, 1, 2020.
Yao Shu, Shaofeng Cai, Zhongxiang Dai, Beng Chin Ooi, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. NASI:
  label- and data-agnostic neural architecture search at initialization. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR, 2022a.
Yao Shu, Zhongxiang Dai, Zhaoxuan Wu, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. Unifying and boosting
  gradient-based training-free neural architecture search. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, NeurIPS, 2022b.
Julien Siems, Lucas Zimmer, Arber Zela, Jovita Lukasik, Margret Keuper, and Frank Hutter. Nas-
  bench-301 and the case for surrogate benchmarks for neural architecture search. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2008.09777, 11, 2020.
Hidenori Tanaka, Daniel Kunin, Daniel L. K. Yamins, and Surya Ganguli. Pruning neural networks
  without any data by iteratively conserving synaptic flow. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, NeurIPS, 2020.
Lucas Theis, Iryna Korshunova, Alykhan Tejani, and Ferenc Huszár. Faster gaze prediction with
  dense networks and fisher pruning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.05787, 2018.
Jack Turner, Elliot J. Crowley, Michael O’Boyle, Amos Storkey, and Gavin Gray. Blockswap:
  Fisher-guided block substitution for network compression on a budget. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2020.
Chaoqi Wang, Guodong Zhang, and Roger B. Grosse. Picking winning tickets before training by
  preserving gradient flow. In International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2020a.
Fangye Wang, Yingxu Wang, Dongsheng Li, Hansu Gu, Tun Lu, Peng Zhang, and Ning Gu. CL4CTR:
  A contrastive learning framework for CTR prediction. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM
  International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 805–813, 2023a.
Huan Wang and Yun Fu. Trainability preserving neural pruning. In International Conference on
 Learning Representations, ICLR, 2023.
Qing Wang, Dillon Ze Chen, Asiri Wijesinghe, Shouheng Li, and Muhammad Farhan. N-wl: A new
  hierarchy of expressivity for graph neural networks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR, 2023b.
Yujing Wang, Yaming Yang, Yiren Chen, Jing Bai, Ce Zhang, Guinan Su, Xiaoyu Kou, Yunhai
  Tong, Mao Yang, and Lidong Zhou. Textnas: A neural architecture search space tailored for text
  representation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI, volume 34,
  pp. 9242–9249, 2020b.
Colin White, Arber Zela, Robin Ru, Yang Liu, and Frank Hutter. How powerful are performance
  predictors in neural architecture search? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  NeurIPS, pp. 28454–28469, 2021.
Colin White, Mahmoud Safari, Rhea Sukthanker, Binxin Ru, Thomas Elsken, Arber Zela, De-
  badeepta Dey, and Frank Hutter. Neural architecture search: Insights from 1000 papers. CoRR,
  abs/2301.08727, 2023.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, and Tejaswini Pedapati. A survey on neural architecture search.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.01392, 2019.
Yuexiang Xie, Zhen Wang, Yaliang Li, Bolin Ding, Nezihe Merve Gürel, Ce Zhang, Minlie Huang,
  Wei Lin, and Jingren Zhou. Fives: Feature interaction via edge search for large-scale tabular data.
  In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp.
  3795–3805, 2021.
Antoine Yang, Pedro M. Esperança, and Fabio Maria Carlucci. NAS evaluation is frustratingly hard.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2020.
Chengrun Yang, Yuji Akimoto, Dae Won Kim, and Madeleine Udell. OBOE: collaborative filtering
  for automl model selection. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
  Discovery & Data Mining, 2019.
Chengrun Yang, Gabriel Bender, Hanxiao Liu, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Madeleine Udell, Yifeng Lu,
  Quoc V Le, and Da Huang. Tabnas: Rejection sampling for neural architecture search on tabular
  datasets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS, 2022.
Taojiannan Yang, Linjie Yang, Xiaojie Jin, and Chen Chen. Revisiting training-free nas metrics: An
  efficient training-based method. In Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, WACV,
  pp. 4751–4760, 2023.
Chris Ying, Aaron Klein, Eric Christiansen, Esteban Real, Kevin Murphy, and Frank Hutter. Nas-
  bench-101: Towards reproducible neural architecture search. In Proceedings of the International
  Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, volume 97, pp. 7105–7114, 2019.
Jiawei Zhang, Yushun Zhang, Mingyi Hong, Ruoyu Sun, and Zhi-Quan Luo. When expressivity meets
   trainability: Fewer than $n$ neurons can work. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems, NeurIPS, pp. 9167–9180, 2021.
Quanlu Zhang, Zhenhua Han, Fan Yang, Yuge Zhang, Zhe Liu, Mao Yang, and Lidong Zhou. Retiarii:
  A deep learning exploratory-training framework. In Operating Systems Design and Implementation,
  OSDI, pp. 919–936, 2020.
Shixiong Zhao, Fanxin Li, Xusheng Chen, Tianxiang Shen, Li Chen, Sen Wang, Nicholas Zhang,
  Cheng Li, and Heming Cui. Naspipe: high performance and reproducible pipeline parallel supernet
  training via causal synchronous parallelism. In International Conference on Architectural Support
  for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, ASPLOS, pp. 374–387, 2022.
Barret Zoph and Quoc V. Le. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2017.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


CONTENTS OF THE APPENDICES


Appendix A. Literature review of NAS, DNN on tabular data, and architecture properties.

Appendix B. NAS research best practices checklist Lindauer & Hutter (2019).

Appendix C. Dataset statistics, hyperparameter configurations, and search space backbone for
building NAS-Bench-Tabular.

Appendix D. Ablation studies and visualization of ExpressFlow.

Appendix E. Empirically analysis of the budget-aware coordinator’s effectiveness and necessity.

Appendix F. Comparison of ATLAS with additional baselines, encompassing various combinations
of training-free and training-based methods, as well as one-shot NAS.

Appendix G.1. A comprehensive comparison of different TRAILERs.

Appendix G.2. Pseudocode for the filtering and refinement phases in our approach.

Appendix G.3. Theoretical analysis of the trainability and expressivity of ExpressFlow.

Appendix G.4. Data-agnostic property and efficient computational pattern of ExpressFlow.

Appendix H. Summary of Notation and Terminology.

Appendix I. Links to source code and datasets.


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     L ITERATURE R EVIEW

A.1    N EURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH (NAS)

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is designed to automate the discovery of architectures optimized for
specified datasets, thereby eliminating the need for manual design and experimentation. The process
often entails the search for connection patterns within a pre-defined architectural backbone, such as
Fully-connected neural network Yang et al. (2022) or cell-based convolutional neural network Ying
et al. (2019); Dong & Yang (2020).
A critical component of NAS is the architecture evaluation. Initial research in NAS Zoph & Le
(2017); Baker et al. (2017) primarily relied on the time-consuming and resource-intensive process of
fully training each architecture to convergence. Several methods have been proposed to address this
issue and to mitigate costs Lee et al. (2023); Shala et al. (2023); Li et al. (2023); Bohdal et al. (2023).
They generally fall into three categories: NAS with performance prediction, NAS based on weight
sharing, and NAS with training-free architecture evaluation.
Performance prediction in NAS involves training a model to forecast the final performance of an
architecture based on features derived from hyperparameters, architectural structures, and partially
trained architectures. This category of methods shows improvements in searching efficiency but it is
limited in tuning the predictors and is hard to enhance generalizability Siems et al. (2020); White
et al. (2021).
In contrast, NAS based on weight sharing seeks to identify a subgraph within a larger computation
graph Pham et al. (2018). This allows multiple sampled subgraphs sharing the same computation unit
to utilize a common set of weights. However, the individual sampling and training procedure of each
discrete subgraph leads to an increased number of architectures to be trained. And inheriting weights
from the larger computational graph does not necessarily ensure improved training efficiency Chu et al.
(2021). To further reduce the number of architectures requiring training, Liu et al. (2019b) proposed
shifting the search from a discrete space to a continuous one. This enables gradient optimization to
expedite the search process.
Last, training-free architecture evaluation estimates architecture performance by calculating certain
statistics of the architecture at initialization without requiring full training Li et al. (2023); White et al.
(2023; 2021); Abdelfattah et al. (2021). One of the main advantages of the training-free evaluation
is its extremely high computational efficiency, requiring only a single forward and/or backward
computation.
The ATLAS approach proposed in this work effectively combines the strengths of both paradigms
of training-free and training-based architecture evaluation to provide high efficiency and effective
architecture searching.


A.2    DNN ON TABULAR DATA

Different approaches have attempted to apply DNN techniques to tabular data, ranging from DNN
design Levin et al. (2023); Cai et al. (2021); Luo et al. (2021) to Automated Machine Learning
(AutoML) on tabular data Fusi et al. (2018); Olson & Moore (2016); Yang et al. (2019). However,
NAS on tabular data has been relatively less explored. Recently, AgEBO-Tabular Égelé et al. (2021)
and TabNAS Yang et al. (2022) investigated the application of NAS on tabular data to achieve more
efficient and higher-performing architectures. Specifically, AgEBO-Tabular integrates NAS with
aging evolution in a search space that includes multiple branches and hyperparameter tuning using
Bayesian optimization. In comparison, TabNAS aims to identify high-performing architectures
from Fully-connected neural network under specified resource constraints by utilizing reinforcement
learning with reject sampling. It shows that simple multiple layers Fully-connected neural network can
already yield outstanding performance. However, both approaches rely on training-based architecture
evaluation, and cannot achieve anytime NAS on tabular data.
ATLAS in this paper introduces a novel filtering-and-refinement optimization scheme with joint
optimization of both training-free and training-based architecture evaluation and can achieve anytime
NAS on three tabular datasets. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work in this direction.


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3    A RCHITECTURE P ROPERTIES

Architecture performance is influenced by two factors: trainability and expressivity. Trainability
measures the extent to which gradient descent can effectively optimize the architecture. Expressivity
denotes the complexity of the function that the architecture can model. Many training-free evaluation
approaches estimate the architecture performance by characterizing both properties.
More recently, Chen et al. (2021) proposes to quantify the expressivity of a ReLU-based DNN by
computing the number of linear regions that the architecture can divide for a batch of data. Likewise,
NASWOT Mellor et al. (2021) characterizes expressivity by measuring the distance between the
vectors of activation patterns for any two samples within a batch. A greater distance suggests a higher
capability to distinguish different samples, indicating good expressivity.
The application of the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) as a measure of trainability has recently been
explored, given a batch of data XB , NTK Jacot et al. (2018); Arora et al. (2019); Allen-Zhu et al.
(2019) characterizes the complexities of the training dynamics at initialization, which is defined as
Θ(XB , XB ; θ) = ▽θ f (XB ; θ) ▽θ f (XB ; θ)T . NTK-related metrics are adopted in many training-
free evaluation approaches, such as NTKTrace Shu et al. (2022b), NTKTraceAppx Shu et al. (2022a),
and NTKCond Chen et al. (2021).
The trainability has also been studied in the context of network pruning Tanaka et al. (2020); Wang
et al. (2020a); Lee et al. (2019), which identifies and prunes less significant parameters. The notion of
synaptic saliencyJTanaka et al. (2020) is proposed to quantify each parameter’s importance, definedJ as
Φ(θ) = f ( ∂L
            ∂θ )    g(θ). Different metrics basically differ in f (·) and g(·), e.g., Φ(θ) = | ∂L
                                                                                               ∂θ | |θ|
                                           L
                                             ) θ in GraSP Wang et al. (2020a), and Φ(θ) = ∂L
                                               J                                                    J
in SNIP Lee et al. (2019), Φ(θ) = −(H ∂θ                                                         ∂θ    θ
in SynFlow Tanaka et al. (2020), where H is the Hessian vector. Similarly, Fisher Turner et al. (2020)
quantifies the performance by aggregating layer Fisher information Theis et al. (2018).
In our study, we introduce a novel, training-free architecture evaluation metric called ExpressFlow to
capture both trainability and expressivity. It demonstrates higher correlations across three tabular
datasets.


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    NAS R ESEARCH CHECKLIST
Recent efforts in NAS research have emphasized the need for enhancing reproducibility and ensuring
fairness in experimental comparisons Yang et al. (2020); Ying et al. (2019). Consequently, the best
practice checklist for NAS has been introduced Lindauer & Hutter (2019). In this section, we address
each part of the checklist for reproducibility and fair comparisons in the NAS research.

     1. For all authors...
         (a) Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s
             contributions and scope? [Yes]
         (b) Did you describe the limitations of your work? [Yes]
         (c) Did you discuss any potential negative societal impacts of your work? [N/A]
         (d) Have you read the ethics review guidelines and ensured that your paper conforms to
             them? [Yes]
     2. If you are including theoretical results..
         (a) Did you state the full set of assumptions of all theoretical results? [Yes]
         (b) Did you include complete proofs of all theoretical results? [Yes]
     3. If you ran experiments...
         (a) Did you include the code, data, and instructions needed to reproduce the main experi-
             mental results (either in the supplemental material or as a URL)? [Yes]
         (b) Did you specify all the training details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they
             were chosen)? [Yes]
         (c) Did you report error bars (e.g., with respect to the random seed after running experi-
             ments multiple times)? [Yes]
         (d) Did you include the total amount of computing and the type of resources used (e.g.,
             type of GPUs, internal cluster, or cloud provider)? [Yes]
     4. If you are using existing assets (e.g., code, data, models) or curating/releasing new assets...
         (a) If your work uses existing assets, did you cite the creators? [Yes]
         (b) Did you mention the license of the assets? [Yes]
         (c) Did you include any new assets either in the supplemental material or as a URL? [N/A]
         (d) Did you discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose data you’re
             using/curating? [N/A]
         (e) Did you discuss whether the data you are using/curating contains personally identifiable
             information or offensive content?[N/A]
     5. If you used crowdsourcing or conducted research with human subjects...
         (a) Did you include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if
             applicable? [N/A]
         (b) Did you describe any potential participant risks, with links to Institutional Review
             Board (IRB) approvals, if applicable? [N/A]
         (c) Did you include the estimated hourly wage paid to participants and the total amount
             spent on participant compensation? [N/A]


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C       NAS-B ENCH -TABULAR

C.1     DATASETS

We use three datasets as shown in Table 2, and briefly summarize them as follows:
Frappe 1 is a dataset from the real-world application recommendation scenario, which incorporates
context-aware app usage logs consisting of 96,203 tuples from 957 users across 4,082 apps used in
various contexts. For each positive app usage log, Frappe generates two negative tuples, resulting
in a total of 288,609 tuples. The learning objective is to predict app usage based on the context,
encompassing 10 semantic attribute fields with 5,382 distinct numerical and categorical embedding
vectors.
UCI Diabetes 2 (Diabetes) encompasses a decade (1999-2008) of clinical diabetes encounters from
130 US hospitals. This dataset aims to analyze historical diabetes care to enhance patient safety
and deliver personalized healthcare. With 101,766 encounters from diabetes-diagnosed patients, the
primary learning objective is to predict inpatient readmissions. This dataset consists of 43 attributes
and 369 distinct numerical and categorical embedding vectors, including patient demographics and
illness severity factors like gender, age, race, discharge disposition, and primary diagnosis.
Criteo 3 is a CTR benchmark consisting of attribute values and click feedback for millions of display
advertising. The learning objective is to predict if a user will click a specific ad in the context of
a webpage. This dataset has 45,840,617 tuples across 39 attribute fields with 2,086,936 distinct
numerical and categorical embedding vectors. These include 13 numerical attribute fields and 26
categorical attributes.

                                         Table 2: Dataset Statistics

               Dataset       # Class     # Sample       # Feature            Task
               Frappe           2        288,609           10         App Recommendation
               Diabetes         2        101,766           43         Healthcare Analytics
                Criteo          2       45,840,617         39           CTR Prediction


C.2     T RAINING H YPERPARAMETERS

                                     Table 3: Training Hyperparameters

                batch     learning        learning                     training        iteration     loss
    Dataset                                             optimizer
                 size       rate       rate schedule                    epoch         per epoch    function
     Frappe      512       0.001       cosine decay         Adam         20             200        BCELoss
    Diabetes     1024      0.001       cosine decay         Adam          1             200        BCELoss
     Criteo      1024      0.001       cosine decay         Adam         10             2000       BCELoss


Training architectures on each dataset necessitates the optimal configuration of hyperparameters
such as training epochs, iterations, learning rate, etc. For each dataset, we employ the grid search
to fine-tune the training hyperparameters. Our goal is to ensure that the three typical architectures
within our search space, i.e., from the smallest to medium and to the largest sizes, achieve DNN
performances that are consistent with the results reported in Cai et al. (2021); Kadra et al. (2021);
Klambauer et al. (2017); Fernández-Delgado et al. (2014). We configure the hyperparameters as
detailed in Table 3. For the Adam optimizer, we adopt the settings β1 = 0.9, β2 =0.999, decay = 0,
and ϵ =1e-8, as proposed in Yang et al. (2022); Kingma & Ba (2014).

    1
      https://www.baltrunas.info/research-menu/frappe
    2
      https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets
    3
      https://labs.criteo.com/2014/02/kaggle-display-advertising-challenge-dataset/


                                                       19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.3   S EARCH S PACE D ESIGN

We fix the number of layer L in DNN to be four for all three tabular datasets and set the candidate set
of layer sizes H as follows:

       • Frappe and Diabetes: H = [8, 16, 24, 32, 48, 64, 80, 96, 112, 128, 144, 160, 176, 192, 208,
         224, 240, 256, 384, 512].
       • Criteo: H = [8, 16, 32, 48, 64, 112, 144, 176, 240, 384].

The size of the search space for Criteo is relatively smaller, with only 104 =10,000 architectures, but
the best-performing architecture found already achieves the state-of-art performance compared with
related works Cai et al. (2021); Kadra et al. (2021); Levin et al. (2023); Fernández-Delgado et al.
(2014).


D     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS OF E XPRESS F LOW

In this section, we present detailed experiments covering an ablation study and correlation visual-
ization. All experiments are conducted using PyTorch on a local server equipped with an Intel(R)
Xeon(R) Silver 4214R CPU (12 cores), 128 GB of memory, and 8 GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs.

D.1   A BLATION S TUDIES AND A NALYSIS

Impacts of Parameter Positivity. As neuron saliency is calculated at the architecture initialization
as illustrated in Section 3.2, we examine the impact of the parameter’s sign on the effectiveness of
ExpressFlow. Specifically, we score each architecture with ExpressFlow using either the parameter’s
absolute value or its default. We then compare the correlations of both approaches with the architec-
ture’s AUC. For consistency across multiple datasets, we maintain a fixed batch size B of 32 and
employ the Xavier initialization method. Interestingly, the results in Table 4 reveal that parameter
positivity significantly impacts ExpressFlow’s effectiveness, leading to a correlation increase of
up to 78.8% in the Criteo dataset. Therefore, before computing the ExpressFlow score, we set all
architecture parameters to their absolute values.

                              Table 4: Impacts of Parameter Positivity

                              Dataset                  Frappe   Diabetes   Criteo
                   ExpressFlow with positive w         0.8364   0.7124     0.8978
                   ExpressFlow with default w          0.5175   0.5901     0.5020


Impacts of Initialization Method. Based on the observed advantages of using absolute parameter
values, we further explore how various initialization methods influence the ExpressFlow correlation.
With the batch size of B=32, we examine three different initializations: LeCun LeCun et al. (2002),
Xavier Glorot & Bengio (2010), and He He et al. (2015). Table 5 shows that while all three
initializations produce comparable correlation values, the He initialization consistently outperforms
the others on the Criteo and Diabetes datasets. This is because He is particularly designed for
ReLU activation functions, and ReLU is exactly what our search space backbone uses as detailed in
Section 3.1. Therefore, we adopt He initialization as the default setting in our approach.

                              Table 5: Impacts of Initialization method

  Dataset    LeCun LeCun et al. (2002)       Xavier Glorot & Bengio (2010)      He He et al. (2015)
 Frappe                 0.8175                            0.8364                       0.8150
 Diabetes               0.7335                            0.7124                       0.7336
  Criteo                0.8823                            0.8978                       0.9005


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Impacts of Batch Size B. Considering that ExpressFlow depends on a forward and a backward
computation on a mini-batch of data, we extend our analysis to measure the effectiveness of Ex-
pressFlow with respect to different batch sizes. Experiments are conducted on three datasets, with
batch sizes varying from 4 to 128. For each setting, we fix the initialization method to He and repeat
the experiment five times, and then we record the median correlation value. The results in Table 6
indicate that the batch size has minimal influence on the final correlation of ExpressFlow, suggesting
that ExpressFlow can potentially be computed efficiently by using only small data batches with B=4.

                                    Table 6: Impacts of Batch Size

               Dataset      B=4        B=8        B = 16      B = 32      B = 64     B = 128
              Frappe       0.8154      0.8152     0.8150      0.8150      0.8150     0.8149
              Diabetes     0.7335      0.7336     0.7335      0.7336      0.7336     0.7336
               Criteo      0.8990      0.8998     0.9008      0.9005      0.9009     0.9009


Data-Agnostics. Given the observation that the correlation of ExpressFlow exhibits limited sensitivity
to different batch sizes, we set the batch size B=4 and shift our focus to explore the influence of data
samples on the ExpressFlow correlation. Instead of employing a random data sample of dimension
d as the input, we utilize an all-one vector with the same dimension, denoted as 1d , as the input
data sample and measure the ExpressFlow correlation. The results presented in Table 7 suggest
that utilizing an all-one vector yields results remarkably similar to those obtained through real
data samples shown in Table 6. This evidence supports the assertion that ExpressFlow captures
the potentially well-performing architecture in a data-agnostic manner, which confirms its good
transferability across different datasets.

                          Table 7: Data Agnostics Property of ExpressFlow

                               Dataset          Frappe      Diabetes      Criteo
                           Data sample 1d       0.8151       0.7336       0.8991


Impact of Recalibration Weight of Neuron Saliency Since we perform a weighted aggregation
of neuron saliency to compute the ExpressFlow score, i.e., each neuron saliency at l-th layer with
  Kl
ℓ(z l )
        as shown in Section 4.2. We further examine the impacts of varying recalibration weight
on characterizing the performance of the architecture on three datasets. Specifically, we contrast
ExpressFlow, which considers both width and depth in the recalibration weight, with two variations:
(1) ExpressFlow leveraging only the width, labeled as recalibrated by K ; (2) ExpressFlow focusing
solely on depth, referred to as recalibrated by ℓ(z1l ) ; Table 8 reveals that ExpressFlow, when consid-
ering both width and depth in recalibration weight, consistently outperforms its other variations in
terms of correlation across all datasets.

                   Table 8: Impacts of Recalibration Weights of Neuron Saliency

                                                                                           Kl
            Dataset      recalibrated by K      recalibrated by ℓ(z1l )   recalibrated by ℓ(z l)


           Frappe             0.7007                   0.7296                      0.8151
           Diabetes           0.6772                   0.6900                      0.7336
            Criteo            0.6402                   0.6414                      0.8991


                                                     21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2   V ISUALIZATION OF C ORRELATION FOR TRAILER S

For each of TRAILER, we randomly sample 4000 architectures from the NAS-Bench-Tabular. We
plot their correlations between validation AUC after training and the TRAILER score computed at
the architecture initialization. The results are shown in Figures 7 to 16.
Our findings demonstrate that scores of GradNorm 7, NASWOT 8, NTKTrace 10, NTKTraceAppx 11,
Fisher 12, SNIP 14, SynFlow 15, and ExpressFlow 16 have a positive correlation with validation AUC
across all datasets. This relationship is particularly pronounced for ExpressFlow, which confirms the
effectiveness of ExpressFlow for tabular data.


 (a) Benchmarking with Frappe.     (b) Benchmarking with Diabetes.    (c) Benchmarking with Criteo.

                        Figure 7: Score of GradNorm vs. Validation AUC.


 (a) Benchmarking with Frappe.     (b) Benchmarking with Diabetes.    (c) Benchmarking with Criteo.

                        Figure 8: Score of NASWOT vs. Validation AUC.


 (a) Benchmarking with Frappe.     (b) Benchmarking with Diabetes.    (c) Benchmarking with Criteo.

                        Figure 9: Score of NTKCond vs. Validation AUC.


                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 (a) Benchmarking with Frappe.   (b) Benchmarking with Diabetes.   (c) Benchmarking with Criteo.

                       Figure 10: Score of NTKTrace vs. Validation AUC.


 (a) Benchmarking with Frappe.   (b) Benchmarking with Diabetes.   (c) Benchmarking with Criteo.

                    Figure 11: Score of NTKTraceAppx vs. Validation AUC.


 (a) Benchmarking with Frappe.   (b) Benchmarking with Diabetes.   (c) Benchmarking with Criteo.

                         Figure 12: Score of Fisher vs. Validation AUC.


 (a) Benchmarking with Frappe.   (b) Benchmarking with Diabetes.   (c) Benchmarking with Criteo.

                         Figure 13: Score of GraSP vs. Validation AUC.



                                               23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 (a) Benchmarking with Frappe.   (b) Benchmarking with Diabetes.   (c) Benchmarking with Criteo.

                          Figure 14: Score of SNIP vs. Validation AUC.


 (a) Benchmarking with Frappe.   (b) Benchmarking with Diabetes.   (c) Benchmarking with Criteo.

                        Figure 15: Score of SynFlow vs. Validation AUC.


 (a) Benchmarking with Frappe.   (b) Benchmarking with Diabetes.   (c) Benchmarking with Criteo.

                      Figure 16: Score of ExpressFlow vs. Validation AUC.


                                               24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     C OORDINATION S CHEME D ESIGN AND A NALYSIS

In this section, we present detailed experiments analyzing sensitivity with respect to M , K, and U ,
and extend our comparisons to include baselines such as zero-cost NAS Abdelfattah et al. (2021) and
one-shot NAS Pham et al. (2018). All experiments are conducted on a local server with an Intel(R)
Xeon(R) Silver 4214R CPU (12 cores), 128 GB of memory, and 8 GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs.


E.1   S ENSITIVITY OF M/K AND U

As explained in Section 3.4, we propose a filtering-and-refinement optimization scheme with joint
optimization, combining the strengths of both training-based and training-free paradigms in a more
principled way, as well as introduce an objective function defined in equation 2.
The primary challenge lies in striking a balance between M and K given Tmax , which is the number
of candidate architectures explored by ExpressFlow in the filtering phase and the number of promising
architectures evaluated by training in the refinement phase, respectively. As empirically evaluated
in Section 4.2 and 4.3, exploring numerous architectures while neglecting the refinement phase
(e.g., K = 1) is highly efficient but may result in a sub-optimal architecture being selected since
the ExpressFlow in the filtering phase may not accurately indicate the actual performance of a
given architecture. In contrast, evaluating each explored architecture for U epochs in training-based
methods (e.g., K= M ) requires training many architectures, which would violate the anytime NAS
requirement.
Further, with a fixed time budget for the refinement phase, it is challenging to decide the trade-off
between K and U , which corresponds to exploiting more architectures with each evaluating fewer
epochs, and exploiting fewer architectures with each evaluating more accurately.
To address these challenges, we first examine the trade-off between K and U . Specifically, we
explore a set of architectures during the filtering phase and then vary the combinations of K and U
to measure the achieved AUC and the total training epochs in the refinement phase on two datasets.
Figure 17 shows that evaluating each architecture with more epochs can accurately identify the
performance. However, this comes at the expense of exploiting fewer architectures, thereby reducing
the opportunity to search for higher-performing architectures—such as 98.01% on Frappe and 80.31%
on Criteo datasets. Conversely, exploiting more architectures by training each for fewer epochs
(e.g., U =2) can not only facilitate the search for higher AUC architectures but also decrease the total
training epochs. Based on these findings, we set U =2 in our ATLAS.
Next, we delve into the trade-offs between M and K. With varying Tmax , we examine how the ratio
of M/K impacts the AUC of the searched architecture. As shown in Figure 18, M/K≈30 could
yield a good-performing final architecture across different Tmax .


E.2   N ECESSITY AND E FFECTIVENESS OF C OORDINATOR

To further illustrate the necessity and effectiveness of the coordinator, we conduct an experiment
that sets a fixed search time budget of 100 minutes. We then compare the AUC of architectures
searched using various manually set K values with those defined by the coordinator. The results
are presented in Table 9. From the table, we can observe that K heavily influences the search
performance, and a moderate K=309 automatically determined by the coordinator achieves the
highest AUC. This confirms that the budget-aware coordinator is effective in jointly optimizing both
filtering and refinement phases as well as necessary in achieving anytime NAS on tabular data.

                 Table 9: Impact of K on the searched AUC. Search for 100 mins.

                        K=1       K=10      K=100      K=500     Coordinator (K=309)
               AUC     0.9789     0.9801    0.9802     0.9791          0.9805



                                                  25
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                          98.05


                                                                                                        K(# Explored Architecture)
 K(# Explored Architecture)
                              97.96 97.96 97.88 97.96 97.96                                                                          2.0    4.0                   8.0          16.0    28.0       200


                                                                                                           16 8 4 2
    16 8 4 2
                              97.96 97.96 97.97 97.96 97.97                               98.00                                      4.0    8.0                   16.0         32.0    56.0       150
                              97.96 97.96 97.96 98.00 98.00                               97.95                                      14.0   28.0                  56.0         92.0   112.0       100
                                                                                                                                                                                                  50
                              97.97 98.01 97.96 98.06 98.06                               97.90                                      31.0   62.0 124.0 198.0                          224.0
                                1     2       4       8  16                                                                           1      2        4       8                        16
                                     U(# Training Epoch)                                                                                     U(# Training Epoch)
                               (a) Reached AUC on Frappe Dataset.                                                             (b) Total Training Epochs on Frappe Dataset.
                                                                                          80.32
 K(# Explored Architecture)


                                                                                                        K(# Explored Architecture)
                              80.27 80.29 80.27 80.29 80.29                                                                          2.0    4.0                   8.0          16.0    20.0       150
    16 8 4 2


                                                                                                           16 8 4 2
                              80.28 80.29 80.27 80.28 80.29                                                                          4.0    8.0                   16.0         32.0    40.0
                                                                                          80.30                                                                                                   100
                              80.28 80.29 80.28 80.30 80.30                                                                          14.0   28.0                  52.0         84.0    80.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                  50
                              80.28 80.31 80.31 80.31 80.32                               80.28                                      31.0   62.0 114.0 178.0                          160.0
                                1     2       4       8  16                                                                           1      2        4       8                        16
                                     U(# Training Epoch)                                                                                     U(# Training Epoch)
                               (c) Reached AUC on Criteo Dataset.                                                               (d) Total Training Epochs on Criteo Dataset.

 Figure 17: Trade-offs between K and U . The ATLAS approach can search for a good-performing
 architecture with smaller U , e.g., U =2, across two tabular dataset.

               98.1
                                                                 AUC on DIABETES


                                                                               67
AUC on FRAPPE


                                                                                                                                                  AUC on CRITEO
                                                                                                                                                              80.30
               98.0                                                            66
                                                                                                                                                              80.25
                                                                               65
                                                                                          T=0.1 min           T=1 min
               97.9                       T=4 min
                                          T=8 min
                                                      T=16 min
                                                      T=32 min                 64         T=0.5 min           T=2 min                                         80.20                   T=16 min
                                                                                                                                                                                      T=64 min
                                                                                                                                                                                                 T=256 min
                                                                                                                                                                                                 T=1024 min
                              100       101          102                            100               101                             102                                100          101        102
                                          N/K                                                           N/K                                                                             N/K
                               (a) Frappe Dataset.                                   (b) Diabetes Dataset.                                                               (c) Criteo Dataset.

Figure 18: Trade-offs between M and K. The approach can search for a good-performing architecture
with M ≈ 30 ∗ K across Tmax .

 E.2.1                          N OISE I MPACT ON REFINEMENT PHASE
 Given that ExpressFlow scores may not provide exact estimations of architecture performance, we
 then investigate the potential benefits of introducing some random noise during the selection of the
 top-K architectures for the refinement phase. To examine this, we fix the total search time to 20
 minutes and measure the AUC achieved across various Random Noise Degrees (RND).
 Specifically, given the time budget, the coordinator determines the trade-off between the filtering
 and refinement phases, which explores M architectures in the train-free filtering phase and keeps
 the top K for the training-based refinement phase. For each RND, we keep the top (1 − RND) × K
 architectures from the top-K architectures and randomly select another RND × K from the search
 space. These K architectures are then evaluated in the refinement phase.
Results in Table 10 show that a lower degree of noise improves the AUC of the search architecture,
which suggests that introducing noise is not beneficial when selecting the top-K architectures, and
further confirms the effectiveness of the coordinator.
                                    Table 10: Impact of noise degrees on the searched AUC. Search for 20 mins.

                                      RND = 100%                 RND = 70%                             RND = 50%                              RND = 30%                               RND = 0%
                              AUC       0.9792                     0.9794                                0.9796                                 0.9799                                 0.9802



                                                                                                      26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     C OMPARISON WITH A DDITIONAL BASELINES
F.1    C OMPARISON WITH D IFFERENT C OMBINATIONS OF T RAINING -F REE AND
       T RAINING -BASED M ETHODS

In this section, we compare our approach with two popular NAS approaches that combine both
training-free and training-based evaluations. The first is the fully decoupled warmup strategy Ab-
delfattah et al. (2021), which employs training evaluations as proxies to pre-train a search algorithm
for subsequent conventional training-based search. The second is the coupled move proposal strat-
egy Abdelfattah et al. (2021), which iteratively uses training-free evaluation to quickly propose the
next candidate architectures for full training. In contrast, our approach is fundamentally different
from theirs. Specifically, in our two-stage optimization, the filtering phase uses training-free metrics
and is guided by the RE algorithm, and the refinement phase uses training-based evaluation and
is scheduled by a successive-halving algorithm. Our two phases are fully decoupled and are time
budget-aware. They are jointly optimized via a coordinator (as detailed in Section 3.4) to support
anytime NAS.
To empirically demonstrate the efficiency of our approach, we conduct comparisons on different
combination strategies in terms of the time usage for searching for an architecture with a specific AUC.
More detailed ablations concerning the combination of different proxies and/or (re)training strategies
are also provided. Specifically, we compare ATLAS with training-based (using the search strategy
RS, RL, and RE), training-free (using best-performing TRAILERs), Warmup and Move-Proposal
(both using RE as the search strategy as in ATLAS, and utilizing best-performing TRAILERs).
The results in Table 11 show that (1) Training-based only and Move-Proposal are the two most
time-consuming approaches, as both require iterative and costly full training of architectures; (2)
Training-free only approach could not reach the target AUC of 0.9798; (3) our ATLAS achieves the
target AUC using only 62 seconds, obtaining a speedup of up to 3.66x and 111.94x compared to
Warmup and Move-Proposal; (4) the novel two-phase scheme with a coordinator approach indeed
achieves much better search performance than other approaches, outperforming the second-best
approach (Warmup+ExpressFlow) by a factor of 3.66x. These findings confirm the necessity of the
combination of training-free and training-based NAS, the efficiency of our approach ATLAS, and the
effectiveness of our novel decoupled two-phase scheme with a joint optimization approach.

               Table 11: Target AUC = 0.9798. N/R: the target AUC is not reached.

                       NAS Approaches                         Search Cost for AUC 0.9798 (Sec)
                       Training-based (RS)                                   21560
                       Training-based (RL)                                    N/R
                       Training-based (RE)                                   8462
                       Training-free (SNIP)                                   N/R
                    Training-free (NASWOT)                                    N/R
                     Training-free (SynFlow)                                  N/R
                   Training-free (ExpressFlow)                                N/R
                      Warmup (NASWOT)                                         234
                         Warmup (SNIP)                                        464
                       Warmup (SynFlow)                                       289
                     Warmup (ExpressFlow)                                     227
                   Move-Proposal (NASWOT)                                    9503
                      Move-Proposal (SNIP)                                   8659
                    Move-Proposal (SynFlow)                                  9106
                  Move-Proposal (ExpressFlow)                                6940
      Filtering + Refinement (ExpressFlow +Full Training)                     329
                             ATLAS                                             62

F.2    C OMPARISON WITH O NE - SHOT NAS M ETHODS

One-shot NAS approaches have shown great promise in the computer vision tasks and NAS bench-
marks Liu et al. (2019b); Pham et al. (2018). They reduce search costs by training only one supernet
to approximate the performance of every subnet in the search space via weight-sharing. The effective-


                                                  27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ness of one-shot NAS relies heavily on the correlation between the estimated performance of subnets
and their true performance, where a high correlation indicates that the weights inherited from the
supernet can be used for evaluation, and thus the costly training of subnets can be avoided.
Given the DNN-based search space, we train a DNN supernet comprising four layers, each with a
maximum of 512 neurons. From this supernet, we evaluate the performance of subnets estimated
using neurons and their weights which are inherited from the supernet. We also evaluate the actual
performance of these subnets by full training. Table 12 shows the SRCC between the weight-sharing
performance and the actual performance. We can find that the weight-sharing approach has a low
correlation compared to our training-free metric, which leads to worse search performance.

                 Table 12: SRCC of Weight-Sharing and ExpressFlow on Frappe.

                                        Algorithm      SRCC
                                     Weight-Sharing     0.12
                                      ExpressFlow       0.80


                                                28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     A DDITIONAL T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
G.1    TRAILER OVERVIEW

Comparison of TRAILERs. We provide the full summarization of different TRAILERs in Ta-
ble 13, with their evaluation metrics, complexity, score computation definition, and the characterized
properties of DNN.

Table 13: A Comparison of Different Training-Free Architecture Evaluation Metrics (TRAILERs).


                    Evaluation
  TFMEM                              Complexity     Computation                       Agnostic   Property
                     Metric

                     Frobenius
  GradNorm                           1FC+1BC        sa = ∥ ∂L
                                                           ∂θ ∥F                      Not        Expressivity
                       norm
                     Hamming
  NASWOT                             1FC            sa = log|KH |                     Label      Expressivity
                      distance
                      Neural
  NTKCond                       |    1FC+1BC        sa = λλmax (Θ)
                                                                                      Not        Trainability
                  tangent kernel                           min (Θ)


                       Neural
  NTKTrace                           1FC+1BC        sa = ∥Θ∥trace                     Not        Trainability
                   tangent kernel
                       Neural
  NTKTrace                           1FC+1BC        sa = ∥Θappx ∥trace                Not        Trainability
                   tangent kernel
  Appx
                     Hadamard                              PL       ∂L        2
  Fisher                             1FC+1BC        sa =     l=1 ( ∂acl acl )         Not        Trainability
                      product
                     Hessian
                                                               −(H ∂L
                                                           P                 J
  GraSP                              1FC+1BC        sa =           ∂θ )           θ   Not        Trainability
                  vector product
                     Hadamard                              P ∂L J
  SNIP                               1FC+1BC        sa =    | ∂θ  θ|                  Not        Trainability
                      product
                     Hadamard                              P ∂L J
  SynFlow                            1FC+1BC        sa =                 θ            Data       Trainability
                      product                                  ∂θ
                                                                                      Label
                     Frobenius
  WeightNorm                         1FC            sa = ∥θ∥F                         Data       Expressivity
                       norm
                                                                                      Label

                     Hadamard                              P     ∂L
                                                                         J
  ExpressFlow
                      product
                                     1FC+1BC        sa =     n | ∂zn |       zn       Data       Expressivity
                                                                                      Label      Trainability
    L: loss function. θ: architecture parameters. Θ: NTK matrix of the architecture.
    J
       : Hadamard product. sa : the score of a architecture a.
    λ: the eigenvalue of NTK matrix. H: Hessian vector. L: number of architecture layers.
    ∥.∥F : Frobenius norm. acl : activation saliency of one layer.
    F C: forward computation. BC: backward computation.


Efficiency of TRAILERs As for efficiency, we provide both the theoretical time complexity and the
average time required to score one architecture on the Frappe dataset using various TRAILERs. The
experiments are run on an NVIDIA RTX 3090 and the results are presented in Table 14.
From the table, we can have the following observations. ExpressFlow is designed to be computa-
tionally efficient with only one forward and one backward computation on one mini-batch, which
is the same order of magnitude as other TRAILERs. In particular, ExpressFlow takes on average
2.70 × 10−3 seconds to score an architecture, i.e., 22,870x speedups compared to training-based
architecture evaluation (61.75 seconds to fully train one architecture on the Frappe dataset).


                                                    29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We further evaluate their efficiency via search costs. Utilizing RE as our strategy, we iteratively
seek higher-scored architectures based on TRAILERs, and monitor the time taken until we obtain
one with the target AUC. The search cost for an AUC of 0.9793 on the Frappe dataset is detailed
in Table 14. The results exhibit a strong correlation between the search cost and the average rank.
Notably, ExpressFlow reaches the specified AUC most rapidly, outpacing the second-best metric by
a factor of 6.71x. Meanwhile, many other metrics fail to achieve the target AUC. This comparison
confirms the efficiency and consistency of ExpressFlow as a training-free metric in the search.

Table 14: Effiency of TRAILERs measured on Frappe dataset. FC/BC: Forward/Backward Computa-
tion, N/R: the target AUC is not reached. Search costs are evaluated on Frappe.
                            Grad NAS NTK NTK NTK
                                                       Fisher GraSP SNIP SynFlow ExpressFlow
                            Norm WOT Cond Trace TrAppx
                            2.69× 1.76× 5.75× 5.66× 2.85× 9.59× 1.14× 3.02×                             2.27×      2.70×
Computational Cost (Sec)
                            10−3 10−3 10−3 10−3 10−3 10−3 10−2 10−3                                     10−3       10−3
       Search Cost
  for AUC 0.9793 (Sec)      19.9     N/R      N/R      N/R         N/R       N/R      N/R      18.8     22.1        2.8
      Filtering-Only
       Search Cost
  for AUC 0.9798 (Sec)      695      1188     N/R      7568        4178      1233     1141     726      1184        62
  Filtering+Refinement


Transferability of TRAILERs. We further examine the transferability of various TRAILERs by
assessing their correlation on different data types.
We choose four widely-adopted benchmarks on image data from NAS-Bench-Suite-Zero Krish-
nakumar et al. (2022), i.e., NB201-CF10, NB201-CF100, NB201-IM, and NB101-CF10. For each
benchmark, we evaluate the SRCC of all TRAILERs and report the results in Table 15 We find that
ExpressFlow achieves the second highest average rank of SRCC in the image data, which confirms the
transferability and effectiveness of ExpressFlow. In the meantime, it is a better metric to characterize
neuron saliency of DNNs for tabular data.

                         Table 15: SRCC of TRAILERs Measured on Image Data
                    Grad     NAS      NTK      NTK        NTK
                                                                      Fisher       GraSP     SNIP     SynFlow   ExpressFlow
                    Norm     WOT      Cond     Trace     TrAppx
  NB101-CF10        -0.34     0.37    -0.28    -0.42      -0.53          -0.37      0.14     -0.27     0.39        0.38
  NB201-CF10        0.64      0.78    -0.48    0.37       0.34           0.38       0.53     0.64      0.78        0.79
  NB201-CF100       0.64      0.80    -0.39     0.38       0.38          0.38       0.54     0.63      0.76        0.77
   NB201-IM         0.57      0.78    -0.41     0.31       0.36          0.32       0.52     0.57      0.75        0.75
 Avg Rank (Image)   4.75      2.0      7.25    7.25          7.0          8.25      7.0       6.0       3.0         2.5


                                                              30
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     G.2    P SEUDOCODE FOR FILTERING AND REFINEMENT PHASES

     In Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2, we provide the pseudocode of the filtering and refinement phases
     introduced in Sections 3.2 and 3.3.

     Algorithm 1: Filtering phase - Efficient Exploration
     Input :A: Search Space, Tmax : Time budget. Q: Message Queue. XB : Mini-batch of data. N : Number
             of architecture encoding.
     Output :K architecture.
 1   Aging Evolution (A, Tmax )
        /* Randomly generate a pool of N encoding */
 2       P ool ← RandomArchitecture(N )
         /* Thread-1 */
 3       while Receive worker’s request do
 4           encoding ← GeneticSelection(P ool)
 5           encoding’ ← MUTATE(encoding)
                    S
 6           Q ← Q (encoding’)

 7       while True do
            /* Fetch (architecture, score) from queue*/
 8           (encoding, sa ) ← Q.FetchScore()
 9           UpdateLocalPool(encoding, sa )

10   Evaluation Worker (XB )
11       while True do
            /* Score the architecture */
12           encoding’ ← Q.FetchArchitecture()
             /* Construct the architecture */
13           a ← ArchitectureConstruct(encoding’)
14           sa ← ρ(a, θ, XB )
                    S
15           Q ← Q (encoding’, sa )


     Algorithm 2: Refinement phase - Effective Exploitation
     Input :K: Top architectures. U : Min computation unit. η: K
                                                               η
                                                                 architectures to keep per-round.
     Output :The final selected architecture.
 1   Training Worker (K)
 2       Ucur ← U
 3       while K.length() > 1 do
            /* Evaluate each architecture using U0 epoch */
             {pai ; ai ∈ K} ← {Eval(ai , Ucur ); ai ∈ K}
             /* Only keep top K
                              η
                                architectures */
             K ← T op 1 ({pai ; ai ∈ K})
                          η
             /* Increase epoch-per-architecture in next round */
             Ucur ← Ucur · η


                                                          31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.3   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF E XPRESS F LOW

As defined in Section 3.2, the neuron saliency for the n-th neuron νn is defined as follows:

                                                      ∂L K
                                        νn = |            | zn                                  (3)
                                                      ∂zn
                                               in          in
                                         P
where zn = σ(hn ) and hn = wx + b = u wnu         zu + b. wnu represents input parameter between
the n-th neuron and u-th neuron in the preceding layer.
                      out
Further, we denote wvn    as the parameter between the n-th neuron and the v-th neuron in the
following layer. We denote the neuron index in the following layer as i. Then we can have

                                        ∂L    X ∂L ∂hv
                                            =                                                   (4)
                                        ∂zn   i
                                                ∂hv ∂zn

                  out
              P
given hv =     n wvn zn + b, we can have:


                              ∂hv          X ∂wout zk
                                     out        vk       out
                                  = wvn  +            = wvn                                     (5)
                              ∂zn              ∂zn
                                                      k̸=n


and

                                 ∂hv         X ∂wout zk
                                                 vk
                                  out
                                      = zn +      out
                                                        = zn                                    (6)
                                ∂wvn            ∂wvn
                                                       k̸=n


then we get

                                       ∂L    X ∂L
                                                    out
                                           =       wvn                                          (7)
                                       ∂zn   i
                                               ∂hv


The neuron saliency νn can be represented as

                                            X ∂L                      K
                                                              out
                                   νn = |                    wvn  |       zn                    (8)
                                              i
                                                      ∂hv

As for the homogeneous activation functions σ including ReLU and Leaky ReLU, zn = σ(h) ≥ 0.
And for any specific neuron n, the Hadamard product is the same as the simple multiplication.

                                              X ∂L
                                                               out
                                     νn = |                   wvn  zn |
                                                  i
                                                       ∂hv
                                           X ∂L                                                 (9)
                                                        out
                                        =|   (     zn )wvn  |
                                           i
                                               ∂hv


With equation 6, we have

                                         X ∂L ∂hv
                                                          out
                                  νn = |   (        out
                                                        )wvn  |
                                         i
                                             ∂hv ∂w vn
                                         X ∂L                                                  (10)
                                      =|           wout |
                                                out vn
                                         i
                                            ∂w  vn



                                                        32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Evidently, ∂w∂L     out
              out wvn aligns precisely with the concept of synaptic saliency, as in the referenced
              vn
literature Tanaka et al. (2020). This measure was originally proposed to assess the individual
                                out
significance of each parameter wvn  .
Based on the equation 10, the neuron saliency of the n-th neuron actually computes the absolute
value of the sum of SynFlow scores of all outgoing parameters of each neuron. Compared with the
SynFlow, ExpressFlow calculates saliency on a neuron-wise basis. Further, the use of absolute value
computation prevents mutual cancellation of neuron saliency, which ensures the importance of all
neurons is captured. Our ExpressFlow thus provides a more accurate and consistent evaluation of
DNN architectures for tabular data, as analyzed in Section 3.2.
                                                                                   ′
Moreover, homogeneous activation functions σ indicates zn = σ(h) = σ(h) h. For any specific
neuron n, we have

                                  ∂L K              ∂L K              ∂L
                          νn = |      |     zn = |      |      hn = |     hn |
                                  ∂zn              ∂hn                ∂hn
                                  ∂L X in
                               =|          (wnu zu + b)|
                                  ∂hn u
                                  X ∂L                  ∂L
                                              in
                               =|    (      wnu  zu +        b)|
                                   u
                                        ∂hn            ∂h n
                                  X ∂L ∂hn                   ∂L                                     (11)
                                                     in
                               =|    (          in
                                                   wnu   +        b)|
                                   u
                                        ∂hn  ∂w nu          ∂h  n
                                  X ∂L                 ∂L
                                                in
                               =|    (     in
                                              wnu  +        b)|
                                   u
                                        ∂w nu         ∂h  n
                                  X ∂L                 X ∂L
                                                in
                               =|    (     in
                                              wnu  )+             b|
                                   u
                                        ∂wnu            u
                                                            ∂hn
                         ∂L    in
Interestingly, the term ∂w in wnu also signifies the synaptic saliency correlated with the input param-
                          nu
      in
eter wnu  of the n-th neuron. Additionally, the computation of the neuron saliency νn encompasses
the aggregate of its respective input synaptic saliencies, which effectively captures the complex and
non-intuitive relationships among input features in tabular data.
Finally, we aggregate all neuron saliency of each layer as the final score of the given architecture a.
With equation 11, we have

                                   N
                                 B X                B X N
                                 X                 X          ∂L K
                          sa =             νin =           |      | zin
                                 i=1 n=1           i=1 n=1
                                                             ∂zin
                                                                                                    (12)
                                  B   N X
                                 X    X       ∂L    in
                                                           X X ∂L
                               =    |      (   in
                                                  w nu ) +         b|
                                 i=1 n=1 u
                                             ∂wnu          n u
                                                               ∂hn

which measures both the trainability and expressivity of the architecture a.

G.4    DATA -AGNOSTIC P ROPERTIES OF E XPRESS F LOW

In this paper, we exclusively employ the ReLU activation function, with zn = σ(h) = 0 holding for
any h ≤ 0. This particular choice inherently implies thatJcertain neurons may yield a zero neuron
                                                         ∂L
saliency, given that the saliency is defined by νn = | ∂z n
                                                            | zn . Consequently, this could potentially
result in the total score not fully encapsulating the information provided by the neurons, thus leading
to a diminution in the correlation of the ExpressFlow. This is substantiated by empirical studies
presented in Appendix D.1.
We, therefore, restrict to the positive value of h by requiring that each non-zero parameter is positive,
i.e., we set w = |w| for all w ∈ a. Specifically, for h = wz + b, given w is positive and z is
non-negative, h could keep positive for all non-zero z.


                                                     33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Empirical findings shown in Appendix D.1 suggest that the correlation remains largely unaffected
by different batch sizes. Based on this observation, we define a novel loss function to aid in the
computation of ExpressFlow:
                                    L(XB ) = a(1d ) = zL+1 .                                  (13)

where zL+1 denotes the output of the final layer of the architecture, 1d represents an all-one vector of
dimension d and batch size B, and a(·) is the architecture mapping this vector to the output zL+1 .
In conclusion, the computation of ExpressFlow is both efficient and data-agnostic, which significantly
simplifies the process of architecture evaluation during the filtering phase, which subsequently
facilitates anytime NAS on various tabular datasets.


                                                  34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H    N OTATION AND T ERMINOLOGY
                          Table 16: Summary of Notation and Terminology

         Tmax                                      Time budget
        A = {a}                           Search space and architecture
           L                              Number of layers in the DNN
           H                               A candidate set of layer sizes
          |H|L                         Number of candidate architectures
           fs                                     Search strategy
           Si                    State of the search strategy at the i-th iteration.
            θ                              Parameter of an architecture
         B, XB                         Batch size. A batch of data samples
            N                    Number of neurons of the whole architecture
           Nl                Number of neurons of the l-th layer of the architecture
            L                                     Loss function
            sa                          TRAILER score of architecture
           ρ(·)
           J                            TRAILER assessment function
                                               Hadamard product
             Θ                                    NTK metrics
             Φ                                  Synaptic saliency
            νn        Neuron saliency of the n-th neuron computed on a batch of samples
            νin        Neuron saliency of the n-th neuron computed on the i-th sample
            zn        Activated output of the n-th neuron computed on a batch of samples
            zin        Activated output of the n-th neuron computed on the i-th sample
            w                           Incoming weights of the neuron
             σ                                 Activation function
             x                                   Neuron inputs
            Kl                          Number of neurons in the l-th layer
          z d (t)     Trajectory of the output of the layer d, and is parametrized by scalar t
           ℓ(·)                                  Trajectory length
         ℓ(z d (t))               Trajectory length of the output of the layer d
            M               Number of architectures explored in the filtering phase
            K              Number of architectures exploited in the refinement phase
            U                   Computational unit in the refinement phase
            t1                          Time to score an architecture
            t2                Time to train an architecture for a single epoch
            T1                      Time allocated to the filtering phase
            T2                     Time allocated to the refinement phase
            H                                  Hessian vector
            N                           Number of architecture encodings
                                        K
            η                           η Architectures to keep per-round



I   C ODE AND DATA
For reproducibility and comparisons in NAS research, we have made the source code available
at the following URL: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/ATLAS/ This repository contains the
experimental code, the experimental data, and a detailed guide outlining the steps to reproduce the
results, located within the README.md file. Furthermore, the link to NAS-Bench-Tabular is also
provided in the same README.md file.


                                                  35
