Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F INITE -T IME A NALYSIS OF F EDERATED T EMPORAL
D IFFERENCE L EARNING WITH L INEAR F UNCTION A P -
PROXIMATION UNDER E NVIRONMENT AND C OMPUTA -
TION H ETEROGENEITY

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Temporal difference (TD) learning is a popular method for reinforcement learning
         (RL). In this paper, we study federated TD learning of multi-agent systems, where
         each agent collaboratively performs policy evaluation with linear function approx-
         imation under heterogeneous computation configurations and environments. We
         devise a Heterogeneous Federated TD (HFTD) algorithm which iteratively aggre-
         gates agents’ local stochastic gradients for TD learning. The HFTD algorithm
         involves two major novel contributions: 1) it aims to find the optimal value func-
         tion model for the mixture environment where the environment is randomly drawn
         from the heterogeneous environments, and the procedure relies only on the lo-
         cal gradients arising from each agent’s mean squared projected Bellman errors
         (MSPBEs) for their respective environments; 2) it allows agents to perform differ-
         ent numbers of local iterations for TD learning, thus enhancing the computational
         capacity of heterogeneous agents. We analyze the finite-time convergence of the
         HFTD algorithm for the scenarios of I.I.D. sampling and Markovian sampling.
         By characterizing bounds on the convergence error, we show that the HFTD algo-
         rithm can asymptotically converge to the optimal model, which is the first result in
         existing works on federated RL to our best  knowledge. The HFTD algorithm also
         achieves a sample complexity of O N1ε2 and linear convergence, which match
         the results of existing TD algorithms.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising machine learning (ML) paradigm and RL has been ap-
plied for a wide range of sequential decision-making problems, such as autonomous driving, gaming
and dynamic resource allocation (Mnih et al., 2013; Ye et al., 2019; Kiran et al., 2021). One major
challenge for RL is that, to achieve a high learning accuracy, an agent needs to learn the optimal
policy in an online manner from a large amount of data samples via repeatedly interacting with the
environment. Hence, the learning performance is restricted by the computational efficiencies of the
agents. For example, when RL is applied to train a walking robot, the walking ability of the robot is
limited by the number of samples used by the robot (Ibarz et al., 2021; Rudin et al., 2022).
Along a different avenue, as an emerging ML paradigm, federated learning (FL) carries out model
training in a distributed manner (McMahan & Ramage, 2017): Instead of transmitting data from a
possibly large number of clients to a central server for training, FL trains a global ML model by
aggregating local ML models computed distributedly by clients based on their local data (Li et al.,
2020; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2022). One significant advantage of FL is to preserve
the privacy of each client data. Moreover, since only local ML models rather than local data are
sent to the server, the communication costs can be greatly reduced. Furthermore, FL can exploit
substantial computation capabilities of ubiquitous smart devices (Yang et al., 2020).
A natural idea to deal with the sample-efficiency issue of RL is to share the information among multi-
agents, so that agents can accelerate the process of learning the optimal policy based on other’s expe-
riences. However, in practical applications, raw RL trajectories often contain sensitive information


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(e.g., medical information of patients) and thus sharing them compromises agents’ privacy. More-
over, exchanging data samples among agents usually leads to high communication costs. Hence,
inspired by FL, federated reinforcement learning (FRL) has been proposed as a promising approach
which allows agents to collectively learn the global optimal policy without sharing raw dataset (Jin
et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023; Zeng et al., 2021; Qi et al., 2021).
As federated supervised learning which has been widely studied, FRL meets similar challenges,
including data (environment) heterogeneity and system (computation and communication) hetero-
geneity. Moreover, there are some unique challenges in FRL due to its salient features. In particular,
unlike typical supervised learning where data are available offline and data samples are drawn from
I.I.D. distributions, each agent in FRL collects data online by following its own Markovian process
decided by its behavior policy and state transitions of the environment.
Compared to the performance guarantees in parallel RL where agents interact with identical environ-
ments independently (Khodadadian et al., 2022; Liu & Olshevsky, 2023; Fan et al., 2021), studies
on FRL with heterogeneous environments are still very limited due to the challenges mentioned
above. For a few recent works on FRL where agents have heterogeneous environments (including
federated TD learning (Jin et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023)), none of these works has shown that the
convergence of their algorithms can diminish to zero asymptotically (i.e., the convergence error can
be made arbitrarily small with appropriate hyperparameters of the algorithm such as the number of
rounds and step size). Moreover, the existing works on FRL assume that each agent can only use
the same number of local iterations in each round of the algorithm. However, in practice the compu-
tation capabilities of agents can be highly diverse, and stragglers could significantly slow down the
training process. Therefore, it is more efficient for agents to use different local iterations based on
their computation capabilities.
To tackle the challenges above, in this paper, we focus on federated TD learning for policy evaluation
with linear function approximation, where agents interact with heterogeneous environments mod-
eled as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), and collaboratively learn the value function model for a
given policy. The MDPs have identical state spaces and action spaces, but heterogeneous transition
probability kernels and reward functions. We also consider agents with heterogeneous computation
capabilities, and they can use different numbers of local iterations in each round of the federated TD
learning. Given the environment heterogeneity and computation heterogeneity of agents, we aim to
answer the following fundamental questions: 1) Is it possible to design a federated TD algorithm
that asymptotically converge to the optimal value function model? 2) If yes, what is the sample
complexity of this algorithm? .
We highlight the main contributions of this paper as follows.
       • We study federated TD learning with linear function approximation, where multiple agents
         collaboratively perform policy evaluation via TD learning, while interacting with hetero-
         geneous environments and using heterogeneous computation configurations. We devise
         a Heterogeneous Federated Temporal Difference (HFTD) learning algorithm which itera-
         tively aggregates agents’ local stochastic gradients for TD learning. Compared to existing
         works on FRL, the HFTD algorithm involves two major novel elements: 1) The goal of
         the algorithm is to find the optimal value function model for the environment that is ran-
         domly drawn from agents’ heterogeneous environments. To this end, the algorithm aims
         to minimize the average of agents’ mean squared projected Bellman errors (MSPBEs) for
         their respective environments, using stochastic gradients of the MSPBEs; 2) The HFTD
         algorithm allows agents to perform different numbers of local iterations for TD learning.
         In particular, each agent’s local stochastic gradients in a round are averaged by its local
         iteration number, which is then used for local gradient aggregation by the server.
       • For the settings of I.I.D. sampling and Markovian sampling, we analyze the finite-time
         convergence performance of the HFTD algorithm by characterizing the bounds on the con-
         vergence error. Our results show that the HFTD algorithm can asymptotically converge to
         the optimal value function model as the number of rounds go to infinity with appropriate
         step sizes. To our best knowledge, this is the first result in existing works on federated RL
         with heterogeneous environments that the convergence error can diminish to zero asymp-
         totically. In particular, a key property of the global gradient of the average MSPBE allows
         us to remove a non-vanishing bias in the convergence error, so that only vanishing error
         terms are left. We also show that the HFTD algorithm achieves a sample complexity of


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Table 1: Comparison of settings and results for federated temporal difference learning
                                    Vanishing     Heterogeneous Heterogeneous Markovian
            References            Convergence Local Iteration
                                                                     Environments       Sampling
                                      Error
                                        √             Numbers
     (Liu & Olshevsky (2023))           √                 ×                ×               √×
    (Khodadadian et al. (2022))                           ×                ×
                                                                           √               √
        (Wang et al. (2023))           √×                 ×
                                                          √                √                √
            This paper


          O N1ε2 and linear convergence speedup, which match the results of existing TD learning

          algorithms Bhandari et al. (2018); Khodadadian et al. (2022).


2    R ELATED W ORK

Temporal Difference Learning. Most existing works on TD learning have focused on the case of
a single agent. For TD learning under I.I.D. sampling, the asymptotic convergence has been well
studied in Borkar & Meyn (2000); Borkar (2009), and the non-asymptotic convergence (i.e., finite-
time analysis) has been studied in Kamal (2010); Dalal et al. (2018); Thoppe & Borkar (2019). For
TD learning under Markovian sampling, the asymptotic convergence has been studied in Tsitsiklis
& Van Roy (1997); Tadić (2001), and the non-asymptotic analysis has been studied in Bhandari et al.
(2018); Srikant & Ying (2019); Hu & Syed (2019); Xu et al. (2020b).
Federated Learning. FL has emerged as a groundbreaking computing paradigm for ML by democ-
ratizing the learning process for potentially many clients (McMahan & Ramage, 2017; Bonawitz
et al., 2019; Stich, 2019; Li et al., 2020; Wang & Ji, 2022; Zhang et al., 2021b; 2022; Guo et al.,
2022; Huang et al., 2022; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Fallah et al., 2020; Cui et al., 2021). Compared
to conventional distributed ML, FL has several salient features, including multiple local iterations
of clients, and heterogeneous computation capabilities of clients. Prior works on FL predominantly
focused on federated supervised learning.
Federated Reinforcement Learning. The settings of FRL have significant differences from those
of federated supervised learning, due to the salient features of RL, including online data sampling
(especially Markovian sampling), and dynamic state transition. There have been a few recent works
on FRL (Xie & Song, 2023; Zeng et al., 2021; Fan et al., 2021; Liang et al., 2023). However,
most of these works have not considered FRL with heterogeneous environments and heterogeneous
computation configurations of agents.
Distributed Reinforcement Learning. Distributed reinforcement learning (DRL) considers mul-
tiple agents operating in a distributed fashion. As a major class of DRL, parallel RL (Fan et al.,
2021; Mnih et al., 2016) uses multiple learners to solve a large-scale single-agent RL task (Li &
Schuurmans, 2011; Nair et al., 2015), where the learners aim to learn a common policy for differ-
ent instances of the same environment. Another major class of DRL is multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL), where a group of agents operate in a common environment; all agents’ actions
influence the global state transition and MARL aims at seeking the optimal policy combining all
local policies in a collaborative manner (Zeng et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2018), or find local optimal
policies in a non-collaborative manner (Zhang et al., 2021a). These prior works of DRL are different
from FRL, since 1) agents in FRL can interact with diverse environments and collaboratively learn
a common policy in different environments; 2) FRL involves some unique features of FL, includ-
ing multiple local iterations of agents, heterogeneous and time-varying computation capabilities of
agents.
Some recent works have studied FRL with heterogeneous environments (Jin et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2023). However, none of the algorithms in these works have convergence guarantee with vanishing
errors. In this paper, we show that the proposed HFTD algorithm can asymptotically converge
to the optimal value function model, which is the first such result in existing works on FRL with
heterogeneous environments. Moreover, agents can have heterogeneous numbers of local iterations
in the HFTD algorithm. We have elaborated the technical differences in the convergence analysis of
the HFTD algorithm in Section 4.3.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3   P RELIMINARIES
Policy Evaluation in a Single-Node Setting. We consider the problem of evaluating a given policy
                                      ∆
in an MDP defined by the tuple M = {S, A, P, R, γ}, where S is the set of states, A is the set of
actions, P is the Markovian transition kernel, R is a reward function, and γ is the discount factor.
For a discrete state space S, P(s′ |s ) showsPthe probability of transitioning form s to state s′ . The
reward function of s is denoted by R(s) = s P(s′ |s )R(s, s′ ). For a given policy µ, the expected
cumulative future rewards can be represented as a function of the initial state s:
                                            "∞                      #
                                             X
                                                  t
                               Vµ (s) = E        γ Rµ (st ) |s0 = s ,
                                                 t=0

where {st } is the sequence of states generated by the transition kernel Pµ . The value function
satisfies the Bellman equation Tµ Vµ = Vµ , where for any V ∈ R|S| ,
                                                    X
                            (Tµ V )(s) = Rµ (s) + γ     Pµ (s, s′ )V (s′ ).                  (1)
                                                           s′

TD Learning with Linear Function Approximation. To mitigate the effect of intractable com-
putation in face of large state spaces in policy evaluation, a common and tractable approach is to
utilize linear function approximator for a representation of value functions. Let {Φk }dk=1 be a set of
d linearly independent basis vectors in Rn . For the value function approximation in this paper, the
true value function Vµ is approximated as Vµ (s) ≈ Vθ (s) = ϕ(s)T θ, where ϕ(s) ∈ Rd is a fixed
feature vector for state s and θ ∈ Rd is the unknown model to be learned. At time t, for an observed
tuple Ot = (st , rt , st+1 ), the TD target can be defined using Bellman operator as (1). Then the loss
function is defined as the squared Bellman error (Bhandari et al., 2018). The negative gradient of
the Bellman error evaluated at the current parameter θt can be expressed as
                              gt (θt ) = (rt + γϕ(st+1 )T θt − ϕ(st )T θt )ϕ(st ).                 (2)
Then the estimated model at time t + 1 can be updated by the gradient descent method (Bhandari
et al., 2018) with step size α ∈ (0, 1) as
                                            θt+1 = θt + αgt (θt ).                                 (3)
When state st sampled in tuple Ot follows the stationary distribution of the MDP, the expected
negative gradient at θ is
                     X
          ḡt (θ) =       π(st )P (st+1 |st )(R(st , st+1 ) + γϕ(st+1 )T θ − ϕ(st )T θ)ϕ(st ), (4)
                   st ,st+1

where π(·) is the stationary distribution of the associated Markov chain which is assumed to be
irreducible and aperiodic.
Let D denote the diagonal matrix whose elements consist of the entries of π(·). In the convergence
analysis of TD(0) using (3), Tsitsiklis & Van Roy (1997) has proved the limit point θ∗ is the unique
solution to the projected Bellman equation Φθ = ΠD Tµ Φθ with ḡ(θ∗ ) = 0, where ΠD (·) is the
projection operator defined on the subspace {Φx x ∈ Rd }.

4   H ETEROGENEOUS F EDERATED T EMPORAL D IFFERENCE L EARNING WITH
    L INEAR F UNCTION A PPROXIMATION
In this section, we first describe the problem statement about the federated policy evaluation in
heterogeneous environments where agents collectively seek to find a global model to approximate
the value function under a given policy µ. As we discussed above, in the process of policy evaluation
for a single agent i, the local loss function Fi is usually defined as expected Bellman error squared
(Bhandari et al., 2018; Srikant & Ying, 2019). Accordingly, the optimization problem for federated
value evaluation can be formulated as
                                           "             N
                                                                   #
                                                      1 X
                                      min F (θ) =            Fi (θ)                               (5)
                                      θ∈Rd           N i=1


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                          h                               i
                                                        2
where Fi (θ) = EOt ∼πi 12 (rt + γVθ (st+1 ) − Vθ (st )) is the local objective function of i-th agent,
i.e., the expected squared Bellman error with respect to the model parameter θ. Here, πi is the sta-
tionary distribution of the state transition Markov chain in i-th environment, and Oit = (sti , rit , st+1
                                                                                                       i   )
represents a data sample from the environment i. We assume that each agent collects samples by
interacting with its own environment independently. The MDP of agent i can be expressed by:
       ∆
Mi = {S, A, Pi , Ri , γ}. We assume that all agents have the same state space and action space
while the reward functions and transition probability functions may differ across various agents.
Prior works on FRL with heterogeneous environments (Jin et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023) consid-
ered the objective of optimizing the value function model for a single virtual environment. This
                                                       ∆
virtual environment is constructed as an MDP M̄ = {S, A, P̄, R̄, γ} by averaging the transition
                                                                                        PN
kernels and reward functions of each agent’s environment, given by P̄ = (1/N ) i=1 Pi and
               PN
R̄ = (1/N ) i=1 Ri . However, such an ”averaged” environment may not coincide with any
agent’s individual environment. Intuitively, from the perspective of an individual agent, the ob-
jective function may not encourage more agents to participate in the federation. Motivated by this
observation, in this paper, we consider a mixture environment defined as the environment randomly
drawn from agents’ heterogeneous environments. Note that this mixture environment is different
from the virtual environment in Jin et al. (2022); Wang et al. (2023). Thus our goal is to find the
optimal value function model for this mixture environment of agents. This goal is similar in spirit to
that of federated supervised learning, since the latter aims to find the optimal model that minimizes
the average training loss for all data samples of all clients. Towards this goal, the global objective
function of our federated TD learning problem is the average MSPBE of all agents for their respec-
tive environments, as the MSPBE quantifies the error of a value function model for an environment.
To minimize the average MSPBE, we devise the HFTD algorithm which updates the value function
model via federated TD learning. The algorithm aims to iteratively estimate the gradient of the
global objective function (i.e., the average MSPBE), given by
                                                         N
                                                    1 X
                                          ḡ(θ) =         ḡi (θ)                                       (6)
                                                    N i=1
where ḡi (θ) is the gradient of agent i’s local objective function (i.e., the MSPBE for agent i’s en-
vironment). Note that the condition (6) is substantially different from the estimation in Wang et al.
(2023) (6) does not hold in Wang et al. (2023)), and is also a key property that allow us to show
that our HFTD algorithm can asymptotically converge to the optimal model θ∗ (rather than to a
neighborhood of θ∗ where the radius of the convergence error is determined by some non-vanishing
bias error as in Khodadadian et al. (2022), see Section 4.3 for detailed discussions of the technical
differences). The optimal value function model θ∗ that minimizes the average MSPBE of agents sat-
isfies ḡ(θ∗ ) = 0. Note that the gradient in TD learning is different from that of the standard gradient
descent, as ḡi (θ) or ḡ(θ) is not the gradient of any fixed objective function. To estimate the gradi-
                                                                                               N
ent ḡ(θ), the HFTD algorithm computes a stochastic gradient g(θt ) given by g(θt ) = N1
                                                                                               P
                                                                                                  gi (θt ),
                                                                                                i=1
where gi (θt ) is the stochastic gradient of ḡi (θ). Note that ḡi (θ) is the expectation of stochastic
gradient gi (θt ) following the stationary distribution of environment i.
The detailed design of the HFTD algorithm is described as below (as summarized in Algorithm 1). In
each round t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, the central server first broadcasts the global model θ̄t to all agents and
each agent i ∈ {1, . . . , N } independently performs Ki,t local iterations starting from the current
global model θit,0 to optimize its local objective. Ki,t may vary across agents since agents have
heterogeneous computation capabilities. Following the same policy µ, agent i observes the tuple
Oit,k = (st,k    t,k t,k+1
            i , ri , si      ) at each local iteration k of the round t which is generated by its own
MDP characterized by {S, A, Pi , Ri , γ}. Using the observation Oit,k , agent i can compute the
stochastic gradient by (2) and update its local model. At the end of each round, agents send the
gradients directly to the server. The server then aggregates the gradients, updates the global model
and starts round t + 1 of federation. Note that no exchange of raw samples is required, hence the
privacy of local environments can be well protected. The update rule can be expressed as
                                                       N
                                                               !       N
                                   t+1     t       1 X             1 X t
                                θ̄     = θ̄ + α            Ki,t ·         d                             (7)
                                                  N i=1            N i=1 i


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                     P−1
                                                                                    Ki,t
where dti is the normalized gradient for agent i in the t-th round as dti = K1i,t          gi (θit,k ); Ki,t
                                                                                    k=0
is the number of local updates at agent i in round t. Here we consider agents have heterogeneous
number of local updates while the number of local updates are identical and fixed in Khodadadian
et al. (2022); Wang et al. (2023); Jin et al. (2022). Note that cumulative local gradients are normal-
ized when averaging, and this is a necessary technique when dealing with heterogeneous number of
local updates in analysis [refer to Section 4.3 for details].

Algorithm 1 Heterogeneous Federated TD (HFTD) Learning with Linear Function Approximation
 1: Input: number of rounds T , step size α, initial model θ0
 2: for t = 1 to T do
 3:   θit,0 ← θ̄t for all agents i
 4:   For each agent i = 1, 2, ..., N do:
 5:   for k = 0 to Ki,t − 1 do
 6:      Observe a tuple Oit,k = (st,k  t,k t,k+1
                                   i , ri , si    ) and calculate the gradient by (2)
 7:      Update the local model by (3)
 8:   end for                                      t,Ki,t −1
                                                 θ           −θ t,0
 9:   Agents send the normalized gradient dti = i Ki,t i to the server
10:   Server computes the global model by (7)
11: end for
12: Output: {θ̄ t }T
                   t=1



4.1   I.I.D. S AMPLING

First, we start from the scenario where the random tuples are independently and identically sam-
pled from the stationary distribution πi of the Markov reward process for each agent i. That is
to say, samples for updating the local model are independently drawn across iterations and rounds
for each agent. We make the following assumptions, which are commonly imposed in federated
reinforcement learning (Khodadadian et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2021).
Assumption 1. (Bounded Gradient Variance) For each agent i, there is a constant σ such that
E ∥gi (θ) − ḡi (θ)∥ ≤ σ 2 for all θ ∈ Rd .

To measure the heterogeneity of environments, we have the following assumptions.
Assumption 2. (Bounded Gradient       PmHeterogeneity) For any set of weights satisfying convex com-
bination, i.e., {pi ≥ 0}m i=1   and i=1 pi = 1, there exist constants β 2 ≥ 1, κ2 ≥ 0 such that
P                2    2
                         P              2    2                                                     2
   i pi ∥ḡi (θ)∥2 ≤ β ∥   i pi ḡi (θ)∥2 + κ . If agents execute in identical environments, then β = 1,
 2
κ = 0.

Assumption 2 is commonly used in the federated learning literature to capture the dissimilarities of
local objectives.
                                                                       2
Assumption 3. (Smoothness) Under the assumption that ∥ϕ(s)∥2 ≤ 1 for all s, it holds that
∥ḡi (θ1 ) − ḡi (θ2 )∥2 ≤ 2∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2 for all θ1 , θ2 ∈ Rd .

Assumption 3 is important for deriving a fast convergence rate and the proof can be found in Bhan-
dari et al. (2018); Tu & Recht (2019); Wang et al. (2023). Now we are ready to present the conver-
gence guarantees using our HFTD algorithm:
Theorem 1. (HFTD with I.I.D. Sampling) Under Assumptions 1,2 and 3, let Kmax = max{Ki,t },
                                                                                              i,t
K̄max = max{K̄t } and K̄min = min{K̄t }. If α ≤ min{αt }, Then output of Algorithm 1 can be
           t                   t                 t
represented as
                           2        λαK̄min T          256α2 σ 2 K̄max (K̄max − 1)
                                                         2
             E θ̄T − θ∗ 2 ≤ e−          8       θ̄0 − θ∗ 2 +
                                                                 λ2 K̄min
                                     2 2                                2
                                 512α κ K̄max Kmax (Kmax − 1) 16αK̄max     σ 2 K̂min
                               +                              +                      .                  (8)
                                           λ2 K̄min                   N λK̄max


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where K̂t = N1          1
                   P
                       Ki,t and K̂max = min{K̂t }.
                   i                     t

Remark 1. Theorem 1 provides a bound on the convergence error of the HFTD algorithm when
agents interact with heterogeneous environments using heterogeneous local iteration. The error
bound consists of four terms. As α > 0, the 1st term converges to zero as T increases. Moreover,
it achieves an exponential decay rate which matches the results of existing RL algorithms (Bhandari
et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2020b; Kumar et al., 2023). The last three terms are all caused by the variances
of stochastic gradients.
Remark 2. We note that the 4th term decreases as N increases . Also note that the 3rd term becomes
zero when each agent’s local iteration number Ki,t is 1 (i.e., perfect synchronization for all agents).
Moreover, if agents interact with the same environments, then we have κ2 = 0, and the 3rd term of
the convergence bound vanishes.
Remark 3. We observe that the last three terms increase as the number of average local iteration
goes up. This is because, due to agents’ heterogeneous environments, more local iterations drive
each agent’s local model more towards its local optimal model and possibly away from the global
optimal model (also known as “local drifts” in the existing works on federated supervised learning
(Khaled et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020).
We notice that the bound will be minimized when the numbers of local iterations are all equal to 1
(i.e., Ki,t = 1, ∀i). However, it has been widely shown that multiple local iterations achieve good
performance empirically in practice while reducing communication costs (compared to communi-
cating after every local iteration). Therefore, we should set local iteration numbers based on their
empirical performance as well as agents’ computation capabilities, rather than solely on the learning
accuracy bound (which captures the worst-case scenario).
Corollary 1. Suppose a constant local update number K for each agent, the convergence rate of
HFTD with I.I.D. sampling is:
               2         λαKT                2    256α2 σ 2 (K − 1) 512α2 κ2 K(K − 1) 16ασ 2
 E θ̄T − θ∗ 2 ≤ e−         8    θ̄0 − θ∗ 2 +                       +                 +       (9)
                                                         λ2                 λ2         λN
                                q
                                    N
Corollary 2. Letting α =            KT yield

                         2
                                √
                                             N (K − 1)

                                                               1

              E θ̄T − θ∗ 2 ≤ O e− N KT + O               +O √                                       (10)
                                                 T            N KT
Remark 4. When the communication rounds T is sufficiently large, then the convergence of HFTD
will be dominated by the last term in (10) which is √N1KT . Then we can conclude that the total
                                                                       2
complexity which can achieve an ϵ-accurate optimal solution E θ̄T − θ∗ 2 ≤ ε is KT = O N1ε2 .

When K = 1 and N = 1, the sample complexity will match the results in Theorem 2(b) in Bhandari
et al. (2018)

4.2   M ARKOVIAN S AMPLING

The case of I.I.D. sampling for RL can be hard to achieve in practical scenario. A more realistic
setting is Markovian sampling, where the observed tuples used by TD are gathered from a single
trajectory of the Markov chain. Different from the setting of I.I.D. sampling, Markovian sampling
brings more challenges since samples are highly correlated. Specifically, in the I.I.D. case, E[g(θ) −
ḡ(θ)] = 0 since g(θ) is the unbiased estimate of ḡ(θ). However, in the Markovian setting, the
samples for calculating g(θ) are not sampled from the stationary distribution. To put it another way,
θ and the sample observed at time t, Ot , are not independent. Hence, E[g(θ) − ḡ(θ)] ̸= 0, indicating
bias exists in the gradient evaluation for the analysis of a single agent. The analysis of federated
temporal learning, will meet more complex time-correlations to deal with.
For the following analysis, we first introduce the geometric mixing property of finite-state, aperiodic
and irreducible Markov chains as follows.
                                    sup ∥Pi (xk ∈ · |x0 ) − πi (·)∥T V ≤ ηi ρki                     (11)
where π(·) is the stationary distribution of the MDP i; ηi > 0 and ρi ∈ [0, 1] for all i ∈ [N ].


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assumption 4. (Irreducibility and Aperiodicity) For each i ∈ [N ], the Markov chain induced by
the policy µ, corresponding to the state transition matrix Pi , is aperiodic and irreducible.
Theorem 2.  (HFTD with Markovian Sampling) Under Assumptions 2, 3 and                  4, if we choose
                        2
αt ≤ min                          , 1 , λ +148 +2 , 4 32K̄ 2 β 2 c2 +16K̄λ2 +16β 2 c2 +β 2 c′
              λ(2c2 K̄t +c2 +K̄t ) λc′ 4( 24
                                                                                                  , then the output
                                             λ   ) ( t                    t                   )
of Algorithm 1 satisfies
              2         λαK̄min T              2
E θ̄T − θ∗ 2 ≤e−    4   E θ̄0 − θ∗ 2
                 817 8τ 2 αc
                                2 2
                                 8α c (Kmax − 1)(2Kmax − 1) 2 2                        2

             +       +                                                   β H +κ
                 λ2      λ                       3(1 − C ′ )
                   817 8τ 2 αc       α2 q 2 (Kmax − 1)(2Kmax − 1)

               +       +
                    λ2     λ                       3(1 − C ′ )
                                                                                       !
                                               2

               8α 2K̄max + 2τ 2 + 1      [q ′ ] K̂max      2qq ′ ρ(Kmax − 1)K̂max2
             +                                           +
                        λ                       N                  N (1 − ρ)
                                                                                     2τP−1
                                                                                                          
                                                  ′ 2

                  8α 2K̄max + 2τ 2 + 1         2[c ]  ρ(K  max −  1) X       1         s=0
                                                                                            (Ki,s +Kj,s )

               +                                                                    ρ                    
                           λ                        N 2 (1 − ρ)      i<j
                                                                         K i,t K j,t

                                                                                                              (12)
                                                                      ′                 ′         ′
                              2                              2
                                                                              2                        2 2

                      4α 32c K̄max + 16K̄max c + 8τ c + c κ + 2αH 2c H + q + 4β τ cH
                  +
                                                        λ
                                                                                                              (13)
              1         1                                        1         1
                                         {K̂t }, K̂t2 = N                            2           2
                P                                                  P
where K̂t = N          Ki,t , K̂max = max                                  2 , and K̂max = max{K̂t }.
                                                                          Ki,t
                  i                    t                          i                         t

Remark 5. Theorem 2 characterizes the convergence of the HFTD algorithm where each agent’s
sampling follows a Markov chain. As in the setting of I.I.D. sampling, we can make similar ob-
servations here on the sampling complexity and the impacts of various system parameters on the
convergence error. Different from the I.I.D. setting, we note that the term (12) comes from the vari-
ance reduction in the Markovian setting. If t is sufficiently large, (12) diminishes to zero. This is
because the Markov chain geometrically converges to its stationary distribution as t evolves.
Corollary 3. If N = 1 and K = 1, then we have:
                                                                                              2
                                           2αH 2c′ H + q ′ + 4β 2 τ 2 cH        8α 3 + 2τ 2 [q ′ ]

                2      λαT            2
   E θ̄T − θ∗ 2 ≤ e− 4 θ̄0 − θ∗ 2 +                                          +
                                                           λ                            λ
                                                                                                   (14)
which matches the results of centralized TD as Theorem 3(b) in Bhandari et al. (2018).

4.3   T ECHNICAL D IFFERENCES OF C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS

In this subsection, we highlight the key technical differences in the convergence analysis of the
HFTD algorithm (i.e., the proofs of Theorems 1 and 2 and Corollary 1), compared to prior works.
In the convergence analysis, in order to bound E θ̄t+1 − θ∗ , we need to bound an inner product
term in (15), which can be decomposed into three terms. As the objective of the HFTD algorithm is
to minimize the average MSPBE, the term B can be cancelled (after the double summation before
the inner product) due to the condition (6). In contrast, in Wang et al. (2023), this term B cannot be
cancelled and becomes a non-vanishing bias in the convergence error.
                  Ki,t −1 D
         1 X 1 X                                   E
                          E ḡi (θit,k ), θ̄t − θ∗
         N i Ki,t
                   k=0
                      Ki,t −1
                               *                                                               +
           1 X 1 X                      t,k          t         t         t         t      t
         =                    E ḡi (θi ) − ḡi (θ̄ ) + ḡi (θ̄ ) − ḡ(θ̄ ) + ḡ(θ̄ ) , θ̄ − θ                (15)
           N i Ki,t               |          {z       } |        {z       }   | {z }
                               k=0
                                            Assumption3                       B        Lemma3



                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Similarly, in the convergence analysis of the Markovian setting, when dealing with such an inner
product term, the term B can also be cancelled (as shown in (27) in the Appendix).
In the convergence analysis, we also need to bound the error between the total accumulated local
                     PKi,t −1
gradients N1 i K1i,t k=0      ḡi (θit,k ) and the global gradient i ḡi (θ̄t ) (as in (16)). By normal-
             P                                                    P

izing each agent’s accumulated local gradients with the agent’s local iteration number Ki,t , we are
allowed to decompose the error into the sum of multiple error terms ḡi (θit,k ) − ḡi (θ̄t ) , each in-
volving only one agent’s local gradients. Then each of these error terms can be further bounded
using the the smoothness condition of the local gradient.
                                                   2                                                    2
               Ki,t −1                                              Ki,t −1
      1 X 1 X                                            1 X    1 X
    E                  ḡi (θit,k ) − ḡi (θ̄t )       ≤     E              ḡi (θit,k ) − ḡi (θ̄t )
      N i Ki,t                                           N i   Ki,t
                       k=0                                                  k=0
                                                   2                                                    2
                                                                       Ki,t −1
                                                         1 X 1 X                              2
                                                       ≤          E ḡi (θit,k ) − ḡi (θ̄t )               (16)
                                                         N i Ki,t                             2
                                                                         k=0

5    S IMULATIONS
In this work, we have studied the problem of federated TD learning under heterogeneous environ-
ments with heterogeneous numbers of local updates. We provide numerical results under I.I.D.
sampling setting and Markovian sampling setting on the platform: GridWorld. We first verify our
theoretical results in a small-scale problem; see examples in Sutton & Barto (2018). Due to limited
space, the details of the environment setting are provided in the Appendix.


Figure 1: Training performance of HFTD with different settings under I.I.D. sampling: training
performance refers to the running error between current model and optimal model. Left: agents
perform local updates with different step sizes; Middle: agents take different number of local steps
with mean values 10, 30, and 50; Right: the number of agents participating training is different.

Empirical results in Figure 1 reveal that the system parameters affect HFTD in different ways. Figure
1 (Left) confirms that HFTD with larger step size will lead to a faster convergence speed. However,
it will have fluctuation when approaching to the optimal solution. As Theorem 1 shows, HFTD
with smaller step size will lead the convergence error to zero. Figure 1 (Middle) shows that more
local updates will lead to faster convergence. Figure 1 (Right) reveals that the federation of more
agents will accelerate the learning process. However, due to the environment heterogeneity, the gap
to optimal solution still exists unless we set a smaller step size.
6 C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we have developed a HFTD algorithm for federated TD learning with linear function
approximation under environment heterogeneity and computation heterogeneity. We have shown
that the HFTD algorithm can asymptotically converge to the optimal value function model, which
is the first such result in existing works on FRL with  heterogeneous environments. The HFTD
algorithm also achieves sampling complexity of O N1ε2 and linear speedup that match the results
of existing RL algorithms. For future work, we will study federated TD algorithms that allow for
more flexibility for agents, including partial and asynchronous participation of agents. We will also
explore FRL algorithms that involve both policy evaluation and policy improvement, such as the
actor-critic algorithms.


                                                         9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Jalaj Bhandari, Daniel Russo, and Raghav Singal. A finite time analysis of temporal difference
   learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on learning theory (COLT), 2018.
Keith Bonawitz, Hubert Eichner, Wolfgang Grieskamp, Dzmitry Huba, Alex Ingerman, Vladimir
  Ivanov, Chloe Kiddon, Jakub Konecny, Stefano Mazzocchi, H Brendan McMahan, et al. Towards
  federated learning at scale: System design. In Machine Learning and Systems (MLSys), 2019.
Vivek S Borkar. Stochastic approximation: a dynamical systems viewpoint, volume 48. Springer,
  2009.
Vivek S Borkar and Sean P Meyn. The ode method for convergence of stochastic approximation
  and reinforcement learning. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 38(2):447–469, 2000.
Laizhong Cui, Xiaoxin Su, Yipeng Zhou, and Yi Pan. Slashing communication traffic in federated
  learning by transmitting clustered model updates. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communi-
  cations, 39(8):2572–2589, 2021.
Gal Dalal, Balázs Szörényi, Gugan Thoppe, and Shie Mannor. Finite sample analyses for td (0) with
  function approximation. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2018.
Alireza Fallah, Aryan Mokhtari, and Asuman Ozdaglar. Personalized federated learning with theo-
  retical guarantees: A model-agnostic meta-learning approach. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NIPS), 2020.
Xiaofeng Fan, Yining Ma, Zhongxiang Dai, Wei Jing, Cheston Tan, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low.
  Fault-tolerant federated reinforcement learning with theoretical guarantee. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Yuanxiong Guo, Ying Sun, Rui Hu, and Yanmin Gong. Hybrid local sgd for federated learning
  with heterogeneous communications. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2022.
Bin Hu and Usman Syed. Characterizing the exact behaviors of temporal difference learning algo-
  rithms using markov jump linear system theory. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Yan Huang, Ying Sun, Zehan Zhu, Changzhi Yan, and Jinming Xu. Tackling data heterogeneity:
  A new unified framework for decentralized sgd with sample-induced topology. In International
  Conferene on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.
Julian Ibarz, Jie Tan, Chelsea Finn, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Peter Pastor, and Sergey Levine. How to
  train your robot with deep reinforcement learning: lessons we have learned. The International
  Journal of Robotics Research, 40(4-5):698–721, 2021.
Hao Jin, Yang Peng, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. Federated reinforcement
  learning with environment heterogeneity. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics (AISTATS), 2022.
Sameer Kamal. On the convergence, lock-in probability, and sample complexity of stochastic ap-
  proximation. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 48(8):5178–5192, 2010.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.
Ahmed Khaled, Konstantin Mishchenko, and Peter Richtárik. Tighter theory for local sgd on iden-
  tical and heterogeneous data. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics
  (AISTATS), 2020.
Sajad Khodadadian, Pranay Sharma, Gauri Joshi, and Siva Theja Maguluri. Federated reinforcement
  learning: Linear speedup under markovian sampling. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning(ICML), 2022.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B Ravi Kiran, Ibrahim Sobh, Victor Talpaert, Patrick Mannion, Ahmad A Al Sallab, Senthil Yoga-
  mani, and Patrick Pérez. Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous driving: A survey. IEEE
  Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 23(6):4909–4926, 2021.
Harshat Kumar, Alec Koppel, and Alejandro Ribeiro. On the sample complexity of actor-critic
  method for reinforcement learning with function approximation. Machine Learning, pp. 1–35,
  2023.
Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. On the convergence
  of FedAvg on non-IID data. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2020.
Yuxi Li and Dale Schuurmans. Mapreduce for parallel reinforcement learning. In European Work-
  shop on Reinforcement Learning, pp. 309–320. Springer, 2011.
Xinle Liang, Yang Liu, Tianjian Chen, Ming Liu, and Qiang Yang. Federated transfer reinforcement
  learning for autonomous driving. In Federated and Transfer Learning, pp. 357–371. Springer,
  2023.
Rui Liu and Alex Olshevsky. Distributed td (0) with almost no communication. IEEE Control
  Systems Letters, 2023.
Brendan McMahan and Daniel Ramage. Federated learning: Collaborative machine learning with-
  out centralized training data. Google Research Blog, 3, 2017.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2016.
Arun Nair, Praveen Srinivasan, Sam Blackwell, Cagdas Alcicek, Rory Fearon, Alessandro De Maria,
  Vedavyas Panneershelvam, Mustafa Suleyman, Charles Beattie, Stig Petersen, et al. Massively
  parallel methods for deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.04296, 2015.
Jiaju Qi, Qihao Zhou, Lei Lei, and Kan Zheng. Federated reinforcement learning: Techniques,
   applications, and open challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.11887, 2021.
Nikita Rudin, David Hoeller, Philipp Reist, and Marco Hutter. Learning to walk in minutes using
  massively parallel deep reinforcement learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 91–100.
  PMLR, 2022.
Rayadurgam Srikant and Lei Ying. Finite-time error bounds for linear stochastic approximation
  andtd learning. In Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), 2019.
Sebastian U Stich. Local SGD converges fast and communicates little. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
Jun Sun, Gang Wang, Georgios B Giannakis, Qinmin Yang, and Zaiyue Yang. Finite-time analysis
  of decentralized temporal-difference learning with linear function approximation. In International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2020.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Vladislav Tadić. On the convergence of temporal-difference learning with linear function approxi-
  mation. Machine Learning, 42:241–267, 2001.
Gugan Thoppe and Vivek Borkar. A concentration bound for stochastic approximation via alekseev’s
  formula. Stochastic Systems, 9(1):1–26, 2019.
John Tsitsiklis and Benjamin Van Roy. An analysis of temporal-difference learning with function
  approximation. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 42(5):674–690, 1997. doi: 10.1109/9.
  580874.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Stephen Tu and Benjamin Recht. The gap between model-based and model-free methods on the
  linear quadratic regulator: An asymptotic viewpoint. In Conference on Learning Theory (COLT),
  2019.
Han Wang, Aritra Mitra, Hamed Hassani, George J Pappas, and James Anderson. Federated tem-
  poral difference learning with linear function approximation under environmental heterogeneity.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02212, 2023.
Jianyu Wang, Qinghua Liu, Hao Liang, Gauri Joshi, and H. Vincent Poor. Tackling the objective in-
   consistency problem in heterogeneous federated optimization. In Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems (NIPS), 2020.
Shiqiang Wang and Mingyue Ji. A unified analysis of federated learning with arbitrary client par-
  ticipation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2022.
Zhijie Xie and Shenghui Song. Fedkl: Tackling data heterogeneity in federated reinforcement learn-
  ing by penalizing kl divergence. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 41(4):
  1227–1242, 2023.
Tengyu Xu, Zhe Wang, and Yingbin Liang. Improving sample complexity bounds for (natural)
  actor-critic algorithms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020a.
Tengyu Xu, Zhe Wang, Yi Zhou, and Yingbin Liang. Reanalysis of variance reduced temporal
  difference learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020b.
Haibo Yang, Minghong Fang, and Jia Liu. Achieving linear speedup with partial worker partici-
  pation in non-iid federated learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.
Hao Ye, Geoffrey Ye Li, and Biing-Hwang Fred Juang. Deep reinforcement learning based resource
  allocation for v2v communications. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 68(4):3163–
  3173, 2019.
Sihan Zeng, Malik Aqeel Anwar, Thinh T Doan, Arijit Raychowdhury, and Justin Romberg. A
  decentralized policy gradient approach to multi-task reinforcement learning. In Uncertainty in
  Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2021.
Siliang Zeng, Tianyi Chen, Alfredo Garcia, and Mingyi Hong. Learning to coordinate in multi-
   agent systems: A coordinated actor-critic algorithm and finite-time guarantees. In Learning for
   Dynamics and Control Conference, 2022.
Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, Han Liu, Tong Zhang, and Tamer Basar. Fully decentralized multi-
  agent reinforcement learning with networked agents. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2018.
Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tamer Başar. Decentralized multi-agent reinforcement learning
  with networked agents: Recent advances. Frontiers of Information Technology & Electronic
  Engineering, 22(6):802–814, 2021a.
Xin Zhang, Jia Liu, Zhengyuan Zhu, and Elizabeth Serena Bentley. GT-Storm: Taming sample,
  communication, and memory complexities in decentralized non-convex learning. In ACM In-
  ternational Symposium on Theory, Algorithmic Foundations, and Protocol Design for Mobile
  Networks and Mobile Computing (MobiHoc), 2021b.
Xin Zhang, Minghong Fang, Zhuqing Liu, Haibo Yang, Jia Liu, and Zhengyuan Zhu. Net-fleet:
  Achieving linear convergence speedup for fully decentralized federated learning with heteroge-
  neous data. In ACM International Symposium on Theory, Algorithmic Foundations, and Protocol
  Design for Mobile Networks and Mobile Computing (MobiHoc), 2022.


                                               12
