Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R E C ONCILE : ROUND -TABLE C ONFERENCE I MPROVES
R EASONING VIA C ONSENSUS AMONG D IVERSE LLM S
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

          Large Language Models (LLMs) still struggle with complex reasoning tasks. Mo-
          tivated by the society of minds (Minsky, 1988), we propose R E C ONCILE, a multi-
          model multi-agent framework designed as a round table conference among diverse
          LLM agents to foster diverse thoughts and discussion for improved consensus.
          R E C ONCILE enhances the reasoning capabilities of LLMs by holding multiple
          rounds of discussion, learning to convince other agents to improve their answers,
          and employing a confidence-weighted voting mechanism. In each round, R E C-
          ONCILE initiates discussion between agents via a ‘discussion prompt’ that consists
          of (a) grouped answers and explanations generated by each agent in the previous
          round, (b) their uncertainties, and (c) demonstrations of answer-rectifying human
          explanations, used for convincing other agents. This discussion prompt enables
          each agent to revise their responses in light of insights from other agents. Once
          a consensus is reached and the discussion ends, R E C ONCILE determines the fi-
          nal team answer by leveraging the confidence of each agent in a weighted voting
          scheme. We implement R E C ONCILE with ChatGPT, Bard, and Claude2 as the
          three agents. Experimental results on various benchmarks demonstrate that R E C-
          ONCILE significantly improves the reasoning performance of the agents (both in-
          dividually and as a team), surpassing prior single-agent and multi-agent baselines
          by 7.7% and also outperforming GPT-4 on some of these datasets. We also ex-
          periment with GPT-4 itself as one of the agents in R E C ONCILE and demonstrate
          that its initial performance also improves by absolute 10.0% through discussion
          and feedback from other agents. Finally, we analyze the accuracy after every
          round and observe that R E C ONCILE achieves better and faster consensus between
          agents, compared to a multi-agent debate baseline.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
A large body of work has focused on improving the reasoning capabilities of Large Language Mod-
els (LLMs) by imitating various human cognitive processes. These include phenomena like reflect-
ing on and critiquing one’s own predictions, being receptive to feedback, and learning from feed-
back. Of note, self-reflection is an introspective process that allows the model to improve its outputs
by generating feedback from the model itself (Madaan et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023). However,
self-reflection suffers from Degeneration-of-Thought – when the model is overly confident in its
answer, it is unable to generate novel thoughts even after multiple rounds of feedback (Liang et al.,
2023). Moreover, it is difficult for the model to refine knowledge that it already does not contain.
To promote more diverse thoughts, past work has drawn inspiration from the society of minds
in multi-agent systems (Minsky, 1988; Zhuge et al., 2023). Communication between multiple
agents plays a vital role in complex decision-making. This has prompted recent developments of
multi-agent debating frameworks (Liang et al., 2023; Du et al., 2023), in which multiple agents
participate in a multi-round debate to arrive at a common final answer. Despite the increased
reasoning diversity obtained through the process of a debate, multiple agents have typically been
limited to different instances of the same underlying model, ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022).2 This
    1
   Code for all experiments is provided in the supplementary.
    2
   In this work, we refer to multi-agent as multiple instances of the same underlying model (e.g., ChatGPT),
whereas multi-model model-agent refers to different models (e.g., ChatGPT, Bard and Claude2) as agents.


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Self-Refine                                      ReConcile
               yes         no                  (Group-Discuss-and-Convince)
                                      no                                               Convincing Samples
                                           No, with 40%
                                                                                 Question (Q):
                                            confidence                           Is an ammonia fighting cleaner
      Multi-Agent                                                                good for pet owners?
     Debate (MAD)
                                                           ChatGPT               Human Explanation (Exp):
              yes          no                                                    Ammonia is a component in pet
                                                                                 urine. It has an unpleasant odor.
                                      no                   Bard
                                                                                 Gold Answer: Yes
                                                           Claude
      MAD+Judge
                                                                                    Confidence Estimation
              yes         no
                                           Yes, with 95%          No, with 50%   (40% no, 50% no, 95% yes)
                                            confidence             confidence
                                 no
Figure 1: An illustration of the main differences between R E C ONCILE and prior works. While most
current self-refine and debating techniques rely on multiple instances of a single model (e.g., Chat-
GPT), our method incorporates models from different families (e.g., ChatGPT, Bard, and Claude2).
Our approach also emphasizes critical elements of effective discussion, including convincing an-
                                                                                                                                0.8 0.2
other agent to improve their answers and incorporating the estimated confidence of all agents. For
illustrative simplicity, we depict only one agent contemplating how to convince the other two agents.                    𝑓(𝑝)
                                                                                                                                yes no
                                                                                              Q        (
                                                                                                       X       ,     )
results in an inherent model bias, a restricted knowledge scope, and a lack of external feedback from
other models due to identical pre-training data and model architectures across Q+all agents.
                                                                                        (    , Relatedly,
                                                                                                   )   V
ensemble methods like self-consistency generate the most consistent answerExp      via sampling diverse
reasoning paths from the same model (Wang et al., 2023b) but do not incorporate any internal or
external feedback. In general, when multiple agents propose diverse solutions to a problem, the
success of such a multi-agent system is fundamentally reliant on the ability to estimate each agent’s
confidence and accordingly, convince other agents (with explanations) to reach a better consensus.
This puts forward the question: if multiple diverse LLMs are asked to collaboratively solve a task,
are they capable of discussing their solutions with each other such that a better consensus is reached?
We aim to solve complex reasoning problems by learning from diverse insights and external
feedback, originating from agents that belong to different model families. Collaborative processes
such as brainstorming, group meetings, and discussions play a pivotal role in reaching a consensus
and arriving at more refined solutions to complex problems (Li et al., 2022b). Effective discussion
also entails the selection of stances, voting, convincing, exchange of information, and a diversity of
opinions. Thus, we propose R E C ONCILE, a novel method of round-table conference for improved
consensus among diverse LLM agents. R E C ONCILE consists of multiple discussion rounds between
diverse LLM agents who try to convince3 each other to either rectify their answers or become more
confident of their initial correct answers (see Fig. 1 for a broad overview). The central motivation
of R E C ONCILE stems from the fact that in a collaborative environment, all participants engaging
in a discussion hold their own opinions at the beginning, and a consensus within is achieved
through various communicative aspects, including convincing others, voting for a decision, and the
adjustment of positions along with their associated confidence levels.
Given a reasoning problem, R E C ONCILE begins with each agent first generating an answer, its un-
certainty, and a corresponding explanation (as a Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022)) for the answer.
Then all agents enter a multi-round discussion phase. Each discussion round comprises all agents
generating a revised explanation and answer based on all other agents’ explanations and answers
from the previous round. The goal of the revised response is to convince other agents to reach a bet-
ter consensus. In particular, R E C ONCILE initiates a discussion by designing a discussion prompt for
each agent, that lets it condition on (1) grouped answers from all agents, (2) corresponding explana-
tions generated in the previous round, and (3) demonstrations of samples with human explanations
(that rectify an agent’s initial incorrect answer) that can convince other agents. We leverage them
in an in-context learning framework to teach models to generate their own convincing explanations
(see Fig. 3). Even in cases where an agent initially offers an incorrect answer and explanation, it
can consider another agent’s convincing explanation and amend its response accordingly. In each
discussion round, we estimate an agent’s uncertainty via a confidence-estimation prompt (Tian et al.,

   3
     When we say that an agent tries to convince another agent, we mean that it learns (based on corrective
explanations) to defend or argue for its stance while still being receptive to the other agent’s argument.


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   Refine   Ensemble   Multi-Agent   Multi-Model   Convince   Confidence
 Self-Refine (SR) (Madaan et al., 2023)
 Self-Consistency (SC) (Wang et al., 2023b)
 SR + SC
 Multi-Agent Debate (Du et al., 2023)                                                      *
 Multi-Agent Debate (Judge) (Liang et al., 2023)
 R E C ONCILE (Ours)

Table 1: Summary highlighting the main differences between prior work and R E C ONCILE.
    means supported and     means not supported. R E C ONCILE supports multi-model multi-agent
discussion with confidence estimation and convincingness. * = Du et al. (2023) primarily exper-
iment with multiple instances of ChatGPT as different agents and conduct an initial investigation
with 20 samples using ChatGPT and Bard as the two agents.

2023; Xiong et al., 2023a). Once all agents converge to the same answer (i.e., a consensus has been
reached), we employ these confidences to compute a weighted vote as the team answer.
We primarily develop R E C ONCILE with three state-of-the-art LLMs, ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022),
Bard (Anil et al., 2023), and Claude2 (Anthropic, 2023). We show our method’s efficacy on mul-
tiple commonsense reasoning (StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021), ECQA (Aggarwal et al., 2021))
and mathematical reasoning (AQuA (Ling et al., 2017) and GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021)) bench-
marks. Our first result demonstrates that across all four datasets, R E C ONCILE outperforms prior
single-agent (e.g., Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023) and Self-consistency (Wang et al., 2023b)) and
multi-agent baselines (Debate (Du et al., 2023) and Judge (Liang et al., 2023)). On the common-
sense reasoning benchmarks, R E C ONCILE exhibits especially strong results, outperforming a much
stronger model like GPT-4 by up to 3.4%. We find that R E C ONCILE not only improves the overall
team performance, but also leads to significant gains for each agent individually. Detailed analyses
of the individual components of R E C ONCILE demonstrate that leveraging diverse LLM agents and
the usage of convincing samples lead to maximum gains. In particular, convincing samples lead to
a 4% improvement as compared to general human explanations without our novel answer-rectifying
selection criterion. Convincing samples also benefit prior methods like the multi-agent debate (Du
et al., 2023). Finally, we show that R E C ONCILE obtains better and faster consensus compared to
multi-agent debate (i.e., achieves higher accuracy in fewer rounds), thus pointing to its efficiency.
Beyond complex reasoning tasks, R E C ONCILE also improves fundamental NLP tasks like Natural
Language Inference, particularly Adversarial NLI (Nie et al., 2020).
We also implement other versions of R E C ONCILE, with either a much stronger GPT-4 or open-
source LLaMA-2 as one of the agents. Note that GPT-4, on top of being stronger compared to the
other agents in consideration here (Zheng et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023) is also substantially more
expensive. Even in such scenarios, collaborative discussions facilitated by R E C ONCILE individually
benefit all agents, including LLaMA-2, and even improve GPT-4’s accuracy by large margins (e.g.,
an absolute 10.0% on StrategyQA). In summary, our primary contributions are as follows:
• We propose R E C ONCILE, a novel method for improving reasoning with diverse Large Language
  Models involved in a Round Table Conference.
• We study the role of confidence estimation and discussion in multi-agent systems and an agent’s
  ability to convince others (by learning from corrective explanations) to reach a better consensus.
• We conduct extensive experiments on multiple math and commonsense reasoning tasks and show
  that R E C ONCILE outperforms prior single-agent, multi-agent baselines and also GPT-4 on some
  benchmarks. We also experiment with GPT-4 as an agent in R E C ONCILE and show that mutual
  discussion among diverse agents significantly improves GPT-4’s accuracy.
• We conduct detailed analysis of R E C ONCILE and show that it improves the efficiency of discus-
  sion, reaching a faster and better consensus compared to a multi-agent debate baseline.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Reasoning with LLMs. Progress in LLMs has led to the development of advanced prompting and
fine-tuning techniques for solving reasoning problems. Representative methods include Chain-of-
Thought (CoT) (Kojima et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a) and Tree-of-Thought
prompting (Yao et al., 2023a), self-consistency (Wang et al., 2023b), meta-reasoning over mul-


                                                              3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tiple paths (Yoran et al., 2023), use of scratchpads (Nye et al., 2021), training verifiers (Cobbe
et al., 2021), self-collaboration (Wang et al., 2023c; Schick et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023a), self-
reflection (Shinn et al., 2023; Madaan et al., 2023; Wang & Zhao, 2023; Yao et al., 2023b), improved
math reasoning (Yue et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023) and fine-tuning via bootstrapping models (Zelik-
man et al., 2022; Lewkowycz et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023b). Eliciting reasoning from a single agent,
while promising, is fundamentally limited by a lack of diverse insights.
Reasoning in Multi-Agent Systems. A recent line of work has explored student-teacher frame-
works with the goal of distilling reasoning capabilities from a stronger teacher to a weaker stu-
dent (Magister et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2023; Ho et al., 2023; Saha et al., 2023; Mukherjee et al.,
2023). As opposed to a teacher teaching weaker agents, we seek to develop a multi-agent system
where different LLM agents have their unique strengths and try to collaboratively improve perfor-
mance by reaching a better consensus. Notable prior works include multi-agent debating frame-
works (Du et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2023; Chan et al., 2023; Xiong et al., 2023a) but such efforts
are still largely limited to multiple instances of the same underlying language model. We argue
that relying on a single model limits the potential of complementary benefits from different model
families and the advantage of ensemble learning. Moreover, estimating the confidence of each agent
and being able to defend or improve one’s opinions become more prominent components in such
multi-model multi-agent systems because of the individual differences. Overall, Table 1 summarizes
R E C ONCILE’s key differences compared to prior single-agent and multi-agent reasoning methods.
Ensembling Large Pretrained Models. Large pre-trained models, by virtue of being trained on
different data and with architectural variations, exhibit distinct capabilities. This has led to the
development of ensembles (Sagi & Rokach, 2018) in multimodal learning (Zeng et al., 2023; Li
et al., 2022a). Mixture of Experts, a popular ensemble learning technique, trains multiple smaller
specialized models to improve robustness and overall accuracy (Jacobs et al., 1991; Shazeer et al.,
2017; Du et al., 2022). Specific to language models, Self-Consistency (Wang et al., 2023b) gener-
ates diverse reasoning paths using CoT and chooses the most consistent answer as the final output.
Jiang et al. (2023) propose LLM-Blender, a method to rank and fuse generations from different
models. Different from these, we study communication via explanations between distinct LLM
agents and their ability to discuss and convince each other in order to improve collective reasoning.


3   P ROBLEM S ETUP

We assume that we are given a test problem Q and there are n agents A = {Ai }ni=1 participating in
a round table discussion. Each agent is a distinct LLM, potentially trained with different pre-training
data and model architectures. All agents are capable of generating an answer and a corresponding
Chain-of-Thought explanation (Wei et al., 2022) for the test problem. For each agent Ai , we utilize
                                                                           (i)
a small number of k demonstrations of convincing samples Ci = {cj }kj=1 . Each convincing
         (i)     (i)   (i)   (i)                                             (i)               (i)
sample cj = (qj , aj , ej ) for an agent Ai is an instance of a question qj , gold answer aj , and
                     (i)
a human explanation ej that helps rectify an agent’s initial incorrect answer (see more details in
Sec 4). The objective of R E C ONCILE is to improve the team performance on a given task by holding
multiple rounds of discussion between the agents, quantifying the uncertainty associated with each
agent, and convincing other agents to reach a better consensus. Note that convincing samples
serve as an additional performance enhancer; even when the dataset lacks human explanations, our
method can still yield performance gains independent of this (more details in Sec. 5.4).


4   R E C ONCILE : A G ROUP -D ISCUSS -A ND -C ONVINCE F RAMEWORK

R E C ONCILE operates in three phases: initial response generation, multi-round discussion, and team
answer generation. The overview of our method is demonstrated in Fig. 2 and Algorithm 1.

Phase 1: Initial Response Generation. R E C ONCILE operates with each agent Ai initially gener-
                  (0)                 (0)                               (0)
ating an answer ai , an explanation ei , and an associated confidence pi ∈ [0, 1] for the generated
answer. Each agent conditions on a zero-shot prompt that instructs it to reason about the problem
‘step-by-step’. See ‘Phase 1’ in Fig. 2 and the prompt is shown in Fig. 5.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Previous Response                   Question: Is August a winter month for part of the world?                                                              Phase3:
            (𝒓−𝟏)      (𝒓−𝟏)                                                                                                                               Team Answer Generation
          (𝒂𝒋       , 𝒆𝒋       )
                                                 Phase1: Initial Response Generation                                                     Round 0

                                   (𝒓−𝟏)              Initial Prompt               Initial Prompt                       Initial Prompt                             Weighted Vote
  Confidence Estimation 𝒑𝒋
                                                                                                                                                          Yes x 0.1 Yes x 0.3 No x 0.3
                95%                0.8        Yes, parts of the world in      Yes, in countries like             No, August is a summer
                80%                0.5        Southern Hemisphere…            Australia…                         month…                                                     Ans: Yes
                70%                0.3        I am 60% confident ...          I am 70% confident …               I am 70% confident ...                   yes no



                                                 Phase2: Multi-Round Discussion                                                          Round 1
             Grouping                                                                                                                                              Weighted Vote
                                                         (𝟏)                              (𝟏)                                 (𝟏)
    Yes                    No                           𝑫𝟏                              𝑫𝟐                                   𝑫𝟑
                                                                                                                                                          Yes x 0.5 Yes x 0.5 No x 0.1
                                               Yes, August in Southern        Yes, after reviewing, I               No, in Northern                                         Ans: Yes
                                               Hemisphere is actually…        still think the answer…               Hemisphere…                           yes no
    Convincing Samples 𝑪𝒋≠𝒊                    I am 80% confident…            I am 80% confident …                  I am 50% confident ...
   Question: Can a prime
   number be represented by the
   number of days in a week?                                                                                                             Round 2
                                                         (𝟐)                              (𝟐)                                 (𝟐)                                  Weighted Vote
   Explanation: There are 7 days
                                                        𝑫𝟏                              𝑫𝟐                                   𝑫𝟑
   in a week. 7 is a prime number.                                                                                                                        Yes x 0.8 Yes x 1.0 Yes x 0.3
                                               Yes, August is a winter       Yes, I agree that August              Yes, I think in Southern
                                               month for part of the…        is a winter month…
                                                                                                                                                                            Ans: Yes
                                                                                                                   Hemisphere…                            yes no
                                   (𝒓)         I am 95% confident…           I am 100% confident …                 I am 60% confident ...
    Discussion Prompt 𝑫𝒊


Figure 2: Overview of R E C ONCILE with ChatGPT, Bard, and Claude2, consisting of three phases:
(1) Initial Response Generation: Each agent generates an initial answer and explanation. (2) Multi-
Round Discussion: Each model is presented with a discussion prompt (as illustrated on the left) and
subsequently generates an updated answer and explanation. (3) Team answer generation: The team
answer is determined by a weighted vote at the end of each round. The left part of the figure shows
the discussion prompt for an agent, consisting of (a) grouped answers and explanations of all agents
from the previous round, (b) estimated confidence, and (c) demonstrations of convincing samples.

Phase 2: Multi-round Discussion. R E C ONCILE then enters a discussion phase, consisting of R
rounds (see ‘Phase 2’ in Fig. 2). In discussion round r, for each agent Ai , R E C ONCILE develops a
                    (r)
discussion prompt Di (as shown in Fig. 5), consisting of the following three components.
                                                                                                                                         (r)
(a) Grouped responses of all agents from the previous round. Di consists of the answers
   (r−1) n                        (r−1) n
{aj     }j=1 and explanations {ej      }j=1 of all agents from round (r − 1). To foster better dis-
cussions, R E C ONCILE summarizes this information by grouping the answers into distinct categories
and appends all plausible explanations for each answer, as shown on the left side of Fig. 2 and Fig. 5.
(b) Confidence associated with the answers. All agents are not equally confident in their answers.
Hence, an effective discussion should also consider each agent’s uncertainty. Since our agents are
                                                             (r)
black-box models, we estimate each agent’s confidence pi in round r by directly prompting the
agent to verbally quantify its uncertainty (Xiong et al., 2023b). See our prompt in Fig. 5.
(c) Convincing samples from all other                                                        1   Convincing Sample (CS) Collection                                   CS of ChatGPT
                                                                                                                                                         Question:
agents. Finally, the prompt contains con-                                                                                                                Is an ammonia fighting cleaner
                                                                                                                                                         good for pet owners?
vincing samples Cj for all other agents Aj̸=i .                                                              Question
                                                                                                                                                         Human Explanation:
                                                                                                                                                         Ammonia is a component in pet
When an agent tries to reassess its reasoning                                             ChatGPT                         Human                          urine. It has an unpleasant odor.
                                                                                                                        explanation
in light of the reasoning provided by other                                                                                                              Gold Answer: Yes

agents, we hypothesize that it should bene-                                                                  Question
                                                                                                                                                         Question:…
                                                                                                                                                                       CS of Bard

                                                                                                                          Human                          Human Explanation:…
fit from conditioning on demonstrations that                                                 Bard
                                                                                                                        explanation
                                                                                                                                                         Gold Answer: Yes / No
can convince other agents. In order to obtain                                                                Question                                                 CS of Claude
                                                                                                                                                         Question:…
such convincing samples for an agent Aj , we                                              Claude2
                                                                                                                          Human
                                                                                                                        explanation
                                                                                                                                                         Human Explanation:…
choose a small number of samples (4 in our                                                                                                               Gold Answer: Yes / No

experiments) from the training set for which                                                 2   In-context Learning for each model
the agent’s initial answer is wrong but con-
ditioning on the corresponding human expla-                                                         CS of Bard                           CS of ChatGPT                     CS of ChatGPT

nation, rectifies the answer (see Fig. 3). We                                                       CS of Claude                          CS of Claude                       CS of Bard

experiment with datasets that are annotated
with high-quality human explanations in prior
work. These human explanations are back-                                             Figure 3: Method for choosing convincing samples
ground facts (for commonsense tasks) or some                                         for each agent. A convincing sample for ChatGPT
intermediate steps (for mathematical tasks).                                         consists of a question, a gold answer, and a ‘cor-
Hence, the explanation will never directly give                                      rective’ human explanation that can rectify its ini-
away the answer and the model still needs to                                         tial incorrect answer. Then Bard and Claude2 use it
reason over it to derive the correct answer.                                         in-context during discussion to convince ChatGPT.


                                                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         (r)        (r−1)   (r−1)   (r−1)
We now define the discussion prompt Di = {aj            , ej , pj    , Cj̸=i }nj=1 for each agent Ai
in round r, based on the above three components. The agent conditions on it to generate an updated
         (r)               (r)                   (r)
answer ai , explanation ei , and confidence pi , to be used in the next round. Demonstrations of
convincing explanations enable the agent to generate explanations that are more likely to convince
other agents to reach a better consensus in the next round.

Phase 3: Team Answer Generation. R E C ONCILE continues the discussion for a maximum of
R rounds or terminates it as soon as a consensus is reached (i.e., all agents agree on the same
answer). At the end of any round r, R E C ONCILE generates the team answer â(r) for that round
using a weighted voting scheme (see the right side of Fig. 2). In particular, it converts the model’s
confidence into a weight and employs this weight in a voting scheme to determine the team answer.
Directly using confidence scores as the voting weights is less effective due to the overconfidence
problem of LLMs (Xiong et al., 2023b; Tian et al., 2023; Mielke et al., 2022). Specifically, LLMs
tend to produce consistently high confidence scores, which can make it challenging to discern subtle
distinctions in confidence levels across different outputs. To address this, we employ a simple yet
effective rescaling technique, facilitating better differentiation of confidence levels.
                                                        (r)
                                            1.0, if pi = 1.0
                                            
                                                               (r)
                                            0.8, if 0.9 ≤ pi < 1.0
                                            
                                            
                                    (r)
                                f (pi ) = 0.5, if 0.8 ≤ p(r)    i   < 0.9
                                                                (r)
                                            
                                              0.3,   if 0.6  < p    < 0.8
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                                               i
                                              0.1, otherwise
        (r)                                                          (r)
where pi is the original confidence of agent Ai in round r and f (pi ) is the corresponding adjusted
score. As we will show in the experiments, this simple recalibration method, used as a weighing
scheme for obtaining the team answer, works well across multiple datasets. Fig. 11 also shows that
it helps reduce the Expected Calibration Error (ECE), a popular calibration metric (Naeini et al.,
2015). While we note that recalibration can also be achieved through a learned model (e.g., Platt
Scaling (Platt et al., 1999)), we refrain from using such models because R E C ONCILE is primarily
designed as a few-shot method, and developing a recalibration model would necessitate access to a
                                                                  (r)
substantial number of annotated samples. Therefore, we use f (pi ) to perform a weighted vote to
generate the team answer as follows (where a is a distinct answer generated by any of the agents).
                                                   f (pi )1(âi = a)
                                                       (r)    (r)
                                               X
                               â(r) = arg max
                                         a
                                                i


5     E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSIS
We primarily implement R E C ONCILE with ChatGPT, Bard, and Claude2, engaging them in up
to three rounds of discussion. Later, in Section 5.1 and Appendix B.2, we experiment with two
versions of R E C ONCILE, with either GPT-4 or LLaMA-2 (Touvron et al., 2023) as one of the agents.
We evaluate R E C ONCILE on two commonsense and two math reasoning tasks. These include (1)
StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021), (2) ECQA (Aggarwal et al., 2021), (3) GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021),
and (4) AQuA (Ling et al., 2017). Owing to the costly nature of conducting experiments with black-
box models and the limit imposed on the number of API calls, we follow many prior works (Du
et al., 2023; Bian et al., 2023; Besta et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023a) and experiment with a subset
of 100 samples (from the validation set for StrategyQA and the test set for all other datasets). We
report accuracy and its standard deviation for all tasks. For each experiment, we conduct at least
three runs on the same test samples with the same prompts, primarily accounting for the variance
caused due to the decoding strategy. Further implementation details can be found in Appendix A.1.

5.1   R E C ONCILE OUTPERFORMS SINGLE - AGENT AND MULTI - AGENT BASELINES

Our first experiment evaluates the overall reasoning capabilities of R E C ONCILE with ChatGPT,
Bard, and Claude2 as the three agents. We compare R E C ONCILE to prior works in three categories:
• Vanilla single-agent methods. These include zero-shot Chain-of-Thought prompting with GPT-
  4, ChatGPT, Bard, and Claude2 for answering the question ‘step-by-step’ (Kojima et al., 2022).


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Method Category           Method                                   StrategyQA        ECQA       GSM8K        AQuA
                           GPT-4                                        75.6±4.7      73.3±0.4   90.7 ±1.7    65.7 ±4.6
 Vanilla                   ChatGPT                                      67.3±3.6      66.0±1.8   73.7±3.1     44.7±0.5
 Single-agent              Bard                                         69.3±4.4      56.8±2.7   58.7±2.6     33.7±1.2
                           Claude2                                      73.7±3.1      66.7±2.1   79.3±3.6     60.3±1.2
                           Self-Refine (w/ ChatGPT)                     66.7±2.7      68.1±1.8   74.3±2.5     45.3±2.2
 Advanced
                           Self-Consistency (w/ ChatGPT)                73.3±2.1      70.9±1.3   80.7±1.2     54.0±2.9
 Single-agent
                           SR + SC (w/ ChatGPT)                         72.2±1.9      71.9±2.1   81.3±1.7     58.3±3.7
                           Debate (w/ ChatGPT)                          66.7±3.1      62.7±1.2   83.0±2.2     65.3±3.1
 Single-model              Debate (w/ Bard)                             65.3±2.5      66.3±2.1   56.3±1.2     29.3±4.2
 Multi-agent               Debate (w/ Claude2)                          71.3±2.2      68.3±1.7   70.7±4.8     62.7±2.6
                           Debate+Judge (w/ ChatGPT)                    69.7±2.1      63.7±2.5   74.3±2.9     57.3±2.1
 Multi-model Multi-agent   R E C ONCILE (ChatGPT, Bard, Claude2)        79.0±1.6      74.7±0.4   85.3±2.2     66.0±0.8

Table 2: Comparison of R E C ONCILE (w/ ChatGPT, Bard, Claude2) with vanilla and advanced
single-agent methods and multi-agent debating frameworks. Across all reasoning benchmarks,
R E C ONCILE outperforms all prior single-agent and multi-agent methods. On commonsense tasks
(StrategyQA and ECQA), R E C ONCILE also outperforms GPT-4. All results are on a random sub-
set of 100 samples. Notably, we obtain further improvements on StrategyQA at 89% (by absolute
10%) when using GPT-4 as an agent in R E C ONCILE (see Table 4 for details).

                                                                           Team Accuracy
                    ChatGPT         Bard    Claude2
                                                           Weighted Vote      Majority Vote      Max Conf
        Round 0     71.0±2.1    71.7±0.9    73.7±1.7         74.3±1.2              74.2±0.9        72.7±1.4
        Round 1     71.3±0.9    77.7±1.2    75.3±0.8         77.0±0.9              76.3±1.2        74.0±1.7
        Round 2     76.7±0.8    77.3±1.4    77.7±0.9         79.0±0.5              77.1±1.3        74.7±2.1
        Round 3     77.0±0.9    76.7±0.8    77.0±1.2         78.7±1.2              78.0±0.5        74.7±1.4

Table 3: The round-wise accuracy of ChatGPT, Bard, and Claude2 and their team performance
(using different aggregation methods) with R E C ONCILE on the StrategyQA dataset.


• Advanced single-agent methods. Next, we compare with (1) Self-Refine (SR) that iteratively
  generates feedback and refines the output leveraging the model itself (Madaan et al., 2023), (2)
  Self-Consistency (SC) that samples multiple reasoning paths and generates the most consistent
  answer (Wang et al., 2023b), and (3) their combination, SR+SC, that first conducts multiple itera-
  tions of refinement, followed by a majority vote. We implement these baselines with ChatGPT.
• Multi-agent methods with a single backbone model. Our final baselines are two multi-agent
  debating methods: Du et al. (2023), who propose a multi-agent debate between multiple ChatGPT
  instances and Liang et al. (2023), who additionally include a judge to monitor the debate process.
For fair comparisons, all iterative methods go through 3 rounds of iteration and all multi-agent
methods are implemented with three agents. We report our results in Table 2. Across all four
datasets, R E C ONCILE, developed with ChatGPT, Bard, and Claude2 as the agents, improves upon
all single-agent and multi-agent baselines that are also built on top of these agents (see last row). On
commonsense tasks like StrategyQA and ECQA, our method also outperforms GPT-4 (without using
it as an agent). Note that between all single agents, GPT-4 exhibits significantly better performance
on all four benchmarks. Therefore, R E C ONCILE’s ability to match or surpass it while leveraging
the three comparatively weaker agents (ChatGPT, Bard, and Claude2) shows the promise of our
framework. On the math reasoning tasks (GSM8K and AQuA), R E C ONCILE matches or closes the
gap to GPT-4, which is also the state-of-the-art LLM on GSM8K. GPT-4’s especially strong results
on GSM8K could be attributed in part to the inclusion of some of GSM8K’s training samples in
GPT-4’s pre-training data (OpenAI, 2023). As also shown in prior works, advanced single-agent
methods are better than their vanilla counterparts (see ‘Method Category’ column in Table 2) (Wang
et al., 2023b; Madaan et al., 2023). Multi-agent debate with ChatGPT (Du et al., 2023) improves
results further, especially on the math datasets. However, debate with multiple instances of Bard or
Claude2 is not effective, possibly because the feedback, originating out of the different instances is
not diverse enough. But when they team up with ChatGPT in a multi-round discussion, R E C ONCILE
outperforms debate frameworks. It obtains maximum gains of 7.7% accuracy on the commonsense
tasks compared to the strongest baseline, multi-agent debate with Claude2. Improvements in the


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            ReConcile   Debate (ChatGPT)       Debate (Bard)                     ReConcile   Debate (ChatGPT)                  Debate (Bard)                         w/o Discussion        w/ Discussion

           82
           80                                                                  100                                                                         0.9
           78                                                                  95                                                                         0.85
           76


                                                               Consensus (%)
           74                                                                  90                                                                          0.8
Accuracy


                                                                                                                                               Accuracy
           72                                                                  85
           70                                                                                                                                             0.75
                                                                               80
           68                                                                                                                                              0.7
           66                                                                  75
           64                                                                  70                                                                         0.65
           62                                                                                                                                              0.6
           60                                                                  65
           58                                                                  60                                                                         0.55
           56                                                                  55
                0       1         2        3          4                              0       1         2        3                     4                          0   20      40       60       80      100

                        Discussion Round                                                     Discussion Round                                                             Consensus (%)

                            (a)                                                                  (b)                                                                       (c)

Figure 4: R E C ONCILE achieves better and faster consensus. (a) Comparison of R E C ONCILE with
Debate baselines showing the accuracy after each round. (b) Fraction of samples for which a con-
sensus is reached after each round. (c) Accuracy as a function of consensus.

math reasoning tasks are relatively moderate, because of ChatGPT’s initial strong performance.
Appendix B.3 shows that R E C ONCILE improves other NLP tasks like Natural Language Inference.
R E C ONCILE improves all agents individually. So far, we have demonstrated that the agents’ team
performance improves via discussion. Next, Table 3 reports each agent’s round-wise accuracy and
the team accuracy, using three different voting mechanisms. These are: (1) our proposed weighted
vote, (2) simple majority vote, and (3) agent with maximum confidence. We observe that after the
initial response generation, both individual and team accuracy increase for at least two rounds when
using weighted and majority voting. Simply choosing the most confident agent proves ineffective.
Using GPT-4 as an agent in R E C ONCILE.              In
                                                                         GPT-4      Bard     Claude2
some cases, R E C ONCILE with ChatGPT, Bard, and
Claude2 outperforms GPT-4, which based on Table 2           Zero-shot 75.6±4.7 69.3±4.4 73.7±3.1
and prior works (OpenAI, 2023; Zheng et al., 2023),               R0    79.0±3.7 75.0±0.8 72.0±0.8
                                                                                                                R E C ONCILE


is likely the strongest (and also, the most expensive)            R1    87.7±1.2 76.0±0.8 75.0±0.8
LLM we experiment with. Next, we study the poten-                 R2    88.3±0.9 78.7±0.9 76.7±0.9
tial of GPT-4 to participate in a discussion with com-            R3    89.0±1.4 77.6±2.6 79.3±1.2
paratively weaker agents. In Table 4, we report the
round-wise accuracy and compare it to the zero-shot Table 4: Accuracy of GPT-4, Claude2,
result of each agent on StrategyQA (see similar re- and Bard on StrategyQA after every round.
sults on AQuA in Appendix B.1). Note that the zero- GPT-4’s final accuracy (89.0±1.4 ) after R3
shot results are different from R E C ONCILE’s Round also outperforms Debate (78.0±0.8 ) and
0 results because of the differences in their respective Self-Refine (83.7±1.2 ) with GPT-4.
prompts: the latter incorporates convincing samples.
With increasing rounds, the accuracy of each agent improves, showing that all models benefit from
mutual discussions. GPT-4’s absolute improvement by 10% is particularly encouraging because it
is the strongest participant, highlighting the potential for a stronger agent to obtain useful external
feedback from comparatively weaker agents, and thereby augmenting its own capability. To further
validate that this improvement is indeed due to the discussion process of R E C ONCILE with other
agents, we compare GPT-4’s final accuracy (89.0±1.4 ) with 3 rounds of Debate and Self-Refine
baselines (also implemented with GPT-4). We observe that both these baselines yield significantly
lower accuracies, at 78.0±0.8 and 83.7±1.2 respectively. Relatedly, we also experiment with a strong
open-source model like LLaMA2-70B as one of the agents in Appendix B.2, and observe similar
improvements across all agents. In summary, R E C ONCILE shows the potential of involving (black-
box as well as open-source) agents with diverse capabilities in round-table discussions, such that
all agents improve individually. Note that the weighted voting scheme becomes less effective in
scenarios when one agent is the dominant one (e.g., GPT-4) and the results tend to converge towards
it. This is why we primarily focus on studying agents with similar capabilities (e.g., ChatGPT, Bard,
and Claude2) in this paper and our analysis below is also with this setup.

 5.2            R E C ONCILE R EACHES FASTER AND B ETTER C ONSENSUS

R E C ONCILE terminates the discussion when a consensus is reached. More discussion rounds are
costlier due to the increased API calls. Hence, achieving faster consensus while maintaining com-
parable accuracy gains is more efficient. To study this, in Fig. 4(a), we plot the accuracy trends after


                                                                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


each round; in Fig. 4(b), we plot the fraction of samples for which consensus has been reached; and
in Fig. 4(c), we analyze accuracy as a function of consensus. From the first plot, we make two impor-
tant observations: (1) R E C ONCILE improves accuracy for two rounds, following which the accuracy
saturates, (2) Compared to the debate baselines, R E C ONCILE is not only superior after every round
but also peaks at a highest accuracy of 79.0% (vs 71.3% for the baselines). Next, from Fig. 4(b), our
observations are also two-fold: (1) In the initial rounds (0 and 1), R E C ONCILE’s consensus percent-
age is lower because the discussion takes place between diverse LLMs. Diverse agents lead to more
differences in opinions initially. (2) However, as the discussion proceeds, R E C ONCILE establishes
consensus for all samples by round 3, while in the baseline, 13% of the samples do not converge
even after round 4. Finally, Fig. 4(c) shows that for the samples that enter the discussion phase (i.e.,
their initial answers did not have a consensus), accuracy is positively correlated with consensus. In
other words, as a greater number of samples reach a consensus, accuracy proportionally improves.
In summary, R E C ONCILE reaches faster and better consensus compared to baselines.

5.3   A BLATIONS OF R E C ONCILE : A LL C OMPONENTS ARE B ENEFICIAL
In Table 5, we evaluate individual components of R E C ONCILE
                                                                      Method              Accuracy
on StrategyQA. In particular, we compare four variants: (1) w/o
Multiple Models: We use ChatGPT as the backbone for all               R E C ONCILE         79.0±1.6
three agents, (2) w/o Grouping: We simply concatenate the re-         w/o Multiple Models  72.2±2.1
sponses from different agents without grouping their answers,         w/o  Grouping        76.7±2.5
(3) w/o Convincingness: We remove convincing samples from             w/o Convincingness   74.5±1.7
                                                                      w/o Conf Estimation  77.7±1.3
all prompts, and (4) w/o Confidence Estimation: We do not use
any confidence estimates during the discussion and compute ma- Table 5: Ablations of R E C ON -
jority vote as the team answer. We show that each component has CILE on StrategyQA.
a positive impact on R E C ONCILE with varying capacities. The
effect of different models as agents is particularly significant and we observe a 6.8% improvement
compared to only using ChatGPT as all three agents. This reinforces our hypothesis that diverse
LLMs have complementary strengths and when put together in a round table discussion, they can
learn from diverse external feedback and refine their responses to reach a better consensus. Con-
vincing samples lead to a 4.5% improvement in accuracy and we further analyze their role below.

5.4   C ONVINCING S AMPLES I MPROVE B OTH R E C ONCILE AND M ULTI - AGENT D EBATE
Recall that R E C ONCILE selects a sample as convinc-
                                                             Method                        Accuracy
ing if the corresponding human explanation rectifies an
agent’s incorrect answer. Based on this, Table 5 showed      Debate (Du et al., 2023)       66.7±3.1
that by collecting only four human explanations, we can      RC (w/o Convincing Expl)       74.5±1.7
obtain significant improvements (‘w/o Convincingness’        RC (w/ Random Expl)            75.0±2.5
row). Next, we consider a scenario where no human ex-        RC (w/ Convincing Expl)        79.0±1.6
planations are present. Table 6 shows that even then,        Debate (w/ Random Expl)        68.7±2.2
R E C ONCILE outperforms the debate baseline by abso-        Debate (w/ Convincing Expl)    69.5±1.7
lute 7.8 points (second row). If random (i.e., general
                                                           Table 6: Evaluation of the role of con-
human explanations that may not necessarily ensure an-
                                                           vincing samples on StrategyQA. R E C-
swer rectification) are available (third row), we obtain
                                                           ONCILE (RC) without convincing sam-
some small improvements; but our convincing samples
                                                           ples outperforms multi-agent debate and
that are selected based on our novel answer-rectification
                                                           with it obtains further gains. Convincing
criterion (fourth row) improve the results substantially.
                                                           samples also boost the debate baseline.
See Appendix C.3 and C.4 for illustrative examples. Be-
ing able to convince another agent is also a generic concept that can be applied to other multi-agent
systems, as demonstrated by improvements in the debate baseline (last row).

6     C ONCLUSION
We presented R E C ONCILE, a multi-agent framework for reasoning with diverse LLM agents, en-
gaged in multiple rounds of discussion via confidence estimation and generating explanations that
can correctively convince other agents. R E C ONCILE demonstrated strong results on multiple com-
monsense and mathematical reasoning benchmarks, consistently outperforming prior single-agent
and multi-agent baselines and even improving upon GPT-4 on some benchmarks. Moreover, when
GPT-4 was used as one of the agents, R E C ONCILE improved its accuracy by 10 absolute points.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT
Given that the current best open-source models often face difficulties with lengthy instructions and
prompts (Zheng et al., 2023), our framework employs three prominent API-based models as agents
for the most part. Appendix B.2 shows the promise of R E C ONCILE with an open-source LLaMA2
model as well. However, for the API-based models, we note that we lack complete knowledge of
the data that these models have been exposed to, and their scales in terms of parameters. Moreover,
due to the API access, we do not possess complete control over their behavior. Depending on
API-based models also necessitates the need to prompt these models to estimate their confidence.
While this approach proves effective as evidenced by our results, we note that these estimates remain
post-hoc in nature. Nevertheless, it is worth highlighting that these limitations could potentially be
mitigated in the future should more open-sourced models emerge and demonstrate robust capabilities
in adhering to long instructions.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We are making our code and prompts available in the supplementary material to enable repli-
cation of our findings. We also provide implementation details of R E C ONCILE in Algo-
rithm 1 and Appendix A.1. The datasets we use in this work are all publicly available
(StategyQA: https://allenai.org/data/strategyqa, ECQA: https://github.
com/dair-iitd/ECQA-Dataset, GSM8K: https://huggingface.co/datasets/
gsm8k, AQuA: https://huggingface.co/datasets/aqua_rat).

R EFERENCES
Shourya Aggarwal, Divyanshu Mandowara, Vishwajeet Agrawal, Dinesh Khandelwal, Parag Singla,
  and Dinesh Garg. Explanations for commonsenseqa: New dataset and models. In Proceedings
  of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th In-
  ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
  3050–3065, 2021. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.238.
Rohan Anil, Andrew M. Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, Eric Chu, Jonathan H. Clark,
  Laurent El Shafey, Yanping Huang, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Gaurav Mishra, Erica Moreira, Mark
  Omernick, Kevin Robinson, Sebastian Ruder, Yi Tay, Kefan Xiao, Yuanzhong Xu, Yujing Zhang,
  Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Junwhan Ahn, Jacob Austin, Paul Barham, Jan Botha, James Brad-
  bury, Siddhartha Brahma, Kevin Brooks, Michele Catasta, Yong Cheng, Colin Cherry, Christo-
  pher A. Choquette-Choo, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Clément Crepy, Shachi Dave, Mostafa De-
  hghani, Sunipa Dev, Jacob Devlin, Mark Dı́az, Nan Du, Ethan Dyer, Vlad Feinberg, Fangxi-
  aoyu Feng, Vlad Fienber, Markus Freitag, Xavier Garcia, Sebastian Gehrmann, Lucas Gonzalez,
  Guy Gur-Ari, Steven Hand, Hadi Hashemi, Le Hou, Joshua Howland, Andrea Hu, Jeffrey Hui,
  Jeremy Hurwitz, Michael Isard, Abe Ittycheriah, Matthew Jagielski, Wenhao Jia, Kathleen Ke-
  nealy, Maxim Krikun, Sneha Kudugunta, Chang Lan, Katherine Lee, Benjamin Lee, Eric Li,
  Music Li, Wei Li, YaGuang Li, Jian Li, Hyeontaek Lim, Hanzhao Lin, Zhongtao Liu, Freder-
  ick Liu, Marcello Maggioni, Aroma Mahendru, Joshua Maynez, Vedant Misra, Maysam Mous-
  salem, Zachary Nado, John Nham, Eric Ni, Andrew Nystrom, Alicia Parrish, Marie Pellat, Mar-
  tin Polacek, Alex Polozov, Reiner Pope, Siyuan Qiao, Emily Reif, Bryan Richter, Parker Riley,
  Alex Castro Ros, Aurko Roy, Brennan Saeta, Rajkumar Samuel, Renee Shelby, Ambrose Slone,
  Daniel Smilkov, David R. So, Daniel Sohn, Simon Tokumine, Dasha Valter, Vijay Vasudevan,
  Kiran Vodrahalli, Xuezhi Wang, Pidong Wang, Zirui Wang, Tao Wang, John Wieting, Yuhuai
  Wu, Kelvin Xu, Yunhan Xu, Linting Xue, Pengcheng Yin, Jiahui Yu, Qiao Zhang, Steven Zheng,
  Ce Zheng, Weikang Zhou, Denny Zhou, Slav Petrov, and Yonghui Wu. Palm 2 technical report,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10403.
Anthropic. model card and evaluations for claude models, 2023. URL https://www-files.
  anthropic.com/production/images/Model-Card-Claude-2.pdf.
Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Lukas Gianinazzi, Joanna Gajda,
 Tomasz Lehmann, Michal Podstawski, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, and Torsten Hoe-


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  fler. Graph of thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.09687, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.09687.

Ning Bian, Xianpei Han, Le Sun, Hongyu Lin, Yaojie Lu, and Ben He. Chatgpt is a knowledgeable
  but inexperienced solver: An investigation of commonsense problem in large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16421, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.16421.

BIG-bench collaboration. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities
  of language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=uyTL5Bvosj.

Samuel Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts, and Christopher D Manning. A large anno-
  tated corpus for learning natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 632–642, 2015.

Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jianxuan Yu, Wei Xue, Shanghang Zhang, Jie Fu, and
  Zhiyuan Liu. Chateval: Towards better llm-based evaluators through multi-agent debate. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.07201, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.07201.

Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to
  solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2110.14168.

Nan Du, Yanping Huang, Andrew M Dai, Simon Tong, Dmitry Lepikhin, Yuanzhong Xu, Maxim
  Krikun, Yanqi Zhou, Adams Wei Yu, Orhan Firat, et al. Glam: Efficient scaling of language
  models with mixture-of-experts. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5547–
  5569. PMLR, 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/du22c/du22c.
  pdf.

Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improving
  factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2305.14325.

Elias Stengel-Eskin and Benjamin Van Durme. Calibrated interpretation: Confidence estimation in
  semantic parsing. In TACL, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.07443.

Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Litu Ou, Ashish Sabharwal, and Tushar Khot. Specializing smaller language
  models towards multi-step reasoning. In ICML, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2301.12726.

Mor Geva, Daniel Khashabi, Elad Segal, Tushar Khot, Dan Roth, and Jonathan Berant. Did aristotle
 use a laptop? a question answering benchmark with implicit reasoning strategies. Transactions
 of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:346–361, 2021. URL https://arxiv.
 org/abs/2101.02235.

Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
  networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1321–1330. PMLR, 2017. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.04599.

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song,
  and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. NeurIPS,
  2021.       URL https://datasets-benchmarks-proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2021/file/be83ab3ecd0db773eb2dc1b0a17836a1-Paper-round2.
  pdf.

Namgyu Ho, Laura Schmid, and Se-Young Yun. Large language models are reasoning teachers. In
  Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 14852–14882, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.830. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2023.acl-long.830.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Robert A Jacobs, Michael I Jordan, Steven J Nowlan, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Adaptive mixtures of
  local experts. Neural computation, 3(1):79–87, 1991. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.
  org/document/6797059.
Dongfu Jiang, Xiang Ren, and Bill Yuchen Lin. LLM-blender: Ensembling large language mod-
  els with pairwise ranking and generative fusion. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meet-
  ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 14165–
  14178, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.792.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  35:22199–22213, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.11916.
Aitor Lewkowycz, Anders Andreassen, David Dohan, Ethan Dyer, Henryk Michalewski, Vinay Ra-
  masesh, Ambrose Slone, Cem Anil, Imanol Schlag, Theo Gutman-Solo, et al. Solving quantitative
  reasoning problems with language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:3843–3857, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.14858.
Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem.
  Camel: Communicative agents for ”mind” exploration of large scale language model society.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17760, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.17760.
Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Antonio Torralba, and Igor Mordatch. Composing
  ensembles of pre-trained models via iterative consensus. International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2022a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.11522.
Yanhong Li, Gang Kou, Guangxu Li, and Yi Peng. Consensus reaching process in large-scale group
  decision making based on bounded confidence and social network. European Journal of Opera-
  tional Research, 303(2):790–802, 2022b. ISSN 0377-2217. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.
  2022.03.040. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S0377221722002648.
Yifei Li, Zeqi Lin, Shizhuo Zhang, Qiang Fu, Bei Chen, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen. Mak-
  ing language models better reasoners with step-aware verifier. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-
  Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 5315–5333, Toronto, Canada, July
  2023b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.291. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.291.
Tian Liang, Zhiwei He, Wenxiang Jiao, Xing Wang, Yan Wang, Rui Wang, Yujiu Yang, Zhaopeng
  Tu, and Shuming Shi. Encouraging divergent thinking in large language models through multi-
  agent debate, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.19118.
Wang Ling, Dani Yogatama, Chris Dyer, and Phil Blunsom. Program induction by rationale gen-
 eration: Learning to solve and explain algebraic word problems. ACL, 2017. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/P17-1015/.
Haipeng Luo, Qingfeng Sun, Can Xu, Pu Zhao, Jianguang Lou, Chongyang Tao, Xiubo Geng,
  Qingwei Lin, Shifeng Chen, and Dongmei Zhang. Wizardmath: Empowering mathemati-
  cal reasoning for large language models via reinforced evol-instruct. 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2308.09583.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad
 Majumder, Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Peter Clark. Self-
 refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
 2303.17651.
Lucie Charlotte Magister, Jonathan Mallinson, Jakub Adamek, Eric Malmi, and Aliaksei Severyn.
  Teaching small language models to reason. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp. 1773–1781, Toronto,
  Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-short.
  151. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-short.151.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sabrina J. Mielke, Arthur Szlam, Emily Dinan, and Y-Lan Boureau. Reducing conversational
  agents’ overconfidence through linguistic calibration. Transactions of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 10:857–872, 2022. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00494. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2022.tacl-1.50.

Marvin Minsky. Society Of Mind. Simon and Schuster, 1988.

Subhabrata Mukherjee, Arindam Mitra, Ganesh Jawahar, Sahaj Agarwal, Hamid Palangi, and
  Ahmed Awadallah. Orca: Progressive learning from complex explanation traces of gpt-4. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.02707, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.02707.

Mahdi Pakdaman Naeini, Gregory Cooper, and Milos Hauskrecht. Obtaining well calibrated proba-
 bilities using bayesian binning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
 volume 29, 2015. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/
 9602.

Yixin Nie, Adina Williams, Emily Dinan, Mohit Bansal, Jason Weston, and Douwe Kiela. Adver-
  sarial NLI: A new benchmark for natural language understanding. In Proceedings of the 58th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4885–4901, Online, July
  2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.441. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.441.

Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin,
 David Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, et al. Show
 your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2112.00114, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.00114.

OpenAI. Chatgpt: Optimizing language models for dialogue, 2022. URL https://openai.
  com/blog/chatgpt/.

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.

John Platt et al. Probabilistic outputs for support vector machines and comparisons to regularized
  likelihood methods. Advances in large margin classifiers, 10(3):61–74, 1999.

Omer Sagi and Lior Rokach. Ensemble learning: A survey. Wiley Interdisciplinary Re-
 views: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 8(4):e1249, 2018. URL https://wires.
 onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/widm.1249.

Swarnadeep Saha, Peter Hase, and Mohit Bansal. Can language models teach weaker agents?
  teacher explanations improve students via theory of mind. In NeurIPS, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2306.09299.

Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Zhengbao Jiang, Fabio Petroni, Patrick Lewis, Gautier Izacard,
  Qingfei You, Christoforos Nalmpantis, Edouard Grave, and Sebastian Riedel. Peer: A collabora-
  tive language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.11663, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2208.11663.

Noam Shazeer, *Azalia Mirhoseini, *Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hin-
  ton, and Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-
  experts layer. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=B1ckMDqlg.

Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Beck Labash, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu
  Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2303.11366.

Katherine Tian, Eric Mitchell, Allan Zhou, Archit Sharma, Rafael Rafailov, Huaxiu Yao, Chelsea
  Finn, and Christopher D Manning. Just ask for calibration: Strategies for eliciting calibrated
  confidence scores from language models fine-tuned with human feedback. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.14975, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14975.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288.
Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu, Yunshi Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-Peng Lim.
  Plan-and-solve prompting: Improving zero-shot chain-of-thought reasoning by large language
  models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 2609–2634, Toronto, Canada, July 2023a. Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.147.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=1PL1NIMMrw.
Yuqing Wang and Yun Zhao. Metacognitive prompting improves understanding in large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.05342, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2308.
  05342.pdf.
Zhenhailong Wang, Shaoguang Mao, Wenshan Wu, Tao Ge, Furu Wei, and Heng Ji. Unleashing
  cognitive synergy in large language models: A task-solving agent through multi-persona self-
  collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05300, 2023c. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2307.05300.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2201.11903.
Kai Xiong, Xiao Ding, Yixin Cao, Ting Liu, and Bing Qin. Examining the inter-consistency of large
  language models: An in-depth analysis via debate, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2305.11595.
Miao Xiong, Zhiyuan Hu, Xinyang Lu, Yifei Li, Jie Fu, Junxian He, and Bryan Hooi. Can llms
 express their uncertainty? an empirical evaluation of confidence elicitation in llms. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2306.13063, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.13063.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.10601, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10601.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629v3.
Ori Yoran, Tomer Wolfson, Ben Bogin, Uri Katz, Daniel Deutch, and Jonathan Berant. Answering
  questions by meta-reasoning over multiple chains of thought. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13007,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.13007.
Xiang Yue, Xingwei Qu, Ge Zhang, Yao Fu, Wenhao Huang, Huan Sun, Yu Su, and Wenhu Chen.
  Mammoth: Building math generalist models through hybrid instruction tuning. 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.05653.


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah Goodman. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with
  reasoning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:15476–15488, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.14465.

Andy Zeng, Maria Attarian, brian ichter, Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski, Adrian Wong, Stefan
  Welker, Federico Tombari, Aveek Purohit, Michael S Ryoo, Vikas Sindhwani, Johnny Lee, Vin-
  cent Vanhoucke, and Pete Florence. Socratic models: Composing zero-shot multimodal reason-
  ing with language. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=G2Q2Mh3avow.

Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric. P Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2306.05685.

Mingchen Zhuge, Haozhe Liu, Francesco Faccio, Dylan R Ashley, Róbert Csordás, Anand
 Gopalakrishnan, Abdullah Hamdi, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Vincent Herrmann,
 Kazuki Irie, et al. Mindstorms in natural language-based societies of mind. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2305.17066, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.17066.


A       A DDITIONAL D ETAILS OF R E C ONCILE

A.1     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We provide more implementation details of R E C ONCILE in this section. During decoding, we set
the temperature to 0.7 for ChatGPT and Bard and use the default setting for Claude2. All im-
plementations involving ChatGPT are using gpt-3.5-turbo-0613 from Azure OpenAI.4 We retrieve
results from Claude2 by posting requests to their webpage5 , and for Bard, we use chat-bison-001
from PaLM2 API6 . For each agent, we use four demonstrations of convincing samples. In addition,
we provide the workflow of R E C ONCILE in Algorithm 1. Required input contains a test problem
Q, maximum number of discussion rounds R, n agents A = {Ai }ni=1 , and convincing samples
C = {Ci }ni=1 for each agent. The output would be the team answer â(r) .

Algorithm 1 R E C ONCILE: A Group-Discuss-And-Convince Framework
Require: Test Problem Q, Discussion Rounds R, Agents A = {Ai }n          i=1 , Convincing Samples C = {Ci }i=1
                                                                                                              n

  function R E C ONCILE(Q, R, A, C)
     r←0
                                                  (r−1) n
     while r ≤ R and not C ONSENSUS(Q, {ai              }i=1 ) do
         S ← [], P ← []
         for each Ai ∈ A do
              if r = 0 then
                   PI ← (Q, C)                      ▷ Initial prompt consists of question and convincing samples
                    (0) (0)    (0)
                   ai , ei , pi ← Ai (PI )                  ▷ Generate initial answer, explanation, and confidence
              else
                                 (r−1) (r−1)    (r−1)
                   PD ← (Q, ai        , ei   , pi     , C)                                    ▷ Discussion prompt
                    (r) (r)    (r)
                   ai , ei , pi ← Ai (PD )
              end if
                           (r)                (r)
              S ← S + [ai ], P ← P + [pi ]                          ▷ Append each agent’s answer and confidence
         end for
         â(r) ← W EIGHTEDVOTE(S, P )                      ▷ Get team answer through a confidence weighted vote
     end while
     return â(r)
  end function


    4
      https://oai.azure.com/
    5
      https://claude.ai/chats
    6
      https://developers.generativeai.google/products/palm


                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                      Initial Prompt
                          {convincing_samples}
                          Q: {test_question}
                          Please answer the question with step-by-step reasoning. Also,
                          evaluate your confidence level (between 0.0 and 1.0) to indicate the
                          possibility of your answer being right.


                                                  Discussion Prompt

                         {convincing_samples}
                         {initial_prompt}
                         Carefully review the following solutions from other agents as additional
                         information, and provide your own answer and step-by-step reasoning to
                         the question.

                         Clearly state which point of view you agree or disagree with and why.

                         There are {majority_num} agents think the answer is {majority_ans}.
                         One agent solution: {agent_reasoning} {agent_ans} {agent_confidence}
                         One agent solution: {agent_reasoning} {agent_ans} {agent_confidence}

                         There are {minority_num} agents think the answer is {minority_ans}.
                         One agent solution: {agent_reasoning} {agent_ans} {agent_confidence}



 Figure 5: The prompts used in R E C ONCILE consist of an initial prompt and a discussion prompt.

A.2   T HE I NITIAL P ROMPT AND THE D ISCUSSION P ROMPT

We show the prompts used in R E C ONCILE in Fig. 5. The initial prompt encompasses (1) the con-
vincing samples that demonstrate how to convince other agents, (2) the test question, and (3) a
requirement for ‘step-by-step’ reasoning. The prompt also instructs the agent to express their con-
fidence level, ranging from 0.0 to 1.0, indicating the likelihood of their answer being correct. The
discussion prompt is an extension of the initial prompt, instructing the agent to review and express
agreement or disagreement with other agents’ solutions. To facilitate discussions, we design a group-
ing scheme that aggregates information based on the current opinions at the table. For instance, if
two agents affirm that the answer to a given question is ‘yes’ while the third agent disagrees with
a ‘no’, the designed grouping mechanism in the discussion prompt consolidates this information
rather than simply concatenating all responses.

B     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
B.1   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON M ATH R EASONING WITH GPT4 AS AN AGENT

Similar to the results in Table 4 on StrategyQA, we
                                                                        GPT-4      Bard      Claude2
now report round-wise accuracy of GPT4, Bard,
and Claude2 on a math reasoning dataset, AQuA.            Zero-shot    65.7±4.6 33.7±1.2 60.3±1.2
The results are presented in Table 7. We observe            Round 0 73.3±0.5 37.7±1.2 59.7±1.6
                                                                     R E C ONCILE


a consistent performance improvement across all             Round 1 75.3±1.2 63.3±2.5 65.3±7.0
agents as the discussion progresses through mul-            Round 2 74.7±2.1 70.3±1.9 71.7±2.1
tiple rounds. For GPT4, the final round perfor-             Round 3 76.7±2.1 72.3±2.1 72.0±2.4
mance outperforms its initial solo one by 3.4%,
and the improvements for Bard and Claude2 are Table 7: Accuracy of GPT-4, Claude2, and
much more (+34.6% and +12.3%, respectively) Bard on AQuA after each discussion round.
because of their initial low accuracies. This trend
mirrors our findings in Table 4, reinforcing the effectiveness of the R E C ONCILE in facilitating both
commonsense and mathematical reasoning tasks.

B.2   U SING O PEN - SOURCE M ODELS AS AGENT IN R E C ONCILE

While most of our experiments have focused on API-
                                                                                              ChatGPT    Claude2    LLaMA2
based models for R E C ONCILE, we now explore its
potential compatibility with an open-source model.                                  Round 0   74.5±3.5   73.0±0.0   73.5±3.5
For effective engagement in discussions, the model                                  Round 1   75.0±1.0   74.5±1.5   75.5±0.5
should be capable of following long instructions. To                                Round 2   79.0±1.0   75.5±0.5   75.5±0.5
                                                                                    Round 3   78.0±0.0   76.0±0.0   75.0±0.0

                                                            16        Table 8: Accuracy of ChatGPT, Claude2, and
                                                                      LLaMA2-70B on StrategyQA.
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                    Debate (ChatGPT)       ReConcile

                                               60
                                               55
                                               50
                                               45
                                               40


                                    Accuracy
                                               35
                                               30
                                               25
                                               20
                                               15
                                               10
                                                5
                                                0
                                                     0       1         2      3

                                                         Discussion Round

               Figure 6: R E C ONCILE outperforms Debate (with ChatGPT) on ANLI.
this end, we develop another version of R E C ONCILE
with ChatGPT, Claude2, and LLaMA2-70B (Tou-
vron et al., 2023) as the three agents. The results
are presented in Table 8. We observe similar trends
between open and closed models – open models also
benefit from R E C ONCILE, such that all agents improve as the discussion proceeds.

B.3   B EYOND R EASONING TASKS : G ENERAL A PPLICABILITY OF R E C ONCILE

Moving beyond complex reasoning tasks, we now investigate whether the discussion and convinc-
ingness setup in R E C ONCILE can generally benefit fundamental NLP tasks, like Natural Language
Inference (NLI). Since traditional NLI benchmarks like SNLI (Bowman et al., 2015) are not chal-
lenging enough for current LLMs, we experiment with Adversarial NLI (ANLI), a dataset with
longer contexts and built adversarially with human and model in the loop (Nie et al., 2020). In
particular, we use the hardest round three test set, where state-of-the-art methods have been shown
to underperform. As shown in Fig. 6, R E C ONCILE obtains an accuracy of 56.7±1.2 after round 2,
which is 5 points better than the multi-agent debate with ChatGPT. Additionally, it is also better
than the baseline after each round. Overall, this result demonstrates that RECONCILE can also
generalize well on challenging long-standing NLP tasks.

B.4   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON OTHER R EASONING TASKS

We further investigate R E C ONCILE’s performance on
two other logical and math reasoning tasks: (1) Date Un-                      DATE       MATH
derstanding (BIG-bench collaboration, 2023), for mea-
                                                                85
suring model’s ability to understand date-related informa-      80
                                                                75
tion, and (2) MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021), that con-          70
                                                                65
sists of math problems from high school math competi-           60
                                                                               Accuracy


                                                                55
tions with seven subjects and five levels of difficulty. We     50
                                                                45
                                                                40
follow the same evaluation protocol as our main exper-          35
                                                                30
iments. Results are presented in Fig. 7. For the date           25
                                                                20
understanding task, R E C ONCILE obtains improvements           15
                                                                10
of up to 37% over vanilla single-agent models (Bard),            5
                                                                 0
                                                                   ChatGPT Bard  Claude2 Debate ReConcile
and up to 17% over multi-agent debate. On the MATH
dataset, R E C ONCILE exhibits a modest 2% improvement                           Model

over the multi-agent debate baseline, echoing the trends
observed in Table 2 for arithmetic reasoning tasks. In Figure 7: R E C ONCILE improves upon
conclusion, R E C ONCILE shows its robustness and gen- other baselines on Date Understanding
eralizability across a wide range of datasets and different and MATH datasets.
kinds of commonsense, logical, and math reasoning tasks.

B.5   Q UANTIFYING E XPLANATION D IVERSITY FROM D IFFERENT M ODELS

In this section, we quantitatively analyze the diversity of the explanations generated by different
LLMs in R E C ONCILE. If explanations from different models are indeed more diverse than those
generated from multiple instances of the same model (e.g., in Multi-agent Debate), then our diversity
metric should capture that. We quantify diversity as D(A1 , A2 , A3 ) = D(A1 , A2 ) + D(A1 , A3 ) +
D(A2 , A3 ), where A1 , A2 , and A3 are the three agents’ initial explanations (either belonging to the


                                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


same underlying model or different models). We measure their pairwise diversity with the help of
two metrics: (1) computing n-gram based ROUGE-2 scores, and (2) computing cosine similarity
between the explanation embeddings. Note that lower similarity scores will mean greater diversity.
We compare multi-agent debate (that uses the same underlying model) and R E C ONCILE against this
diversity metric. As shown in Table 9, R E C ONCILE exhibits higher diversity by obtaining lower
similarity scores.


              Metric                  Method                 D (A1, A2)                D (A1, A3)               D (A2, A3)           D (A1, A2, A3)
                                      Debate                     0.4161                    0.3998                    0.4018                 1.2177
              ROUGE-2
                                      R E C ONCILE               0.1685                    0.1666                    0.1733                 0.5084
                                      Debate                     0.9141                    0.9167                    0.9087                 2.7395
              Cosine
                                      R E C ONCILE               0.8992                    0.8385                    0.8294                 2.5671

Table 9: Explanations from different models in R E C ONCILE are more diverse (i.e., less similar)
compared to explanations from multiple instances of the same model in Debate.



C      Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES

C.1       D EMONSTRATIONS OF C ONVINCING S AMPLES FOR E ACH AGENT

Table 10 shows examples of convincing samples on StrategyQA for each agent.


C.2       D EMONSTRATIONS OF E FFECT OF C ONVINCING S AMPLES

Here, we provide qualitative examples of how convincing samples change the way each agent re-
sponds to the question. We compare the initial responses (of each agent) with and without convincing
samples in Table 11.

 Was Bruce Lee absent from the 1964 University of Washington graduation ceremony?       Gold Answer: Yes
                                                                                                                                                                     Round 0


                                                             No, Bruce Lee graduated from high school in 1958.
      No, Bruce Lee graduated from the University of                                                                    Yes, Bruce Lee graduated from the University of
                                                             He then studied philosophy at the University of
      Washington in 1963. The 1964 graduation                                                                           Washington in 1964 with a degree in philosophy.
                                                             Washington from 1961-1964. Bruce Lee was very
      ceremony took place after Bruce Lee had already                                                                   However, he was not present at the graduation
                                                             proud of his academic achievements, making it
      graduated, so he would not have been absent                                                                       ceremony because he was filming the movie The
                                                             unlikely he would intentionally miss his college
      from it. Confidence level: 0.90                                                                                   Green Hornet in Hong Kong. Confidence level: 0.90
                                                             graduation. Confidence level: 1.0



                                                                                                                                                                     Round 1

    No, Based on the information provided by the
                                                              No, after reviewing the other agents' solutions, I         Yes, Bruce Lee graduated from the University of
    agents, it is likely that Bruce Lee did not attend the
                                                              agree with the reasoning from the two agents who           Washington in 1964 with a degree in philosophy.
    1964 University of Washington graduation ceremony.
                                                              concluded the answer is no. The claim that Bruce           However, he was not present at the graduation
    One agent mentioned that there are no credible
                                                              Lee missed the 1964 ceremony due to filming The            ceremony because he was filming the movie The
    sources indicating his absence, and graduation
                                                              Green Hornet is likely incorrect, as that movie did        Green Hornet in Hong Kong.
    ceremonies are important events that most students
                                                              not begin filming until 1965. Confidence level: 0.95       Confidence level: 0.95
    attend. Confidence level: 0.80



                                                                                                                                                                     Round 2

    No, After considering the reasoning provided by
                                                             No, After reviewing the other agents' solutions, I
    the agents, it is apparent that there is a consensus                                                                Yes, Bruce Lee graduated from the University of
                                                             agree with the reasoning from the two agents who
    among the agents that the answer is no. Taking into                                                                 Washington in 1964 with a degree in philosophy.
                                                             concluded the answer is no. Bruce Lee graduated
    account the agreement among the agents and the                                                                      However, he was not present at the graduation
                                                             from the University of Washington in 1963, so he
    reasoning provided, it is unlikely that Bruce Lee was                                                               ceremony because he was filming the movie The
                                                             would not have been scheduled to participate in the
    absent from the 1964 University of Washington                                                                       Green Hornet in Hong Kong. Confidence level: 1.0
                                                             1964 graduation ceremony. Confidence level: 0.95
    graduation ceremony. Confidence level: 1.0


Figure 8: An illustrative example showing that without demonstrations of convincing samples,
agents’ opinions do not change much across the discussion rounds. All agents maintain their origi-
nal stances and hence, never converge to the correct answer.


                                                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.3       D EMONSTRATION OF R E C ONCILE WITHOUT C ONVINCING S AMPLES

We notice that when R E C ONCILE operates in the absence of convincing samples, the agents tend
to maintain their initial opinions more often. As depicted in Fig. 8, all three agents adhere to their
original stances throughout the entire discussion and hence never converge to the correct answer.

 Question: Is it dangerous to consume chlorine when mixed with sodium?     Gold Answer: No
                                                                                                                                                                           Round 0

      No, When chlorine and sodium combine, they                                                                          Yes, Chlorine is a highly reactive element that reacts
                                                              Yes, Chlorine and sodium are both reactive
      form table salt or sodium chloride. Consuming                                                                       violently with sodium to produce sodium chloride
                                                              elements. When mixed together, they can react
      chlorine gas directly can be extremely hazardous                                                                    (table salt) and hydrogen gas. The reaction is
                                                              violently to produce dangerous chlorine gas. This
      for human health. However, when chlorine is                                                                         exothermic, meaning that it releases heat. The heat
                                                              exothermic reaction gives off heat and toxic fumes,
      mixed with sodium to form sodium chloride, it is                                                                    generated by the reaction can cause the mixture to
                                                              making it very hazardous.
      no longer dangerous to consume.                                                                                     catch fire or explode.
                                                              Confidence level: 0.90
      Confidence level: 0.95                                                                                              Confidence level: 0.90



                                                                                                                                                                           Round 1

   Yes, Chlorine is a highly reactive element that can
                                                              No, I agree with the agent who said the answer is no.      Yes, Chlorine and sodium are both reactive elements.
   react violently with sodium. The two agents who
                                                              When chlorine and sodium react, they form sodium           When mixed together, they can react violently to
   think the answer is yes provide similar reasoning,
                                                              chloride, which is table salt. While chlorine gas on its   produce dangerous chlorine gas. This exothermic
   stating that the reaction between chlorine and
                                                              own can be dangerous to ingest, the chemical               reaction gives off heat and toxic fumes, making it very
   sodium can produce dangerous chlorine gas, toxic
                                                              reaction with sodium turns it into a harmless              hazardous. I agree with the first two agents' answers.
   fumes, and release heat.
                                                              compound. Confidence level: 0.95                           Confidence level: 0.90
   Confidence level: 0.80



                                                                                                                                                                           Round 2

   No, I agree with the agents who say the answer is           No, I agree with the agents who said the answer is
                                                                                                                           No, Chlorine and sodium, when combined, react
   no. Chlorine and sodium react to form sodium                no. When chlorine and sodium react, they form
                                                                                                                           to form sodium chloride, which is table salt. While
   chloride, which is table salt. The end product is safe      sodium chloride, which is table salt. The reasoning
                                                                                                                           chlorine gas on its own can be dangerous to
   for consumption. I disagree with the agent who says         that the mixture remains dangerous after the
                                                                                                                           ingest, the chemical reaction with sodium turns it
   the mixture remains dangerous after the reaction,           reaction is not convincing. The agents saying no
                                                                                                                           into a harmless compound.
   as table salt is commonly used for seasoning food.          provide more compelling explanations.
                                                                                                                           Confidence level: 0.90
   Confidence level: 0.95                                      Confidence level: 0.95


Figure 9: An illustrative example showing that with access to demonstrations of convincing samples,
agents’ opinions and explanations change during the course of multiple discussion rounds.


C.4       D EMONSTRATION OF R E C ONCILE WITH C ONVINCING S AMPLES

On the contrary, when convincing samples are present, we show how the explanations of all agents
change during the course of a discussion (see Fig. 9). Initially, Bard and Claude2 provide incorrect
answers, but as the discussion unfolds, both agents revise their initial predictions, ultimately arriving
at the correct answer.

C.5       D EMONSTRATION OF S INGLE -M ODEL M ULTI -AGENT D EBATE S TRUGGLING WITH
          E CHO C HAMBER

In Fig. 10, we provide an illustration of multi-agent debate, implemented with multiple instances
of the same underlying ChatGPT model. In this case, an incorrect answer is initially provided, but
because external feedback from diverse models is lacking, all agents persist with the same incorrect
response throughout the interaction.


                                                                                       19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Question: Is it dangerous to consume chlorine when mixed with sodium?      Gold Answer: No
                                                                                                                                                                                 Round 0

     Yes, consuming chlorine gas (Cl2) or sodium metal
                                                              Yes. Chlorine is a highly toxic substance, and when               Yes, Chlorine is a highly reactive element that reacts
     (Na) separately or in a mixture can be extremely
                                                              mixed with sodium, it can form sodium hypochlorite,               violently with sodium to produce sodium chloride
     dangerous and harmful to human health. Mixing
                                                              a strong oxidizer and potentially harmful compound.               (table salt) and hydrogen gas. The reaction is
     chlorine gas with sodium metal or sodium
                                                              Consuming chlorine when mixed with sodium can                     exothermic, meaning that it releases heat. The heat
     hydroxide would likely result in a highly
                                                              be dangerous.                                                     generated by the reaction can cause the mixture to
     exothermic reaction, potentially leading to the
                                                                                                                                catch fire or explode.
     release of even more toxic and dangerous
                                                                                                                                Confidence level: 0.90
     chemicals.


                                                                                                                                                                                 Round 1

   Yes, it is dangerous to consume chlorine when              Yes, There seems to be a consensus among the                      Yes, Taking into account the recent opinions provided
   mixed with sodium. The combination of chlorine             agents that it is dangerous to consume chlorine when              by other agents and the consensus among them, it is
   and sodium can form compounds such as sodium               mixed with sodium. Therefore, my answer remains the               clear that consuming chlorine when mixed with sodium
   hypochlorite, which can be harmful to the body.            same: Yes, it is dangerous to consume chlorine when               is indeed considered dangerous. Therefore, my
   Consuming chlorine in this form can pose health            mixed with sodium.                                                updated answer aligns with their opinions: Yes, it is
   risks.                                                                                                                       dangerous to consume chlorine when mixed with
                                                                                                                                sodium.


                                                                                                                                                                                 Round 2

   Yes, Based on the opinions provided by other                Yes, After considering the potential formation of                  Yes, After considering the opinions provided by
   agents, it appears that the consensus is that it is         compounds such as sodium hypochlorite, which can                   other agents, it is evident that there is a
   indeed dangerous to consume chlorine when mixed             be harmful to the body, it is best to exercise caution.            consensus among them that consuming chlorine
   with sodium. Therefore, my updated answer aligns            Consuming chlorine when mixed with sodium and                      when mixed with sodium is indeed dangerous.
   with theirs: Yes, it is dangerous to consume chlorine       forming specific compounds can pose health risks.                  Therefore, my updated answer aligns with their
   when mixed with sodium.                                                                                                        opinions: Yes, it is dangerous to consume chlorine
                                                                                                                                  when mixed with sodium.


Figure 10: An illustrative example of multi-agent debate with multiple instances of ChatGPT. Ini-
tially, an incorrect answer is provided, and due to a lack of external feedback from diverse models,
all agents persist with the same erroneous response throughout the debate process.


                                                ECE Score: 0.2565                                                           ECE Score: 0.1374
                                       1.0                                                                         1.0
                Accuracy within Bins


                                                                                            Accuracy within Bins


                                       0.8                                                                         0.8
                                       0.6                                                                         0.6
                                       0.4                                                                         0.4
                                       0.2                                                                         0.2
                                       0.0                                                                         0.0
                                             0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                                                     0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                                                  Confidence Bins                                                             Confidence Bins
                                                    (a)                                                                         (b)
Figure 11: Expected Calibration Error (ECE) (Naeini et al., 2015; Guo et al., 2017; Elias Stengel-
Eskin & Benjamin Van Durme, 2023) (a) before and (b) after confidence rescaling in R E C ONCILE.
We observe a significant drop in ECE, showing the effectiveness of our simple method.


                                                                                       20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Q UESTION: Is the tongue part of a creature’s head? (Gold answer: yes)
 C HAT GPT (I NITIAL ): The tongue is a muscular organ located in the mouth of most vertebrates,
 including humans. It is involved in functions such as taste, chewing, and speaking. The head,
 on the other hand, is the anatomical part that contains the brain, eyes, ears, nose, and mouth.
 Answer: no.
 C ONVINCING H UMAN E XPLANATION: A creature’s tongue is inside its mouth. A creature’s
 mouth is part of its head.
 C HAT GPT ( W / C ONVINCING H UMAN E XPLANATION ): Based on the information provided, the
 tongue is inside a creature’s mouth. The mouth is part of a creature’s head. Answer: yes.
 Q UESTION: Are slime lilies in a different scientific family than asparagus? (Gold answer: no)
 BARD (I NITIAL ): Slime lilies are in the scientific family Araceae while asparagus is in the sci-
 entific family Asparagaceae. Answer: yes.
 C ONVINCING H UMAN E XPLANATION: Asparagus is a species of plants of the Asparagaceae
 family. Slime lilies are the common name for the flowering albuca plant. The albuca plant
 belongs to the scientific family of Asparagaceae.
 BARD ( W / C ONVINCING H UMAN E XPLANATION ): Slime lilies are in the scientific family of
 Asparagaceae, while asparagus is in the same family. Answer: no.
 Q UESTION: Would an astrologer focus on the densest terrestrial planet for a Friday horoscope?
 (Gold answer: yes)
 C LAUDE 2 (I NITIAL ): Astrologers do not focus on Earth for Friday horoscopes specifically. As-
 trologers tend to focus on the positions of the Sun, Moon, and planets in the zodiac for horo-
 scopes. The day of the week is not especially relevant. Answer: no.
 C ONVINCING H UMAN E XPLANATION: Friday is associated with Venus in astrology Venus is
 the densest of the terrestrial planets
 C LAUDE 2 ( W / C ONVINCING H UMAN E XPLANATION ): Friday is associated with Venus in as-
 trology, and Venus is the densest of the terrestrial planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars). So the
 question is asking if an astrologer would focus on Venus for a Friday horoscope. Answer: yes.


Table 10: Examples of convincing human explanations for each agent (ChatGPT, Bard, and
Claude2). A convincing explanation is an instance of a answer-rectifying human explanation. For
all three examples, the convincing explanation helps rectify an agent’s initial incorrect answer.


                                                21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Q UESTION: Was Lil Jon’s top ranked Billboard song a collaboration with a member of The Lox?
 (Gold answer: no)
 C HAT GPT ( W / O C ONVINCING ): To determine if Lil Jon’s top ranked Billboard song was a
 collaboration with a member of The Lox, we need to search for Lil Jon’s discography and look
 for his highest-charting song on the Billboard charts. Then, we need to check if this song is a
 collaboration with a member of The Lox. Answer: no. Confidence: 0.8.
 C HAT GPT ( W / C ONVINCING ): Lil Jon’s top ranked Billboard song is ‘Yeah!’ which features
 vocals from Usher and Ludacris. There is no collaboration between Lil Jon and any member of
 The Lox on this song. Answer: no. Confidence: 0.9.
 Q UESTION: Could ten gallons of seawater crush a six year old? (Gold answer: yes)
 BARD ( W / O C ONVINCING ): Ten gallons of seawater weighs about 82 pounds. The average
 weight of a six year old is about 44 pounds. Therefore, ten gallons of seawater would be about
 twice as heavy as a six year old. It is possible that ten gallons of seawater could crush a
 six year old, but it is also possible that the six year old could survive. The outcome would
 depend on a number of factors, such as the size and strength of the six year old, the shape of the
 container holding the seawater, and the amount of time the six year old was submerged in the
 seawater. Answer: yes. Confidence: 0.7.
 BARD ( W / C ONVINCING ): The density of seawater is about 1.025 grams per cubic centimeter.
 Ten gallons of seawater is about 37.85 liters. The volume of a human body is about 60 liters.
 Therefore, ten gallons of seawater would be about 63% of the volume of a human body. If ten
 gallons of seawater were to be poured on a six year old, it would be very difficult for the child to
 breathe and they would likely drown. Answer: yes. Confidence: 0.95.
 Q UESTION: Would the top of Mount Fuji stick out of the Sea of Japan? (Gold answer: yes)
 C LAUDE 2 ( W / O C ONVINCING ): To determine if the top of Mount Fuji would stick out of the
 Sea of Japan, I need to compare the elevation of Mount Fuji to the depth of the Sea of Japan.
 According to Wikipedia, the elevation of Mount Fuji is 3,776 meters. The average depth of the
 Sea of Japan is 1,752 meters according to Wikipedia. Since the elevation of Mount Fuji is greater
 than the average depth of the Sea of Japan, I can conclude that the top of Mount Fuji would stick
 out above the surface of the Sea of Japan if it was placed there. Answer: yes. Confidence: 0.9.
 C LAUDE 2 ( W / C ONVINCING ): Mount Fuji is the highest mountain in Japan, with a summit
 elevation of 12,389 feet or 3,776 meters above sea level. The average depth of the Sea of Japan is
 about 3,742 meters. Since the summit of Mount Fuji is higher than the average depth of the Sea
 of Japan, the top of Mount Fuji would stick out above the water if it was located in the middle of
 the Sea of Japan. Answer: yes. Confidence: 0.9.


Table 11: Comparison of how each agent’s reasoning changes with and without convincing samples.
We observe that by conditioning on convincing samples, all agents tend to become more confident
in their reasoning and generate less uncertain statements (shown in bold), which is also reflected in
the actual confidence scores generated by each agent (e.g., goes up from 0.7 to 0.95 for Bard).


                                                 22
