Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACHIEVING FAIRNESS IN M ULTI -AGENT MDP U SING
R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Peizhong Ju                                                  Arnob Ghosh
 Department of ECE                                            ECE Department
 The Ohio State University                                    New Jersey Institute of Technology
 Columbus, OH 43210, USA                                      Newark, NJ 07102, USA
 ju.171@osu.edu                                               arnob.ghosh@njit.edu

 Ness B. Shroff
 Department of ECE and CSE
 The Ohio State University
 Columbus, OH 43210, USA
 shroff.11@osu.edu

                                           A BSTRACT
         Fairness plays a crucial role in various multi-agent systems (e.g., communication
         networks, financial markets, etc.). Many multi-agent dynamical interactions can
         be cast as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). While existing research has fo-
         cused on studying fairness in known environments, provably efficient exploration
         of fairness in such systems for unknown environments remains open. In this paper,
         we propose a Reinforcement Learning (RL) approach to achieve fairness in multi-
         agent finite-horizon episodic MDPs. Instead of maximizing the sum of individual
         agentsРђЎ value functions, we introduce a fairness function that ensures equitable
         rewards across agents. Since the classical BellmanРђЎs equation does not hold when
         the sum of individual value functions is not maximized, we cannot use traditional
         approaches. Instead, in order to explore, we maintain a confidence bound of the
         unknown environment and then propose an online convex optimization based ap-
         proach to obtain a policy constrained to this confidence region. We show that such
         an approach achieves sub-linear regret in terms of the number of episodes. Addi-
         tionally, we provide a probably approximately correct (PAC) guarantee based on
         the obtained regret bound. We also propose an offline RL algorithm and bound
         the optimality gap with respect to the optimal fair solution. To mitigate com-
         putational complexity, we introduce a policy-gradient type method for the fair
         objective. Simulation experiments also demonstrate the efficacy of our approach.

1   I NTRODUCTION
In classical Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), the primary objective is to find a policy that max-
imizes the reward obtained by a single agent over the course of an episode. However, in numerous
real-world applications, decisions made by an agent can have an impact on multiple agents or enti-
ties. For instance, in a wireless network scenario, each device aims to maximize its own throughput
by increasing its transmission power. However, higher transmission power can lead to interference
issues for neighboring terminals. Similarly, consider a situation where two jobs are competing for
a single machine; selecting one job results in a penalty or delay for the other job. The sequential
decision-making process as in the above examples can be cast as a multi-agent episodic MDP where
the central decision-maker seeks to obtain the best policy for multiple users or agents over a time
horizon. Each user or agent achieves a reward (potentially different) based on the state and action.
Before delving into the concept of an optimal policy, it is necessary to address what constitutes an
optimal policy in the given context. While a particular policy may be good for one agent, it may
not be the best choice for another agent. A naive approach could be to maximize the aggregate
value functions across all agents, thereby reducing the problem to a classical MDP. However, such
an approach may not be considered РђюfairРђЮ for all agents involved. To illustrate this, consider a
scenario where two jobs are competing for a single machine. If one job offers a higher reward, a


                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


central controller that focuses solely on maximizing the aggregate reward may allocate the machine
exclusively to the job with the higher reward, causing the job with the lower reward to remain in a
waiting state indefinitely. In this paper, our objective is to identify fair decision-making strategies
for multi-agent MDP problems, ensuring that all agents are treated equitably.
Drawing inspiration from well-known fairness principles (Arrow, 1965; Pratt, 1978; Atkinson et al.,
1970), we establish a formalization of fairness as a function of the individual value function of
agents. Specifically, we concentrate on ╬▒-fairness, which encompasses both egalitarian or max-min
fairness (when ╬▒ Рєњ Рѕъ) and proportional fairness (when ╬▒ = 1). The parameter ╬▒ allows us to
adjust the level of fairness desired. To illustrate this concept, letРђЎs consider our example of two
jobs with different rewards competing for the same machine. Proportional fairness dictates that the
machine should be accessed with equal probability by both the low-reward and high-reward jobs.
Conversely, max-min fairness suggests that the job with the higher reward should access the machine
with a probability that is inversely proportional to its reward.
In this work, we seek to determine the policy that maximizes the ╬▒-fairness value of the individual
value functions of an MDP. Considering that the knowledge of the environment is usually unknown
beforehand in real-world applications, we consider a Reinforcement Learning (RL)-based approach.
However, a significant challenge of non-linearity arises since the central controller is not optimizing
the sum of the individual value functions, rendering the classical Bellman equation inapplicable.
Consequently, conventional techniques such as value-iteration-based or policy-gradient-based ap-
proaches cannot be directly employed. To evaluate an online algorithm, regret is a widely used met-
ric that measures the cumulative performance gap between the online solution in each episode and
the optimal solution. While there are algorithms that provide good empirical performance, they do
not provide any regret guarantee. Therefore, we aim to develop an algorithm that exhibits sub-linear
regret with respect to the ╬▒-fair solution. Further, since generating new data is costly or impossible
for some applications, we also seek to develop a provably-efficient offline fair RL algorithm, i.e., an
algorithm that requires no real-time new data. In short, we seek to answerРђЊ
Can we attain a fair RL algorithm with sub-linear regret for multi-agent MDP? Can we develop a
                          provably-efficient fair offline RL algorithm?
Our Contributions: We summarize our contributions in the following:
                                                                        Рѕџ
Рђб We show that our proposed algorithm achieves O╠Ѓ CF (H 2 N S AK) regret where H is the
  length of the horizon of each episode, S is the cardinality of state space, A is the cardinality
  of the action space, and K is the number of episodes. CF is a parameter determined by the
  types/parameters of the fairness function.
Рђб This is the first sub-linear regret bound for the ╬▒-fairness function in MDP. We achieve the result
  by proposing an optimism-based convex optimization framework using state-action occupancy
  measures. In our algorithm, we use confidence bounds to quantify the error of the estimated
  reward and transition probability, with which we relax the constraints on possible values of the
  state-action occupancy measures to encourage exploration. With any convex optimization solver,
  our proposed algorithm can be solved efficiently in polynomial time. In order to address large
  state-space problems, we also develop an efficient policy-gradient-based approach that caters to
  the function approximation setup.
Рђб We also propose a pessimistic version of the optimization problem and establish the theoretical
  guarantees for the offline fair RL setup. In particular, we construct an MDP with a reward function
  based on the available data such that the value function of the constructed MDP is a lower bound
  of the actual value function for the same policy with high probability. The policy is obtained by
  solving the convex optimization problem using the occupancy measure on the constructed MDP.
  We show that the sub-optimality gap of our policy depends on the intrinsic uncertainty multiplied
  by CF . This is the first result with a theoretical bound for the offline fair RL setup.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Fairness in resource allocation: Fairness in traditional resource allocation setup has been well
studied (Mo & Walrand, 2000; Kelly et al., 1998; Lin et al., 2006). RL-based fair resource alloca-
tion decision-making has also been considered for resource allocation (Chen et al., 2021; Hao et al.,
2023; Jain et al., 2017; Cui et al., 2019). However, theoretical guarantees have not been provided.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Fairness in MDP/RL: Joseph et al. (2016); Liu et al. (2017) considered individual fairness cri-
terion which stipulates that an RL system should make similar decisions for similar individuals.
Huang et al. (2022); Schumann et al. (2019); Wen et al. (2021) considered a group fairness notion
where the main focus is on policy is fair to a group of users (refer to Gajane et al. (2022) for details).
Jiang & Lu (2019) proposed an approach where they perturbed the reward to make it fair across the
users. In contrast to the above, our setup is different as we seek to achieve fairness in terms of value
functions (i.e., long-term return) of different agents.
Hossain et al. (2021); Bistritz et al. (2020); Barman et al. (2022); Patil et al. (2021) considered Nash
social welfare (or, proportional fairness) and other fairness notions in multi-armed bandit setup.
Do et al. (2022) also considered fairness in the contextual bandit setup. However, we consider an
RL setup instead of a bandit setup. The algorithms designed for bandit setup can not be readily
extended to the MDP setup. Further, we consider the generic ╬▒ fairness concept rather than the
proportional-fairness concept. Zimmer et al. (2021); Siddique et al. (2020) considered ╬▒-fairness
and Gini social welfare metrics. However, the regret bounds have not been provided there. Finally,
we provide a fair algorithm in an offline RL setup, which has not been considered in most of the RL
literature.
The closest to our work is Mandal & Gan (2022) which adopted a welfare-based axiomatic ap-
proach and showed regret bound for Nash social welfare, and max-min fairness. In contrast, we
considered the ╬▒-based fairness metric and showed regret bound for the generic value of ╬▒. Unlike
in Mandal & Gan (2022), our approach admits efficient computation. Further, we provided the PAC
guarantee and developed an algorithm for offline fair RL with a theoretical guarantee. Finally, we
also developed a policy-gradient-based algorithm that is applicable to large state space as well.
Convex and multi-objective MDP: Cheung (2019) obtained regret bound for a specific non-linear
function of the objectives. Tarbouriech et al. (2020) considered an MDP setup with a convex objec-
tive for infinite-horizon setup. Brantley et al. (2020) considered an episodic MDP setting where the
objective is to maximize a concave function of an individual value function. Unlike all the above
works, we consider a setup where the objective is to achieve fairness among multiple agents. Natu-
rally, the above papers did not consider the effect of various fairness metrics on the agents. Further,
the proof techniques and algorithms also rely on the Lipschitz property, however, the fairness func-
tion may not be Lipschitz (e.g., ╬▒ fairness), hence, the proof techniques and the regret bound are also
different. Furthermore, we consider offline setup unlike all the above papers. For detailed literature
review, please see Appendix A.

3    BACKGROUND : T YPES OF FAIRNESS IN R ESOURCE A LLOCATION
Fairness in resource allocation in multi-agent systems (especially in networks) has been extensively
studied (Lin & Shroff, 2005; 2004; Eryilmaz & Srikant, 2007; Neely et al., 2008). Specifically, in
resource allocation, a feasible solution is any vector x := [x1 x2 ┬и ┬и ┬и xN ] Рѕѕ F Ріє RN
                                                                                     + where N de-
notes the number of agents, xi denotes the allocated resource to each agent, and F denotes a feasible
set determined by some constraints. A fair objective is to allocate resources while maintaining some
kind of fairness. As described in Mo & Walrand (2000), the following are some standard definitions
of fairness.
Proportional Fairness: A solution xРѕЌ is proportional fair when it is feasible and for any other
feasible solution x Рѕѕ F, the aggregate of proportional change is non-positive:
                                        PN xi РѕњxРѕЌi
                                           i=1 xРѕЌ     РЅц 0.                                  (1)
                                                     i

In particular, for all other allocations, the sum of proportional rate changes with respect to xРѕЌ is
non-positive. Proportional fairness is widely used in network applications such as scheduling.
Max-min fairness: Max-min fairness wants to get a feasible solution that maximizes the minimum
resources of all agents, i.e., maxxРѕѕF mini xi . For this solution, no agent can get more resources
without sacrificing another agentРђЎs resources.
(p, ╬▒)-proportional fairness: Let p = (p1 , ┬и ┬и ┬и , pN ) and ╬▒ be positive numbers. A solution xРѕЌ is
(p, ╬▒)-proportionally fair when it is feasible and for any other feasible solution x Рѕѕ F, we have
                                          PN       xi РѕњxРѕЌ
                                            i=1 pi xРѕЌ ╬▒ РЅц 0.                                      (2)
                                                        i
                                                        i


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


When p = (1, ┬и ┬и ┬и , 1) and ╬▒ = 1, Eq. (2) reduces to Eq. (1), i.e., the proportionally fair solution.
Besides, by Corollary 2 of Mo & Walrand (2000), the solution of (p, ╬▒)-proportional fair approaches
the one of max-min fair as ╬▒ Рєњ Рѕъ. By Lemma 2 of Mo & Walrand (2000), the solution that
achieves (p, ╬▒)-proportional fairness can be solved by

                  X                                 log x,             if ╬▒ = 1
             max       pi f╬▒ (xi ), where f╬▒ (x) =
              x                                     (1 Рѕњ ╬▒)Рѕњ1 x1Рѕњ╬▒ , other positive ╬▒.
                     i

When pi = 1 for all i, we denote that by ╬▒-fairness in short, which is widely studied in the network-
ing literature (Lan et al., 2010). Note that f╬▒ is a monotonic increasing function, and concave.

4     S YSTEM M ODEL
Multi-agent Finite Horizon MDPs. Let M = (N, S, A, r, p, s1 , H) be the finite-horizon MDP,
where N denotes the number of agents, A denotes the action space with cardinality A, S denotes
the state space with cardinality S, and H is a positive integer that denotes the horizon length. At
time h = 1, 2, ┬и ┬и ┬и , H, we let rh,(i) (s, a) denote the non-stationary immediate reward for the i-th
agent when action is a Рѕѕ A at state s Рѕѕ S. The transition probability is denoted by ph (sРђ▓ |s, a).
Note that this setup can be easily extended to the scenario where agents are also part of the MDP by
letting A denote the joint action space of all agents.

4.1   VALUE FUNCTION AND FAIRNESS
The state-action value function of agent i is defined as
                                                     H
                                                     X
             Q¤ђh,(i) (s, a) := rh,(i) (s, a) + E           rl,(i) (sl , al )|sh = s, ah = a, ¤ђ, p .
                                                   l=h+1

                                               ¤ђ
                                                                 P                ¤ђ
The i-th agentРђЎs value function is defined as Vh,(i) (s) :=          aРѕѕA ¤ђh (a|s)Qh,(i) (s, a).

To achieve fairness among each agentРђЎs return, we optimize a different global value function (instead
of V1¤ђ,sum (s) that sums up each agentРђЎs return):

                          V1¤ђ,F (s) := F (V1,(1)
                                            ¤ђ           ¤ђ
                                                 (s), V1,(2)                ¤ђ
                                                             (s), ┬и ┬и ┬и , V1,(N ) (s)),                 (3)

where F is some function of every agentРђЎs return that can be chosen for fairness. Similar to the
fairness objective used in resource allocation literature (Mo & Walrand, 2000), we consider the fol-
lowing three possible options of F :
                             ¤ђ           ¤ђ                  ¤ђ
          Fmax-min = min{V1,(1)  (s), V1,(2) (s), ┬и ┬и ┬и , V1,(N ) (s)}     (max-min fairness),          (4)
                       PN         ¤ђ
        Fproportional = i=1 log V1,(i) (s)                                 (proportional fairness),     (5)
                       PN     1    ¤ђ       1Рѕњ╬▒
                 F╬▒ = i=1 1Рѕњ╬▒ V1,(i) (s)                                   (╬▒ fairness where ╬▒ > 0),    (6)

Note that we have adopted the ╬▒-fairness in resource allocation to the ╬▒-fairness in value functions
across the agents. Chen et al. (2021) also formalized fairness among value functions in network
applications. Recently, Zhang et al. (2022) also adopted ╬▒-fairness to federated learning setup. In
the rest of this paper, we sometimes remove the superscript F in V1¤ђ,F (s) for ease of notation.
Remarks and Connections: From (1), maximizing proportional fairness in the value function
means that the average relative value function is maximized. In particular, at any other policy, the
average relative value function across the agents would be reduced compared to the proportionally
fair maximizing policy. Hossain et al. (2021); Mandal & Gan (2022) maximize the product (contrast
                                             QN       ¤ђ
to the sum) of each agentРђЎs value function i=1 V1,(i)     (s) (also, known as Nash social welfare). By
taking the logarithm on the product, it is equivalent to Fproportional (Kelly, 1997) in Eq. (5) in our case.
Mandal & Gan (2022) has a regret bound for Nash social welfare. Even though the proportional-
fair solution is Nash social welfare solution, the regret bound for the Nash social welfare and for
the proportional fair case is not comparable. For example, their bound scales O(H N ), whereas our
regret bound scales as O(N H 2 ) (shown later in this paper). The proof technique is also different.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


When ╬▒ = 0, we recover the utilitarian social welfare where the objective is to maximize the sum
of the value functions. On the other hand, ╬▒ = Рѕъ refers to max-min fairness in value functions. By
tuning ╬▒, one can achieve different fairness metrics.
Social Impact: One can view different types of fairness as achieving different goals in society. For
example, max-min fairness aims to make decisions that are beneficial to the weakest users.

4.2   P ERFORMANCE EVALUATION
Define the optimal fair value function corresponding to the optimal policy as
                                           V1РѕЌ (s) = sup¤ђ V1¤ђ (s).
The central controller does not know either the probability or the rewards. Rather, it selects a policy
¤ђk for k Рѕѕ [K] episode. Without loss of generality, we assume that the initial state s1 for all episodes
is the same and fixed. If the initial state s1 is drawn from some distribution, then we can construct an
artificial initial state s0 that is fixed for all episodes, and the distribution of the actual initial state s1
determines the transition probability p0 (s1 |s0 , a). We consider the bandit-feedback setup, i.e., the
central controller can only observe the rewards (of all the agents) corresponding to the encountered
state-action pair (Agarwal et al., 2011; Dani et al., 2008). We assume the following for the reward:
Assumption 1. The noisy observation of the immediate reward is a random variable r╠ѓh,(i) (s, a),
which is in the range [ HКФ , 1] almost surely where КФ is some positive real number. The mean value of
the noisy observation is equal to the true immediate reward, i.e., E r╠ѓh,(i) (s, a) = rh,(i) (s, a).
Remark 1. We need r╠ѓ РЅЦ HКФ because this guarantee V1,(i) ¤ђ
                                                            (s1 ) РЅЦ КФ > 0 which ensures that Eqs. (5)
and (6) are finite. Also, this makes the functions Lipschitz continuous everywhere. We characterize
the impact of КФ on the regret/suboptimality bound in Theorem 1.

We are interested in minimizing the regret Reg(K) over finite time horizon K, given by
                                         PK
                            Reg(K) := k=1 (V1РѕЌ (s1 ) Рѕњ V1¤ђk (s1 )) .
The regret characterizes the cumulative sum of the difference at each episode k = 1, 2, ┬и ┬и ┬и , K
between the fair value function and the optimal fair value function.

5     O NLINE FAIR MARL
5.1   O PTIMAL POLICY WITH COMPLETE INFORMATION
Before we characterize the algorithm when the MDP parameters are unknown, we start from the
ideal situation where all parameters of the MDP are known, i.e., complete information. The insight
will help us to develop an algorithm for the challenging scenario when the parameters are unknown.
For the classical objective that maximizes the sum of all agentsРђЎ returns, the optimal return and
policy can be efficiently calculated by backward induction that utilizes the Bellman equation, i.e,
                                    nP                      P                            o
                                        N
            VhРѕЌ,sum (s) = maxaРѕѕA        i=1 rh,(i) (s, a) +
                                                                         Рђ▓       РѕЌ,sum Рђ▓
                                                              sРђ▓ РѕѕS ph (s |s, a)Vh+1 (s ) ,       (7)
       РѕЌ,sum                                                                               PN      ¤ђ
where VH+1   (s) = 0 for all s Рѕѕ S. The reason for Eq. (7) is that maximize                   i=1 Vh,(i) (s) is
                                                                                          PN
equivalent to solving another single-agent MDP with immediate reward equal to                i=1 rh,(i) (s, a).

In contrast, such a convenience no longer exists for the fairness objective since Eq. (7) relies on the
linearity of Vh¤ђ,sum (s) w.r.t. Vh,(i)
                                 ¤ђ
                                       (s). To solve this problem, we alternatively use an occupancy-
measure-based approach which is inspired by Efroni et al. (2020). Define the occupancy measure
                              qh¤ђ (s, a; p) := Pr{sh = s, ah = a | s1 , p, ¤ђ}.                              (8)
The occupancy measure defined by Eq. (8) represents the frequency of the appearance for each
state-action pair under the policy ¤ђ on the environment transition probability p. We will omit p in
the notation qh¤ђ (s, a; p) when the context is clear.
With this definition, each agentРђЎs return can be written as a linear function w.r.t. qh¤ђ (s, a), i.e.,
                               ¤ђ
                                           P
                             V1,(i) (s1 ) = s,a,h rh,(i) (s, a) ┬и qh¤ђ (s, a).                               (9)


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then we can solve a convex optimization of q (we use [┬и]i=1,2,┬и┬и┬и ,N to denote N inputs of F (┬и)):
               h                                    i
                 P
     max F               r
                    s,a,h h,(i) (s, a) ┬и q ¤ђ
                                           h (s, a)             (i.e., maxqРѕѕQ V1¤ђ,F (s1 )),      (10)
       qРѕѕQ                                           i=1,2,┬и┬и┬и ,N

where Q is a set of linear constraints on q to make sure q is a legit occupancy measure with the tran-
sition probability p and initial state s1 (details in Appendix C). Since (10) is a convex optimization
(proof in Lemma 6 in Appendix B), and thus can be solved efficiently in polynomial time. After we
get the occupancy measure q, the corresponding policy can be calculated by ¤ђh (a|s) = P qРђ▓hq(s,a)    Рђ▓ .
                                                                                               h (s,a )
                                                                                                   a


5.2   O NLINE ALGORITHM WITH UNKNOWN ENVIRONMENT
To construct an online algorithm under the bandit-feedback, a straightforward idea is using the
empirical average p╠ё, r╠ё (precisely defined in Eqs. (31) and (30) in Appendix C) of the unknown
transition probability p and reward r to replace the precise ones in (10). Due to the imprecision
of the empirical average, a common strategy is to introduce some confidence interval to balance
exploration and exploitation as done in Efroni et al. (2020). Here we briefly show the algorithm.
More details are in Appendix C.
                                                        p
Define the confidence interval for phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a) as ╬▓h,k (s, a, sРђ▓ ) such that
                                            p
       phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a) Рѕњ p╠Ѓh (sРђ▓ |s, a) РЅц ╬▓h,k (s, a, sРђ▓ ), for all h Рѕѕ [H Рѕњ 1], s, sРђ▓ Рѕѕ S, a Рѕѕ A.    (11)
                                    kРѕњ1              r
Define the confidence interval for rh,(i) (s, a) as ╬▓h,k (s, a) such that
                               kРѕњ1             r
             r╠Ѓh,(i) (s, a) Рѕњ rh,(i) (s, a) РЅц ╬▓h,k (s, a), for all i Рѕѕ [N ], h Рѕѕ [H], s Рѕѕ S, a Рѕѕ A.    (12)

After we get the confidence interval at the h-th step during the k-th iteration, we solve the following
extended convex optimization:
                     h                                                         i
                       P            kРѕњ1             r                       Рђ▓
            max F        s,a,h,sРђ▓ r h,(i) (s, a) + ╬▓h,k (s, a) ┬и zh (s, a, s )            ,        (13)
               zРѕѕZ                                                                  i=1,2,┬и┬и┬и ,N

where Z is a set of constraints that ensures z is a legit state-action-next-state occupancy measure
given initial state s1 (characterized by the set of probable transition probabilities,
                                                                           P
                                                                                       see Appendix C).
                                                                                 z (s,a,sРђ▓ )
Once we have solved z, we can recover the policy by ¤ђk,h (a|s) = P Рђ▓sРђ▓ Рђ▓ zhh (s,aРђ▓ ,sРђ▓ ) . The whole
                                                                            a ,s
algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1. Mandal & Gan (2022) developed an algorithm using the
state-action occupancy measure. However, the algorithm in Mandal & Gan (2022) relies on an op-
timization problem with infinite variables, which does not always have a polynomial solver. In
contrast, our approach requires only finite variables and is more efficient.

Algorithm 1 Online FairMARL
 1: for k = 1, 2, ┬и ┬и ┬и , K do
 2:     Calculate the empirical average phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a), and rh,(i)
                                                               kРѕњ1
                                                                     (s, a).
                                            p            Рђ▓       r
 3:     Calculate the confidence intervals ╬▓h,k (s, a, s ) and ╬▓h,k (s, a).
 4:     Compute policy ¤ђk by solving (13).
 5:     Execute the policy ¤ђk .
 6: end for


Theorem 1. With probability 1 Рѕњ ╬┤, we have
                                      Рѕџ
          Reg(K) = CF ┬и O╠Ѓ(H 2 N S AK) + O╠Ѓ(HN 2 S 3/2 A) + O╠Ѓ(H 2 N S 2 A) ,
where CF is a constant determined by the type of fairness. Specifically,
                        №Б▒ Рѕњ╬▒
                        №Б▓КФ      when F = F╬▒ (╬▒ fairness)
                 CF = КФРѕњ1 when F = Fproportional (proportional fairness) .
                        №Б│
                          1/N when F = Fmax-min (max-min fairness)
The notation O╠Ѓ(┬и) ignores logarithm terms (such as log 1╬┤ ).

                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Theorem 1 is in Appendix C. Here we provide a proof outline:
First, for the optimism choice of q (i.e., ¤ђk ), r╠Ѓ, p╠Ѓ, we have V1¤ђk (s1 ; r╠Ѓ, p╠Ѓ) РЅЦ V1РѕЌ (s1 ; r, p) when
r, p Рѕѕ Mk (which    happens with high  probability).    By the montonocity property of  F (┬и), we thus
      PK   РѕЌ,F              ¤ђk ,F         PK   ¤ђk ,F
have k=1 V1 (s1 ) Рѕњ V1            (s1 ) РЅц k=1 V1            (s1 ; r╠Ѓ, p╠Ѓ) Рѕњ V1¤ђk ,F (s1 ; r, p) .

Next, we need to bound V1¤ђk ,F (s1 ; r╠Ѓ, p╠Ѓ) Рѕњ V1¤ђk ,F (s1 ; r, p). However, unlike the tra-
ditional techniques, we can not use the standard value-difference lemma to bound the
above as the BellmanРђЎs equation does not hold.         Rather, we obtain the bound in two
                                            PN      ¤ђk               ¤ђk
steps. First, we bound the above by CF i=1 V1,(i) (s1 ; r╠Ѓ, p╠Ѓ) Рѕњ V1,(i) (s1 ; r, p) or by CF ┬и
                 ¤ђk                   ¤ђk
N maxiРѕѕ[N ] V1,(i)  (s1 ; r╠Ѓ, p╠Ѓ) Рѕњ V1,(i) (s1 ; r, p) . The value of CF is determined by the Lipchitz con-
stant of the fairness objective function F or the property of the max-min operator. Then we bound
                                  ¤ђk                   ¤ђk
the individual differences V1,(i)    (s1 ; r╠Ѓ, p╠Ѓ) Рѕњ V1,(i) (s1 ; r, p) using Azuma-Hoeffding inequality. The
result of Theorem 1 then follows.
Remark 2. For max-min fairness, the requirement r╠ѓ РЅЦ HКФ in Assumption 1 can be relaxed.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first sub-linear regret for ╬▒-fair RL. When ╬▒ = 0, we
recover the single-agent regret (scaled by N ) as it is equivalent to the MDP where the reward is
P
   i rh,(i) . The constant CF decreases as ╬▒ increases. For the max-min fairness, our result matches
that of Mandal & Gan (2022), although our algorithm is more efficient.
From regret to PAC guarantee: The probably approximately correct (PAC) guarantee shows how
many samples are needed to find an ╬х-optimal policy ¤ђ satisfying V1РѕЌ (s1 ) Рѕњ V1¤ђ (s1 ) РЅц ╬х (Jin et al.,
2018; Valiant, 1984). Similar to Section 3.1 in Jin et al. (2018), in order to get the probably approx-
imately correct (PAC) guarantee from regret, we can randomly select ¤ђ = ¤ђk for k = 1, 2, ┬и ┬и ┬и , K.
We define such a policy as ¤ђ mix . However, since V1¤ђ (s) is not linear w.r.t. the immediate reward
                 mix           PK
r, generally V1¤ђ ,F (s) 6= K 1
                                  k=1 V1
                                         ¤ђk ,F
                                               (s). Therefore, compared with Jin et al. (2018), some
additional derivation is needed to achieve PAC guarantee from regret in our case. In particular, from
                                                mix
                                                          1
                                                            PK       ¤ђk
JensenРђЎs inequality (since F is concave), V1¤ђ (s1 ) РЅЦ K       k=1 V1 (s1 ). We obtain
Theorem 2. To find ╬х-optimal policy, with high probability, it suffices to have C number of samples
where                    n                                                                  o
         C = CF max O╠Ѓ(H 5 N 2 S 2 A/╬х2 ), O╠Ѓ(H 3 N 4 S 3 A2 /╬х2 ), O╠Ѓ(H 3 N 2 S 4 A2 /╬х2 ) .

Proof of Theorem 2 is in Appendix D.
Fair Online Policy Gradient. In the proposed convex-optimization-based algorithm, the decision
variable and the constraints scale with the cardinality of the state space. In order to develop an
algorithm for large state space, generally function approximation-based approaches (e.g., using neu-
ral networks) are used to approximate the Q function or value function. We can use policy-gradient
methods that cater to such a function approximation-based approach. In particular, consider a trajec-
tory ¤ё = (s¤ёh , a¤ёh , r╠ѓh¤ё )h=1,2,┬и┬и┬и ,H where r╠ѓh¤ё = (r╠ѓh,(1)
                                                         ¤ё                 ¤ё
                                                               , ┬и ┬и ┬и , r╠ѓh,(N ) ) denotes the noisy observation of
                                                                                                       PH      ¤ё
immediate reward for all agents. We define the return for the i-th agent as R(i) (¤ё ) := h=1 r╠ѓh,(i)               .
To calculate the gradient of the fair objective, we can apply the chain rule of РѕЄ╬И F (┬и). We use
proportional fairness Fproportional as an example of calculating the gradient:
                         N
                         X                          N Рѕѓ log(V ¤ђ╬И (s ))
                                                    X                                         N РѕЄ V ¤ђ╬И (s )
                                                                                              X
                                                             1,(i) 1                             ╬И 1,(i) 1
РѕЄ╬И V1¤ђ╬И ,F (s1 ) = РѕЄ╬И                ¤ђ╬И
                               log V1,(i) (s1 ) =            ¤ђ╬И
                                                                               ¤ђ╬И
                                                                          РѕЄ╬И V1,(i) (s1 ) =           ¤ђ╬И           .
                         i=1                        i=1
                                                          РѕѓV1,(i) (s1 )                       i=1
                                                                                                    V1,(i) (s1 )
                      ¤ђ╬И                                                   ¤ђ╬И
It is known that РѕЄ╬И V1,(i) (s1 ) = E¤ё [R(i) (¤ё ) log ¤ђ╬И (a¤ёh |s¤ёh )] and V1,(i) (s1 ) = E¤ё [R(i) (¤ё )]. By using
the empirical averagePto replace
                            PH     E ¤ё , we  can   get an   unbiased estimator  of gradient w.r.t. ╬И as follows:
               PN                  R(i) (¤ё )РѕЄ╬И log ¤ђ╬И (a¤ёh |s¤ёh )
gproportional = i=1    ¤ё РѕѕD      P
                               h=1
                                                                  .
                                         R(i) (¤ё )
                                      ¤ё РѕѕD

For other types of fairness, we can use a similar method. The final expression of the gradient, the
rest part of the algorithm, and other related details are in Appendix F. Note that we can extend this
approach to the natural policy-gradient, actor-critic method, and baseline-based approach. Charac-
terization of the convergence rate of the approaches are beyond the scope of this paper. Interested


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


readers can refer to Zhang et al. (2020); Agarwal et al. (2021); Mei et al. (2020) for convergence
analysis of standard policy gradient.

6    O FFLINE FAIR MARL
As mentioned in the Introduction, we develop an offline algorithm because for some applications
generating new data may not be feasible. In an offline setting, the learner is given a dataset and
it needs to compute a policy only based on this given dataset. One cannot employ a policy and
measure its return. Due to this difference, instead of optimism, pessimism is optimal for standard
MDP (Xie et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2021b). We develop an offline fair algorithm and analyze its sub-
optimality gap. Before delving into the result, we need to have some assumptions about the data
collection process.
                                         ¤ё
Assumption 2. The dataset D = {rh,(i)        , x¤ёh , a¤ёh }hРѕѕ[H],¤ё Рѕѕ[K],iРѕѕ[N ] is compliant with the underlying
MDP, i.e., Рѕђi,           ¤ё
                    PD (rh,(i) = riРђ▓ , x¤ёh+1 = xРђ▓ |{(xjh , ajh )}¤ёj=1 , {(rh,(i)
                                                                           j
                                                                                 , xjh+1 )}j=1
                                                                                           ¤ё Рѕњ1
                                                                                                )
                  =P(rh,(i) (sh , ah ) = riРђ▓ , sh+1 = xРђ▓ |sh = x¤ёh , ah = a¤ёh ).

The above assumption is satisfied when the data is collected by interacting with the environment and
the policy is only updated at the end of an episode. Jin et al. (2021b) also uses a similar assumption.
Similar to the online algorithm, we denote the empirical estimation p and r on p and r, respectively,
for the dataset D. We first define the uncertainty quantizer for the data set which we use to construct
MDP with pessimistic reward.
Definition 1. We define the set E as the ╬┤-uncenrtainty quantifier with respect to the dataset D asРђЊ
              E = {brh (s, a, ╬┤), bph (s, a, sРђ▓ , ╬┤) : rh,(i) (s, a) Рѕњ rh,(i) (s, a) РЅц brh (s, a, ╬┤)
                                   |ph (sРђ▓ |s, a) Рѕњ ph (sРђ▓ |s, a)| РЅц bph (s, a, sРђ▓ , ╬┤), Рѕђi, s, a, h}
such that PD (E) РЅЦ 1 Рѕњ ╬┤.

The values of brh (s, a, ╬┤), bph (s, a, sРђ▓ , ╬┤) are given in Appendix E. They are related to ╬▓h,k
                                                                                              r          p
                                                                                                  , and ╬▓h,k .
The only difference is that the empirical estimation now depends on the dataset rather than the
obtained information till episode k in the online version.
We can show that with probability 1 Рѕњ ╬┤, for any Vh,(i)
                                       X                                                   X p
|Ph [Vh,(i) ] Рѕњ P╠ёh [Vh,(i) ](s, a)| =   |(ph (sРђ▓ |s, a) Рѕњ ph (sРђ▓ |s, a))Vh,(i) (sРђ▓ )| РЅц H  bh (s, a, sРђ▓ , ╬┤).
                                       sРђ▓                                                      sРђ▓

We then define the pessimistic reward rh,(i) as
                                                                         X p
                    rh,(i) (s, a) := rh,(i) (s, a) Рѕњ brh (s, a, ╬┤) Рѕњ H    bh (s, a, sРђ▓ , ╬┤).
                                                                          sРђ▓
                                            P
Note that we have also subtracted H sРђ▓ bph (s, a, sРђ▓ ) in order to ensure the value function attained
for the MDP with reward rh,(i) and empirical probability ph is less than the value function corre-
sponding to the original MDP parameters for the same policy, i.e., ensure pessimism. Note that
similar pessimistic estimate is also used in constrained MDP setup (Liu et al., 2021). However, our
proof and algorithms are different as we consider a fair objective.
To bound the suboptimality, we need an additional assumption that each agentРђЎs return under pes-
simistic reward r should be positive and shouldnРђЎt be too small. Specifically, we need the following
assumption.
Assumption 3. V1,(i) (s1 , r, p) РЅЦ КФ for all i.
The above assumption is required to apply the Lipschitz continuous property (see Lemma 5 in Ap-
pendix B). If rh,(i) (s, a) РЅЦ КФ/H for every h, i, s, a, then the above Assumption is trivially satisfied.
Also, our analysis would go through using a slightly larger r since the true reward value is greater
than or equal to КФ/H. In particular, we can set rh,(i) (s, a) = max{rh,(i) (s, a) Рѕњ brh (s, a, ╬┤), КФ/H} Рѕњ
   P
H sРђ▓ bph (s, a, sРђ▓ ). Hence, it is clear that Assumption 3 is more likely to hold when the uncertainty


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


on the estimation of p in the offline data is small. This is reasonable because when the uncertainty is
high, it is unlikely to bound the regret, especially since some fair objectives F are unbounded when
any agentРђЎs return is near 0.
Our proposed offline algorithm is solving the following convex optimization:
                                     X
                         max F            rh,(i) (s, a)qh (s, a) i=1,2,┬и┬и┬и ,N ,                   (14)
                          qРѕѕQ
                                      h,s,a

where Q is the same as Q in (10) but with p instead of p. Similar to the online algorithm, we still use
the occupancy measure q to construct a convex optimization problem. However, compared with the
online version, a key difference is that we use a pessimistic reward instead of the optimistic reward
in the objective. Further, the MDP is based on the empirical probability p, unlike the online setup
where we allow the probability to take value within the confidence interval.

6.1   P ERFORMANCE GUARANTEE OF THE OFFLINE ALGORITHM
We denote the solution of Eq. (14) as q╠ѓ and the corresponding policy as ¤ђ╠ѓ. The suboptimality of any
policy ¤ђ is defined by                            РѕЌ
                           SubOpt(¤ђ; s) :=V1¤ђ (s; r, p) Рѕњ V1¤ђ (s; r, p).

Theorem 3. Given offline data D, with probability 1 Рѕњ ╬┤
                                       X                       X p
         SubOpt(¤ђ╠ѓ; s1 ) РЅц 2N CF E¤ђРѕЌ [ ((brh (sh , ah , ╬┤) + H  bh (sh , ah , sРђ▓ , ╬┤)))].         (15)
                                              h                       sРђ▓
                                          |                      {z                     }
                                                        IntrinsicРѕњUncertainty

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first offline RL result for the ╬▒-fairness function. In the
standard single-agent MDP, the result also depends on the ╬┤ uncertainty quantifier term and intrin-
sic uncertainty term that constitutes information theoretic lower limit on optimality-gap (Jin et al.,
2021b). Here, it is scaled by N and CF . CF is the Lipschitz constant which depends on ╬▒-
fairness function. Further, if the dataset D has good coverage over the optimal policy, then the
Intrinsic Рѕњ Uncertainty term is small.
Proof of Theorem 3 is in Appendix E. Here we provide a proof sketch: We have
                        РѕЌ                   РѕЌ
                                                              РѕЌ
     SubOpt(¤ђ╠ѓ; s) = V1¤ђ ,F (s; r, p) Рѕњ V1¤ђ ,F (s; r, p) + V1¤ђ ,F (s; r, p) Рѕњ V1¤ђ╠ѓ,F (s; r, p)
                      |                {z                  } |              {z                 }
                                     Term 1                               Term 2

                      + V1¤ђ╠ѓ,F (s; r, p) Рѕњ V1¤ђ╠ѓ,F (s; r, p) .                                    (16)
                         |               {z                }
                                        Term 3
Term 2 of Eq. (16) is non-positive because ¤ђ╠ѓ is the solution of Eq. (14). In standard offline RL
literature (Jin et al., 2021b; Xie et al., 2021), Term 3 of Eq. (16) is non-positive because of the
pessimism which is proved using BellmanРђЎs property. However, since BellmanРђЎs property does not
hold, we cannot use the standard technique. Rather, we use the fact that F (┬и) is monotone increasing
w.r.t. r to show Term 3 is non-positive. For Term 1, we use the Lipschitz property of F (┬и) to show
              РѕЌ                    РѕЌ
                                                  P
                                                     N       ¤ђРѕЌ                 ¤ђРѕЌ
             V1¤ђ ,F (s; r, p) Рѕњ V1¤ђ ,F (s; r, p) РЅц i=1 CF |V1,(i) (s; r, p) Рѕњ V1,(i) (s; r, p)|. (17)
The right-hand side then becomes differences of individual value functions and can be bounded by
the Value-difference lemma.

7     N UMERICAL R ESULTS
We have conducted experiments on randomly generated MDP environments to verify our online and
offline algorithms. Please see Appendix G for details.

8     C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we develop convex-optimization-based algorithms for both the online and offline fair
RL with provable performance guarantee. Potential future directions include studying decentralized
fair MARL algorithms and other policy gradient methods along with their convergence. Developing
provably-efficient fair RL algorithms beyond tabular setup constitutes a future research direction.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


9   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work has been supported in part by NSF grants: CNS-2312836, CNS-2223452, CNS-2225561,
CNS-2112471, CNS-2106933, a grant from the Army Research Office: W911NF-21-1-0244, and
was sponsored by the Army Research Laboratory under Cooperative Agreement Number W911NF-
23-2-0225. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and
should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the
Army Research Laboratory or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to repro-
duce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation herein.
AG was also partly supported by the NJIT startup grant 172884.

R EFERENCES
Axel Abels, Diederik Roijers, Tom Lenaerts, Ann Nowe╠Ђ, and Denis Steckelmacher. Dynamic
  weights in multi-objective deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 11РђЊ20. PMLR, 2019.
Alekh Agarwal, Dean P Foster, Daniel J Hsu, Sham M Kakade, and Alexander Rakhlin. Stochastic
  convex optimization with bandit feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  24, 2011.
Alekh Agarwal, Sham M Kakade, Jason D Lee, and Gaurav Mahajan. On the theory of policy
  gradient methods: Optimality, approximation, and distribution shift. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 22(1):4431РђЊ4506, 2021.
Kenneth Joseph Arrow. Aspects of the theory of risk-bearing. Helsinki: Yrjo╠ѕ Jahnsonian Sa╠ѕtio╠ѕ,
  1965.
Anthony B Atkinson et al. On the measurement of inequality. Journal of economic theory, 2(3):
  244РђЊ263, 1970.
Siddharth Barman, Arindam Khan, Arnab Maiti, and Ayush Sawarni. Fairness and welfare quantifi-
  cation for regret in multi-armed bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13930, 2022.
Ilai Bistritz, Tavor Baharav, Amir Leshem, and Nicholas Bambos. My fair bandit: Distributed
   learning of max-min fairness with multi-player bandits. In International Conference on Machine
   Learning, pp. 930РђЊ940. PMLR, 2020.
Kiante╠Ђ Brantley, Miro Dudik, Thodoris Lykouris, Sobhan Miryoosefi, Max Simchowitz, Aleksan-
  drs Slivkins, and Wen Sun. Constrained episodic reinforcement learning in concave-convex and
  knapsack settings. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:16315РђЊ16326, 2020.
Jingdi Chen, Yimeng Wang, and Tian Lan. Bringing fairness to actor-critic reinforcement learn-
   ing for network utility optimization. In IEEE INFOCOM 2021-IEEE Conference on Computer
   Communications, pp. 1РђЊ10. IEEE, 2021.
Wang Chi Cheung. Regret minimization for reinforcement learning with vectorial feedback and
 complex objectives. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Jingjing Cui, Yuanwei Liu, and Arumugam Nallanathan. Multi-agent reinforcement learning-based
   resource allocation for uav networks. IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 19(2):
   729РђЊ743, 2019.
Varsha Dani, Thomas P Hayes, and Sham M Kakade. Stochastic linear optimization under bandit
  feedback. 2008.
Christoph Dann, Tor Lattimore, and Emma Brunskill. Unifying pac and regret: Uniform pac bounds
  for episodic reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30,
  2017.
Zhun Deng, He Sun, Zhiwei Steven Wu, Linjun Zhang, and David C Parkes. Reinforcement learning
  with stepwise fairness constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.03994, 2022.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Virginie Do, Elvis Dohmatob, Matteo Pirotta, Alessandro Lazaric, and Nicolas Usunier. Contextual
  bandits with concave rewards, and an application to fair ranking. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Yonathan Efroni, Nadav Merlis, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Shie Mannor. Tight regret bounds
  for model-based reinforcement learning with greedy policies. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Yonathan Efroni, Shie Mannor, and Matteo Pirotta. Exploration-exploitation in constrained mdps.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.02189, 2020.
Atilla Eryilmaz and Rayadurgam Srikant. Fair resource allocation in wireless networks using queue-
  length-based scheduling and congestion control. IEEE/ACM transactions on networking, 15(6):
  1333РђЊ1344, 2007.
Pratik Gajane, Akrati Saxena, Maryam Tavakol, George Fletcher, and Mykola Pechenizkiy. Survey
  on fair reinforcement learning: Theory and practice. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10032, 2022.
Hao Hao, Changqiao Xu, Wei Zhang, Shujie Yang, and Gabriel-Miro Muntean. Computing of-
  floading with fairness guarantee: A deep reinforcement learning method. IEEE Transactions on
  Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, 2023.
Safwan Hossain, Evi Micha, and Nisarg Shah. Fair algorithms for multi-agent multi-armed bandits.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:24005РђЊ24017, 2021.
Wen Huang, Kevin Labille, Xintao Wu, Dongwon Lee, and Neil Heffernan. Achieving user-side
 fairness in contextual bandits. Human-Centric Intelligent Systems, pp. 1РђЊ14, 2022.
Rahul Jain, Preeti Ranjan Panda, and Sreenivas Subramoney. Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement
  learning-based co-optimization of cores, caches, and on-chip network. ACM Transactions on
  Architecture and Code Optimization (TACO), 14(4):1РђЊ25, 2017.
Jiechuan Jiang and Zongqing Lu. Learning fairness in multi-agent systems. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Chi Jin, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Sebastien Bubeck, and Michael I Jordan. Is q-learning provably effi-
  cient? Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Chi Jin, Qinghua Liu, Yuanhao Wang, and Tiancheng Yu. V-learningРђЊa simple, efficient, decentral-
  ized algorithm for multiagent rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14555, 2021a.
Ying Jin, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Is pessimism provably efficient for offline rl? In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5084РђЊ5096. PMLR, 2021b.
Matthew Joseph, Michael Kearns, Jamie H Morgenstern, and Aaron Roth. Fairness in learning:
 Classic and contextual bandits. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Frank Kelly. Charging and rate control for elastic traffic. European transactions on Telecommuni-
  cations, 8(1):33РђЊ37, 1997.
Frank P Kelly, Aman K Maulloo, and David Kim Hong Tan. Rate control for communication
  networks: shadow prices, proportional fairness and stability. Journal of the Operational Research
  society, 49(3):237РђЊ252, 1998.
Tian Lan, David Kao, Mung Chiang, and Ashutosh Sabharwal. An axiomatic theory of fairness in
  network resource allocation. IEEE, 2010.
Chris Junchi Li, Dongruo Zhou, Quanquan Gu, and Michael Jordan. Learning two-player markov
  games: Neural function approximation and correlated equilibrium. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:33262РђЊ33274, 2022.
Xiaojun Lin and Ness B Shroff. Joint rate control and scheduling in multihop wireless networks.
  In 2004 43rd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC)(IEEE Cat. No. 04CH37601),
  volume 2, pp. 1484РђЊ1489. IEEE, 2004.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiaojun Lin and Ness B Shroff. The impact of imperfect scheduling on cross-layer rate control in
  wireless networks. In Proceedings IEEE 24th Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer
  and Communications Societies., volume 3, pp. 1804РђЊ1814. IEEE, 2005.
Xiaojun Lin, Ness B Shroff, and Rayadurgam Srikant. A tutorial on cross-layer optimization in
  wireless networks. IEEE Journal on Selected areas in Communications, 24(8):1452РђЊ1463, 2006.
Tao Liu, Ruida Zhou, Dileep Kalathil, Panganamala Kumar, and Chao Tian. Learning policies
  with zero or bounded constraint violation for constrained mdps. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:17183РђЊ17193, 2021.
Yang Liu, Goran Radanovic, Christos Dimitrakakis, Debmalya Mandal, and David C Parkes. Cali-
  brated fairness in bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.01875, 2017.
Debmalya Mandal and Jiarui Gan.          Socially fair reinforcement learning.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2208.12584, 2022.
Andreas Maurer and Massimiliano Pontil. Empirical bernstein bounds and sample variance penal-
  ization. arXiv preprint arXiv:0907.3740, 2009.
Jincheng Mei, Chenjun Xiao, Csaba Szepesvari, and Dale Schuurmans. On the global convergence
   rates of softmax policy gradient methods. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
   6820РђЊ6829. PMLR, 2020.
Blossom Metevier, Stephen Giguere, Sarah Brockman, Ari Kobren, Yuriy Brun, Emma Brunskill,
  and Philip S Thomas. Offline contextual bandits with high probability fairness guarantees. Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Jeonghoon Mo and Jean Walrand. Fair end-to-end window-based congestion control. IEEE/ACM
  Transactions on networking, 8(5):556РђЊ567, 2000.
Hossam Mossalam, Yannis M Assael, Diederik M Roijers, and Shimon Whiteson. Multi-objective
  deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02707, 2016.
Michael J Neely, Eytan Modiano, and Chih-Ping Li. Fairness and optimal stochastic control for
 heterogeneous networks. IEEE/ACM Transactions On Networking, 16(2):396РђЊ409, 2008.
Vishakha Patil, Ganesh Ghalme, Vineet Nair, and Yadati Narahari. Achieving fairness in the stochas-
  tic multi-armed bandit problem. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(1):7885РђЊ7915,
  2021.
John W Pratt. Risk aversion in the small and in the large. In Uncertainty in economics, pp. 59РђЊ79.
  Elsevier, 1978.
Diederik M Roijers, Peter Vamplew, Shimon Whiteson, and Richard Dazeley. A survey of multi-
  objective sequential decision-making. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 48:67РђЊ113,
  2013.
Candice Schumann, Zhi Lang, Nicholas Mattei, and John P Dickerson. Group fairness in bandit arm
  selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.03802, 2019.
Umer Siddique, Paul Weng, and Matthieu Zimmer. Learning fair policies in multi-objective (deep)
 reinforcement learning with average and discounted rewards. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 8905РђЊ8915. PMLR, 2020.
Jean Tarbouriech, Shubhanshu Shekhar, Matteo Pirotta, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Alessandro
  Lazaric. Active model estimation in markov decision processes. In Conference on Uncertainty in
  Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1019РђЊ1028. PMLR, 2020.
Leslie G Valiant. A theory of the learnable. Communications of the ACM, 27(11):1134РђЊ1142, 1984.
Kristof Van Moffaert, Madalina M Drugan, and Ann Nowe╠Ђ. Scalarized multi-objective reinforce-
  ment learning: Novel design techniques. In 2013 IEEE Symposium on Adaptive Dynamic Pro-
  gramming and Reinforcement Learning (ADPRL), pp. 191РђЊ199. IEEE, 2013.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Min Wen, Osbert Bastani, and Ufuk Topcu. Algorithms for fairness in sequential decision making.
 In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1144РђЊ1152. PMLR, 2021.
Tengyang Xie, Ching-An Cheng, Nan Jiang, Paul Mineiro, and Alekh Agarwal. Bellman-consistent
  pessimism for offline reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  34:6683РђЊ6694, 2021.
Runzhe Yang, Xingyuan Sun, and Karthik Narasimhan. A generalized algorithm for multi-objective
  reinforcement learning and policy adaptation. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  32, 2019.
Andrea Zanette and Emma Brunskill. Tighter problem-dependent regret bounds in reinforcement
  learning without domain knowledge using value function bounds. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 7304РђЊ7312. PMLR, 2019.
Chongjie Zhang and Julie A Shah. Fairness in multi-agent sequential decision-making. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 27, 2014.
Guojun Zhang, Saber Malekmohammadi, Xi Chen, and Yaoliang Yu. Proportional fairness in fed-
  erated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01666, 2022.
Kaiqing Zhang, Alec Koppel, Hao Zhu, and Tamer Basar. Global convergence of policy gradient
  methods to (almost) locally optimal policies. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 58(6):
  3586РђЊ3612, 2020.
Matthieu Zimmer, Claire Glanois, Umer Siddique, and Paul Weng. Learning fair policies in decen-
 tralized cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 12967РђЊ12978. PMLR, 2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     Supplemental Material


A    R ELATED W ORKS IN D ETAIL

Fairness in resource allocation: Fairness in traditional resource allocation setup has been well
studied (Mo & Walrand, 2000; Kelly et al., 1998; Lin et al., 2006). RL-based fair resource alloca-
tion decision-making has also been considered for resource allocation (Chen et al., 2021; Hao et al.,
2023; Jain et al., 2017; Cui et al., 2019). However, theoretical guarantees have not been provided.
Fairness in MDP/RL: Zhang & Shah (2014) proposed max-min fairness in MDP, however, the
learning component has not been considered. Joseph et al. (2016); Liu et al. (2017) considered indi-
vidual fairness criterion which stipulates that an RL system should make similar decisions for similar
individuals or the worst action should not be selected compared to a better one. Huang et al. (2022);
Schumann et al. (2019); Wen et al. (2021) considered a group fairness notion where the main focus
is on policy is fair to a group of users (refer to Gajane et al. (2022) for details). Deng et al. (2022);
Metevier et al. (2019) considered an approach where fairness is modeled as a constraint to be sat-
isfied. (Jiang & Lu, 2019) proposed an approach where they perturbed the reward to make it fair
across the users. In contrast to the above, our setup is different as we seek to achieve fairness in
terms of value functions (i.e., long-term return) of different agents.
Zimmer et al. (2021); Siddique et al. (2020) considered Gini-fairness across the value functions of
the multiple agents, while we focus on different fairness metrics. Besides, the regret bounds have
not been provided there. Hossain et al. (2021); Bistritz et al. (2020); Barman et al. (2022); Patil et al.
(2021) considered Nash social welfare (or, proportional fairness) and other fairness notions in multi-
armed bandit setup. Do et al. (2022) also considered fairness in the contextual bandit setup. How-
ever, we consider an RL setup instead of a bandit setup. The algorithms designed for bandit setup
can not be readily extended to the MDP setup. Further, we consider the generic ╬▒ fairness concept
rather than the proportional-fairness concept. Finally, we provide a fair algorithm in an offline RL
setup, which has not been considered in most of the fair RL literature.
The closest to our work is Mandal & Gan (2022) which adopted a welfare-based axiomatic ap-
proach and showed regret bound for Nash social welfare, and max-min fairness. In contrast, we
considered the ╬▒-based fairness metric and showed regret bound for the generic value of ╬▒. Unlike
in Mandal & Gan (2022), our approach admits efficient computation. Further, we provided the PAC
guarantee and developed an algorithm for offline fair RL with a theoretical guarantee. Finally, we
also developed a policy-gradient-based algorithm that is applicable to large state space as well unlike
Mandal & Gan (2022).
Convex and multi-objective MDP: Our work is related to multi-objective RL (Roijers et al.,
2013). Most of the approaches considered a single objective by weighing multiple objectives
(Van Moffaert et al., 2013; Abels et al., 2019). Few also proposed algorithms to learn Pareto op-
timal front (Yang et al., 2019; Mossalam et al., 2016). We consider a non-linear function of the mul-
tiple value functions and provide a regret bound which was different from the existing approaches.
Cheung (2019) obtained regret bound for a specific non-linear function of the objectives. Unlike the
above, our objective is fairness among multiple agents. Naturally, the above papers did not consider
the effect of various fairness metrics on the agents. Additionally, they considered infinite-horizon
setup rather than an episodic setup which are fundamentally different. Thus, the algorithms are also
different. Furthermore, we consider offline setup. Tarbouriech et al. (2020) considered a MDP setup
with convex objective for infinite-horizon setup. However, the above paper also did not consider
the fairness metrics and the offline which we considered. Furthermore, the paper considered sample
complexity rather regret bound. Brantley et al. (2020) considered a MDP setting where the objective
is to maximize a concave function of an individual value function. Unlike the above, we consider a
setup where the objective is to achieve fairness among multiple agents. Naturally, the above paper
did not consider the effect of various fairness metrics on the agents. Further, the proof techniques
and algorithms also rely on the Lipschitz property, however, fairness function may not be Lipschitz
(e.g.,max-min fairness), hence, the proof techniques are also different. Additionally, our proposed
algorithm is computationally much simpler. For example, for the online setup, we only need to solve
a convex optimization problem while the algorithm proposed by Brantley et al. (2020) is a bi-level
optimization problem where the lower-level problems are convex. Hence, (Brantley et al., 2020)


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


needs to solve a large number of convex optimization problems at each episode. Furthermore, we
consider offline setup unlike all the above papers.
Multi-agent RL: Another related approach is Multi-agent RL (MARL) which seeks to learn equi-
librium (Li et al., 2022; Jin et al., 2021a) in the Markov game. However, our focus is to achieve
fairness among the individual value functions. In our setup, the central controller is taking decisions
rather than the agents. Hence, the objective is inherently different, and thus, the algorithms and
analysis are also different.
However, in all the above setups, the fair policy is largely ignored. Besides, in the above papers, the
individual agent takes a decision, instead, we focus on the setup where the central decision maker
is taking the decision. Our focus is to ensure fairness among value functions of individual agents,
hence, the setup is inherently different compared to the above.

B    U SEFUL L EMMAS
Lemma 4. Let x1 , x2 , ┬и ┬и ┬и , xN and y1 , y2 , ┬и ┬и ┬и , yN be real numbers. We must have

                               min          xi Рѕњ       min           yj РЅц max |xi Рѕњ yi | .
                          iРѕѕ{1,2,┬и┬и┬и ,N }          jРѕѕ{1,2,┬и┬и┬и ,N }          iРѕѕ[N ]


Proof. Without loss of generality, we let mini xi РЅЦ minj yj . For any iРѕЌ Рѕѕ arg mini xi and any
j РѕЌ Рѕѕ arg minj yj , we have
                                                      xiРѕЌ РЅц xj РѕЌ ,
which implies that
                                    xiРѕЌ Рѕњ yj РѕЌ РЅц xj РѕЌ Рѕњ yj РѕЌ РЅц |xj РѕЌ Рѕњ yj РѕЌ | .                     (18)
We thus have

                            min xi Рѕњ min yj = min xi Рѕњ min yj
                               i            j              i            j

                                                     =xiРѕЌ Рѕњ yj РѕЌ
                                                     РЅц |xj РѕЌ Рѕњ yj РѕЌ | (by Eq. (18))
                                                     РЅц max |xi Рѕњ bi | .
                                                           i

The result of this lemma thus follows.
Lemma 5. Recall the definition of CF in Theorem 1. When xi , yi РЅЦ КФ > 0 for all i Рѕѕ [N ], we must
have
                |F (x1 , x2 , ┬и ┬и ┬и , xN ) Рѕњ F (y1 , y2 , ┬и ┬и ┬и , yN )| РЅц N ┬и CF max |xi Рѕњ yi | .
                                                                                     iРѕѕ[N ]


Proof. When F = Fproportional , we have
                              |F (x1 , x2 , ┬и ┬и ┬и , xN ) Рѕњ F (y1 , y2 , ┬и ┬и ┬и , yN )|
                               N
                               X
                          =           log xi Рѕњ log yi
                               i=1
                              N
                              X
                          РЅц          |log xi Рѕњ log yi | (by the triangle inequality)
                              i=1
                          РЅцN max |log xi Рѕњ log yi |
                                   iРѕѕ[N ]
                            1
                          РЅцN max |xi Рѕњ yi | .
                            КФ iРѕѕ[N ]
The last step is by the Lipschitz continuity of log(┬и) in the domain [КФ, Рѕъ), where 1КФ is the correspond-
ing Lipschitz constant.


                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                     1Рѕњ╬▒
Similarly, when F = F╬▒ , since the Lipschitz constant of (┬и)
                                                          1Рѕњ╬▒ in the domain [КФ, Рѕъ) is КФ
                                                                                        Рѕњ╬▒
                                                                                           , we can
show that
               |F (x1 , x2 , ┬и ┬и ┬и , xN ) Рѕњ F (y1 , y2 , ┬и ┬и ┬и , yN )| РЅц N ┬и КФРѕњ╬▒ max |xi Рѕњ yi | .
                                                                                 iРѕѕ[N ]


When F = Fmax-min , by Lemma 4, we have
                 |F (x1 , x2 , ┬и ┬и ┬и , xN ) Рѕњ F (y1 , y2 , ┬и ┬и ┬и , yN )| РЅц max |xi Рѕњ yi |
                                                                       iРѕѕ[N ]
                                                                           1
                                                                     =N      ┬и max |xi Рѕњ yi | .
                                                                           N iРѕѕ[N ]
Notice that in this case xi , yi РЅЦ КФ is not needed.
In summary, the result of this lemma thus follows.
Lemma 6. (10) is a convex optimization whose value is monotone increasing w.r.t. the immediate
reward r.

Proof. Notice that the constraints of (10) are linear, we only need to prove that the fair objectives in
Eqs. (4) to (6) are concave w.r.t. state-action occupancy measure q and state-action-state occupancy
                          ¤ђ
measure z. Notice that V1,(i) is a weighted sum of q and z, in order to prove the concavity, it remains
                                                   ¤ђ
to show that Eqs. (4) to (6) are concave w.r.t. V1,(i) . Notice that min(┬и) and log(┬и) are concave. We
only need to verify the concavity of F╬▒ . Since
                                               1
                                          Рѕѓ 2 1Рѕњ╬▒ x1Рѕњ╬▒
                                                = Рѕњ╬▒xРѕњ╬▒Рѕњ1 ,
                                        Рѕѓx2
which is non-positive when x РЅЦ 0. Thus, we have also proven the concavity of F╬▒ . Therefore, we
have proven that (10) is a convex optimization.
Notice that r only appears in the objective (i.e., the constraints do not have r), and all Fmax-min ,
Fproportional , F╬▒ are monotone increasing w.r.t. r. Thus, the value of (10) is monotone increasing w.r.t
r.
The result of this lemma thus follows.
Lemma 7 (HoeffdingРђЎs inequality). Let Z1 , Z2 , ┬и ┬и ┬и , Zn be i.i.d. samples of a random variable
Z Рѕѕ [0, 1]. For any ╬┤╠Ѓ > 0, we must have
                             №Б▒                     s            №Б╝
                             №Б▓           n
                                       1X              ln(2/╬┤╠Ѓ) №Бй
                          Pr E Z Рѕњ         Zi РЅц                    РЅЦ 1 Рѕњ ╬┤╠Ѓ.
                             №Б│         n       i=1
                                                         2n №БЙ

Lemma 8 (empirical Bernstein inequality (Theorem 4 of (Maurer & Pontil, 2009))). Let
Z1 , Z2 , ┬и ┬и ┬и , Zn be i.i.d. samples of a random variable Z Рѕѕ [0, 1]. For any ╬┤╠Ѓ > 0, we must have
                        №Б▒                       s                           №Б╝
                        №Б▓              n
                                   1X             2Vn ln(4/╬┤╠Ѓ) 7 ln(4/╬┤╠Ѓ) №Бй
                     Pr E Z Рѕњ             Zi РЅц                 +               РЅЦ 1 Рѕњ ╬┤╠Ѓ,
                        №Б│          ni=1
                                                        n         3(n Рѕњ 1) №БЙ

where VARn is the sample variance
                                                1            X
                                 VARn =                            (Zi Рѕњ Zj )2 .                     (19)
                                             n(n Рѕњ 1)
                                                         1РЅцiРЅцjРЅцn

Lemma 9 (Lemma F.4 of (Dann et al., 2017)). Let Fi for i = 1, 2, ┬и ┬и ┬и be a filtration and X1 , X2 , ┬и ┬и ┬и
be a sequence of Bernoulli random variables with Pr{Xi = 1|FiРѕњ1 } = Pi with Pi being FiРѕњ1 -
measurable and Xi being Fi measurable. For any W РЅЦ 0, It holds that
                           (          n         n
                                                             )
                                     X         X    Pt
                       Pr exist n :      Xt <           Рѕњ W РЅц eРѕњW .
                                     t=1       t=1
                                                     2


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The following is the standard value difference lemma. Its proof can be found in, e.g., (Dann et al.,
2017), Lemma E.15.
Lemma 10 (Value difference lemma). For any two MDPs M Рђ▓ and M Рђ▓Рђ▓ with rewards rРђ▓ and rРђ▓Рђ▓ and
transition probabilities P Рђ▓ and P Рђ▓Рђ▓ , the difference in value functions with respect to the same policy
¤ђ can be written as
                                    "H                                                 #
                                       X
             Рђ▓         Рђ▓Рђ▓                     Рђ▓                 Рђ▓Рђ▓
           Vi (s) Рѕњ Vi (s) = E              (r (st , at , t) Рѕњ r (st , at , t)) si = s
                                 P Рђ▓Рђ▓ ,¤ђ
                                           t=i
                                              "H                                                                    #
                                               XX
                                  + E                      PtРђ▓ (s╠Ѓ|st , at ) Рѕњ PtРђ▓Рђ▓ (s╠Ѓ|st , at ))T Vt+1
                                                                                                      Рђ▓
                                                                                                         (s╠Ѓ)           .
                                    Рђ▓Рђ▓ P ,¤ђ
                                               t=i   s╠Ѓ


C     D ETAILS IN S ECTION 5

The overall confidence interval is defined as
                                  Mk := {(p╠Ѓ, r╠Ѓ) : Eq. (11) and Eq. (12)} ,
i.e., the true value of (p, r) is in Mk with high probability. We now want to use this confidence
interval Mk in (10). A possible way is to replace p and r by (r╠Ѓ, p╠Ѓ) Рѕѕ Mk and view r╠Ѓ, p╠Ѓ as decision
variables. Thus, the objective in (10) now becomes

                                                     max         V1¤ђ,F (s1 ).                                               (20)
                                              (r╠Ѓ,p╠Ѓ)РѕѕMk , qРѕѕQ

It is indeed an optimistic solution compared to the real optimal solution because we relax the value of
r and p in such optimization (which leads to better objective value). However, it is no longer a convex
optimization problem because now r and p are decision variables. To turn such an optimization
into a convex one, we need to determine the value of r╠Ѓ and p╠Ѓ beforehand. To that end, notice the
monotonicity of the objective with respect to r╠Ѓ (proof in Lemma 6 in Appendix B). Thus, without
affecting the solution of (20), we can let
                                                     kРѕњ1             r
                                   r╠Ѓh,(i) (s, a) = rh,(i) (s, a) + ╬▓h,k (s, a).                                            (21)

Now, we only need to determine the value of p╠Ѓ. To that end, consider the state-action-next-state
occupancy measure zh¤ђ (s, a, sРђ▓ ; p) := ph (sРђ▓ |s, a)qh¤ђ (s, a; p). Considering Eq. (11), we only need
                                                       P
                                      p
 zh (s, a, sРђ▓ ) РЅц phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a) + ╬▓h,k (s, a, sРђ▓ )    yРѕѕS zh (s, a, y) for all h Рѕѕ [H Рѕњ 1], s, a, s ,
                                                                                                         Рђ▓

                                                       P                                                     (22)
                                      p
 zh (s, a, sРђ▓ ) РЅЦ phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a) Рѕњ ╬▓h,k (s, a, sРђ▓ )    yРѕѕS  z h (s, a, y) for all h Рѕѕ [H Рѕњ 1], s, a, s Рђ▓
                                                                                                           .

Now we are ready to solve (20) by convex optimization.

C.1    A BOUT OPTIMIZATION PROBLEMS

In this subsection, we will show details of the optimization problems (10), (20), and (13).
Let ┬х(s) denote the probability of the initial state s. (for a fixed initial state s1 , then ┬х(s) equals to
1 for s = s1 while equals to 0 otherwise.)
About Q (constraints of q):
The following are the constraints that make q a legit state-action occupancy measure, i.e., the defi-
nition of Q:
           X              X
              qh (s, a) =     phРѕњ1 (s|sРђ▓ , aРђ▓ )qhРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ , aРђ▓ ) for all s Рѕѕ S, h Рѕѕ [H] \ {1}
              a               sРђ▓ ,aРђ▓

            qh (s, a) РЅЦ 0                                                 for all s Рѕѕ S, a Рѕѕ A, h Рѕѕ [H]                     (23)
            X
                 q1 (s, a) = ┬х(s)                                         for all s Рѕѕ S.
              a


                                                            17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                 P
The constraint s,a qh (s, a) = 1 is redundant because the first and the third constraint imply
P
  s,a qh (s, a) = 1 for all h Рѕѕ [H].

About Z (constraints of z):
By the definition of z, (22) is part of Z. Besides, z should also be constrained by Eq. (23). Recall
the definition of z
                                   zh (s, a, sРђ▓ ) := ph (sРђ▓ |s, a)qh (s, a).                          (24)
By summing over the next state sРђ▓ on both sides of Eq. (24), we have
                     X                    X
                         zh (s, a, sРђ▓ ) =    ph (sРђ▓ |s, a)qh (s, a) = qh (s, a).                      (25)
                          sРђ▓                  sРђ▓


Summing over a on both sides of Eq. (25), we have
                                X                    X
                                    zh (s, a, sРђ▓ ) =   qh (s, a).                                     (26)
                                     a,sРђ▓                   a


Thus, we can rewrite the constraints Q Eq. (23) in the form of z:
               X                    X
                   zh (s, a, sРђ▓ ) =   zhРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ , aРђ▓ , s) for all s Рѕѕ S, h Рѕѕ [H] \ {1},
                 a,sРђ▓                sРђ▓ ,aРђ▓
                          Рђ▓
                zh (s, a, s ) РЅЦ 0                               for all s, a, sРђ▓ , h,                 (27)
                X
                     z1 (s, a, sРђ▓ ) = ┬х(s)                      for all s Рѕѕ S.
                 a,sРђ▓

In Eq. (27), we get the first constraint by plugging Eq. (26) into the left side of the first constraint of
Eq. (23) while plugging Eq. (24) into the right side. We get the third constraint by plugging Eq. (26)
into the third constraint of Eq. (23).
Notice that by replacing q by z, we have one additional requirement Eq. (24). Using Eq. (25) to
replace qh (s, a) in Eq. (24), we can express Eq. (24) as
                                                                X
                               zh (s, a, sРђ▓ ) = ph (sРђ▓ |s, a) ┬и   zh (s, a, y).            (28)
                                                                yРѕѕS

By Eqs. (11) and (28), we have the constraint Eq. (22) (used in the optimization problem (13)).
We now show that (20) is equivalent to (13) by the following proposition.
Proposition 11. (20) and (13) are equivalent. In other words, the optimal value of the objective of
(20) is equal to the optimal value of the objective of (13).


Proof. By the monotonicity w.r.t. r shown in Lemma 6, we know that the optimal choice of r╠Ѓ in
(20) is r + ╬▓ r . It remains to show that the effect of choosing optimal of p╠Ѓ in (20) is equivalent to
Eq. (22). To that end, notice that p╠Ѓ does not appear in the objective. Thus, we only need to focus on
how p╠Ѓ affects the constraints of z. Notice that among all constraints in Eqs. (27) and (28), the only
one that connects p and z is Eq. (28). Since the optimal p╠Ѓ in (20) must be in the confidence interval
[p Рѕњ ╬▓ p , p + ╬▓ p ], we know that the optimal objective value by using Eq. (22) is at least as good as
the one by using the optimal p╠Ѓ in Eq. (28). From another aspect, For the optimal z get by Eq. (22),
we can always construct p╠Ѓ which is in the confidence interval [p Рѕњ ╬▓ p , p + ╬▓ p ] by letting
                                      ( z (s,a,sРђ▓ )          P
                                       P h                if yРѕѕS zh (s, a, y) 6= 0,
                            Рђ▓                zh (s,a,y)
                      p╠Ѓh (s |s, a) =    yРѕѕS
                                                             P
                                       p                  if yРѕѕS zh (s, a, y) = 0.

which implies that the optimal objective value by using optimal p╠Ѓ in Eq. (28) is at least as good as
the one by using Eq. (22). The equivalent of these two different approaches is thus follows.


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

To prove Theorem 1, we will first introduce the good event and its probability, then prove a regret
bound under the good event. Some auxiliary lemmas are needed in the proof. We list them at the
end of this subsection.
Failure events and the good event
Define the empirical average of the transition probability and the immediate reward at the k-th
iteration of Algorithm 1 as
                                           kРѕњ1
                                           X
                                                   1 skh = s, akh = a ,
                                                           Рђ▓           Рђ▓
                        nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) :=                                                                  (29)
                                           kРђ▓ =1

                                                           1 skh = s, akh = a, skh+1 = sРђ▓
                                              PkРѕњ1                 Рђ▓         Рђ▓    Рђ▓
                                                   kРђ▓ =1
                        phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a) :=                                                     ,        (30)
                                                        max{nhkРѕњ1 (s, a), 1}
                                                                      Рђ▓
                                            kРђ▓ =1 r╠ѓh,(i) (s, a) ┬и 1 sh = s, ah = a
                                           PkРѕњ1 kРђ▓                    k       kРђ▓
                         kРѕњ1
                        rh,(i) (s, a) :=                                                    .            (31)
                                                           max{nhkРѕњ1 (s, a), 1}

Define
                             s
        p                        4phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a)(1 Рѕњ phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a))Lp╬┤          14Lp╬┤
       ╬▓h,k (s, a, sРђ▓ ) :=                                                  +                        ,   (32)
                                          max{nhkРѕњ1 (s, a), 1}                3 max{nhkРѕњ1 (s, a), 1}
                        s
        r                          Lr╬┤
       ╬▓h,k (s, a) :=             kРѕњ1
                                               .                                                         (33)
                             max{nh (s, a), 1}
                        2
where Lp╬┤ := ln 12S ╬┤AHK and Lr╬┤ := 2 ln 3SAHN
                                            ╬┤
                                               K
                                                 .
We define the following failure events based on confidence intervals in Eq. (11) and Eq. (12).

           n                                                                                         o
                                                                                       p
      Gp := exist some s, a, sРђ▓ , h, k such that phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a) Рѕњ ph (sРђ▓ |s, a) РЅЦ ╬▓h,k  (s, a, sРђ▓ ) ,
           №Б▒                                                                                  №Б╝
           №Б▓                                                   1 X ¤ђ                  3SAH    №Бй
      Gn := exist some s, a, h, k such that nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) РЅц           qh j (s, a) Рѕњ ln             ,     (34)
           №Б│                                                   2                         ╬┤ №БЙ
                                                                 j<k
           n                                                                                o
                                                 kРѕњ1              kРѕњ1
      Gr := exist some s, a, h, i, k such that rh,(i) (s, a) Рѕњ rh,(i) (s, a) РЅЦ ╬▓h,k r
                                                                                      (s, a) .

Intuitively, Gp denotes the case where the transition probability is out of the confidence interval,
Gn denotes the case where the empirical occupancy measure deviates from the actual occupancy
measure, and Gr denotes the case where the empirical reward is out of the confidence interval. The
following lemma estimates the probability of those failure events.
Lemma 12. We have
                                                                       ╬┤
                                                     Pr{Gp } РЅц           .
                                                                       3

Proof. We first focus on the situation on fixed s, a, sРђ▓ , h, k. If nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) Рѕѕ {0, 1}, then
                                                                      14Lp╬┤     14Lp╬┤
                      q
      p                                                                                  14 ln 4
    ╬▓h,k (s, a, sРђ▓ ) = 4phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a)(1 Рѕњ phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a))Lp╬┤ +          РЅЦ         РЅЦ           > 2.
                                                                        3         3          3
Thus, we have
      n                                                                           o               ╬┤
                                           p
   Pr phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a) Рѕњ ph (sРђ▓ |s, a) РЅЦ ╬▓h,k (s, a, sРђ▓ ) | nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) Рѕѕ {0, 1} = 0 РЅц                 .
                                                                                             3S 2 AHK
                                                                                                        (35)


                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now we consider the case of nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) РЅЦ 2. We define b1 , b2 , ┬и ┬и ┬и , bnkРѕњ1 (s,a) , where each term
      Рђ▓                                                                     h

is 1 skh+1 = sРђ▓ under the condition skh = s and akh = a for k = 1, 2, ┬и ┬и ┬и , k Рѕњ 1 (recall the
                                        Рђ▓           Рђ▓



definition of nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) in Eq. (29)). Thus, b1 , b2 , ┬и ┬и ┬и , bnkРѕњ1 (s,a) are nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) i.i.d. samples of
                                                                   h
Bernoulli distribution with the parameter of the (success) probability ph (sРђ▓ |s, a). Therefore, the
sample variance (defined in Eq. (19)) of these nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) samples is equal to
                                 1                      X
                                                                      (bi Рѕњ bj )2
            nhkРѕњ1 (s, a)(nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) Рѕњ 1)
                                           1РЅцiРЅцjРЅцnkРѕњ1 (s,a)Рѕњ1
                                                         h
                                                                P         Рђ▓
                       1                                       ┬и kРђ▓ =1 1 skh = s, akh = a, skh+1 6= sРђ▓
            PkРѕњ1                  Рђ▓        Рђ▓        Рђ▓             kРѕњ1                Рђ▓        Рђ▓
               kРђ▓ =1           skh = s, akh = a, skh+1 = sРђ▓
        =
                                               nhkРѕњ1 (s, a)(nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) Рѕњ 1)
               nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) kРѕњ1 Рђ▓
        =                    ph (s |s, a)(1 Рѕњ phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a)) (by Eq. (30))
            nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) Рѕњ 1
        РЅц2phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a)(1 Рѕњ phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a)).
                                     ╬┤
Thus, by Lemma 8 (where ╬┤╠Ѓ = 3S 2 AHK      ), for fixed s, a, sРђ▓ , h, k, we have
         (                                     s                                                2
                                                  4phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a)(1 Рѕњ phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a)) ln 12S ╬┤AHK
      Pr phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a) Рѕњ ph (sРђ▓ |s, a) РЅЦ
                                                                        nhkРѕњ1 (s, a)
                        2
                                 )
               7 ln 12S ╬┤AHK                   ╬┤
           +                         РЅц                .
             3(nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) Рѕњ 1)         3S 2 AHK
                   7                  kРѕњ1
Notice that 3(nkРѕњ1 (s,a)Рѕњ1) РЅц 14
                              3 when nh (s, a) РЅЦ 2. We thus have
                   h

           n                                                                         o         ╬┤
                                                   p
      Pr       phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a) Рѕњ ph (sРђ▓ |s, a) РЅЦ ╬▓h,k (s, a, sРђ▓ ) | nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) РЅЦ 2 РЅц            .       (36)
                                                                                          3S 2 AHK
Combining Eq. (35) and Eq. (36), we thus have
                 n                                                   o                   ╬┤
                                                      p
               Pr phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a) Рѕњ ph (sРђ▓ |s, a) РЅЦ ╬▓h,k (s, a, sРђ▓ ) РЅц                      .
                                                                                    3S 2 AHK
Applying the union bound by traversing all s, a, sРђ▓ , h, k, we thus have
                                                                    ╬┤
                                                     Pr{Gp } РЅц        .
                                                                    3
The result of this lemma thus follows.

Lemma 13. We have
                                                                    ╬┤
                                                     Pr{Gn } РЅц        .
                                                                    3

Proof. For fixed s, a, h, by Lemma 9 (letting W = ln 3SAH
                                                        ╬┤    ), we have
            №Б▒                                                             №Б╝
            №Б▓                                 1 X                    3SAH №Бй   ╬┤
                                                    ¤ђ
        Pr exist k such that nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) РЅц       qh j (s, a|p) Рѕњ ln        РЅц    .
            №Б│                                 2                         ╬┤ №БЙ 3SAH
                                                             j<k

Applying the union bound by traversing all s, a, h, the result of this lemma thus follows.

Lemma 14. We have
                                                                    ╬┤
                                                     Pr{Gr } РЅц        .
                                                                    3

                                                              20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. For fixed s, a, h, i, k, by Lemma 7, we have
                    (                               s                                         )
                                 kРѕњ1             kРѕњ1                              Lr╬┤                       ╬┤
                        Pr      rh,(i) (s, a) Рѕњ rh,(i) (s, a) РЅЦ                                      РЅц
                                                                              nhkРѕњ1 (s, a)               3SAHN K

Applying the union bound by traversing all s, a, h, i, k, the result of this lemma thus follows.

The regret bound under the good event
Lemma 15. If outside the union of all failure events Gp Рѕф Gn Рѕф Gr , then we must have

                q                      Рѕџ              p          SAH
  Reg(K) РЅц4CF Lr╬┤ ln(4 + K)HN SAK + 2CF Lr╬┤ 4 ln                        +  5  HN SA
                                                                    ╬┤Рђ▓
                   q                         Рѕџ             q
                                                                       SAH
           + 8CF Lp╬┤ ln(4 + K)H 2 N S AK + 4CF Lp╬┤ 4 ln                      + 5  HN 2 S 3/2 A
                                                                        ╬┤Рђ▓

              28CF Lp╬┤ 4 ln(4 + K) + 4 ln SAH   ╬┤Рђ▓ + 5
           +                                              H 2N S2A
                                   3
                             Рѕџ
         =CF ┬и O╠Ѓ(H 2 N S AK) + O╠Ѓ(HN 2 S 3/2 A) + O╠Ѓ(H 2 N S 2 A) .


Proof. Let r╠Ѓk , p╠Ѓk , and ¤ђ k denote the optimal r╠Ѓ, p╠Ѓ, and policy in (20) in the k-th iteration of Algo-
rithm 1, respectively. Since outside Gr , we have r╠Ѓk РЅЦ r. Thus, by Assumption 1 and Remark 1, we
have
                                        ¤ђk                                    ¤ђk
                                      V1,(i) (s1 ; r╠Ѓk , p╠Ѓk ) РЅЦ КФ,     and V1,(i) (s1 ; r, p) РЅЦ КФ.                               (37)

We have
    Reg(K)
    K
    X
=           (V1РѕЌ (s1 ) Рѕњ V1¤ђk (s1 ))
    k=1
    K
    X
=           (V1РѕЌ (s1 ; r, p) Рѕњ V1¤ђk (s1 ; r, p))
    k=1
    K
    X
РЅц            V1¤ђk (s1 ; r╠Ѓk , p╠Ѓk ) Рѕњ V1¤ђk (s1 ; r, p) (by optimism, i.e., r╠Ѓk and q╠Ѓ k are optimal)
    k=1
    K
    X                  ¤ђk                         ¤ђk
РЅц           CF N max V1,(i) (s1 ; r╠Ѓk , p╠Ѓk ) Рѕњ V1,(i) (s1 ; r, p)              (by Lemma 5 and Eq. (37))
                    iРѕѕ[N ]
    k=1
              K
              X                 H h
                                X
                                           kРѕњ1
=CF N               max E                r╠Ѓh,(i) (s, a) Рѕњ rh,(i) (sh , ah )
                    iРѕѕ[N ]
              k=1               h=1
                                                                                                          #
        X                                                       ¤ђk
    +             p╠ЃhkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a) Рѕњ ph (sРђ▓ |s, a)          ┬и Vh+1,(i)         kРѕњ1
                                                                        (sРђ▓ ; r╠Ѓ(i) , p╠Ѓ)    s1 , p, ¤ђk       (by Lemma 10)
        sРђ▓ РѕѕS
              K
                             "H                                                                  #
              X               X
                                          kРѕњ1
РЅц CF N              max E               r╠Ѓh,(i) (s, a) Рѕњ rh,(i) (sh , ah )          s1 , p, ¤ђk
                    iРѕѕ[N ]
              k=1               h=1
    |                                             {z                                             }
                                                Term A
                 K
                                 "H                                                                                                #
                 X                XX                                                          ¤ђk
    + CF N             max E                     p╠ЃhkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a) Рѕњ ph (sРђ▓ |s, a)       ┬и   Vh+1,(i)         kРѕњ1
                                                                                                      (sРђ▓ ; r╠Ѓ(i) , p╠Ѓ)   s1 , p, ¤ђk .
                       iРѕѕ[N ]
                 k=1              h=1 sРђ▓
        |                                                                {z                                                        }
                                                                       Term B
                                                                                                                                  (38)


                                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since outside Gr and Gp , we have
                                     kРѕњ1                                  r
                                   r╠Ѓh,(i) (s, a) Рѕњ rh,(i) (sh , ah ) РЅц 2╬▓h,k (s, a),                           (39)
                                                                               p
                                   p╠ЃhkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a) Рѕњ ph (sРђ▓ |s, a)       РЅц 2╬▓h,k (s, a, sРђ▓ ).                 (40)
We have
         Term A of Eq. (38)
                  K X
                  X H X
        РЅц2CF N                       qh¤ђk (s, a)╬▓h,k
                                                 r
                                                     (s, a) (by Eq. (39))
                  k=1 h=1 (s,a)
                    H X
                  K X
                                                   s
                  X                                          Lr╬┤
        =2CF N                       qh¤ђk (s, a)            kРѕњ1
                                                                                  (by Eq. (33))
                  k=1 h=1 (s,a)
                                                       max{nh (s, a), 1}

              p                   p              SAH
        РЅц2CF      Lr╬┤ N
                     2H SAK ln(4 + K) + SAH 4 ln     +5    (by Lemma 16)
                                                  ╬┤Рђ▓

             q              Рѕџ           p        SAH
        =4CF Lr╬┤ ln(4 + K)HN SAK + 2CF Lr╬┤ 4 ln      + 5 HN SA.
                                                  ╬┤Рђ▓

            kРѕњ1
Since 0 РЅц r╠Ѓh,(i) (s, a) РЅц 1 for all h, i, s, a, we have

                                                 ¤ђk              kРѕњ1
                                                Vh+1,(i) (sРђ▓ ; r╠Ѓ(i) , p╠Ѓ) РЅц H.                                 (41)

Thus, we have
    Term B of Eq. (38)
              X H X
              K X                               X     p
 РЅц2CF N H                         qh¤ђk (s, a)        ╬▓h,k (s, a, sРђ▓ ) (by Eqs. (40) and (41))
              k=1 h=1 (s,a)                     sРђ▓
              q           H X
                        K X                                                         Xq
                        X                                          1
 РЅц4CF HN          Lp╬┤                   qh¤ђk (s, a) q                                        phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a)
                        k=1 h=1 (s,a)                    max{nhkРѕњ1 (s, a), 1} sРђ▓
                              K     H
        28CF HN SLp╬┤ X X X     qh¤ђk (s, a)
    +                                           (by Eq. (32) and 1 Рѕњ phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a) РЅц 1)
             3             max{nhkРѕњ1 (s, a), 1}
                            k=1 h=1 (s,a)
              q           H X
                        K X                                     Рѕџ                   sX
                        X                                           S
 РЅц4CF HN          Lp╬┤                   qh¤ђk (s, a) q                                        phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a)
                        k=1 h=1 (s,a)                    max{nhkРѕњ1 (s, a), 1}           sРђ▓

                              K     H
        28CF HN SLp╬┤ X X X     qh¤ђk (s, a)
    +                                           (by CauchyРђЊSchwarz inequality)
             3             max{nhkРѕњ1 (s, a), 1}
                            k=1 h=1 (s,a)
              q          K X
                           H X
                         X                                             1
 =4CF HN          SLp╬┤                    qh¤ђk (s, a) q
                         k=1 h=1 (s,a)                    max{nhkРѕњ1 (s, a), 1}
                    K H
    28CF HN SLp╬┤ X X X                qh¤ђk (s, a)               X
    +                                    kРѕњ1
                                                         (since      phkРѕњ1 (sРђ▓ |s, a) = 1)
          3                      max{n   h   (s, a), 1}           Рђ▓
                   k=1 h=1 (s,a)                                s
     q                      Рѕџ               q
                                                          SAH
 РЅц8CF Lp╬┤ ln(4 + K)H 2 N S AK + 4CF Lp╬┤ 4 ln                    +   5   HN 2 S 3/2 A
                                                            ╬┤Рђ▓

    28CF Lp╬┤ 4 ln(4 + K) + 4 ln SAH╬┤Рђ▓ + 5
  +                                           H 2 N S 2 A (by Lemma 16).
                       3



                                                              22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Some auxiliary lemmas
Define ╬┤ Рђ▓ := 3╬┤ and
                                       №Б▒                           №Б╝
                                       №Б▓  1 X ¤ђj            SAH    №Бй
                           Lk,h := (s, a)    qh (s, a) РЅЦ ln     + 1  .                                         (42)
                                  №Б│       4                  ╬┤Рђ▓    №БЙ
                                                          j<k



The following lemmas and proofs are similar to those in (Efroni et al., 2019; Zanette & Brunskill,
2019) with different notations. For ease of reading, we provide the full proof using the notation of
this paper.
Lemma 16. If outside the failure event Gn , then

  H X
K X
                          s
X                                           1                        p                            SAH
      qh¤ђk (s, a)                                           РЅц 2H         SAK ln(4 + K) + SAH 4 ln     +5 ,
k=1 h=1 s,a
                              max{nhkРѕњ1 (s, a), 1}                                                 ╬┤Рђ▓
                                                                                                               (43)
  H X
K X
X           qh¤ђk (s, a)                            SAH
               kРѕњ1
                          РЅц SAH 4 ln(4 + K) + 4 ln     +5 .                                                    (44)
    s,a max{nh (s, a), 1}
                                                    ╬┤Рђ▓
k=1 h=1


Proof. We have

                   H X
                 K X
                                               s
                 X                                         1
                       qh¤ђk (s, a)
                 k=1 h=1 s,a
                                                   max{nhkРѕњ1 (s, a), 1}
                 H X
               K X
                                               s
               X                                  1
             РЅц       qh¤ђk (s, a)                          (since nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) РЅЦ 1 by Lemma 17)
                 k=1 h=1 s,a
                                            nhkРѕњ1 (s, a)
                   H
                 K X
                                                 s                  K X H
                 X                X     ¤ђk              1         X           X
             РЅц                         qh (s, a)    kРѕњ1
                                                               +                     qh¤ђk (s, a).              (45)
                 k=1 h=1 (s,a)РѕѕLk,h
                                                   nh (s, a) k=1 h=1 (s,a)РѕѕL   /           k,h



By Eq. (8), we have

                       X H
                       K X             X                         K X
                                                                 X H X
                                                 qh¤ђk (s, a) РЅц                   qh¤ђk (s, a) = KH.             (46)
                       k=1 h=1 (s,a)РѕѕLk,h                        k=1 h=1 (s,a)


For the first term of Eq. (45), we have

      H
    K X
                                       s
    X            X                              1
                         qh¤ђk (s, a)
    k=1 h=1 (s,a)РѕѕLk,h
                                           nhkРѕњ1 (s, a)
      H
    K X
                                           s
    X            X       q                qh¤ђk (s, a)
=                            qh¤ђk (s, a)
    k=1 h=1 (s,a)РѕѕLk,h
                                         nhkРѕњ1 (s, a)
 v                                       v
    H
 uK X                                    uK X    H
 uX                                      uX
                  X                                   X                   qh¤ђk (s, a)
РЅцt                         q ¤ђk (s, a) ┬и t
                              h                                                       (by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality)
      k=1 h=1 (s,a)РѕѕLk,h                        k=1 h=1 (s,a)РѕѕLk,h
                                                                         nhkРѕњ1 (s, a)
 Рѕџ   p
РЅц KH 4SAH ln(4 + K) (by Eq. (46) and Lemma 20)
   p
=2H SAK ln(4 + K).                                                                                             (47)


                                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By Eq. (47), Eq. (45), and Lemma 19, we can get Eq. (43). It remains to prove Eq. (44). To that end,
we have
               H X
             K X
             X               qh¤ђk (s, a)
             k=1 h=1 s,a
                         max{nhkРѕњ1 (s, a), 1}
               H X
             K X
             X     q ¤ђk (s, a)
         РЅц                  h
                                        (since nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) РЅЦ 1 by Lemma 17)
             k=1 h=1 s,a
                         nhkРѕњ1 (s, a)
               H
             K X                               K X  H
             X           X    qh¤ђk (s, a)     X           X
         РЅц                     kРѕњ1
                                            +                    qh¤ђk (s, a)
          k=1 h=1 (s,a)РѕѕLk,h
                             n h    (s, a)    k=1 h=1 (s,a)РѕѕL
                                                           / k,h

                                               SAH
         РЅц4SAH ln(4 + K) + SAH 4 ln                   + 5 (by Lemma 19 and Lemma 20)
                                                 ╬┤Рђ▓

                                        SAH
         =SAH 4 ln(4 + K) + 4 ln                + 5   .
                                           ╬┤Рђ▓
Thus, we have proven Eq. (44). The result of this lemma thus follows.
Lemma 17. If outside the failure event Gn , for any (s, a) Рѕѕ Lk,h , we must have
                                               №Б▒                      №Б╝
                                               №Б▓1 X                   №Бй
                                                         ¤ђ
                          nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) РЅЦ max            qh j (s, a), 1 .
                                               №Б│4                     №БЙ
                                                          jРЅцk


Proof. We have
                 1 X ¤ђj         1 X ¤ђj            SAH
nhkРѕњ1 (s, a) >      qh (s, a) +    qh (s, a) Рѕњ ln     (recall the definition of Gn in Eq. (34))
                 4              4                  ╬┤Рђ▓
                  j<k                j<k
               1 X ¤ђj
             РЅЦ       qh (s, a) + 1 (since (s, a) Рѕѕ Lk,h )
               4
                 j<k
                    №Б▒                      №Б╝
                    №Б▓1 X                   №Бй
                              ¤ђ
             РЅЦ max           qh j (s, a), 1  (since qh¤ђk РЅц 1).
                    №Б│4                     №БЙ
                          jРЅцk


Lemma 18. For any (s, a) 6Рѕѕ Lk,h , we must have
                               X ¤ђ                     SAH
                                    qh j (s, a) РЅц 4 ln     + 5.
                                                        ╬┤Рђ▓
                                    jРЅцk


Proof. Since (s, a) Рѕѕ
                    / Lk,h , we have
                                  1 X ¤ђj            SAH
                                     qh (s, a) < ln     + 1.
                                  4                  ╬┤Рђ▓
                                        j<k

Thus, we have
                                    X ¤ђ                 SAH
                                     qh j (s, a) < 4 ln     + 4.
                                                         ╬┤Рђ▓
                                    j<k

Because qh¤ђk РЅц 1, the result of this lemma thus follows.
Lemma 19. We have
                          H
                        K X
                        X          X                                 SAH
                                              qh¤ђk (s, a) РЅц SAH 4 ln     + 5  .
                                                                      ╬┤Рђ▓
                        k=1 h=1 (s,a)РѕѕL
                                     / k,h



                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Define

                   0,                                                if {k РѕЌ Рѕѕ [K] | (s, a) Рѕѕ
                                                                                            / LkРѕЌ ,h } = РѕЁ,
     ks,a,h :=                                                                                                     (48)
                   max {k РѕЌ Рѕѕ [K] | (s, a) Рѕѕ
                                           / LkРѕЌ ,h }                otherwise.
By the definition of Lk,h in Eq. (42), we know that
                                         (s, a) Рѕѕ
                                                / Lk,h for all k РЅц ks,a,h .                                        (49)
Therefore, we have
        K X
        X H           X                          K X
                                                XX H
                               qh¤ђk (s, a) =         qh¤ђk (s, a)1 ((s, a) Рѕѕ
                                                                          / Lk,h )
        k=1 h=1 (s,a)РѕѕL
                     / k,h                      (s,a) k=1 h=1

                                                 H kX
                                                XX  s,a,h

                                            =             qh¤ђk (s, a) (by Eq. (48))
                                                (s,a) h=1 k=1

                                                      SAH
                                            РЅцSAH 4 ln     + 5 (by Eq. (49) and Lemma 18).
                                                       ╬┤Рђ▓


Lemma 20. If outside the failure event Gn , we must have
                               H
                             K X
                             X              X          qh¤ђk (s, a)
                                                                   РЅц 4SAH ln(4 + K).
                             k=1 h=1 (s,a)РѕѕLk,h
                                                      nhkРѕњ1 (s, a)

Proof. We have
          H
        K X                                      K X H
        X             X          qh¤ђk (s, a)    X           X                       qh¤ђk (s, a)
                                  kРѕњ1
                                             РЅц4                                P          ¤ђj     (by Lemma 17)
        k=1 h=1 (s,a)РѕѕLk,h
                                nh (s, a)       k=1 h=1 (s,a)РѕѕL         k,h
                                                                                   jРЅцk qh (s, a)

                                                        K
                                                      H X
                                                     XX                    qh¤ђk (s, a)
                                                =4                    P          ¤ђj     1 ((s, a) Рѕѕ Lk,h ) .       (50)
                                                     (s,a) h=1 k=1        jРЅцk qh (s, a)

For fixed s, a, h, if
                                     {k = 1, 2, ┬и ┬и ┬и , | (s, a) Рѕѕ Lk,h } 6= РѕЁ,
then by the monotonicity of the size of Lk,h with respect to k, we can define
                                ks,a,h := min {k = 1, 2, ┬и ┬и ┬и , | (s, a) Рѕѕ Lk,h } .
Thus, we have
            K                                               K
            X          qh¤ђk (s, a)                          X                       qh¤ђk (s, a)
                  P          ¤ђj     1 ((s, a) Рѕѕ L k,h ) =                      P          ¤ђj
            k=1       jРЅцk qh (s, a)                       k=k          s,a,h
                                                                                   jРЅцk qh (s, a)

                                                                      K
                                                                      X                    qh¤ђk (s, a)
                                                               РЅц                     P                 ¤ђj      .   (51)
                                                                    k=ks,a,h
                                                                               4+        ks,a,h РЅцjРЅцk qh (s, a)

The last inequality is because (s, a) Рѕѕ Lks,a,h ,h , by the definition of Lk,h in Eq. (42), we have
                              1 X ¤ђj                       SAH
                                        qh (s, a) РЅЦ ln            + 1 РЅЦ 1.
                              4                              ╬┤Рђ▓
                                      j<ks,a,h

Define functions
                                                           ¤ђ                       X          ¤ђ
                        Gs,a,h (x) := (x Рѕњ РїіxРїІ) ┬и qh РїѕxРїЅ (s, a) +                           qh j (s, a),           (52)
                                                                           ks,a,h РЅцjРЅцРїіxРїІ
                                        ¤ђ
                        gs,a,h (x) := qh РїѕxРїЅ (s, a).                                                               (53)


                                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                         ¤ђ
Roughly speaking, Gs,a,h (x) is the linear interpolation of the sum of qh j (s, a), and gs,a,h (x) is the
                               ¤ђ
step function whose steps are qh j (s, a). We can easily check that when x is not an integer,
                                                РѕѓGs,a,h (x)
                                                            = gs,a,h (x).                                                   (54)
                                                   Рѕѓx
Notice that the not-differentiable points (i.e., when x is an integer) of Gs,a,h (s, a)(x) are countable
and will not affect the following calculation.


                        K
                        X                    qh¤ђk (s, a)
                                      P                  ¤ђj
                      k=ks,a,h
                                 4+        ks,a,h РЅцjРЅцk qh (s, a)
                      Z K
                                    gs,a,h (x)
                 =                                dx (by Eq. (52) and Eq. (53))
                       ks,a,h Рѕњ1 4 + Gs,a,h (РїѕxРїЅ)
                      Z K
                                   gs,a,h (x)
                 РЅц                              dx (since Gs,a,h (┬и) is monotone increasing)
                       ks,a,h Рѕњ1 4 + Gs,a,h (x)
                 = ln(4 + Gs,a,h (K)) Рѕњ ln(4 + Gs,a,h (ks,a,h Рѕњ 1)) (by Eq. (54))
                      №БФ                         №БХ
                               X       ¤ђ
                 РЅц ln №БГ4 +            q j (s, a)№БИh
                                 ks,a,h РЅцjРЅцK

                 РЅц ln(4 + K).                                                                                               (55)
By Eq. (55), Eq. (50), and Eq. (51), the result of this lemma thus follows.

D    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Proof. For the proof of PAC guarantee, we have
                                                                   №БФ"                        #                №БХ
                                                                            K
                                    mix                             1 X ¤ђk
                V1РѕЌ,F (s1 ) Рѕњ V1¤ђ         (s1 ) = V1РѕЌ,F (s1 ) Рѕњ F №БГ    V1,(i) (s1 )                           №БИ.
                                                                    K
                                                                            k=1                  i=1,┬и┬и┬и ,N

Because F is a concave function, by JensenРђЎs inequality, we have
    №БФ"                      #     №БХ
           K                                K     h              i                   K
        1 X      ¤ђk               №БИРЅЦ 1
                                           X           ¤ђk                         1 X ¤ђk ,F
  F№БГ           V1,(i) (s1 )                    F    V1,(i) (s1 )                =      V    (s1 ).
        K                               K i=1                      i=1,┬и┬и┬и ,N     K i=1 1
                k=1               i=1,┬и┬и┬и ,N

                                                     mix                    PK
Thus,      we     have      V1РѕЌ,F (s1 ) Рѕњ V1¤ђ (s1 )            РЅц        1
                                                                        K       k=1   V1РѕЌ,F (s1 ) Рѕњ V1¤ђk ,F (s1 )             =
Reg(K)
  K .    By Theorem 1, we know that with  high probability Reg(K)                                                  =       CF ┬и
         Рѕџ
       2
 O╠Ѓ(H N S AK) + O╠Ѓ(HN 2 S 3/2 A) + O╠Ѓ(H 2 N S 2 A) . Thus, by letting
                                          Рѕџ
                           CF ┬и O╠Ѓ(H 2 N S AK) + O╠Ѓ(HN 2 S 3/2 A) + O╠Ѓ(H 2 N S 2 A)
                      ╬х=                                                                                  ,
                                                              K
we can get
                     n                                                                       o
           K = CF max O╠Ѓ(H 4 N 2 S 2 A/╬х2 ), O╠Ѓ(H 2 N 4 S 3 A2 /╬х2 ), O╠Ѓ(H 2 N 2 S 4 A2 /╬х2 ) .

Notice that for each episode we have H samples. Thus, the total number of samples is
                        n                                                                  o
         C = CF max O╠Ѓ(H 5 N 2 S 2 A/╬х2 ), O╠Ѓ(H 3 N 4 S 3 A2 /╬х2 ), O╠Ѓ(H 3 N 2 S 4 A2 /╬х2 ) .

The result thus follows.


                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3


Recalling the definition of suboptimality, we get Eq. (16). Term 2 of Eq. (16) is non-positive because
¤ђ╠ѓ is the solution of Eq. (14).
We now bound Term 3. First, we specify the value of brh (s, a, ╬┤) and bph (s, a, sРђ▓ , ╬┤). For the offline
setup, we denote nh (s, a, sРђ▓ ) as the empirical value within the dataset. Now, set brh (s, a, ╬┤) as the
value in (12) and bph (s, a, sРђ▓ , ╬┤) as the value in (32) respectively. From the Value-difference Lemma,
for any i, we have


                                                     "H                                                        #
                                                      X
      ¤ђ╠ѓ
    V1,(i)               ¤ђ╠ѓ
           (s, r, p) Рѕњ V1,(i) (s, r, p) =   Ep,¤ђ╠ѓ             (r(i),h (sh , ah ) Рѕњ r(i),h (sh , ah )|s1 = s
                                                        h=1
                                                     H X
                                                     X
                                         + Ep,¤ђ╠ѓ [               (ph (sh , ah , sРђ▓h+1 ) Рѕњ p(sh , ah , aРђ▓h+1 ))Vh+1,(i) ]
                                                     h=1 sРђ▓h+1
                                                                                                                             (56)



From Lemma 12, 13, and 14, we have |r(i),h (s, a) Рѕњ r(i),h (s, a)| РЅц brh (s, a, ╬┤), and |p(s, a, sРђ▓ ) Рѕњ
p(s, a, sРђ▓ )| РЅц bph (s, a, sРђ▓ ) with probability 1 Рѕњ ╬┤. Since, Vh+1,(i) РЅц H. Thus,


      ¤ђ╠ѓ                 ¤ђ╠ѓ
    V1,(i) (s, r, p) Рѕњ V1,(i) (s, r, p) РЅц
           №Б«                                                                                         №Б╣
             XH                                                            X p
    Ep,¤ђ╠ѓ №Б░ (r(i),h (sh , ah ) Рѕњ r(i),h (sh , ah ) + brh (sh , ah , ╬┤) + H  bh (sh , ah , sРђ▓h+1 , ╬┤))№Б╗                       (57)
           h=1                                                                            sРђ▓h+1


Now, by the definition of r, we can bound the above by 0. Finally, using the fact that F (┬и) is
monotone increasing, we can conclude that Term 3 is bounded by 0.
It remains to estimate Term 1. To that end, when the event E (defined in Definition 1) happens, we
have



         rh,(i) (s, a) Рѕњ rh,(i) (s, a)
                                                                     X
      = rh,(i) (s, a) Рѕњ rh,(i) (s, a) Рѕњ brh (s, a, ╬┤) Рѕњ H                    bph (s, a, sРђ▓ , ╬┤)   (by the definition of r)
                                                                     sРђ▓ РѕѕS
                            X
      РЅц2brh (s, a, ╬┤) + H           bph (s, a, sРђ▓ , ╬┤) (by Definition 1 and the triangle inequality).                        (58)
                            sРђ▓ РѕѕS


By Assumption 3, we have


                                                    РѕЌ
                                               ¤ђ ,F
                                              Vh,(i) (s, r, p) Рѕѕ [КФ, H].                                                     (59)


                                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus, we can apply Lemma 5. Specifically, under Assumption 3 and when the event E happens, we
have
        Term 1 of Eq. (16)
                РѕЌ                         РѕЌ
          =V1¤ђ ,F (s1 ; r, p) Рѕњ V1¤ђ ,F (s1 ; r, p)
                                 РѕЌ                      РѕЌ
                       ¤ђ                   ¤ђ
          РЅцCF N max Vi,(i) (s1 ; r, p) Рѕњ V1,(i) (s1 ; r, p) (by Lemma 5)
                iРѕѕ[N ]
                       h                                    i
          =CF N max E rh,(i) (sh , ah ) Рѕњ rh,(i) (sh , ah )
                iРѕѕ[N ]
               "H                                                                  #
                 XX
                                Рђ▓                  Рђ▓            ¤ђРѕЌ        Рђ▓
           +E            (ph (s |sh , ah ) Рѕњ ph (s |sh , ah )) Vh+1,(i) (s ; r, p)                     (by Lemma 10)
                    h=1 sРђ▓ РѕѕS
                              H
                              X
          РЅцCF N max E                 rh,(i) (sh , ah ) Рѕњ rh,(i) (sh , ah )
                    iРѕѕ[N ]
                              h=1
                                H X
                                X                                                              РѕЌ
             + CF N max                       (ph (sРђ▓ |sh , ah ) Рѕњ ph (sРђ▓ |sh , ah )) Vh+1,(i)
                                                                                       ¤ђ
                                                                                               (sРђ▓ ; r, p)
                       iРѕѕ[N ]
                                h=1 sРђ▓ РѕѕS
               (by the triangle inequality)
                  "H                                                  !#
                   X                            X p
                            r                                   Рђ▓
          РЅцCF N E         2bh (sh , ah , ╬┤) + H  bh (sh , ah , s , ╬┤)
                        h=1                                  sРђ▓ РѕѕS
                             "H                                     #
                              XX
             + CF N E                     bph (sh , ah , sРђ▓ , ╬┤)H        (by Eqs. (58) and (59) and Definition 1)
                             h=1 sРђ▓ РѕѕS
                        "H                                                                    !#
                         X                                   X
          =2CF N E                   brh (sh , ah , ╬┤) + H           bph (sh , ah , sРђ▓ , ╬┤)        .
                         h=1                                 sРђ▓ РѕѕS
(The expectation E in the above equation is on the trajectories with optimal policy ¤ђ РѕЌ on the true
MDP with r and p.) The result of Theorem 3 thus follows.

F       D ETAILS OF FAIR O NLINE P OLICY G RADIENT
The following proposition gives an estimation of the gradient based on the samples.
Proposition 21. After collecting a set D of trajectories (with the policy ¤ђ╬И ) where each trajectory
¤ё Рѕѕ D contains the information (s¤ёh , a¤ёh , rh¤ё )h=1,2,┬и┬и┬и ,H , then g Рѕѕ Rd is an unbiased1 estimation of
the gradient РѕЄ╬И V1¤ђ╬И ,F (s1 ).

                                  H
                         1 XX                                                                   X
          gmax-min =                  R(i╠ѓРѕЌ ) (¤ё )РѕЄ╬И log ¤ђ╬И (a¤ёh |s¤ёh ), where i╠ѓРѕЌ╬Иl := arg min      R(i) (¤ё ).
                        |D|               ╬И
                                                                                         iРѕѕ[N ] ¤ё РѕѕD
                            ¤ё РѕѕD h=1
                           N P         PH                                ¤ё ¤ё
                                           h=1 R(i) (¤ё )РѕЄ╬И log ¤ђ╬И (ah |sh )
                          X
                                  ¤ё РѕѕD
          gproportional =                      P                              .                                 (60)
                          i=1                      ¤ё РѕѕD R(i) (¤ё )
                            N P        PH                                ¤ё ¤ё
                                           h=1 R(i) (¤ё )РѕЄ╬И log ¤ђ╬И (ah |sh )
                      ╬▒Рѕњ1
                          X
                                  ¤ё РѕѕD
          g╬▒ = |D|                             P                  ╬▒           .
                          i=1                     ¤ё РѕѕD R(i) (¤ё )


Proof. Based on the chain rule, we have the following results.
                                                  ¤ђ╬И ,F
1. When F = Fmax-min , let iРѕЌ╬И := arg miniРѕѕ[N ] V1,(i)  (s1 ):
                                              РѕЄ╬И V1¤ђ╬И ,F (s1 ) = РѕЄ╬И V1,(i
                                                                      ¤ђ╬И
                                                                         РѕЌ ) (s1 ).                                    (61)
                                                                                  ╬И

    1
        An unbiased estimation means that when |D| Рєњ Рѕъ, the estimated value approaches the true value.


                                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              ¤ђ╬И ,F
Notice that РѕЄ╬И iРѕЌ╬И = 0 almost everywhere if V1,(i)  (s1 ) is continuous w.r.t. ╬И.
2. When F = Fproportional :

                                                 N
                                                 X                          N РѕЄ V ¤ђ╬И (s )
                                                                            X  ╬И 1,(i) 1
                     РѕЄ╬И V1¤ђ╬И ,F (s1 ) = РѕЄ╬И                   ¤ђ╬И
                                                       log V1,(i) (s1 ) =           ¤ђ╬И           .      (62)
                                                 i=1                        i=1
                                                                                  V1,(i) (s1 )


3. When F = F╬▒ :

                              N                             N
                              X     1   ¤ђ╬И            1Рѕњ╬▒ X                   Рѕњ╬▒
     РѕЄ╬И V1¤ђ╬И ,F (s1 ) = РѕЄ╬И              V1,(i) (s1 )     =        ¤ђ╬И
                                                                V1,(i) (s1 )          ¤ђ╬И
                                                                                 РѕЄ╬И V1,(i) (s1 ).       (63)
                              i=1
                                  1 Рѕњ ╬▒                    i=1


                                   ¤ђ╬И              ¤ђ╬И
It remains to approximate РѕЄ╬И V1,(i)    (s1 ) and V1,(i) (s1 ) in the above equations. To that end, noticing
       ¤ђ╬И                                                 ¤ђ╬И
that V1,(i) (s1 ) = E¤ё R(i) (¤ё ), we can approximate V1,(i)    (s1 ) by the empirical average of R(i) , i.e.,

                                                   1 X
                                                       R(i) (¤ё ).                                       (64)
                                                  |D|
                                                        ¤ё РѕѕD


                        ¤ђ╬И
Before calculating РѕЄ╬И V1,(i) (s1 ), we first list some equations that will be used later.
1. Probability of a trajectory:


                                                 H
                                                 Y
                                Pr(¤ё |╬И) =            ph (sh+1 |sh , ah )¤ђ╬И (ah |sh ).                  (65)
                                                h=1



2. The log-derivative trick:



                                РѕЄ╬И Pr(¤ё |╬И) = Pr(¤ё |╬И) ┬и РѕЄ╬И log Pr(¤ё |╬И).                               (66)


3. Log-probability of a trajectory:


                                             H
                                             Y
                   log Pr(¤ё |╬И) = log            ph (sh+1 |sh , ah )¤ђ╬И (ah |sh ) (by Eq. (65))
                                         h=1
                                       H
                                       X
                                   =         log ph (sh+1 |sh , ah ) + log ¤ђ╬И (ah |sh ).
                                       h=1


Thus, we have

                                                          H
                                                          X
                                  РѕЄ╬И log Pr(¤ё |╬И) =             РѕЄ╬И log ¤ђ╬И (ah |sh ).                    (67)
                                                          h=1


Notice that to get the above equation, we use the fact that the transition probability p is irrelevant to
╬И.


                                                           29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   ¤ђ╬И
Now we are ready to calculate РѕЄ╬И V1,(i) (s1 ). We have
                       ¤ђ╬И
                  РѕЄ╬И V1,(i) (s1 ) =РѕЄ╬И E R(i) (¤ё )
                                      ¤ё
                                      Z
                                  =РѕЄ╬И Pr(¤ё |╬И)R(i) (¤ё )
                                   Z ¤ё
                                  = РѕЄ╬И Pr(¤ё |╬И)R(i) (¤ё )
                                   Z¤ё
                                  = Pr(¤ё |╬И)РѕЄ╬И log(Pr(¤ё |╬И))R(i) (¤ё ) (by Eq. (66))
                                        ¤ё
                                 = E РѕЄ╬И log(Pr(¤ё |╬И))R(i) (¤ё )
                                    ¤ё
                                 = E R(i) (¤ё )РѕЄ╬И log Pr(¤ё |╬И)
                                    ¤ё
                                                   H
                                                   X
                                 = E R(i) (¤ё )           РѕЄ╬И log ¤ђ╬И (ah |sh ) (by Eq. (67)).
                                    ¤ё
                                                   h=1
                              ¤ђ╬И
Thus, we can approximate РѕЄ╬И V1,(i) (s1 ) by the following empirical average:
                                                           H
                                  1 X           X
                                      R(i) (¤ё )   РѕЄ╬И log ¤ђ╬И (ah |sh ).                                  (68)
                                 |D|
                                        ¤ё РѕѕD             h=1
The result of this proposition thus follows by plugging the empirical estimation Eqs. (64) and (68)
into Eqs. (61) to (63).

As an example, we show the whole algorithm for max-min fairness in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2 Policy Gradient for Max-Min Fairness
 1: Initialize: ╬И0 Рѕѕ Rd , step size ╬▒Рђ▓ > 0.
 2: for each iteration l = 0, 1, 2, ┬и ┬и ┬и , do
 3:     Collect a set of trajectory D by using ¤ђ╬Иl where each trajectory ¤ё Рѕѕ D contains the infor-
      mation (sh , ah , rh )h=1,2,┬и┬и┬и ,H .
 4:       For each collected trajectory, calculate its total reward for each agent
                                                                                   ╬Иl
 5:       For each agent i, get an estimation of its own value function V╠ѓ1,(i)       (s1 )               Рєљ
       1
          P
      |D|   ¤ё РѕѕD R(i) (¤ё ).
                                                                                             ╬Иl
 6:      Select the agent with the minimum estimated value i╠ѓРѕЌ╬Иl Рєљ arg miniРѕѕ{1,2,┬и┬и┬и ,N } V╠ѓ1,(i) (s1 ).
                                               d
 7:      Calculate the estimated gradient g Рѕѕ R by
                                                                H
                                     1 X              X
                              gРєљ         R(i╠ѓРѕЌ ) (¤ё )   РѕЄ╬Иl log ¤ђ╬Иl (ah |sh ).
                                    |D|      ╬Иl
                                            ¤ё РѕѕD                h=1
                                                       Рђ▓
 8:    Update the parameters ╬Иl+1 Рєљ ╬Иl + ╬▒ g.
 9: end for


G      S IMULATION R ESULTS
In Fig. 1, we plot the curves of V1F (s1 ) of the optimal policy (dashed red curves) and the curves of
the policy calculated by Algorithm 1 (the blue curves) for different fair objectives. We can see that
for all three different fair objectives, the solution of Algorithm 1 becomes very close to the optimal  Рѕџ
one after K РЅЦ 550. This validates
                              Рѕџ
                                      our  theoretical result that the regret scales sub-linearly ( O╠Ѓ(   K))
since the average regret O╠Ѓ( KK ) goes to zero when K becomes larger.
In Fig. 2, we plot the curves of V1F (s1 ) of the optimal policy (dashed red curves) and the curves
of the policy calculated by the policy gradient method (the blue curves). We use a two-layer fully-
connected neural network with ReLU (rectified linear unit) as the policy model. During each iter-
ation of the policy gradient algorithm, 20 trajectories are generated and collected under the current


                                                           30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               (a) max-min fairness



                  V1F (s1 )
                              2.22                                                        optimal
                                                                                          Algo. 1
                              2.20
                                     0   100     200    300    400      500   600
                                                         K

                                           (b) proportional fairness

                       1.6425
           V1F (s1 )


                                                                                          optimal
                       1.6400                                                             Algo. 1

                                     0   100     200    300    400      500   600
                                                         K

                                               (c) ╬▒ fairness (╬▒ = 5)
      V1F (s1 )


                  Рѕњ0.0190                                                                 optimal
                                                                                          Algo. 1
                  Рѕњ0.0195
                                     0   100     200    300    400      500   600
                                                         K

Figure 1: Curves of V1F (s1 ) of Algorithm 1 w.r.t. K for different fair objectives. The solid blue
curve is the average of 10 runs with different seeds. The shaded part denotes the range of these 10
runs (i.e., the range between the max and the min value).
policy. As shown by Fig. 2, such a policy gradient method can achieve the nearly optimal solution
within 1000 iterations.
In Figs. 3 and 4, each point of the offline curve is calculated by applying the offline algorithm with
the data generated by Algorithm 1 at K-th epoch. We can see that the offline policy is better than the
online policy, which is reasonable because the offline policy only needs exploitation (i.e., choose the
current best action), while the online policy needs to explore (i.e., try suboptimal actions to estimate
the environment).
Figs. 5 and 6 show the cost of fairness. In Fig. 6, the fair optimal solution is evaluated in the classical
objective (i.e., the sum of individualsРђЎ return), compared with the optimal classical (unfair) solution.
We can see the gap is not very large, which suggests that the cost of fairness is relatively small.
In contrast, in Fig. 5, the optimal classical (unfair) solution is evaluated in the fairness objective,
compared with the optimal fair solution. We can see for some points the gap is significant, which
justifies the necessity of a fair solution.

G.1     C ONFIGURATIONS OF S IMULATIONS

We use a synthetic MDP. Each term of the transition probability
                                                            P         p is i.i.d. uniformly generated
between [0, 1], and then we normalize p to make sure that sРђ▓ РѕѕS p(s, a, sРђ▓ ) = 1. Every term of the
true immediate reward r is i.i.d. uniformly generated between [0.15, 0.95]. Each noisy observation
of an immediate reward is drawn from a uniform distribution centered at its true value within the
range of ┬▒0.05 (thus all noisy observations are in [0.1, 1]). Figs. 1 and 2 use S = A = N = 2 and
H = 3. Fig. 3 uses A = 3, S = 3, N = 3, H = 4. Fig. 4 uses A = 2, S = 2, N = 3, H = 10.
Figs. 5 and 6 use A = 2, S = 2, H = 3.


                                                          31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       (a) max-min fairness
                      2.25

          V1F (s1 )
                                                                               optimal
                      2.00
                                                                               policy gradient
                      1.75
                             0     200       400       600      800    1000
                                            iteration index

                                   (b) proportional fairness
          V1F (s1 )


                      1.50                                                     optimal
                                                                               policy gradient
                      1.25
                             0     200       400       600      800    1000
                                            iteration index

                                       (c) ╬▒ fairness (╬▒ = 5)
                 Рѕњ0.02
     V1F (s1 )


                                                                               optimal
                                                                               policy gradient
                 Рѕњ0.04
                             0     200       400       600      800    1000
                                            iteration index

Figure 2: Curves of V1F (s1 ) of policy gradient w.r.t. the number of iterations for different fair
objectives. The solid blue curve is the average of 10 runs with different seeds. The shaded part
denotes the range of these 10 runs (i.e., the range between the max and the min value).



                                       max-min fairness
                 2.4

                 2.2

                 2.0                                                          optimal
     V1F (s1 )


                                                                              Algo. 1 (online)
                 1.8                                                          offline


                 1.6

                 1.4
                         0       200      400       600        800    1000
                                                K

Figure 3: The curve of the offline algorithm performance w.r.t. the number of data, where the offline
data is generated by the Algorithm 1 during the online learning process. Each point is the average
of 10 random runs. (A = 3, S = 3, N = 3, H = 4)



                                                          32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   max-min fairness


                  6.0

                                                                                                 optimal
      V1F (s1 )


                  5.5                                                                            Algo. 1 (online)
                                                                                                 offline
                  5.0


                  4.5
                         0                   200        400       600        800     1000
                                                              K

Figure 4: The curve of the offline algorithm performance w.r.t. the number of data, where the offline
data is generated by the Algorithm 1 during the online learning process. Each point is the average
of 10 random runs. (A = 2, S = 2, N = 3, H = 10)


                                                                  (a) max-min fairness
                                         2
                             V1F (s1 )


                                         1

                                             2          4          6         8       10     12       14
                                                                             N

                                                              (b) proportional fairness
                                         4
                             V1F (s1 )


                                         2
                                             2          4          6         8       10     12       14
                                                                             N

                                                                  (c) ╬▒ fairness (╬▒ = 5)
                                         0
                        V1F (s1 )


                                                   unfair
                                    Рѕњ2
                                                   opt

                                             2          4          6         8       10     12       14
                                                                             N


          Figure 5: The value of the fairness objective for the optimal unfair (classical) policy


                                                                        33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    (a) max-min fairness
                               20
              i V1,(i) (s1 )


                               10
                  ¤ђ
            P


                                    2          4     6          8       10     12   14
                                                                N

                                                   (b) proportional fairness
                               20
              i V1,(i) (s1 )


                               10
                  ¤ђ
            P


                                    2          4     6          8       10     12   14
                                                                N

                                                    (c) ╬▒ fairness (╬▒ = 5)
                               20
              i V1,(i) (s1 )


                                        fair
                                        opt
                               10
                  ¤ђ
            P


                                    2          4     6          8       10     12   14
                                                                N


             Figure 6: The value of the classical objective for the optimal fair policy.


                                                           34
