Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I MAGE T RANSLATION AS
D IFFUSION V ISUAL P ROGRAMMERS
 Cheng Han1,2∗ & James C. Liang1∗ & Qifan Wang3 & Majid Rabbani1 & Sohail Dianat1
 & Raghuveer Rao4 & Ying Nian Wu5 & Dongfang Liu1†
 Rochester Institute of Technology1 , University of Missouri - Kansas City2 , Meta AI3 ,
 DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory4 , University of California, Los Angeles5



                                              A BSTRACT

             We introduce the novel Diffusion Visual Programmer (DVP), a neuro-symbolic
             image translation framework. Our proposed DVP seamlessly embeds a condition-
             flexible diffusion model within the GPT architecture, orchestrating a coherent se-
             quence of visual programs (i.e., computer vision models) for various pro-symbolic
             steps, which span RoI identification, style transfer, and position manipulation,
             facilitating transparent and controllable image translation processes. Extensive
             experiments demonstrate DVP’s remarkable performance, surpassing concurrent
             arts. This success can be attributed to several key features of DVP: First, DVP
             achieves condition-flexible translation via instance normalization, enabling the
             model to eliminate sensitivity caused by the manual guidance and optimally focus
             on textual descriptions for high-quality content generation. Second, the frame-
             work enhances in-context reasoning by deciphering intricate high-dimensional
             concepts in feature spaces into more accessible low-dimensional symbols (e.g.,
             [Prompt], [RoI object]), allowing for localized, context-free editing while main-
             taining overall coherence. Last but not least, DVP improves systemic control-
             lability and explainability by offering explicit symbolic representations at each
             programming stage, empowering users to intuitively interpret and modify results.
             Our research marks a substantial step towards harmonizing artificial image trans-
             lation processes with cognitive intelligence, promising broader applications. Our
             demo page is released at here.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Concurrent state-of-the-art image translation
                                                                Input             Where are these   What objects do we       Output
methods predominantly follow the paradigm                    [Instruction]
                                                                                    objects?         want to translate?
                                                                                                    “left dog” → “sheep”
of connectionism (Garcez et al., 2022), setting                  “change
                                                         the left dog to sheep/
their goal as answering “what” — they aim                 middle dog to duck/
                                                           right kitten to pig”
to translate the image from the source domain
                                                                                                    “middle dog” → “duck”
to the designated target domain with fidelity.                  [Image]

These methods can be broadly categorized
into Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)-
                                                                                                    “right kitten” → “pig”
based and Diffusion-based methods (see §2).
Diffusion-based approaches usually demon-
strate superior capabilities when compared to
their GAN-based counterparts, especially in          Figure 1: Working pipeline showcase. DVP rep-
the domains such as image quality and coher-         resents a solution rooted in visual programming,
ence, training stability, and fine-grained con-      demonstrating pronounced capabilities in-context
trol (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). As such, they        reasoning and explainable control, in addition to
are perceived to harbor more auspicious poten-       its remarkable efficacy in style transfer.
tial in image translation (Mokady et al., 2023).
    ∗
        Equal contribution
    †
        Corresponding author


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Despite their huge success (Epstein et al., 2023; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), these diffusion-based
methods exhibit a series of limitations: ① Condition-rigid learning. Existing arts following the
principles in classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2021; Mokady et al., 2023) face a significant
challenge in effectively achieving a harmonious equilibrium between unconditional and conditional
predictions. Typically, these methods rely on manually crafted guidance scale parameters to su-
pervise the process of each individual image translation. This inherent restriction curtails the algo-
rithmic scalability, thereby impeding their potential for achieving holistic automation for real-world
applications; ② Context-free incompetence. Concurrent methods primarily engage in the global ma-
nipulation of diverse attributes (e.g., stylistic and content-related elements) within images, which
prioritize the maintenance of contextual integrity over local alterations. Nevertheless, the absence
of context-free reasoning hinders the precision required to realize specific RoI modifications, while
simultaneously upholding a broader sense coherence. Such contextual understanding capacities ne-
cessitate a high degree of semantic acumen and a robust mastery of image structure, which is sorely
lacking within contemporary image translation solutions (Hitzler et al., 2022; Oltramari et al., 2020;
Mao et al., 2019). ③ System opacity. Due to their black box nature, diffusion-based methods —
coined by connectionism (Wang et al., 2023) — often exhibit a level of abstraction that distances
them from the intrinsic physical characteristics of the problem they aim to model (Angelov & Soares,
2020). As a result, users encounter limited control over the model’s behaviors before reaching the
final outputs, rendering them rudderless in establishing trustworthiness in decision-making or pur-
suing systemic enhancement.
In this work, we revolutionize the focus of “what” into a more flexible image translation paradigm
of “where-then-what.” Under this paradigm, we first answer the question of “where” by finding the
instructed target region accurately. After getting the target region (i.e., Region of Interest (RoI)), we
answers the question of “what” by translating it into the targeted domain with high-fidelity. Con-
sidering the aforementioned discussions, we are approaching the task of image translation from a
fresh neuro-symbolic perspective, presenting a novel method named the Diffusion Visual Program-
mer (DVP). More concretely, we architect an condition-flexible diffusion model (Song et al., 2021),
harmoniously integrated with the foundation of GPT (Brown et al., 2020), which orchestrates a con-
catenation of off-the-shelf computer vision models to yield the coveted outcomes. For example in
Fig. 1, given an input instruction that specifies the translation from the “left dog” to a “sheep,” DVP
utilizes GPT as an AI agent to plan a sequence of programs with operations, subsequently invoked
in the following procedure. It first addresses the fundamental question of “where” by identifying
and segmenting the RoI of the “dog.” Once segmented, the background undergoes an inpainting to
restore the regions obscured by the “dog,” and our condition-flexible diffusion model translates
→ , addressing the query of “what.” DVP, leveraging spatial data, positions the “sheep” in the
instructed spatial location, and further enables various context-free manipulations (see §3.2).
DVP is an intuitive and potent image translation framework, showing superior performance qual-
itatively and quantitatively (§4.2) over state-of-the-art methods (Chen et al., 2023; Batzolis et al.,
2021; Choi et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2023; Gal et al., 2022;
Hertz et al., 2023; Mokady et al., 2023). It enjoys several attractive qualities: ❶ Condition-flexible
translation. Our proposed condition-flexible diffusion model creatively utilizes instance normaliza-
tion guidance (see §3.1) to mitigate the global noises in the unconditional embeddings by adaptive
distribution shifting, and ensure that the model remains optimally conditioned based on the textual
descriptions without any parameter engineering. It offers a streamlined solution tackling the chal-
lenge of hand-crafted guidance sensitivity on condition-rigid learning. This innovation addresses
the “what” inquiry and enables a generalized learning paradigm for diffusion-based solutions. ❷
Effective in-context reasoning. By decoupling the high-dimensional, intricate concepts in feature
spaces into low-dimensional, simple symbols (e.g., [Prompt], [RoI object]), we enable context-free
manipulation of imagery contents via visual programming (see §3.2). It essentially includes a se-
quence of operations (e.g., segmentation, inpainting, translation) to establish in-context reasoning
skills. Such a neuro-symbolic design fortifies our method with the capability to discern the con-
cept of “where” with commendable precision. ❸ Enhanced controllability and explainability. Our
modulating scheme uses explicit symbolic representations at each intermediate stage, permitting
humans to intuitively interpret, comprehend, and modify. Leveraging by the step-by-step pipeline,
we present not only a novel strong baseline but also a controllable and explainable framework to the
community (see §4.3). Rather than necessitating the redesign of networks for additional functions or
performance enhancement, we stand out for user-centric design, facilitating the seamless integration
of future advanced modules.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2   R ELATED W ORK
Image-to-Image Translation. Image-to-Image (I2I) translation aims at estimating a mapping
of an image from a source domain to a target domain, while preserving the domain-invariant
context from the input image (Tumanyan et al., 2023; Isola et al., 2017). For current data-driven
methods, the I2I tasks are dominated into two groups: GAN-based and Diffusion-based methods.
GAN-based methods, though they present high fidelity translation performance (Kim et al., 2022;
Park et al., 2020a;b; Zhu et al., 2017a), pose significant challenges in training (Arjovsky et al.,
2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017), and exhibit mode collapse in the output distribution (Metz et al.,
2017; Ravuri & Vinyals, 2019). In addition, many such models face constraints in producing
diverse translation outcomes (Li et al., 2023). Diffusion-based methods, on the other hand, have
recently shown competitive performance on generating high-fidelity images. Works on conditional
diffusion models (Choi et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022) show promising
performance, viewing conditional image generation through the integration of the reference image’s
encoded features during inversion (Mei et al., 2022). Though highly successful, they only offer
coarse guidance on embedding spaces for generations (Chen et al., 2023), and exhibit ambiguity
in intricate scenarios. In contrast, our approach, empowered by in-context reasoning, decouples
complex scenes into low-dimensional concepts, and naturally handles such challenges.
Text-guided Diffusion Models. Several concurrent works contribute to text-guided diffusion
models. DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023) and Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022) design pre-trained
text-to-image diffusion models, while several images should be provided. Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz
et al., 2023; Mokady et al., 2023) manipulate local or global details solely by adjusting the text
prompt. Through injecting internal cross-attention maps, they maintain the spatial configuration and
geometry, thereby enabling the regeneration of an image while modifying it through prompt editing.
However, (Hertz et al., 2023) does not apply an inversion technique, limiting it to synthesized
images (Mokady et al., 2023). They both introduce extra hyper-parameter w (i.e., guidance scale
parameter), which significantly influences the translated performance (see Fig. 5). In the light
of this view, our approach re-considers the design of classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans,
2021) prediction, and further gets rid of such an oscillating parameter for robust prediction in a
fully-automatic manner. We further include our intriguing findings in §4.3.
Visual Programming. Visual programming serves as an intuitive way to articulate programmatic
operations and data flows in addressing complex visual tasks (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023), coined by
the paradigm of neuro-symbolic. Concurrent visual programming, empowered by Large Language
Models (LLMs), shows superior performance in various vision tasks (e.g., visual relationship
understanding (Donadello et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2021), visual question answering (Yi et al.,
2018; Mao et al., 2019; Amizadeh et al., 2020), commonsense reasoning (Arabshahi et al., 2021),
image translation (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023)), holding potential to change the landscape of image
translation in terms of transparency and explainability, and in-context reasoning. We recognize
a number of insightful approaches, where the most relevant ones to our work are AnyDoor (Chen
et al., 2023), Inst-Inpaint (Yildirim et al., 2023) and VISPROG (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023).
Nevertheless, (Chen et al., 2023) select an object to a scene at a manually selected location,
classifies objects by an additional ID extractor, and extract detail maps for hierarchical resolutions.
(Yildirim et al., 2023) needs additional training on GQA-Inpaint dataset (Pfeiffer et al., 2022).
Overall, these processes remain opaque or need additional training, which are not amenable to
manual modifications or training-free paradigm. (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023) introduces visual
programming to compositional visual tasks. However, it mainly contributes to the paradigm of
building a modular neuro-symbolic system, while the strong editing abilities for compositional gen-
eralization, has been overlooked. In addition, it simply replaces the original object by text-to-image
generation, ignoring the preservation from any content from the original image. Our DVP, on the
other hand, offers a nuanced framework that delineates each intermediate step in a manner that is
both comprehensible and modifiable for human users (see §4.3). By translating complex feature
spaces into lower-dimensional symbols, DVP enables fruitful context-free manipulations (see §3.2).

3   A PPROACH
In this section, we introduce Diffusion Visual Programmer (DVP), a visual programming pipeline
for image translation (see Fig. 2). Within our framework, image translation is decomposed into
two distinct sub-objectives: ① style transfer, translating RoIs within images while upholding con-
textual coherence; and ② context-free editing, endowing the capacity for unrestricted yet judicious
modifications. In response to ①, Condition-flexible diffusion model is introduced for autonomous,


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 “change the burger
                  to apple and then                               Condition-flexible
                    move it to the                                 Diffusion Model
                  right/enlarge it.”
      [Image]        [Instruction]   [RoI Object]                                                 [Translated
                                                                                                    object]
                                                                                                                          Position
                                                                                                                         Manipulator
                              RoI Segmenter
        GPT-driven
                                Inpainter                                    an apple
         Planner                                          “an ice-cream and a burger               [Scenario]
                                Prompter                    floating on the ocean.”
                 [Plan]                                             [Prompt]
                                                              “move apple to the right”                                                                 [Output]
                                                               or “enlarge the apple”
      GPT-driven Planner             ROI Segmenter                      Prompter                     Inpainter                       Position Manipulator
      [Plan]=GPlan{[Image],   [RoI Object]=Segment{[Image],     [Prompt]=PG{[Instruction],   [Scenario]=Inpaint{Image,      [Output]=PM{[Translated Object], [Scenario],
           [Instruction]}             [Plan](‘Object’)}             [Plan](‘Prompt’)}              [Plan](‘Object’)}             [Plan](‘Position’), [Plan](‘Size’)}


Figure 2: Diffusion Visual Programmer (DVP) overview. Our proposed framework contains two
core modules:      is the condition-flexible diffusion model (see §3.1), augmented by the integration
of instance normalization (see Fig. 3), aimed to achieve a more generalized approach to translation;
    stands for visual programming (see §3.2), fulfilled by a series of off-the-shelf operations (e.g.,
Segment operation for precise RoI segmentation). The overall neuro-symbolic design enables in-
context reasoning for context-free editing. We also enjoy enhanced controllability and explainability
by intuitively explicit symbols (e.g., [Prompt], [RoI object], [Scenario], [Translated object]) at each
intermediate stage, facilitating human interpretation, comprehension and modification.
non-human-intervened translation (§3.1). To achieve ②, we present In-context Visual Programming,
which decomposes high-level concepts into human-understandable symbols, enabling adaptable ma-
nipulation (§3.2). We elaborate on our techniques below.

3.1      C ONDITION - FLEXIBLE D IFFUSION M ODEL

Preliminaries. Text-guided diffusion models transform a stochastic noise vector zt and a textual
prompt embedding P into an output image z0 aligned with the given conditioning prompt. For
achieving step-by-step noise reduction, the model ϵθ is calibrated to estimate synthetic noise as:
                                       min Ez0 ,ϵ∼N (0,I),t∼Uniform(1,T ) ||ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t, P)||2 ,                                                                        (1)
                                            θ
where P is the conditioning prompt embedding and zt is a hidden layer perturbed by noise, which
is further introduced to the original sample data z0 based on the timestamp t. During inference,
the model progressively eliminates the noise over T steps given a noise vector zT . To accurately
reconstruct a given real image, the deterministic diffusion model sampling (Song et al., 2021) is:
                           r             s                r        !
                              αt−1            1              1
                    zt−1 =         zt +            −1−         − 1 · ϵθ (zt , t, P),               (2)
                               αt           αt−1            αt
                Qt
where αt := i=1 (1 − βi ), and βi ∈ (0, 1) is a hyper-parameter for noise schedule. Motivated
by (Hertz et al., 2023), we generate spatial attention maps corresponding to each textual token.
Specifically, a cross-attention mechanism is incorporated for controllability during translation, fa-
cilitating interaction between the image and prompt during noise prediction as:
                                              lQ (ϕ(zt ))lK (ψ(P))
                                                        √
                                 ϵθ (zt , t, P) = Softmax(          )lV (ψ(P)),                     (3)
                                                          d
where lQ , lK , lV are learned linear projections. ϕ(zt ) represents spatial features of the noisy im-
age, and ψ(P) stands for the textual embedding.
Instance Normalization Guidance. Text-guided generation frequently faces the challenge of mag-
nifying the influence of the conditioning text during the generation process (Song et al., 2021). (Ho
& Salimans, 2021) thus put forth a classifier-free guidance approach, making an initial prediction
generated without any specific conditioning. This unconditioned output with the guidance scale pa-
rameter w is then linearly combined with predictions influenced by the conditioning text with scale
(1 − w). Formally, given ∅ = ψ(·) as the feature representation from the null text, we have:
                                 ϵ̃θ (zt , t, P, ∅) = w · ϵθ (zt , t, P) + (1 − w) · ϵθ (zt , t, ∅).                                                                       (4)


                                                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In practice, we observe that the scaling factor w is highly sensitive. Even minor fluctuations in its
value can lead to substantial effects on the final images. This stringent requirement for fine-tuning
on a per-image basis makes its widespread adoption in real-world applications impractical. In the
light of this view, we introduce the concept of adaptive distribution shift for the condition-flexible
translation. Specifically, we carefully consider the role of the two types of embeddings (i.e., the con-
ditional prediction, ϵθ (zt , t, P) and the unconditional noise prediction ϵθ (zt , t, ∅) ). We argue that
these embeddings warrant differentiated treatment, transcending a rudimentary linear combination
from Eq. 4. In the works of (Ulyanov et al., 2016; 2017), it is posited that the efficacy of instance
normalization in style transfer can be attributed to its robustness against fluctuations in the content
image. Classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2021) exhibits a similar form, which blends stable
predictions from a conditional embedding with those concurrently trained unconditional embedding.
We, therefore, utilize instance normalization                           conditional
and find that it effectively aligns with the in-       P          DM ϵ
                                                                          θ          Instance-
tended translation direction by reducing the im-       zt                        normalization  ϵ̃θ zt−1
pact of unconditional embeddings (see Fig. 3).                          ϵ θ         (see Eq. 5)
This ensures the diffusion model remains ex-           ∅          DM
                                                                        unconditional
clusively conditioned on the prompt, eliminat-
ing any undesired variations. The introduction Figure 3: Instance Normalization Guidance.
of instance normalization not only enhances the translation performance but also fortifies the model’s
ability to handle variations from the input distribution, regardless of potential differences in uncon-
ditional distributions (see Fig. 5). Formally, the instance normalization guidance is formulated as:
                                                    ϵθ (zt , t, ∅) − µ(ϵθ (zt , t, P))
      ϵ̃θ (zt , t, P, ∅) = σ(ϵθ (zt , t, ∅))conv(                                      ) + µ(ϵθ (zt , t, ∅)),   (5)
                                                              σ(ϵθ (zt , t, P))
where conv represents a 1×1 conv layer. Intuitively, the network ϵ̃θ is re-scaled with σ and shift it with
µ, where µ and σ represent the mean of the unconditional embedding and the standard deviation of
the conditional embedding, respectively. Given that both µ and σ are known values from predictions,
we elegantly abstain from operations that are influenced by human intervention for further uncondi-
tional textual embedding tuning. Ablative studies in §4.3 further demonstrate our contributions.

3.2   I N - CONTEXT V ISUAL P ROGRAMMING

Condition-flexible diffusion model in §3.1 provides a generalized image translation solution, ad-
dressing the “what” inquiry as the neural embodiment part in our proposed framework. We further
present in-context visual programming, using a symbolic reasoning process to bridge the learning of
visual concepts and text instructions, understanding the concept of “where” (see Fig. 6). By break-
ing down the rich complexity of high-dimensional concepts into simpler, low-dimensional symbolic
forms, we set the stage for a cascade of logical operations. This, in turn, enables the development of
nuanced, in-context reasoning capabilities. The core components are articulated below.
Symbols. Within our framework, we produce intermediate steps such as [Prompt], [RoI object],
[Scenario]. These intermediary outcomes not only facilitate transparency and explainability for hu-
man interpretation, comprehension, and modifications, but can also be considered as symbols (Cor-
nelio et al., 2022). These symbols serve as low-dimensional data enable structured operations, bridg-
ing the gap between raw data-driven methods and symbolic reasoning.
Operations. We carefully grounded five operations, {GPlan, PG, Segment, Inpaint, PM}, in
in-context visual programming (see Fig. 2). We first leverage the power of large language model
— GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) as an AI agent to perceive, plan and generate program directives (Jen-
nings, 2000; Anderson et al., 2018). This component, named as the GPT-driven Planner module,
manages corresponding programs with few examples of similar instructions, and invokes requisite
operations via the GPlan operation in the reasoning process. All programs adhere to the first-order
logic principles to identify attributes, allowing us to express more complex statements than what can
be expressed with propositional logic alone (Mao et al., 2019). Specifically, these programs have a
hierarchical structure of symbolic, functional operations (i.e., PG, Segment, Inpaint, PM), guid-
ing the collections of modules (i.e., Prompter, RoI Segmenter, Inpainter and Position Manipulator)
for each phase. Note that the operations can be executed in parallel, offering flexible combinations
for systemic controllability via the program execution (see Fig. 7). Specifically, Prompter utilizes
GPT-4 to generate detailed image descriptions on any given input image by the operation PG. Our
input image therefore is not restricted solely to human-annotated images as in previous arts (Mokady
et al., 2023; Ho & Salimans, 2021; Chen et al., 2023); rather, it enables random unlabeled images as


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Input Image                        DVP (ours)   VQGAN-CLIP   Text2Live   SDEDIT   DiffuseIT   Prompt2Prompt   VISPROG


                     “Change the
                    young boy to a
                        robot”


                  “Change the plane
                  scratch to a plane
                     in the sky”


                     “Change the
                    church to the
                    sandcastle on
                       beach”


                     “Change the
                      cartoon to
                     real photo”


                    “Change the
                    right fox to
                    arctic wolf”


                   “Change the two
                   random oranges
                      to apples”


                    “Change the
                    fossil to real
                      dinosaur”


Figure 4: Qualitative results with the state-of-the-art baselines. DVP exhibits rich capability
in style transfer, achieving realistic quality while retaining high fidelity. Owing to the context-free
manipulation (see §3.2), the DVP framework is capable of flawlessly preserving the background
scenes while specifically targeting the translation of the RoI. Note that while VISPROG also enables
context-free editing, it exhibits considerable limitations in rational manipulation (see Fig. 6).
inputs, thereby broadening the potential application scenarios and augmenting data efficiency. RoI
Segmenter creates flexible RoI segmentation via a pre-trained Mask2former (Cheng et al., 2022),
in alignment with the operation of Segment. Inpainter operates based on the logic of ¬RoI, in-
dicating the completion of foreground/background via stable diffusion v1.5 (Rombach et al., 2022;
Lugmayr et al., 2022), assigned to the Inpaint operation. We further classify rational concepts
(e.g., position, scale) by Position Manipulator (i.e., assigned as the PM operation), translating the
programmed human language instructions into a domain-specific language (DSL) designed for po-
sitioning. The DSL covers a set of fundamental logic such as Enlarge, Shrink, Left, Right,
Up, and Down etc. These intuitive logic share the same input format and output interface, thus
achieving programming flexibility (see Fig. 7).
Program Execution. The programs are managed by the Compiler (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023),
which creates a mapping association between variables and values. It further steps through the pro-
gram by incorporating the correct operations line-by-line. At every stage of execution, the program
will activate the specified operation, and the intermediate outputs (e.g., [prompts], [RoI object]) are
in human-interpretable symbols, thereby enhancing the explainability of the system. Since these out-
puts enable direct visual evaluations, offering an option to either repeat the current step or proceed
to the next one, which in turn improves the system’s controllability, demonstrated in §4.3.

4       E XPERIMENTS
4.1       I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Benchmarks. For quantitative and qualitative results, we conduct a new benchmark (see §E), con-
sisting of 100 diverse text-image pairs. Specifically, we manually pick images from web, generated


                                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


images, ImageNet-R (Hendrycks et al., 2021), ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015), MS COCO (Lin
et al., 2014), and other previous work (Ruiz et al., 2023; Tumanyan et al., 2023). To ensure a fair
comparison and analysis, we construct a list of text templates including 20 different classes for trans-
lating, each containing five images of high-resolution and quality. For each originating class (e.g.,
building), we stipulate corresponding target categories and stylistic attributes , thereby facilitating
the automated sampling of various permutations and combinations for translating and evaluation.
Evaluation Metrics. We follow (Ruiz et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023), and calculate the CLIP-
Score (Hessel et al., 2021) and DINO-Score (Caron et al., 2021). These metrics enable the similarity
between the generated image and the target prompt. We further conduct user studies involving 50
participants to evaluate 100 sets of results from multiple viewpoints, such as fidelity, quality, and
diversity. Each set comprises a source image along with its corresponding translated image. To
facilitate the evaluation, we establish comprehensive guidelines and scoring templates, where scores
range from 1 (worst) to 5 (best). Please refer to §M for more details.

4.2   C OMPARISONS WITH C URRENT M ETHODS

Qualitative Results. For fair comparison, we include six state-of-the-art baselines (i.e.,
SDEdit (Meng et al., 2022), Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz et al., 2023), DiffuseIT (Kwon & Ye, 2023),
VQGAN-CLIP (Crowson et al., 2022), Text2LIVE (Bar-Tal et al., 2022) and VISPROG (Gupta &
Kembhavi, 2023) on diverse prompt-guided image translation tasks. We present the visualization
results with DVP in Fig. 4. For style transfer, incorporating instance normalization imbues our
translated images to strike a balance between high preservation to the guidance layout, and high
fidelity to the target prompt. For example, DVP vividly transfers the “young boy”, “church”, etc.
into “robot”, “sandcastle”, etc. in Fig. 4. Other methods contrastingly yields corrupted translation
on these RoI or introduce excessive variations. DVP also exhibits strong in-context reasoning by
acknowledging and transferring objects as instructed by the user. For example, DVP selectively
modify the “right fox” to the “arctic wolf,” while leaving other foxes and the background unaffected
(see Fig. 4 fifth row). Though VISPROG enables local editing, it falls short in cultivating the context
reasoning skills, and result in translating all “foxes” into “arctic wolves” (see §2). The overall
results demonstrate that SDEdit and VQGAN-CLIP compromises between preserving structural
integrity and allowing for significant visual changes. DiffuseIT and Prompt2Prompt maintain
the shape of the guidance image but makes minimal alterations to its appearance. Text2Live
exhibits associations between text and certain visual elements (e.g., the shape of objects); however,
translating the objects to entirely new ones may not lead to visually pleasing results. In contrast,
DVP effectively handles all examples across various scenarios and instructions.
Quantitative Comparisons. Dis-         Input Image      Instance Norm W=2.5  W=5       W=7.5     W=10

cussed in §4.1, we further report                 “Change the
                                                 Parthenon to
the user study, CLIP-Score, and                  Himeji castle”


DINO-Score in Table 1. The re-
sults are consistent with our visual           “Change the woman
evidence: DVP distinctively out-                to golden buddha
                                                   in a temple”

performs other competitors in both
fidelity and quality, most notably
in the realm of fidelity. While                    “Change the
                                                  image to Van
                                                 Gogh painting”
existing methods are designed to
consider merely on the seman-
tic consistency, DVP goes one Figure 5: Ablative visualization results of instance normal-
step further by introducing visual ization compared with various guidance scales w.
programming understanding with
cognitive reasoning that preserving instance identity and background scenarios. This inherently
allows for superior performance in terms of fidelity, thereby making our model more versatile and
applicable in various scenarios.

4.3   S YSTEMIC D IAGNOSIS

This section ablates our core design of DVP on instance normalization guidance in translation (§3.1)
and in-context reasoning in visual programming (§3.2). Our systemic merits in explainable control-
lability as well as label efficiency, coined by the neuro-symbolic paradigm, are also discussed.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Table 1: User study, CLIP-Score, and DINO-Score on the comparison between our proposed
  framework and state-of-the-art baselines. The metrics are detailed in §4.1.
                                                 User Study                 Quantitative Results
                 Method
                                         Quality Fidelity Diversity CLIP-Score DINO-Score
 VQGAN-CLIP (Crowson et al., 2022)          3.25    3.16       3.29         0.749         0.667
     Text2Live (Bar-Tal et al., 2022)       3.55    3.45       3.73         0.785         0.659
      SDEDIT (Meng et al., 2022)            3.37    3.46       3.32         0.754         0.642
   Prompt2Prompt (Hertz et al., 2023)       3.82    3.92       3.48         0.825         0.657
      DiffuseIT (Kwon & Ye, 2023)           3.88    3.87       3.57         0.804         0.648
 VISPROG (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023) 3.86              4.04       3.44         0.813         0.651
               DVP (ours)                   3.95    4.28       3.56         0.839         0.697


                                                                          Attention map
                   “Change the right                                                                                 “Change the left
                                                                              of the
                   pigeon to an eagle”                                                                               pigeon to a duck”
                                                                           right pigeon



    Input Image                           DVP (Ours)   Prompt2Prompt                                   Input Image                            DVP (Ours)   VISPROG
                  • “Swap the donkey                                                                                 • “Swap the stuffed
                    and the elephant”                                                                                  monkey and the
                  • “Enlarge the donkey                                                                                stuffed lion”
                    and the elephant”                                     Attention map                              • “Enlarge the
                  • “Change the stuff                                        of the                                    monkey and the
                    elephant to a real                                      elephant                                   stuffed lion”
                    elephant”                                                                                        • “Change the stuff
                                                                                                                       lion to a real lion”

    Input Image                           DVP (Ours)   Prompt2Prompt                                   Input Image                            DVP (Ours)   VISPROG


Figure 6: Visualization results of in-context reasoning against attention-based Prompt2Prompt
(Mokady et al., 2023) and programming-based VISPROG (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023).
Instance Normalization. Our condition-flexible diffusion model diverges from conventional ap-
proaches (Mokady et al., 2023; Ho & Salimans, 2021) by employing instance normalization guid-
ance to enhance the robustness of translations and capacity to manage variations in the input dis-
tribution (see §3.1). To verify diffusion model methods with instance normalization and guidance
scale (Mokady et al., 2023), we conduct extensive experiments in Fig. 5 and Table 2(a) qualitatively
and quantitatively. For fairness, these comparisons are made without incorporating in-context visual
programming into our approach. We opt for the guidance scale parameter w range centered around
7.5 for linear combination, which is chosen based on the default parameter provided in (Mokady
et al., 2023; Ho & Salimans, 2021). The parameter is varied with a step size of 2.5 to investigate its
influence on the translated images. While the guidance scale baseline exhibits substantial variations
on translated images (see Fig. 5 right 4 columns) when w ∈ {2.5, 5, 7.5, 10}, instance normalization
enables high fidelity with natural, stable translation without any manually tuned parameter.
In-context Reasoning. DVP em-
                                                                                 “Change the                                                      “Change the
ploys a set of visual programming                                              left woman to                                                       left horse
operations for image translation,                                               an astronaut”                                                      to a zebra”
thereby facilitating a powerful                   Input Image                        Instuction                     Input Image                        Instuction
in-context reasoning capability
during image manipulation. To [Plan]=GPlan{[Image], [Instruction]} [Plan]=GPlan{[Image], [Instruction]}
                                                  Plan-1                            Plan-2                          Plan-1                       Plan-2
better demonstrate our claim,              RoI Object, mask=Segment
                                                                              Translated Object=
                                                                           Condition-flexible             RoI Object, mask=Segment
                                                                                                                                              Translated Object=
                                                                                                                                          Condition-flexible
we present and compare our                 {Image, ‘woman on the left’}   DDIM{Image, ‘two astronauts
                                                                           walking down a sidewalk’}
                                                                                                           {Image, ‘horse on the left’} DDIM{Image, ‘a group of zebras
                                                                                                                                             standing in a field’}

translated results with strong cross-
                                                                 Step 1


attention map baseline method
Prompt2Prompt (Mokady et al.,
2023) in Fig. 6. Specifically, in              Translated Object=         RoI Object, mask=Segment            Translated Object=         RoI Object, mask=Segment
                                            Condition-flexible           {Image, ‘astronaut on the left’}  Condition-flexible             {Image, ‘zebra on the left’}
the first row of Fig. 6, we aim           DDIM{RoI Object, ‘astronauts’}                                   DDIM{RoI Object, ‘zebra’}


to translate only the right pigeon
                                                                 Step 2


to an eagle. The cross-attention
map on Prompt2Prompt indicates
that it recognizes both pigeons,           Output=PM{Translated Object, Output=PM{Translated Object,
                                            Scenario, position=‘origin’,   Scenario, position=‘origin’,
                                                                                                          Output=PM{Translated Object,
                                                                                                           Scenario, position=‘origin’,
                                                                                                                                         Output=PM{Translated Object,
                                                                                                                                           Scenario, position=‘origin’,
albeit with a notable failure to                  size=‘origin’}                 size=‘origin’}                  size=‘origin’}                  size=‘origin’}


discern the positional information
                                                                 Output


accurately.      Consequently, the
model erroneously translates both
pigeons into eagles. In contrast,
our approach exhibits a strong Figure 7: Explainable controllability during program execu-
in-context understanding of the tion, which is easy for error assessment and correction.


                                                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Table 2: Ablative results on instance normalization guidance and label efficiency.

  Metrics w = 2.5 w = 5 w = 7.5 w = 10 Inst. norm  Methods      CLIP-Score DINO-Score
CLIP-Score 0.833 0.795 0.742 0.686        0.839 Human-annotated   0.817       0.688
DINO-Score 0.664 0.681 0.712 0.678        0.697    Prompter       0.839       0.697
          (a) Instance normalization                                         (b) Label efficiency
scene and accurately translates the designated pigeon as instructed. We design more sophisticated
instructions in the second row example in Fig. 6. For Prompt2Prompt, the ambiguous cross-attention
on elephant results in wrongful artifacts across various animals in translation. It also demonstrates
limitations in performing RoI relation editing (i.e., Swap, Enlarge). We further compare DVP
with VISPROG (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023), a visual programming approach that enables local
image editing (see §2). As seen, although both DVP and VISPROG allow for instructive object
replacement (Fig. 6 right section), VISPROG is inferior in translation fidelity (e.g., translated duck
is too yellow and lion has a different pose). VISPROG also fails to support relation manipulations
while DVP exhibits a commendable result in all examples following strictly to human instructions.
Explainable Controllability. We next study the explainable controllability during program
execution (see §3.2). In design, we enable multiple operations worked in parallel, there are different
program plans available for a diverse order of operation sequences. As shown in Fig. 7 (left
section), “change the left woman to an astronaut” can be achieved by using both Plan-1 and Plan-2.
Throughout the execution process, the program is run line-by-line, triggering the specified operation
and yielding human-interpretable intermediate outputs at each step, thereby facilitating systemic
explainability for error correction. As shown in Fig. 7 (right section), Plan-1 mistakenly segments
only the head of the “left horse,” leading to an incomplete translation to “zebra.” Owing to the
provision of explainable output at each step, we are able to identify specific issues and subsequently
employ alternative Plan-2 as a more suitable strategy for translating the “left horse.”
Label Efficiency.         Prompter                                Reconstruction                     Translation
generates detailed image de-
scriptions for arbitrary input                                                             “Change
                                                                                          the corgi
images, thereby relaxing label                                                               to a
                                                                                           bulldog”
dependency without being                Input image    Automatic label       Human label
                                                                            “A small dog”
tightly bound by human anno-                         “A corgi sitting on a
                                                     orange background”
tations (see §3.2). To verify
its efficacy, we introduce user                                                            “Change
                                                                                           the sea
study (i.e., Table 2(b)) and                                                              otter to a
                                                                                           sea lion”
further provide visual evidences
                                                       Automatic label       Human label
(i.e., Fig. 8), contrasting human-      Input image
                                                    “Sea otter on the rock “A sea otter”
                                                         by the sea”
generated annotations with
those produced by Prompter.
Given that the focus of this ab- Figure 8: Human-annotated and Prompter-generated descrip-
lative study is to investigate the tions. Descriptions generated via the Prompter yield finer recon-
impact of labels on translated structions, as well as subsequent translated outputs, suggesting a
images, visual programming is relaxation of label dependency.
excluded from the experimental design. In Fig. 8, we bypassed 60% of the optimization steps.
Otherwise, the reconstructed images would closely resemble the input images, irrespective of the
prompts, even in scenarios where the prompts are entirely erroneous. As seen, the GPT-4 generated
annotations result in superior performance in both CLIP-Score and DINO-Score (i.e., Table 2(b)),
indicating that the generated annotations benefit the quality of the translated images. The visual
evidences in Fig. 8 support our claim: by having detailed descriptions of images, the reconstruction
phase yields finer results, which subsequently manifest in the quality of the final translated images.


5    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduce DVP, a neuro-symbolic framework for image translation. Compared to
concurrent image translation approaches, DVP has merits in: i) generalized translation without con-
sidering hand-crafted guidance scales on condition-rigid learning; ii) simple yet powerful in-context
reasoning via visual programming; iii) intuitive controllability and explainability by step-by-step
program execution and parallel operations. As a whole, we conclude that the outcomes presented in
our paper contribute foundational insights into both image translation and neuro-symbolic domains.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This research was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 2242243 and the
DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory under Contract W911QX-21-D-0001.

R EFERENCES
I Elaine Allen and Christopher A Seaman. Likert scales and data analyses. Quality Progress, 40(7):
   64–65, 2007.
Saeed Amizadeh, Hamid Palangi, Alex Polozov, Yichen Huang, and Kazuhito Koishida. Neuro-
  symbolic visual reasoning: Disentangling. In ICML, 2020.
Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce, Mark Johnson, Niko Sünderhauf, Ian Reid,
  Stephen Gould, and Anton Van Den Hengel. Vision-and-language navigation: Interpreting
  visually-grounded navigation instructions in real environments. In CVPR, 2018.
Plamen Angelov and Eduardo Soares. Towards explainable deep neural networks (xdnn). Neural
  Networks, 130:185–194, 2020.
Forough Arabshahi, Jennifer Lee, Mikayla Gawarecki, Kathryn Mazaitis, Amos Azaria, and Tom
  Mitchell. Conversational neuro-symbolic commonsense reasoning. In AAAI, 2021.
Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein generative adversarial networks.
 In ICML, 2017.
Omer Bar-Tal, Dolev Ofri-Amar, Rafail Fridman, Yoni Kasten, and Tali Dekel. Text2live: Text-
 driven layered image and video editing. In ECCV, 2022.
Georgios Batzolis, Jan Stanczuk, Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb, and Christian Etmann. Conditional
  image generation with score-based diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.13606, 2021.
Dane Bertram. Likert scales. Retrieved November, 2(10):1–10, 2007.
Harry N Boone Jr and Deborah A Boone. Analyzing likert data. The Journal of Extension, 50(2):
  48, 2012.
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In CVPR, 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. NeurIPS, 2020.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In ICCV, 2021.
Xi Chen, Lianghua Huang, Yu Liu, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Hengshuang Zhao. Anydoor: Zero-
  shot object-level image customization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09481, 2023.
Bowen Cheng, Ishan Misra, Alexander G Schwing, Alexander Kirillov, and Rohit Girdhar. Masked-
  attention mask transformer for universal image segmentation. In CVPR, 2022.
Jooyoung Choi, Sungwon Kim, Yonghyun Jeong, Youngjune Gwon, and Sungroh Yoon. Ilvr: Con-
  ditioning method for denoising diffusion probabilistic models. ICCV, 2021.
Cristina Cornelio, Jan Stuehmer, Shell Xu Hu, and Timothy Hospedales. Learning where and when
  to reason in neuro-symbolic inference. In ICLR, 2022.
Katherine Crowson, Stella Biderman, Daniel Kornis, Dashiell Stander, Eric Hallahan, Louis Cas-
  tricato, and Edward Raff. Vqgan-clip: Open domain image generation and editing with natural
  language guidance. In ECCV, 2022.

                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. NeurIPS,
  2021.
Ivan Donadello, Luciano Serafini, and Artur D’Avila Garcez. Logic tensor networks for semantic
  image interpretation. IJCAI, 2017.
Dave Epstein, Allan Jabri, Ben Poole, Alexei A Efros, and Aleksander Holynski. Diffusion self-
  guidance for controllable image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00986, 2023.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
Artur d’Avila Garcez, Sebastian Bader, Howard Bowman, Luis C Lamb, Leo de Penning, BV Illu-
  minoo, Hoifung Poon, and COPPE Gerson Zaverucha. Neural-symbolic learning and reasoning:
  A survey and interpretation. Neuro-Symbolic Artificial Intelligence: The State of the Art, 2022.
Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron C Courville. Im-
   proved training of wasserstein gans. NeurIPS, 2017.
Tanmay Gupta and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Visual programming: Compositional visual reasoning
  without training. In CVPR, 2023.
Cheng Han, Qifan Wang, Yiming Cui, Zhiwen Cao, Wenguan Wang, Siyuan Qi, and Dongfang
  Liu. Eˆ 2vpt: An effective and efficient approach for visual prompt tuning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.13770, 2023.
Cheng Han, Qifan Wang, Yiming Cui, Wenguan Wang, Lifu Huang, Siyuan Qi, and Dongfang
  Liu. Facing the elephant in the room: Visual prompt tuning or full finetuning? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.12902, 2024.
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul
  Desai, Tyler Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, et al. The many faces of robustness: A critical
  analysis of out-of-distribution generalization. In ICCV, 2021.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. ICLR, 2023.
Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Clipscore: A
  reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08718, 2021.
Pascal Hitzler, Aaron Eberhart, Monireh Ebrahimi, Md Kamruzzaman Sarker, and Lu Zhou. Neuro-
  symbolic approaches in artificial intelligence. National Science Review, 2022.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. NeurIPS Workshop, 2021.
Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros. Image-to-image translation with
  conditional adversarial networks. In CVPR, 2017.
Nicholas R Jennings. On agent-based software engineering. Artificial intelligence, 2000.
Kunhee Kim, Sanghun Park, Eunyeong Jeon, Taehun Kim, and Daijin Kim. A style-aware discrim-
  inator for controllable image translation. In CVPR, 2022.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
Gihyun Kwon and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusion-based image translation using disentangled style and
  content representation. ICLR, 2023.
Bo Li, Kaitao Xue, Bin Liu, and Yu-Kun Lai. Bbdm: Image-to-image translation with brownian
  bridge diffusion models. In CVPR, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In ICML, 2022.
Rensis Likert. A technique for the measurement of attitudes. Archives of Psychology, 1932.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In ECCV, 2014.
Dongfang Liu, Yiming Cui, Wenbo Tan, and Yingjie Chen. Sg-net: Spatial granularity network for
  one-stage video instance segmentation. In CVPR, 2021.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. ICLR, 2019.
Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In CVPR, 2022.
Jiayuan Mao, Chuang Gan, Pushmeet Kohli, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. The neuro-
   symbolic concept learner: Interpreting scenes, words, and sentences from natural supervision.
   ICLR, 2019.
Kangfu Mei, Nithin Gopalakrishnan Nair, and Vishal M Patel. Bi-noising diffusion: Towards con-
  ditional diffusion models with generative restoration priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.07352,
  2022.
Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. ICLR, 2022.
Luke Metz, Ben Poole, David Pfau, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Unrolled generative adversarial
  networks. ICLR, 2017.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Null-text inversion for
  editing real images using guided diffusion models. In CVPR, 2023.
Geoff Norman. Likert scales, levels of measurement and the “laws” of statistics. Advances in Health
  Sciences Education, 15:625–632, 2010.
Alessandro Oltramari, Jonathan Francis, Cory Henson, Kaixin Ma, and Ruwan Wickramarachchi.
  Neuro-symbolic architectures for context understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04707, 2020.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. ArXiv, abs/2303.08774, 2023.              URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257532815.
Taesung Park, Alexei A Efros, Richard Zhang, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Contrastive learning for unpaired
  image-to-image translation. In ECCV, 2020a.
Taesung Park, Jun-Yan Zhu, Oliver Wang, Jingwan Lu, Eli Shechtman, Alexei Efros, and Richard
  Zhang. Swapping autoencoder for deep image manipulation. NeurIPS, 2020b.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
  Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Jonas Pfeiffer, Gregor Geigle, Aishwarya Kamath, Jan-Martin O. Steitz, Stefan Roth, Ivan Vulić,
  and Iryna Gurevych. xGQA: Cross-Lingual Visual Question Answering. In ACL, 2022.
Zheyun Qin, Xiankai Lu, Xiushan Nie, Dongfang Liu, Yilong Yin, and Wenguan Wang. Coarse-
  to-fine video instance segmentation with factorized conditional appearance flows. IEEE/CAA
  Journal of Automatica Sinica, 2023.
Suman Ravuri and Oriol Vinyals. Classification accuracy score for conditional generative models.
  NeurIPS, 2019.

                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In CVPR,
  2023.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
  Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael S. Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Fei-Fei
  Li. Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. IJCV, 2015.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Huiwen Chang, Chris Lee, Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, David
  Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Palette: Image-to-image diffusion models. In ACM SIGGRAPH,
  2022.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. ICLR,
   2021.
Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features for
  text-driven image-to-image translation. In CVPR, 2023.
Dmitry Ulyanov, Andrea Vedaldi, and Victor Lempitsky. Instance normalization: The missing in-
 gredient for fast stylization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.08022, 2016.
Dmitry Ulyanov, Andrea Vedaldi, and Victor Lempitsky. Improved texture networks: Maximizing
 quality and diversity in feed-forward stylization and texture synthesis. In CVPR, 2017.
Wenguan Wang, James Liang, and Dongfang Liu. Learning equivariant segmentation with instance-
 unique querying. NeurIPS, 2022.
Wenguan Wang, Cheng Han, Tianfei Zhou, and Dongfang Liu. Visual recognition with deep nearest
 centroids. In ICLR, 2023.
Liqi Yan, Cheng Han, Zenglin Xu, Dongfang Liu, and Qifan Wang. Prompt learns prompt: exploring
  knowledge-aware generative prompt collaboration for video captioning. In IJCAI, 2023.
Kexin Yi, Jiajun Wu, Chuang Gan, Antonio Torralba, Pushmeet Kohli, and Josh Tenenbaum. Neural-
  symbolic vqa: Disentangling reasoning from vision and language understanding. NeurIPS, 2018.
Ahmet Burak Yildirim, Vedat Baday, Erkut Erdem, Aykut Erdem, and Aysegul Dundar. Inst-inpaint:
  Instructing to remove objects with diffusion models, 2023.
Ziheng Zhang, Anpei Chen, Ling Xie, Jingyi Yu, and Shenghua Gao. Learning semantics-aware
  distance map with semantics layering network for amodal instance segmentation. In Proceedings
  of the 27th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 2124–2132, 2019.
Tianfei Zhou, Siyuan Qi, Wenguan Wang, Jianbing Shen, and Song-Chun Zhu. Cascaded parsing of
  human-object interaction recognition. IEEE TPAMI, 2021.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Unpaired image-to-image translation
  using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In ICCV, 2017a.
Yan Zhu, Yuandong Tian, Dimitris Metaxas, and Piotr Dollár. Semantic amodal segmentation. In
  Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017b.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 SUMMARY OF THE APPENDIX
This appendix contains additional details for the ICLR 2024 submission, titled “Image Translation
as Diffusion Visual Programmers.” The appendix is organized as follows:

       • §A Implementation details and the pseudo-code.
       • §B More quantitative results for instance normalization.
       • §C More quantitative results for in-context reasoning.
       • §D Video translation.
       • §E General-context dataset.
       • §F Runtime analysis.
       • §G More qualitative results.
       • §H Module Replacement Analysis.
       • §I More comparison with Instruct-Pix2Pix.
       • §J Ambiguous instruction analysis.
       • §K Complex instruction analysis.
       • §L Error analysis.
       • §M Introduction of user study metrics and more user study results.
       • §N Discussion of limitations, societal impact, and directions of our future work.

A    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS AND P SEUDO - CODE OF DVP
Hyper-parameters. We follow the common practices (Ruiz et al., 2023; Hertz et al., 2023; Kwon
& Ye, 2023) and use stable diffusion v1.5 (Rombach et al., 2022) as the base generator. For null-
text optimization (Mokady et al., 2023), we process the image resolution to 512 × 512. We choose
AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) optimizer with an initial learning rate of 1e-5, betas = (0.9,
0.999), eps = 1e-8 and weight decays of 0.01 as default.
Condition-flexible Diffusion Model. For all experiments, we utilize diffusion model (Song et al.,
2021) deterministic sampling with 50 steps. The deterministic diffusion model inversion is per-
formed with 1000 forward steps and 1000 backward steps. Our translation results are performed
with 50 sampling steps, thus we extract features only at these steps. Within each step, null-text opti-
mization (Mokady et al., 2023) is employed for inference time pivotal fine-tuning without additional
training schedule. Specifically for each input image, our approach optimizes the 1×1 conv layer and
the unconditional embedding concurrently. Furthermore, we follow the common practise (Mokady
et al., 2023; Hertz et al., 2023) and re-weight the positive and negative prompting via the hyper-
parameter, which is used to magnify/depreciate the attention during the conditional prediction and
unconditional prediction process.
In-context Visual Programming. We choose the GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) as our Planner discussed
in §3.2, utilizing the official OpenAI Python API. The maximum length for generated programs is
set to 256, and the temperature is set to 0 for the most deterministic generation. Furthermore, we
utilize Mask2Former (Cheng et al., 2022) as a segmenter, Repaint (Lugmayr et al., 2022) as an in-
painter, and BLIP (Li et al., 2022) as a prompter.
Competitors. We employ the official implementations provided for each competitor for fair com-
parisons: VISPROG (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023), Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz et al., 2023), Diffu-
seIT (Kwon & Ye, 2023), and Text2LIVE (Bar-Tal et al., 2022). To run SDEdit (Meng et al., 2022)
on stable diffusion, we utilize the code provided in the Stable Diffusion official repo. The publicly
accessible repository for VQGAN-CLIP (Crowson et al., 2022) is also applied in our experiments.
Algorithm and Pseudo-code. The algorithm of condition-flexible diffusion model (see §3.1) is
demonstrated in Algorithm 1. The pseudo-code of instance normalization guidance in condition-
flexible diffusion model is given in Pseudo-code 1. Modules for in-context visual programming are
provided in in Pseudo-code 2. Our work is implemented in Pytorch (Paszke et al., 2019). Experi-
ments are conducted on one NVIDIA TESLA A100-80GB SXM GPU.
Reproducibility. Our demo page is released at here. To further guarantee reproducibility, our full
implementation and code are publicly released.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1: Condition-flexible diffusion model inversion
Input: A source prompt embedding P , translation textual embedding P and input image I.
Output: Noise vector zT∗ .
Using instance normalization;
Compute the intermediate results zT∗ , . . . , z0∗ using diffusion model inversion over I;
Using instance normalization;
Initialize z¯T ← zT∗ , ∅T ← ψ(“”);
for t = T, T − 1, . . . , 1 do
     for j = 0, . . . , N − 1 do
                                   ∗
         ∅t ← ∅t − η∇∅ ||zt−1          − zt−1 (z¯t , ∅t , P )||2 ;
     end
     Set z̄t−1 ← zt−1 (z¯t , ∅t , P ), ∅t−1 ← ∅t ;
               ∗
     Update zt−1    ← ϵ̃θ (z̄t , t, P, ∅t )
end
Return zT∗



Pseudo-code 1: Pseudo-code of instance normalization used in condition-flexible diffusion
model in a PyTorch-like style.
    # cond_noise: conditional noise prediction embeddings
    # uncond_noise: unconditional noise prediction embeddings
    def calc_mean_std(input, eps=1e-8):
       #== Calculation of the mean and standard deviation of the input embedding
           ==#
       size = input.size()
       N, C = size[:2]
       input_var = input.view(N, C, -1).var(dim=2) + eps
       input_std = feat_var.sqrt().view(N, C, 1, 1)
       input_mean = input.view(N, C, -1).mean(dim=2).view(N, C, 1, 1)
       return input_mean, input_std

    def instance_normalization(cond_noise, uncond_noise):
       #== Insntance normalization of shifting the distribution to conditional
           noise prediction ==#
       size = cond_noise.size()
       uncond_mean, uncond_std = calc_mean_std(uncond_noise)
       cond_mean, cond_std = calc_mean_std(cond_noise)
       normalized_noise = (uncond_noise - cond_mean.expand(size))/cond_std.expand(
           size)
       return conv(normalized_noise) * uncond_std.expand(size) + uncond_mean.expand
           (size)


B    M ORE QUALITATIVE RESULTS FOR INSTANCE NORMALIZATION

In this section, we provided more qualitative results for instance normalization guidance (see §3.1)
compared with different guidance scales w in Fig 9. For fair comparison to other approaches, we do
not utilize visual programming here (see §4.3). In addition, we report the overall qualitative results
by integrating either traditional diffusion model or our proposed condition-flexible one within the
framework of DVP. As shown in Fig. 11, our results consistently achieve robust performance with
high fidelity when comparing with the fixed scale approach.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pseudo-code 2: Pseudo-code of in-context visual programming in a PyTorch-like style.
    class VisualProgramming():
       def __init__(self):
       # load pre-trained models and transfer them to the GPU
       def html(self, inputs: List):
       # return an string that visually represents the input and output steps.

       def parse(self, plan: str):
       # analyze the step, extracting a list of input values and variables along
           with the name of the output variable
       def crop(self, image, plan: str):
       # return the image by cropping at the given coordinates and stores the
           coordinates as attributes

       def find(self, image, plan: str):
       # return a list of objects that match the object_name if any such objects
           are discovered
       def move(self, iamge, objects: Dict, plan: str):
       # return an image with objects that have been moved to new positions
       def execute(self, plan: str, state):
          inputs, input_var_names, output_var_name = self.parse(plan)

           # retrieve the values of input variables from the state
           for var_name in input_var_names:
              inputs.append(state[var_name])
           # execute the code and calculates the output utilizing the loaded model
           output = some_computation(inputs)
           # update the state
           state[output_var_name] = output
           # visual representation summarizing the computation of the step.
           step_html = self.html(inputs,output)
           return output, step_html


C    M ORE QUALITATIVE RESULTS FOR IN - CONTEXT REASONING
The DVP framework utilizes a series of visual programming operations to enable image trans-
lation, thereby enhancing its capacity for context-aware reasoning for arbitrary content manipu-
lation. Fig. 10 provides more results and showcases our advantages over strong baselines, i.e.,
Prompt2Prompt (Mokady et al., 2023) and VISPROG (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023).

D    V IDEO TRANSLATION
We further evaluate the efficacy of DVP on video translation in Fig. 12. Empirically, we are profi-
cient in translating video content without the necessity for explicit temporal modeling. However, we
do acknowledge certain issues during translation: a) the occurrence of artifacts, which depict non-
existent elements within the original image (see □); and b) instances of missing objects (see □),
often resulting from the failure to accurately identify the object, possibly due to the object possess-
ing only a limited number of informative pixels or assuming an unconventional pose. More failure
cases are discussed in §L.

E    G ENERAL - CONTEXT DATASET
We present a general-context dataset consisting of 500 image-text pairs across 20 different classes
representing common objects in their typical contexts. Each class contains 25 unique samples. The
objects span a range of common everyday items (see Fig. 13 top) such as foods, furniture, ap-
pliances, clothing, animals, plants, vehicles, etc. The images consist of high-quality photographs
capturing the objects in natural environments and generated images with advanced digital rendering


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Input Image                     Instance Norm   W=2.5       W=5            W=7.5           W=10


                    “Change the
                  image to Monet
                       style”


                  “Cartoonize the
                     photo into
                    anime style”


                    “Change the
                    image to oil
                      painting”


                    “Change the
                      image to
                       sketch”


                      Figure 9: More qualitative results for instance-normalization.



techniques. The textual descriptions detail the location and spatial connections between primary ob-
jects and other context-rich elements in the scene produced by the GPT-driven prompter (see §3.2).
Each final image-text pair (see Fig. 13 bottom) incorporates a source image with its descriptions,
comprehensive instructions, and a translated image generated by DVP, which also includes cues
about the position of objects in relation to other elements in the setting (e.g., “Two foxes are stand-
ing to the right of a wolf that is perched on a rock in front of a forest”). The fine-grained details in
both images and instructions aim to establish a comprehensive and demanding benchmark for future
studies capable of precisely anchoring position relations within intricate real-world scenarios.



F      RUNTIME A NALYSIS

We further do runtime analysis, shown in Table 3. As seen, though Table 3: Runtime analysis.
SDEdit achieves a superior performance in editing speed by exclud- We measure the total editing
ing a diffusion inversion process, coming with a price that is less time for different methods.
effective in retaining the intricate details from the original image.
                                                                                   Method        Editing
In contrast, our proposed method achieves satisfying image transla-
                                                                                   SDEdit         ∼ 10s
tion results with limited computational overhead (e.g., ∼ 30%) when
                                                                               VQGAN-CLIP ∼ 1.5m
compared to other famous techniques, i.e., Text2Live (Bar-Tal et al.,
                                                                                  Text2live      ∼ 10m
2022), VQGAN-CLIP (Crowson et al., 2022), and VISPROG (Gupta
                                                                                 VISPROG         ∼ 1.5m
& Kembhavi, 2023). Specifically, Text2live (Bar-Tal et al., 2022)
generates an edit layer of color and opacity, which is then composited              Ours          ∼2m
over the original input image, rather than directly producing an edited output; VQGAN-CLIP (Crow-
son et al., 2022) employs a multimodal encoder to assess the similarity between a text-image pair
and iteratively updates the candidate generation until it closely resembles the target text; VIS-
PROG (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023) introduces visual programming to compositional visual tasks
relying solely on a standard stable diffusion model (Rombach et al., 2022). Compared to these
methods, DVP facilitates various editing operations (see §3.2) during the translation process, adding
to its practicality in applications where versatility in editing is crucial (see §4.2). We thus argue that
the overhead of our proposed DVP is acceptable, considering its satisfying performance.


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                       Attention map
                   “Change the left                                                                        “Change the right
                                                                           of the
                   dog to the sheep”                                                                       kitten to the pig”
                                                                          left dog



    Input Image                         DVP (ours)   Prompt2Prompt                          Input Image                         DVP (ours)    VISPROG


                                                                       Attention map
                  “Change the middle                                      of the                           “Change the right
                   person to a robot”                                  middle person                       person to a robot”



    Input Image                         DVP (ours)   Prompt2Prompt                          Input Image                         DVP (ours)    VISPROG


                                                                       Attention map
                  “Change one random                                                                      “Change all oranges
                                                                           of the
                  orange to an apple”                                                                        to peaches”
                                                                     one random orange



    Input Image                         DVP (ours)   Prompt2Prompt                          Input Image                         DVP (ours)    VISPROG


                                                                       Attention map                       “Change the left
                  “Change the largest                                      of the                            little bear to
                    bear to a panda”                                  the largest bear                          a panda”



    Input Image                         DVP (ours)   Prompt2Prompt                          Input Image                         DVP (ours)    VISPROG



                                  Figure 10: More qualitative results for in-context reasoning.
  Input Image                                    Instance Norm                 W=2.5        W=5                    W=7.5                     W=10

                             “Change the
                            apples in the
                              basket to
                               peaches”


Figure 11: Qualitative results by integrating either traditional diffusion model or our proposed
condition-flexible one (see §3.1).


G       M ORE Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS
We present more qualitative results in Fig. 14. As seen, our DVP is capable of achieving appealing
performance in various challenging scenarios. For example, in the first row of Fig. 14, DVP trans-
fers the husky into a sheep with high fidelity, and preserves all details from the intricate outdoor
background.

H       M ODULE R EPLACEMENT A NALYSIS
We also introduce a segmentation model                                         Mask      Editing
replacement      module,       substituting     the
                                                                                                                                                        Mask2Former


model (Cheng et al., 2022) with Segment                Input Image
Anything (Kirillov et al., 2023). As demon-
strated in Fig. 15, Segment Anything exhibits                        “Change
                                                                    the middle
superior segmentation capacity (correctly iden-                      zebra to
                                                                    the horse”
tifying a zebra with partial occlusion), resulting
                                                                                                                                                        SAM


in improved translation results. Our modu-
lating design enhances overall performance
by replacing the segmentation component,
particularly in scenarios that demand accurate Figure 15: Module replacement analysis. We re-
per-pixel understanding. This characteristic place Mask2former (Cheng et al., 2022) to Seg-
ensures the flexibility of our approach, enabling ment Anything (Kirillov et al., 2023) as our RoI
effective management of a diverse range of Segmenter in DVP.
scenarios (Wang et al., 2022; Qin et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2021; Han et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2023; Han et al., 2024).


                                                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I   C OMPARISON WITH I NSTRUCT-P IX 2P IX

In Fig. 16, we present a detailed qualitative      Input Image                   DVP (ours) Instruct-Pix2Pix
comparison between our method and Instruct-
Pix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023). As seen, our                      “Change the kid
                                                                  to branches”
approach yields better qualitative results. For
example, when changing the kid to branches,
DVP presents a more faithful translated result
than Instruct-Pix2Pix. We also need to point
                                                               “Change the photo
out that Instruct-Pix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023)                to a Starry Night
                                                                 style painting”
relies on an instructive tuning-based diffusion
model, which necessitates a rigorous and exten-
sive training schedule. This stands in stark con-
trast to our method. Our paradigm is notably Figure 16: Qualitative comparison with Instruct-
training-free, eschewing the need for such in- Pix2Pix.
tensive data processing and model adjustment. This fundamental difference in approach not only
sets our method apart but also underscores its efficiency where extensive training schedules are
either impractical or undesirable.


J   A MBIGUOUS I NSTRUCTION A NALYSIS

To evaluate the robustness of DVP, we con-           Input Image                        DVP
ducted an ablation study to determine the qual-
ity of the translated image under ambiguous in-
structions. The results in Fig. 17 show that                            “Apples”
despite the vagueness of the instructions, our
approach is still capable of translating images
with reasonably accurate results (e.g., when
having “apples” as the only instruction, DVP
is able to translate both ice-cream and burger
to the apples). The validity of translated results
                                                                         “Car”
can be primarily attributed to the advanced ca-
pabilities of GPT planning (see §3.2). GPT’s
understanding of nuanced instructions and its
ability to generate coherent plans from incom-
plete or unclear data played a pivotal role. Our     Figure 17: Ambiguous instruction analysis.
approach thus not only excels in straightforward scenarios but also possesses a commendable level
of adaptability when faced with ambiguous or less-defined instructions. Such a feature is valuable
in real-world applications where clear and precise instructions may not always be available.


K    C OMPLEX I NSTRUCTION A NALYSIS .

DVP harnesses the strong capabilities of the         Input Image                       DVP
GPT as its core planning mechanism. In                               “Swap the dog
Fig. 18, we demonstrate how DVP applies com-                        on the far right
                                                                       to the most
plex textual augmentations to translate the im-                      left, and then
age effectively. In this example, the instruction                   swap the dog in
                                                                      the middle to
is given as ‘Swap the dog on the far right to the                      the right.”
most left, and then swap the dog in the middle
to the right” necessitating the planner to inter-
pret and process the intricate/multiple textual        Figure 18: Complex textual arguments.
descriptions “to the most left” and “on the far right.” DVP shows a proficient capability in com-
prehending the underlying textual descriptions and subsequently creating satisfying results. This
illustration exemplifies how, by leveraging the advanced capabilities of GPT, our approach is also
adept at managing and handling complex arguments.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L    E RROR A NALYSIS

In Fig. 19, we present an overview of the most notable failure cases and derive conclusions concern-
ing their distinct patterns that result in less-than-optimal outputs. Evidently, our DVP encounters
difficulties in differentiating and translating objects from backgrounds with challenging situations,
such as poor photometric conditions (Fig. 19 bottom) and occluded objects (see Fig. 19 top). For
instance, in the first row, poor lighting causes the translation to appear odd; in the second row, under
unfavorable photometric conditions, both shape and shading are mistakenly identified as objects and
utilized for subsequent translation; in the third row, the cat is obscured, making its translation into a
full tiger challenging; in the fourth row, due to the crowded nature of the lychees, their count varies
after translation. The translation on these challenging situations remains a common limitations ob-
served across the majority of concurrent diffusion models. Additional research in this domain is thus
imperative. A viable approach involves the integration of amodal segmentation models (Zhang et al.,
2019; Zhu et al., 2017b) (i.e.. considering both the visible and occluded parts of the instance) to fully
restore object masks prior to the reconstruction process. We highlight this as a future direction for
addressing challenging scenarios.


M     U SER S TUDY
In Table 1, we design user study including Table 4: User study on controllability and user-
“Quality,” “Fidelity” and “Diversity,” respec- friendliness.
tively. Specifically, we employ user study on Lik-      Method Controllability User-friendliness
ert scale (Likert, 1932), a well-established rating
                                                      VISPROG           25.1%            39.7%
scale metric utilized for quantifying opinions, at-
                                                      DVP (ours)        74.9%            60.3%
titudes, or behavioral tendencies (Allen & Sea-
man, 2007; Bertram, 2007; Boone Jr & Boone,
2012; Norman, 2010). This scale typically presents respondents with either a statement or a ques-
tion. In our case, the questions are measuring the overall harmony of the translated image (i.e.,
“Quality”), the preservation of the identity in the image (i.e., “Fidelity”), and variations between
the original and translated images (i.e., “Diversity”) rated by users from 1 (worst) to 5 (best), Re-
spondents then select the choice that most closely aligns with their own perspective or sentiment
regarding the given statement or question.
We further provide user study in Table 4, focusing on the usability of explainable controllability
discussed in §4.3. The results demonstrate that our approach facilitates user-friendly error correction
and permits the intuitive surveillance of intermediate outputs.


N    D ISCUSSION

Novelty. Our DVP contributes on three distinct technical levels. Specifically, we first re-consider the
design of classifier-free guidance, and propose a conditional-flexible diffusion model which eschews
the reliance on the sensitive manual control hyper-parameter w. Second, by decoupling the intricate
concepts in feature spaces into simple symbols, we enable a context-free manipulation of contents
via visual programming, which is both controllable and explainable. Third, our GPT-anchored pro-
gramming framework serves as a demonstrable testament to the versatile transferability of Language
Model Models, which can be extended seamlessly to a series of critical yet traditional tasks (e.g.,
detection, segmentation, tracking tasks). We do believe these distinctive technical novelties yield
invaluable insights within the community.
Limitation and Future Work. Despite DVP showcases superiority over state-of-the-art methods
in both qualitative and quantitative aspects (see §4.2), it also comes with new challenges and un-
veils some intriguing questions. For example, our approach grapples with obscured objects, at-
tributed mainly to the segment module’s limitation in exclusively processing the visible segment
of an object, neglecting the occluded portion. This limitation consequently influences the diffu-
sion process to generate base merely on the segmented part. In addition, in scenarios of photo-
metric conditions, DVP and its counterparts falter in accurately aligning with the translated ob-
ject(s), echoing challenges akin to the aforementioned issue (see §L). We posit that a special-
ized, fine-grained dataset tailored for a specific purpose (e.g., occluded items, photometric con-
ditions) might be the future direction to bolster the diffusion model’s proficiency. In our study,


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we integrated instance normalization with the null-text optimization, which is specifically design
for text-guided diffusion model. This integration, however, is not directly applicable to a wider
range of diffusion-based image generation applications. Nonetheless, the substantial potential of
instance normalization has not been fully explored or utilized yet. A promising direction to lever-
age the power of instance normalization lies in fine-tuning the text-to-image task, which is split
into a two-step procedure: image generation followed by image fine-tuning. Specifically, we can
first generate some base images with any text2image model. Subsequently, we can naturally em-
ploy our approach with instance normalization to fine-tune these images. For example in Fig. 20,
we initially produce an image following comprehensive instructions and then proceed to fine-
tune the images directly, eliminating the need for complete regeneration the image from scratch.
This pipeline enhances the quality Input Instruction                         Base Image                Fine-tuned Image
of the generated images, tailoring “An apple resting on a
                                            wooden table. The         Any                “Change the
them to achieve the satisfying re-          apple is bright and    diffusion              red one to
                                             shiny, with a few      models              Granny Smith.”
sults. Moreover, fine-tuning exist- droplets of water on
ing images presents a more time and its       skin, making it look
                                          fresh and appetizing.”
computationally efficient alternative
compared to the regeneration from Figure 20: Expand instance normalization to broader image
scratch at each time. This effort also generation pipeline.
has the potential to handle image variations in lighting, contrast, and other characteristics.
Societal Impact. This work introduces DVP as a neuro-symbolic framework for image translation,
showing robust image translation, strong in-context reasoning and straightforward controllability
and explainability. On positive side, our framework reaches superior image translation performance
qualitatively and quantitatively, and provide a user-centric design for the integration of future ad-
vanced modules. DVP holds significant merit, particularly in applications pertinent to safety-critical
domains and industrial deployments. For potential negative social impact, our DVP struggles in
handling obscured objects and photometric conditions, which are common limitations of almost all
concurrent diffusion models. Hence its utility should be further examined.
Ethics Concerns. The inherent design of the DVP, characterized by its modular structure, implies
that it does not intrinsically contribute knowledge or understanding to the process of image trans-
lation. This modular architecture indicates that DVP acts as a framework through which various
processes are executed, rather than a knowledge-contributing entity in its own right. Therefore, the
concerns related to ethics or bias within the DVP system are predominantly relevant to its individual
modules, rather than the system as a whole. It is worth noting that the modular nature of DVP of-
fers a significant advantage in addressing these biases and ethical concerns. Since each component
operates as a discrete unit within the framework, it is feasible to identify and isolate the individual
modules that exhibit concerns. Once identified, these biased modules can be replaced with neutral
alternatives. This adaptability is crucial in maintaining the integrity and effectiveness of the DVP,
ensuring that it remains a robust and fair tool in the realm of image translation.


                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    t=0         t=1               t=2


              Input Video
              Ours (oil painting)


                                    t=3         t=4               t=5
              Input Video
              Ours (oil painting)


                                    t=6         t=7               t=8
              Input Video
              Ours (oil painting)


Figure 12: Video translation results. Devoid of any dedicated temporal module, our approach
demonstrates commendable performance outcomes when applied to video data. □ and □ indicate
artifacts and missing objects respectfully.



                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       There are four        There is a cat that is        Anime girl holding a         Scratch of two
   goldfish in a tank with     laying down on a          basketball in front of a     teddy bears sitting
      sand and plants             window sill               crowd of people              next to a girl


    A white jeep driving         Painting of a         There is a golden humanoid   There is a phenix
  through a desert with a    mountain with a snow       robot that is standing in firebird that is flying
  mountain in background        covered valley           the street with a gun    over a flowery branch


    Cartoon robot with a         There are five             Dolphin riding on the      There is a German
   rocket and a spaceship    sunflowers in a vase on         water with a wave        shepherd running in
     in the background              a table                      behind it                 the grass


                             “Change the left/right
                             fox to the arctic wolf”


   Three foxes standing                                  Two foxes are standing      Two foxes are standing
   on a rock in front of a                                to the right of a wolf      to the left of a wolf
           forest                                          that is perched on a       that is perched on a
                                                        rock in front of a forest   rock in front of a forest

Figure 13: General-context dataset contains diverse image-text pairs (top three rows), and DVP
presented images with targeted translation of the RoI (bottom two rows).


                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Input Image                        DVP (ours)   VQGAN-CLIP   Prompt2Prompt    VISPROG


                   “Change the
                  toy husky to a
                    toy sheep”


                   “Change the
                  left person to
                     a robot”


                “Change the yellow
                 rubber duck to a
                    real chick”


                   “Change the
                     bell to a
                      donut”


                   “Change the
                  right pigeons
                    to eagles”


                   “Change the
                  Bundt cake to
                      pizza”


                   “Change the
                    apples to
                     peaches”


Figure 14: More qualitative results of DVP. As seen, DVP shows high-fidelity image translation
with context-free manipulation.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            “Change the kid to a
                            robot” / “Change the
                           dog to a cat then move
                              it to the bottom”
Bad photometic condition


                            “Change the pears to
                           apples with oil painting
                            style” / “Change the
                            pears to gourds with
                              oil painting style”


                           “Change the cat to the
                            tiger then move it to
                            the right of the dog”
Occluded objects


                           “Change the lychees to
                           the Cherries then move
                            one cherry to the top
                                of the apples”


Figure 19: Failure cases. Current DVP might get unsatisfied results when the input image is in poor
photometric conditions or contains occluded objects.


                                                  25
