Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A MICABLE P ERTURBATIONS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Machine learning based classifiers have achieved incredible success in a variety
         of sectors such as college admissions, hiring and banking. However their ability
         to make classifications has not been fully exploited to understand how to improve
         undesirable classifications. We propose a new framework for finding the most
         efficient changes that could be made in the real world to achieve a more favor-
         able classification, and term these changes amicable perturbations. We present a
         principled methodology for creating amicable perturbations and demonstrate their
         effectiveness on data sets from a variety of fields. Amicable perturbations dif-
         fer from counterfactuals in that they are better suited to balance the effort-reward
         trade-off and lead to the most efficient plan of action. Unlike adversarial exam-
         ples, which fool a classifier into making false prediction, amicable perturbations
         are intended to affect the true class of the data point. To this end, we develop a
         novel method for verifying that amicable perturbations change the true class prob-
         abilities. We also compare our results to those achieved by previous methods such
         as counterfactuals and adversarial attacks.


1   I NTRODUCTION

The astounding accuracy of modern machine learning (ML) has lead to its widespread adoption in
an increasing number of fields such as credit lending (Leo et al., 2019), college admissions (Mar-
tinez Neda et al., 2021), and healthcare (Sauer et al., 2022). When one of these classifiers returns
an undesirable classification, however, it can leave users feeling unsatisfied and powerless. We pro-
pose a new framework to exploit the insight gained from these classifiers to efficiently change an
undesirable classification. Consider a classifier that determines the credit risk associated with a loan
application that a bank could use to determine to whom they should offer a loan. These classifiersвҖҷ
understanding of what makes an individual a good or bad credit risk could also be used to find the
changes an individual should make to improve their credit worthiness, after their application is re-
jected. The useful actions may be obvious: pay down existing debts, increasing income and money
in saving, etc., but an amicable perturbation could suggest the precise combination of these changes
that would reach a specific goal (such as less than 10% chance of default) most efficiently, for exam-
ple changes that can be made in the least amount of time. We call these classifier informed changes
amicable perturbations. We present a few more illustrative applications of amicable perturbations:
(a) If a classifier gives low odds of survival to a patient in an understaffed hospital, then an amicable
perturbation could suggest the course of treatment that would double the patients odds of survival
while requiring the least staff hours. (b) When an ML classifier decides not to pass a job applicantвҖҷs
resume on to an employer, an amicable perturbation could suggest the skills the applicant could
acquire in the least amount of time that would lead to a high likelihood of receiving an interview
request. (c) If an ML classifier has been trained to predict at which price range a product will sell,
an amicable perturbation could suggest the cheapest modifications to a product that would bring it
into a more premium price range and enhance marketability.
Overview of Amicable Perturbations and Contributions. Our framework consist of a) a concept
of real world feasibility of a change through the notion of an actionable set (i.e., xМғAP вҲҲ A(x)); b)
a measure of the effort/cost required to make a change (denoted by dX (x, xМғAP )); c) the goal of the
change, denoted by a target set of probability distributions T ; and d) a measure of how close the true
class probabilities yМғ of xМғAP comes to achieving the desired goal through the notion of statistical
distance to the target set, dY (yМғ, T ). Generating amicable perturbations can then be formulated as
minimizing a weighted sum of the statistical distance to the target set and the effort/cost measure,


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: a) Illustration of the framework for creating amicable perturbations. b) Example of the
original input and corresponding Amicable Perturbation on German Credit data set.

                                             Amicable           Counterfactuals     Adversarial
                                         Perturbations (AP)         (CF)           Attacks (AA)
         Intended to give advice                 !                     !                 Г—
       Verifies real world efficacy              !                     Г—                 Г—
     Flexible definition of final goal           !                     Г—                 Г—
     Designed for optimal efficiency             !                     Г—                 !

     Table 1: Comparison of amicable perturbations to counterfactuals and adversarial attacks.
subject to the constraint that the change xМғAP is actionable. To ensure that an amicable perturbation
does not behave like an adversarial attack (affecting the classifierвҖҷs decision but not the true class
probabilities) we propose a novel verification procedure. We take advantage of the fact that we have
access to the original data point and the modified point (never the case in adversarial settings). This
allows us to use a verifier function V that takes in two data points simultaneously. We use the value
of V (x, xМғAP ) to determine whether the changes are likely to produce a truly different outcome. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of this procedure on data sets from a variety of fields.
Distinction from Adversarial Examples & Counterfactuals Previous work on modifying an in-
put x to change its classification can be grouped into two main categories. 1) Adversarial attacks
xМғAA are small perturbations which also seek to change the classification of an input, but they are
intended to вҖңfoolвҖқ the classifier without changing the true class of the data point (Szegedy et al.,
2013; Goodfellow et al., 2015; Madry et al., 2019; Carlini & Wagner, 2017b). 2) A Counterfactual
for an input x is a similar input xМғCF which leads to a different classification. Counterfactuals were
originally proposed as a way to explain the decisions of a black-box classifier (Wachter et al., 2017;
Dhurandhar et al., 2018; Guidotti et al., 2018; Van Looveren & Klaise, 2021). Many works have
repurposed counterfactuals to also give advice on changing an unfavorable outcome (Mothilal et al.,
2020; Ustun et al., 2019; Poyiadzi et al., 2020; Karimi et al., 2021) sometimes using different (but
highly related) terms such as recourse or inverse classification. In contrast to adversarial attacks and
counterfactuals, amicable perturbations xМғAP have the express purpose of changing real world out-
comes (true class probabilities). Consider an individual turned down for a loan: a counterfactualвҖҷs
purpose is to get the individual approved by the classifier, but an amicable perturbationвҖҷs purpose is
to help the individual improve their actual odds of paying off the loan. This is significant because
counterfactuals are created with similar methods as adversarial attacks (Pawelczyk et al., 2022),
which are known to вҖңfoolвҖқ classifiers. Our objective is shared by KoМҲnig et al. (2023), but we also in-
troduce flexible goals and a cost reward-framework more conducive to this task. While KoМҲnig et al.
(2023) ensure trustworthiness against non-causal correlations through the use of Structural Causal
Models (SCMs), we provide trustworthiness against classifier weakness through the introduction of
a verification procedure. For more information on adversarial attacks and counterfactuals we direct
the reader to surveys Akhtar & Mian (2018) and Guidotti (2022). Table 1 highlights key distinctions
and similarities between amicable perturbations, counterfactuals and adversarial attacks.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2   A MICABLE P ERTURBATIONS
Problem Setting and Goals: Suppose there is an unknown distribution (x, C) вҲј D. Here x
is a member of the input space X вҠӮ Rm and C вҲҲ {1, ..., k} is the class of x. We define the
class probabilities y := (P(C = 1|x), ..., P(C = k|x)). We let Y denote the k-simplex and use a
classifier M : X вҶ’ Y to estimate the y corresponding to an input x. Let CМғ and yМғ be the class and
class probabilities of xМғ. Our goal in designing an amicable perturbation is: Given an input x with an
undesirable classification M (x), find the most efficient real world actions to create a modified input
xМғ such that the corresponding true probabilities yМғ (and not just M (xМғ)) are more desirable.
Real World Actionability: Amicable perturbations should only suggest modifications that are fea-
sible in the real world (e.g., not decreasing an individualвҖҷs age). To this end, we introduce: the
Actionable Set A(x) of a data point x is the set of all perturbations of x that are feasible in the
real world. For example, if X represents loan applications with x1 the age of the applicant, x2 the
applicantвҖҷs credit score, x3 the amount of credit and x4 the loan duration, and the applicant must
obtain a loan quickly we would use A(x) = {xМғ вҲҲ X |xМғ1 = x1 , xМғ2 = x2 }, i.e. the applicant can
change the size and duration of the loan they request, but not their age or credit score. Alternatively,
if the applicant can wait for a longer time to get the loan, we could define the actionable set as
A(x) = {xМғ вҲҲ X |xМғ1 вүҘ x1 }, i.e. allowing flexibility to change the credit score over time. We note
that the actionable set is dependent on both the specific data point, as well as the underlying context.
Efficiency: The definition of the most efficient change depends on the context of the problem and
could involve a well defined value such as вҖңcost in dollarsвҖқ or more nebulous value such as вҖңamount
of effort required.вҖқ We characterize this value with a function dX : X Г— X вҶ’ R, where dX (x, xМғ)
is the cost of changing x to xМғ. For example, if x represents a resume and xМғ is a modified resume,
then dX (x, xМғ) could represent the time it would take to acquire the attributes listed on resume xМғ, but
not on x. We note this function may not be a true distance measure. For example, if dX represents
the difference in financial cost between two courses of medical treatment, then dX (x, xМғ) should be
negative when xМғ is more affordable than x. This function (and the actionable set) may need to be
designed with the help of a subject matter expert.
Desirability: We now define what we mean by a desirable outcomeвҖ”the goal of an amicable per-
turbation. The Target Set T is the set of all elements of Y that would be an acceptable result of an
amicable perturbation. If we wish to belong to a desirable class w with probability no less than
p, the target set would have the form T = {z вҲҲ Y|zw вүҘ p}. If our goal is rather to avoid some
undesirable class u, T could be of the form T = {z вҲҲ Y|zu вүӨ q} for a fixed q. More generally,
suppose we wish to belong to a set of desirable classes W with probability at least p and we wish to
belong to a set of undesirable classes U with probability no greater than q. Then T may be written
                                    (                               )
                                              X           X
                              T = zвҲҲY             zi вүҘ p,     zi вүӨ q .                           (1)
                                              iвҲҲW          iвҲҲU

We next quantify how close an amicable perturbation xМғ comes to its goal in a principled manner.
To do this, we first choose a measure of statistical distance D(yМғ||z) (such as Kullback-Leibler (KL)
Divergence). We then denote dY (yМғ, T ) as the distance of yМғ to the target set T , defined as follows:
                                      dY (yМғ, T ) = min D(yМғ||z).                                    (2)
                                                    zвҲҲT

We next formally define amicable perturbations. Let Пө represent budget вҖ”the amount of work we
are willing to perform, and Оҙ represent tolerance вҖ”how close the final result is to our target set T .

Definition 1 ((Пө, Оҙ)-Amicable Perturbation) xМғ is an (Пө, Оҙ)-amicable perturbation for x and T if

      1. dX (x, xМғ) вүӨ Пө
      2. dY (yМғ, T ) вүӨ Оҙ
      3. xМғ вҲҲ A(x).

Real-world Verifiability of Amicable Perturbations: Note that amicable perturbations are defined
with respect to the true class probabilities yМғ because amicable perturbations should have an effect
in the real world. Notwithstanding, yМғ is unknown and we must use M (xМғ) to create our amicable


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


perturbations (more details in Section 3), which introduces the risk that we might produce an xМғ that
has the desired effect on M (xМғ) but not yМғ (like an adversarial example). Ilyas et al. (2019) suggest
that this occurs because M learns correlations that are found in the training data, {x(j) , C (j) }nj=1 , but
do not generalize outside the training data. Verifying xМғ is similar to detecting adversarial examples
which has been the object of significant research (Yang et al., 2020; Roth et al., 2019; Fidel et al.,
2020; Carlini & Wagner, 2017a) with no satisfactory solution. Fortunately, we have an important
advantage over detecting adversarial examples: we know the original data point x and exactly how
it was modified, i.e., xМғ. To capitalize on this knowledge, we propose a novel verification procedure
using a classifier V : X Г— X вҶ’ [0, 1] which compares two inputs simultaneously and predicts the
probability of the inputs belonging to the same class: the value of V (x, xМғ) estimates P(C = CМғ|x, xМғ).
We create V using the same structure as M (only changing the dimension of the input and output)
and training on the new set of difference training data {(x(i) , x(j) ), z (i,j) }1вүӨi,jвүӨn , where z (i,j) =
1[C (i) = C (j) ]. Because V is trained on a fundamentally different classification problem than M
it will learn different features and will not be affected by the same non-generalizable correlations
                                                                               Pk
as M . We can also estimate P(C = CМғ|x, xМғ) using M by calculating i=1 Mi (x)Mi (xМғ). If xМғ
                                       Pk
acts adversarially we would expect i=1 Mi (x)Mi (xМғ) to be very small while V (x, xМғ) is large. If
                                                                    Pk
xМғ is not adversarial we would expect similar values from both i=1 Mi (x)Mi (xМғ) and V (x, xМғ).
Accordingly we use the discrepancy between these two estimates:
                                                       Xk
                               вҲҶ(x, xМғ) = V (x, xМғ) вҲ’      Mi (x)Mi (xМғ)                                  (3)
                                                           i=1
to verify that an amicable perturbation xМғ can be trusted to have the anticipated result in the real world.
Specifically, if вҲҶ(x, xМғ) < Оі, then we accept xМғ as a verified amicable perturbation; otherwise, we
reject. In Section 3, we describe how to select the threshold Оі.
Relation to Previous Work: Previous work on modifying an input to change its classification has
focused on counterfactuals and adversarial attacks. A counterfactual xМғCF to an input x is a similar
input that results in a different classification. Wachter et al. (2017) suggested using counterfactuals
to explain the logic an ML classifier, and subsequent works (Mothilal et al., 2020; Ustun et al.,
2019; Poyiadzi et al., 2020; Karimi et al., 2021) suggested making counterfactuals actionable by
only allowing changes that could be made in the real world, that is xМғCF вҲҲ A(x). Counterfactuals
are well suited to explaining a classifiers decisions, but amicable perturbations have several key
advantages for providing advice to change the real world. First, amicable perturbations are more
precise and flexible in how their goals are defined. In contrast, counterfactuals focus only on the
final classification, and a change that leads to only a 51% chance of the desired result is a valid
counterfactual. Secondly, counterfactuals typically minimize ||x вҲ’ xМғCF || for an в„“p norm which
fails represent the real world costs of a change. Alternatively, amicable perturbations minimize
real world cost which (in conjunction with the principled measure of distance to a target) leads to
optimal advice (see examples in Section 4). Finally, amicable perturbationвҖҷs verification procedure
helps ensure that changes will have the intended effect on the real world.
Verification is essential because of the existence of adversarial attacks (Akhtar & Mian, 2018): algo-
rithms which create inputs xМғAA (called adversarial examples) that lead to misclassifications. Coun-
terfactuals and adversarial examples are both created by solving the some version of the problem
                             xМғCF , xМғAA = arg min loss(xМғ, w) + О»||xМғ, x||                        (4)
                                                  xМғ
where w is the desired class, О» is a tuning parameter, || В· || is a norm and a variety of loss functions
could be used. It is concerning that counterfactuals (which are often assumed to change the actual
class of and input), and adversarial examples (which fool a classifier) are created using such similar
methods. In fact, Pawelczyk et al. (2022) showed that many of the most common adversarial attacks
and counterfactual generation algorithms solve nearly identical versions of equation 4 and produce
very similar results. Wachter et al. (2017) noted this concern when introducing counterfactuals, but
they dismissed it because the adversarial attacks of the time 1) modified many more features than
counterfactuals and 2) were targeted almost exclusively at image data whereas counterfactuals were
proposed for use on tabular data. Since that time, Su et al. (2019) demonstrated that adversarial
attacks can be effective when changing a very small number of features (just one pixel), and several
works (Ballet et al., 2019; Mathov et al., 2020; Cartella et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2021) have shown
that adversarial examples exist even on tabular data sets. This implies verification is necessary to
achieve a result that can be trusted to change the true class probabilities.


                                                       4
                          this function and show that it has properties conducive to solving the optimization in S
                          our analysis, we set D(yМғ||z) to be an f -divergence: a broad class of measures incl
                          divergence, total-variation (TV) andвҮЈother
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024                     вҢҳ commonly used statistical distances. An f -
                                                     Pk         yМғi
                          is defined as D(yМғ||z) = i=1 zi f zi , where f is a convex function satisfying f (1
                                                                         f (0) = limx!0+ f (x). In Theorem 1 we find that dY has an easy to use differentiable c
                                                                         as long as f is twice differentiable (for instance, KL Divergence) and the target set T h
                                                                         general form (1).
                                         1
                                                                                                   Distance to the Target Set T
                                                                         Theorem 1 If D(yМғ||z) is an f -Divergence with twice differentiable f and T is of form (
Total Probability in Undesired Classes                                                     8
                                                                                        (A)>0
                                                                                           > вҮЈ         вҢҳ               вҮЈ         вҢҳ if SW p and SU пЈҝ q                    вҮЈ
                                                                                                  рқ’®                   1 вҲ’1 рқ’®
                                                                                           >
                                                                                           >pf (вҮЈ pp вҢҳ) + (1 вҲ’ p)f (вҮЈ 1 вҲ’       )
                                                 (D)                                       >
                                                                                           >      Sрқ’І                        Sрқ’І                                               q
                                                                                           > pf     W
                                                                                                          +  (1   p)f         W
                                                                                                                                     if S    <  p and S   пЈҝ   (1   S   )
                                                                                        (B)>                              1 pвҢҳ            W             U            W     1
                                                                                                                                                                        вҮЈ
                                                                                                                        1 Sp
                                                                                           <      SU
                                                                            dY (yМғ, T ) = qf вҮЈрқ’®qрқ’° вҢҳ+ (1 вҮЈq)fвҢҳ        1 вҲ’ 1рқ’®рқ’°q
                                                                                                                             U
                                                                                                                                     if SU > q and SW (1 SU ) 1 p
                                                                                                ( q ) + qf         ( 1вҲ’q )
                                                                                           >
                                                                                        (C)>
                                                                                           > qf SW + (1 вҲ’ q)fSU                                           вҮЈ      вҢҳ
                                                   (B)                 (C)
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                           >
                                                                                           > pf                                      if S U  > (1   S W )
                                         q                                                 >        p           вҮЈ q          вҢҳ                              1 вҮЈp    вҢҳ
                                                                                           > рқ’®                рқ’®рқ’° 1 SW SU           1 вҲ’ рқ’®рқ’І вҲ’ рқ’®рқ’°
                                                                                                ( p )        ( q )1 p q           ( 1вҲ’pвҲ’q )
                                                                                           >      рқ’І
                                                                                           :
                                                                                         (D) pf         +          + (1 вҲ’   вҲ’
                                                                                                                                                                 p
                                                                           (A)
                                                                                             +(1      p   qf
                                                                                                           q)f            p   q)f     and   S W <  (1   S U )   1 q
                                                                                        P                        P
                                             0                          pwhere SW1 = i2W yМғi and SU = i2U yМғi . Furthermore, dY (yМғ, T ) is continuously diffe
                                                 Total Probability in Desired Classes
                                                                         Theorem 1 shows that dY (yМғ, T ) takes on a piece-wise form, and Figure 3 illustrates how
                            of statistical
Figure 2: Illustration of the   (8) dividedistance
                                            the probability
                                                     based costspace.
                                                                  dY (yМғ,Despite   its piece-wise
                                                                          T ) derived  in Theorem form,
                                                                                                     1 as a this function is continuo
function of the total probability in desired
                            entiable          vs. entire
                                        over its   undesired  classes.
                                                         domain,        Although
                                                                    which          thesignificant
                                                                             will be    cost function takessolving the optimization
                                                                                                    when
different functional form(s)Step
                            in the1.four
                                      Theregions,
                                           proof itofisTheorem
                                                        continuously
                                                                  1 anddifferentiable
                                                                           additionalinresults
                                                                                         the entire space.
                                                                                                about   dY may be found in the Ap
3                                        G ENERATING A MICABLE P ERTURBATIONS
                                                                                                                                  5
Two Step Creation Method: We now present and discuss the general optimization framework for
creating amicable perturbations. Ideally, we would like to solve the following optimization problem:
arg minxМғвҲҲA(x) dY (yМғ, T )+О»dX (xМғ, x), where the scalar parameter О» balances the effort(Пө)-reward(Оҙ)
trade-off. Although solving this optimization would lead to a guaranteed and effective amicable
perturbation, the problem is that yМғ is unknown. To deal with this challenge, we instead propose the
following two-step procedure where: in Step 1, we treat M (xМғ) as a surrogate for yМғ, and in Step 2,
we use a verification algorithm to ensure that xМғ is not just fooling the classifier.
                         arg min dY (M (xМғ), T ) + О»dX (xМғ, x) вҶ’ Verify M (xМғ) вүҲ yМғ вҶ’ Amicable Perturbation (5)
                            xМғвҲҲA(x)                              |       {z       }
                         |              {z                   }          Step 2
                                                             Step 1

Properties of Statistical Distance dY to the Target: Understanding dY will be key to com-
pleting Step 1. In Section 2 we defined: dY (yМғ, T ) = minzвҲҲT D(yМғ||z); Here we will analyze
this function and show that it has properties conducive to solving the optimization in Step 1. For
our analysis, we set D(yМғ||z) to be an f -divergence: a broad class of measures including KL-
divergence, total-variation (TV) and other  commonly used statistical distances. An f -divergence
                           Pk         yМғi
is defined as D(yМғ||z) = i=1 zi f zi , where f is a convex function satisfying f (1) = 0 and
f (0) = limxвҶ’0+ f (x) (Polyanskiy & Wu, 2022). In Theorem 1 we find that dY has an easy to use
differentiable closed form as long as f is twice differentiable (for instance, KL Divergence) and the
target set T has the very general form (1).

Theorem 1 If D(yМғ||z) is an f -Divergence with twice differentiable f and T is of form (1), then
                пЈұ
                пЈҙ0
                пЈҙ
                пЈҙ
                пЈҙ                                if SW вүҘ p and SU вүӨ q
                пЈҙ
                пЈҙ    SW
                 pf p + (1 вҲ’ p)f 1вҲ’p      1вҲ’SW
                                                   if SW < p and SU вүӨ (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’p       q
                пЈҙ
                пЈҙ
                пЈІ  S
                                         1вҲ’SU

                                                                                         p

  dY (yМғ, T ) =  qf    U
                          +  (1 вҲ’  q)f             if SU  > q and  SW  вүҘ   (1 вҲ’ S U )          , (6)
                пЈҙ
                пЈҙ     q              1вҲ’q                                                1вҲ’q
                пЈҙ    SW
                пЈҙpf p + qf q       SU
                                                   if SU > (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’p   q
                пЈҙ
                пЈҙ
                пЈҙ
                пЈҙ
                пЈі+(1 вҲ’ p вҲ’ q)f     1вҲ’SW вҲ’SU
                                                    and  SW  <  (1 вҲ’ S U )    p
                                     1вҲ’pвҲ’q                                   1вҲ’q
              P                   P
where SW = iвҲҲW yМғi and SU = iвҲҲU yМғi . Furthermore, dY (yМғ, T ) is continuously differentiable.

Theorem 1 shows that dY (yМғ, T ) takes on a piece-wise form, and Figure 3 illustrates how the pieces
of (6) divide the probability space. Despite its piece-wise form, this function is continuously differ-
entiable over its entire domain, which will be significant when solving the optimization problem in
Step 1. The proof of Theorem 1 and additional results about dY may be found in the Appendix.


                                                                                              5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Generating Amicable Perturbations
Require: Classifiers M & V , point x, target family T , learning rate Оұ, verification-cut off Оі
  xМғ вҶҗ x
  while xМғ not converged do
       g вҶҗ вҲҮxМғ (dY (M (xМғ), T ) + О»dX (xМғ, x) + b(xМғ) + p(xМғ))
       gj вҶҗ 0 for all immutable features j.
       xМғ вҶҗ xМғ вҲ’ Оұg
  end while
  xМғ = cond(xМғ) (project onto the coherent space)
  Пө, Оҙ = dX (xМғ, x), dY (M (xМғ), T )
  if Пө and Оҙ requirements NOT met then
       Adjust О» (see text for explanation)
       Return to while loop
  end if
                  Pk
  if V (x, xМғ) вҲ’ i=1 Mi (x)Mi (xМғ) вүҘ Оі then
       Adjust problem parameters (see text for explanation)
       Restart algorithm
  end if
  return xМғ


Solving Step 1: We solve our optimization problem using gradient descent which requires us to use
differentiable models M and formulate dX in a differentiable manner (dY is differentiable according
to Theorem 1). We modify our gradient descent to address two challenges. (1) We must insure that
our solution is actionable: xМғ вҲҲ A(x). (2) Our solution xМғ must follow any formatting rules associated
with the data set (Boolean variables must be either 0 or 1, categorical features must respect one-hot
encoding, etc.). A perturbation that follows these formatting rules is called coherent. To solve these
two difficulties, we first assume A(x) = {xМғ|li вүӨ xМғi вүӨ ui , 1 вүӨ i вүӨ m} for some set of lower bounds
     i=1 and upper bounds {ui }i=1 . An attribute is immutable if li = ui . We ensure actionability by
{li }m                           m

setting all elements of the gradient corresponding to immutable features to zero and adding a large
penalty b(xМғ) term to the objective function which punishes points for leaving the actionable set. To
ensure coherence, we project the result of our gradient descent onto the coherent space by using a
function cond : Rm вҶ’ X which performs the appropriate value rounding to make an input coherent.
We found it useful to introduce a second penalty term p(xМғ) which requires that any one-hot encoded
features sum to 1. This ensures our answers never stray too far from a coherent point and improves
robustness. Details on b, p and cond may be found in the Appendix. In practice we also found it
useful to replace regular gradient descent with the ADAM algorithm (Kingma & Ba, 2014).
Solving Step 2: In Section 2, we discussed the necessity of verifying amicable per-
turbations and suggested that an amicable perturbation can be trusted if вҲҶ(x, xМғ) =
              Pk
 V (x, xМғ) вҲ’ i=1 Mi (x)Mi (xМғ) is smaller than a threshold Оі. To find the proper cut-off Оі, we first
decide on an acceptable risk of eliminating a truly effective amicable perturbation (we use 10%). To
find the Оі, corresponding to this risk, we calculate вҲҶ(x(i) , x(j) ) for a sufficiently large number of
pairs (x(i) , x(j) ) from the testing data such that C (i) Мё= C (j) . We can now pick Оі such that only
the desired percentage of вҲҶ(x(i) , x(j) ) values (e.g. 10%) are above Оі. The verification procedure is
now reduced to eliminating any amicable perturbation that results in вҲҶ(x, xМғ) > Оі.
Adjusting for Suitability and Verifiability: When creating amicable perturbations we will often
have a particular budget (Пө) or tolerance (Оҙ) bound we need to satisfy. To find a suitable amicable
perturbation we repeat Step 1 of our process adjusting О» until the desired budget or tolerance is met:
increasing О» to decrease Пө and decreasing О» to decrease Оҙ. It may also be appropriate to use a variety
of О» values and plot the Пө and Оҙ values of each resulting amicable perturbation (see Section 4). The
user may then select a perturbation they see as offering particularly good value. When an amicable
perturbation fails the verification step, there are a few recourses. (1) Sometimes it is sufficient to
decrease О», putting greater emphasis on reaching the target set. (2) вҖңShrinkвҖқ the target set (increase
the value of p and decrease the value of q) in order to force the algorithm to find more effective
changes. (3) Add a random perturbation to x in order to move the starting point away from the
adversarial example. We show the entire procedure in Algorithm 1.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Figure 3: Table containing details on data sets used for testing.
4   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
Experimental Set Up: We compare amicable perturbations, counterfactuals and adversarial attacks
on four data sets from different fields; additional data set details in Figure 3 and Section 5.3.1.
Adult Income (Becker & Kohavi, 1996): This data set contains demographic information on Amer-
icans labelled by whether they had a high income. The actionable set A(x) allows individuals to
increase their education, change jobs and adjust their weekly work hours. The cost function dX
sums the expected number of years to improve education, a one-year cost to change jobs and the
square of the change in hours worked (weighted so 3 hours is equal to a year spent on education).
Law School Success (Wightman, 1998): This data set contains information on law school students
labelled by whether they passed the BAR exam. In A(x) we allow changes to law school grades
(through more studying) and the region where the exam is taken. The cost function dX sums the
increase in grades and the physical distance travelled to take the BAR. Moving to an adjacent region
(e.g. Far West to North West) is weighted the same as increasing grades by one standard deviation.
Diabetes Prediction (for Disease Control & , CDC): The individuals in this data set are labelled by
whether they have diabetes. We define A(x) to allow changes in health habits, BMI, education and
income. We use a weighted 2-norm for dX to represent the relative difficulty of making changes.
For example, starting to get regular physical activity is weighted the same as dropping one BMI.
German Credit (Hofmann, 1994): This data set contains loan applications. In A(x), we allow for
changes to the loan duration and size and funds in the checking and savings accounts. We use dX to
measure the total difference in Deutsche Marks (DM) over all elements of the application.
Other Methods: We compare our results against counterfactuals created using the original method
proposed to create counterfactuals (Wachter et al., 2017) and the diverse counterfactuals (DICE)
method in (Mothilal et al., 2020), the most cited methods in the literature. We also compare amicable
perturbations against the Carlini & Wagner (2017b) в„“2 adversarial attack, one of the most well
known and effective adversarial attacks. The counterfactuals belong to the same actionable set as
the amicable perturbations, but the adversarial examples need not be actionable or even coherent.
Models: Gradient boosted tree algorithms Friedman (2001) are considered state of the art architec-
tures for tabular data classification Shwartz-Ziv & Armon (2021). Unfortunately, these models are
not differentiable and cannot be used with our framework. Instead we use neural networks which
we tuned until they provide accuracy on par with gradient boosted tree models on the same data set.
Details on our modelsвҖҷ structure and training may be found in the appendix.
Representative Amicable Perturbations and Trade-off between cost/desirability: We first ex-
amine two representative examples of how amicable perturbations behave differently than counter-
factuals for specific individuals. Figure 4 shows a plot of the Пө/Оҙ values of amicable perturbations
and counterfactuals for one individual in the Law School data set and one individual in the Adult
Income data set. We examine the results from the Law School data set: The amicable perturbation
labelled AP1 suggests only a mild (0.2 standard deviation) increase in grades and the relatively short
move from the Far West to the Great Lakes region resulting in a small 11% increase in the chance
of passing the BAR. On the other hand, AP2 suggest a larger increase in grades and a longer move


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Cost-Benefit plots of amicable perturbations and counterfactuals for an individually from
the Law School data set (a) and an individual in the Adult Income data set (b).
which results in a much larger 34% increase to the odds of success. Finally the counterfactual CF1
suggest an enormous increase in grades and massive cross country move to achieve 51% increase in
the odds of success. Turning our attention to the Adult Income example: AP3 suggests a relatively
simple increase in education to the masters level resulting in a 20% increase to the odds of a high
income. Alternatively, AP4 achieves an 71% increase by suggesting far more changes including
a professional degree and becoming self-employed. The counterfactual CF2 does not suggest be-
coming self-employed and produces a smaller 67% increase in the odds of high income despite also
suggesting a professional degree and a drastic 16 hour increase in the hours worked per week.
These examples illustrates two trends: 1) Amicable perturbations offer both low-cost/low-reward
(large-Оҙ/small-Пө) and high-cost/high-reward options, whereas counterfactual methods Wachter et al.
(2017); Mothilal et al. (2020) only offer high-cost options. This is because amicable perturbations
are defined by distance to the target set, but counterfactuals are defined as belonging to the desirable
class. That rules out any advice that doesnвҖҷt result in the desirable class being the most likely class.
2) Counterfactuals are prone to suggesting very high-cost outliers. This has two main causes: (a)
The в„“1 norm used to create the counterfactuals does not accurately represent real world effort. For
example this norm considers any move in region to cost the same regardless of actual distance. (b)
Because counterfactuals do not use a target set, they are prone to вҖңovershootingвҖқ the desired goal.
For example CF1 resulted in a 95% chance of passing the BAR when our goal was only 85%.
Comparison of Amicable Perturbations vs. Other Approaches We now compare amicable per-
turbations, counterfactuals Wachter et al. (2017); Mothilal et al. (2020) and CW attacks Carlini &
Wagner (2017b) over the entire data sets. In Figure 5: Each bar chart refers to a particular data set
and desired distance Оҙ to the target set T . Each bar shows the percentage of individuals that a method
was able to move inside the goal Оҙ at a variety of costs Пө. (Bar charts for all data sets may be found
in the Appendix.) The table summarizes this information for all data sets with the upper (red) value
in each cell representing the data before the verification procedure and the lower (green) value the
success rate after the verification procedure. Consider the bar chart on the top middle which refers
to the German Credit data and a goal of Оҙ = 0.5 from the target (the same information as the last
three columns of the table). At a Пө = 0 Deutsche Marks (DM) cost, amicable perturbations are able
to move 73% of individuals within the goal range by closing empty accounts. Counterfactuals do
not match this success until the cost Пө = 7, 000DM, and CW attacks never achieve more than a 31%
success rate. Amicable perturbations outperform counterfactuals in all of the test scenarios.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           Performance Comparison Over Entire Data Sets


                                                                        a)


                                                                    b)
         Percentage of Individuals Moved Within Оҙ=0.5 of Target (top (red) cells unverified, bottom (green) cells verified)
                                Adult Income            Law School Success           Diabetes Prediction             German Credit
                         (Cost in years of education) (Cost in Пғ grade increase) (Cost in BMI point change)   (Cost in Deutsche Marks DM)
          Cost/Оө             6         12       18       2          4       6       4         8        12         0        3,500    7,000
        Amicable           34%       76%       81%      78%       99% 100% 93%              95%       98%       73%        100%     100%
      Perturbations        31%       62%       67%     75%        99% 100% 56%              59%       62%       58%         81%      85%
     Counterfactual        7.8%       71%      78%      51%       95%      99%    14%       47%       64%        0%         62%      81%
  Wachter et al. (2017)     6%        44%      45%      48%       91%      95%    8.1%      29%       35%        0%         42%      58%
          DICE             17%        69%      78%      39%       93% 100% 21%              55%       71%        0%         46%      77%
  Mothilal et al (2020)    12%        49%      59%      38%       92%      98%    14%       37%       47%        0%         35%      58%
     Carlini Wagner        7.5%      7.5%      7.5%    90%        98%      99%     0%        0%        0%       3.8%        31%      31%
Carlini & Wagner (2017b)    0%        0%        0%      0%         0%      0%      0%        0%        0%        0%          0%       0%
                                                                        c)
Figure 5: a) & b) show average success rate for moving individuals within a variety of distances
(Оҙ) to the target set. The y-axis shows the percentage of individuals within the goal distance, and
the x-axis, represents different costs (Пө values). c) Summarizes success values for all data sets. The
upper (red) value for each row is the success rate before the verification procedure and the lower
(green) value is the success rate after verification with a 10% chance of rejecting valid examples.

Impact and Effectiveness of Verifier: The first important take away from the success rates after
verification is that the verifier was 100% effective at eliminating Carlini Wagner adversarial exam-
ples (visible in the bottom row of the table in Figure 5 c), implying that the verification method does
indeed eliminate inputs that fool the classifier. Importantly, the verification procedure also removes
a significant number of amicable perturbations and counterfactuals. Consider the second column of
Figure 5 c: Out of all amicable perturbations generated 14% appeared effective but where elimi-
nated by the verification procedure. Counterfactual methods fared even worse with 20% to 27% of
counterfactuals eliminated. This reinforces the necessity of a verification procedure.
Concluding Remarks & Future Work In this work, we proposed amicable perturbations which
find efficient actions to an input in order to change an undesirable classification. We discussed the
key distinctions from adversarial attacks and counterfactuals. Our proposed framework measures
the cost of actions, their real world feasibility, and how close the actions come to achieving a goal
in principled manner, allowing for truly optimal advice. We also developed a novel method for
verifying that amicable perturbations affect the true class probabilities and donвҖҷt just fool the classi-
fier. Finally, we showed a comprehensive evaluation on data sets from multiple fields demonstrating
their effectiveness. We finally note the universal applicability of amicable perturbations in generat-
ing вҖңfeasible adviceвҖқ whenever the decision of an ML classifier is undesirable. Our framework is
general enough for future work to incorporate additional desiderata. Of particular note is the concept
of causality. A(x) could be modified to include casual relationships in inputs (e.g. education cannot
be increased without increasing age) as suggested by Karimi et al. (2020). KoМҲnig et al. (2023) noted
that a classifier could pick up on correlations that have no causal relationship with the label which
could result in changes not having the anticipated effect. They suggested using Structural Causal
Models (SCMs) to ensure causal relationships which could also be incorporated into our verification
procedure. Ensuring causality through the use of longitudinal data on the actual effects of amicable
perturbations could also be incorporated into our framework and verification procedure.


                                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Naveed Akhtar and Ajmal Mian. Threat of adversarial attacks on deep learning in computer vision:
  A survey. Ieee Access, 6:14410вҖ“14430, 2018.
Vincent Ballet, Xavier Renard, Jonathan Aigrain, Thibault Laugel, Pascal Frossard, and Marcin
  Detyniecki. Imperceptible adversarial attacks on tabular data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03274,
  2019.
Barry Becker and Ronny Kohavi. Adult.          UCI Machine Learning Repository, 1996.        DOI:
  https://doi.org/10.24432/C5XW20.
Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Adversarial examples are not easily detected: Bypassing ten
  detection methods. AISec вҖҷ17, pp. 3вҖ“14, New York, NY, USA, 2017a. Association for Computing
  Machinery. ISBN 9781450352024. doi: 10.1145/3128572.3140444. URL https://doi.
  org/10.1145/3128572.3140444.
Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. In 2017
  IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 39вҖ“57, 2017b. doi: 10.1109/SP.2017.49.
Francesco Cartella, Orlando AnunciacМ§aМғo, Yuki Funabiki, Daisuke Yamaguchi, Toru Akishita, and
  Olivier Elshocht. Adversarial attacks for tabular data: Application to fraud detection and imbal-
  anced data. CoRR, abs/2101.08030, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.08030.
Amit Dhurandhar, Pin-Yu Chen, Ronny Luss, Chun-Chen Tu, Paishun Ting, Karthikeyan Shan-
 mugam, and Payel Das. Explanations based on the missing: Towards contrastive explanations
 with pertinent negatives. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Gil Fidel, Ron Bitton, and Asaf Shabtai. When explainability meets adversarial learning: Detecting
  adversarial examples using shap signatures. In 2020 International Joint Conference on Neural
  Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1вҖ“8, 2020. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN48605.2020.9207637.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Behavioral risk factor surveillance system sur-
  vey data (brfss), 2015. URL https://www.cdc.gov/brfss/index.html.
Jerome H. Friedman. Greedy function approximation: A gradient boosting machine. The Annals
   of Statistics, 29(5):1189вҖ“1232, 2001. ISSN 00905364. URL http://www.jstor.org/
   stable/2699986.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples, 2015.
Riccardo Guidotti. Counterfactual explanations and how to find them: literature review and bench-
  marking. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, pp. 1вҖ“55, 2022.
Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Salvatore Ruggieri, Dino Pedreschi, Franco Turini, and Fosca
  Giannotti. Local rule-based explanations of black box decision systems, 2018.
Hans Hofmann. Statlog (German Credit Data). UCI Machine Learning Repository, 1994. DOI:
  https://doi.org/10.24432/C5NC77.
Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Logan Engstrom, Brandon Tran, and Aleksander
  Madry. Adversarial examples are not bugs, they are features. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 32, 2019.
Amir-Hossein Karimi, Julius Von KuМҲgelgen, Bernhard SchoМҲlkopf, and Isabel Valera. Algorithmic
 recourse under imperfect causal knowledge: a probabilistic approach. Advances in neural infor-
 mation processing systems, 33:265вҖ“277, 2020.
Amir-Hossein Karimi, Bernhard SchoМҲlkopf, and Isabel Valera. Algorithmic recourse: from coun-
 terfactual explanations to interventions. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM conference on fairness,
 accountability, and transparency, pp. 353вҖ“362, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gunnar KoМҲnig, Timo Freiesleben, and Moritz Grosse-Wentrup. Improvement-focused causal re-
  course (icr). In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp.
  11847вҖ“11855, 2023.
Nishant Kumar, Siddharth Vimal, Kanishka Kayathwal, and Gaurav Dhama. Evolutionary adversar-
  ial attacks on payment systems. In 2021 20th IEEE International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing and Applications (ICMLA), pp. 813вҖ“818, 2021. doi: 10.1109/ICMLA52953.2021.00134.
Martin Leo, Suneel Sharma, and K. Maddulety. Machine learning in banking risk management:
 A literature review. Risks, 7(1), 2019. ISSN 2227-9091. doi: 10.3390/risks7010029. URL
 https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9091/7/1/29.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks, 2019.
Barbara Martinez Neda, Yue Zeng, and Sergio Gago-Masague. Using machine learning in ad-
  missions: Reducing human and algorithmic bias in the selection process. In Proceedings of
  the 52nd ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, SIGCSE вҖҷ21, pp. 1323,
  New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450380621. doi:
  10.1145/3408877.3439664. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3408877.3439664.
Yael Mathov, Eden Levy, Ziv Katzir, Asaf Shabtai, and Yuval Elovici. Not all datasets are born
  equal: On heterogeneous data and adversarial examples, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2010.03180.
Ramaravind K. Mothilal, Amit Sharma, and Chenhao Tan. Explaining machine learning clas-
  sifiers through diverse counterfactual explanations. New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association
  for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450369367. doi: 10.1145/3351095.3372850. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/3351095.3372850.
Martin Pawelczyk, Chirag Agarwal, Shalmali Joshi, Sohini Upadhyay, and Himabindu Lakkaraju.
 Exploring counterfactual explanations through the lens of adversarial examples: A theoretical
 and empirical analysis. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
 4574вҖ“4594. PMLR, 2022.
Yury Polyanskiy and Yihong Wu. Information theory: From coding to learning. Book draft, 2022.
Rafael Poyiadzi, Kacper Sokol, Raul Santos-Rodriguez, Tijl De Bie, and Peter Flach. Face: feasible
  and actionable counterfactual explanations. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI,
  Ethics, and Society, pp. 344вҖ“350, 2020.
Kevin Roth, Yannic Kilcher, and Thomas Hofmann. The odds are odd: A statistical test for detecting
  adversarial examples. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 5498вҖ“5507. PMLR, 09вҖ“15 Jun 2019. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v97/roth19a.html.
Christopher M Sauer, Tariq A Dam, Leo A Celi, Martin Faltys, Miguel AA de la Hoz, Lasith Ad-
  hikari, Kirsten A Ziesemer, Armand Girbes, Patrick J Thoral, and Paul Elbers. Systematic review
  and comparison of publicly available icu data setsвҖ”a decision guide for clinicians and data sci-
  entists. Critical care medicine, 50(6):e581вҖ“e588, 2022.
Ravid Shwartz-Ziv and Amitai Armon. Tabular data: Deep learning is not all you need, 2021.
Jiawei Su, Danilo Vasconcellos Vargas, and Kouichi Sakurai. One pixel attack for fooling deep
   neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 23(5):828вҖ“841, 2019.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199, 2013.
Berk Ustun, Alexander Spangher, and Yang Liu. Actionable recourse in linear classification. In Pro-
  ceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAT* вҖҷ19, pp. 10вҖ“19,
  New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450361255. doi:
  10.1145/3287560.3287566. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3287560.3287566.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Arnaud Van Looveren and Janis Klaise. Interpretable counterfactual explanations guided by proto-
  types. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases. Research Track: European
  Conference, ECML PKDD 2021, Bilbao, Spain, September 13вҖ“17, 2021, Proceedings, Part II 21,
  pp. 650вҖ“665. Springer, 2021.

Sandra Wachter, Brent Daniel Mittelstadt, and Chris Russell. Counterfactual explanations without
  opening the black box: Automated decisions and the gdpr. Cybersecurity, 2017.

Linda F Wightman. Lsac national longitudinal bar passage study. lsac research report series. 1998.

Puyudi Yang, Jianbo Chen, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Jane-Ling Wang, and Michael Jordan. Ml-loo: Detecting
  adversarial examples with feature attribution. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 34(04):6639вҖ“6647, Apr. 2020. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v34i04.6140. URL https://
  ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/6140.



5     A PPENDIX

5.1     A NALYSIS OF dY

5.1.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Recall that our target sets have the form
                                        (                                                  )
                                                  X                X
                               T =          zвҲҲY         zi вүҘ p ,            zi вүӨ q             ,
                                                  iвҲҲW              iвҲҲU


where either W or U could be empty. Also recall

                                    dY (yМғ, T ) = min Df (yМғ||z)
                                                    zвҲҲT
                                                          k
                                                          X
                                                                            yМғi
                                                  = min          zi f                 .                               (7)
                                                    zвҲҲT
                                                           i=1
                                                                            zi


Closed Form:
Our proof will be made easier by introducing notation N = (W вҲӘ U)C as the neutral classes that are
neither desirable nor undesirable. We will use the fact that 1 = SW + SU + SN to rewrite equation 6
as


              пЈұ
              пЈҙ0
              пЈҙ                                                                           if SW вүҘ p and SU вүӨ q
              пЈҙ
              пЈҙ
              пЈҙ
              пЈҙpf SpW + (1 вҲ’ p)f SU1вҲ’p  +SN
                                                                                          if SW < p and SU вүӨ (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’pq
              пЈҙ
              пЈҙ
              пЈІ  S
                                     SW +SN

                                                                                                                         p

dY (yМғ, T ) =   qf   U
                        + (1 вҲ’ q)f                                                        if SU > q and SW вүҘ (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q     ,
              пЈҙ
              пЈҙ      q            1вҲ’q
              пЈҙ
              пЈҙpf p + qf SqU + (1 вҲ’ p вҲ’ q)f 1вҲ’pвҲ’q
                    SW                          SN                                                           q
                                                                                          if SU > (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’p
              пЈҙ
              пЈҙ
              пЈҙ
              пЈҙ
              пЈі                                                                                                 p
                                                                                           and SW < (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q
               P                    P                        P
where SW =         iвҲҲW yМғi , SU =       iвҲҲU yМғi and SN =     iвҲҲN yМғi .

The case where yМғ вҲҲ T is obvious so we consider only the case where yМғ вҲҲ   / T , First note that f -
divergence Df (yМғ||z) is convex in z. Furthermore T is a convex set. Therefore any z satisfying the


                                                        12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


KKT conditions is a minimizer. The KKT conditions for this problem can be written as
                                                    вҲҮL(z) = вғ—0                                             (8)
                                                     k
                                                     X
                                                              zi = 1                                       (9)
                                                     i=1
                                                     X
                                               pвҲ’             zi вүӨ 0                                      (10)
                                                     iвҲҲW
                                               X
                                                     zi вҲ’ q вүӨ 0                                           (11)
                                               iвҲҲU
                                                     Вө1 , Вө2 вүҘ 0                                          (12)
                                                          !
                                                   X
                                         Вө1   pвҲ’         zi       =0                                      (13)
                                                   iвҲҲW
                                                              !
                                                   X
                                         Вө2   qвҲ’         zi       = 0,                                    (14)
                                                   iвҲҲU

where Lagrangian is defined by
                    k                k
                                                                              !                     !
                   X         yМғi    X                              X                     X
          L(z) =       zi f      +О»     zi + Вө1           pвҲ’             zi       + Вө2         zi вҲ’ q .
                   i=1
                             zi     i=1                            iвҲҲW                   iвҲҲU

Note that we have neglected to explicitly state the requirement that 0 вүӨ zi вүӨ 1 for all i. This is
because our eventual solution will satisfy these bounds anyways, and omitting these bounds will
drastically simplify our calculations. We now rewrite equation 8 as

                       yМғi      yМғi вҖІ yМғi
                   f         вҲ’ f            + О» вҲ’ Вө1 = 0                 iвҲҲW                 (15)
                       zi       zi     zi

                       yМғi      yМғi    yМғi
                   f         вҲ’ fвҖІ           + О» + Вө2 = 0                  iвҲҲU                (16)
                       zi       zi     zi

                             yМғi     yМғi    yМғi
                          f         вҲ’ fвҖІ         +О»=0                    iвҲҲN                 (17)
                             zi      zi     zi

We now propose a solution can be found where that the ratios yМғzii are constant in each of the sets W,
U, N . That is
                           zi = CW yМғi                                         iвҲҲW
                           zi = CU yМғi                                          iвҲҲU
                           zi = CN yМғi                                        i вҲҲ N.

In that case we can satisfy conditions equation 15, equation 16 and equation 17 (originally equa-
tion 8) by setting
                                     вҲ’1 вҖІ  вҲ’1         вҲ’1
                                О» = CN f (CN  ) вҲ’ f (CN  )
                                            вҲ’1      вҲ’1 вҖІ  вҲ’1
                               Вө1 = О» + f (CW  ) вҲ’ CW f (CW  )
                               Вө2 = вҲ’О» вҲ’ f (CUвҲ’1 ) + CUвҲ’1 f вҖІ (CUвҲ’1 ).

We can now reformulate equation 12 so that it is easier to analyze. We will first define h(x) =
xf вҖІ (x) вҲ’ f (x). Note that because f (x) is convex hвҖІ (x) = xf вҖІвҖІ (x) вүҘ 0 for all x вүҘ 0 and h(x) is
increasing. We can then rewrite our formulas for О», Вө1 and Вө2 .
                                                вҲ’1
                                         О» = h(CN  )
                                              вҲ’1        вҲ’1
                                      Вө1 = h(CN  ) вҲ’ h(CW  )
                                      Вө2 = h(CUвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ h(CN
                                                         вҲ’1
                                                            )


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then Вө1 вүҘ 0 becomes
                                               вҲ’1        вҲ’1
                                            h(CN  ) вүҘ h(CW  )
                                                вҲ’1    вҲ’1
                                               CN  вүҘ CW
                                               CN вүӨ CW ,
and Вө2 вүҘ 0 similarly becomes CN вүҘ CU . This means equation 12 is equivalent to
                                             CU вүӨ CN вүӨ CW                                  (18)

We must now find values of CW , CU and CN that satisfy equation 9 through equation 14. We will
consider 3 cases illustrated in figure 5.1.1.


                     Figure 6: The three cases visualized in probability space.

                                                        q
Case: 1 Suppose SW < p and SU вүӨ (1 вҲ’ SW )              1вҲ’p       .

Let CW = SpW and CU = CN = SU1вҲ’p      . This implies Вө2 = 0 which satisfies equation 14 and half
                                 P+SN
of equation 12. This also implies i=вҲҲW zi = p satisfying equation 10 and equation 13. We will
use the fact SU + SN = 1 вҲ’ SW in our proof of condition equation 11.
                             X        X
                                 zi =    CU yМғi
                              iвҲҲSU          iвҲҲSU
                                           1вҲ’p
                                        =         SU
                                          SU + SN

                                           1вҲ’p                 q
                                        вүӨ         (1 вҲ’ SW )
                                          SU + SN             1вҲ’p
                                        =q

This proves equation 11 is satisfied.
Because SW < p we have
                                  p      1вҲ’p      1вҲ’p
                          CW =      >1>        =         = CN
                                 SW     1 вҲ’ SW   SU + SN


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This implies Вө1 > 0 and satisfies the other half of equation 12.
We have now shown all the KKT conditions are satisfied and we have found a minimizer. We now
plug these values into equation 7 to find a closed form for the distance.

                                     k
                                     X
                                                       yМғi
                 dY (yМғ, T ) = min         zi f
                               zвҲҲT
                                     i=1
                                                       zi
                               X pyМғi
                                                X (1 вҲ’ p)yМғi   SU + SN
                                                   SW
                           =               f                 f   +
                                 SW                 pSU + SN    1вҲ’p
                             iвҲҲW                iвҲҲW
                                                 /

                                  SW                SU + SN
                           = pf        + (1 вҲ’ p)f             .
                                   p                  1вҲ’p



                                                                  p
Case: 2 Suppose SU > q and SW вүҘ (1 вҲ’ SU )                        1вҲ’q       .

Let CU = SqU and CW = CN = SW1вҲ’q    +SN . This implies Вө1 = 0 which satisfies equation 13 and half
                               P
of equation 12. We also have i=вҲҲU zi = q satisfying equation 11 and equation 14. We now prove
condition equation 10 is satisfied.
                               X               X
                                     zi =               CW yМғi
                             iвҲҲSW              iвҲҲSW
                                            1вҲ’q
                                         =         SW
                                           SW + SN

                                            1вҲ’q                 p
                                         вүҘ         (1 вҲ’ SU )
                                           SW + SN             1вҲ’q
                                         =p


Finally we prove CN вүҘ CU implying Вө2 вүҘ 0 which satisfies the other half of equation 12

                                  q      1вҲ’q      1вҲ’q
                          CU =      <1<        =         = CN
                                 SU     1 вҲ’ SU   SW + SN

Now that we have proven that this is a minimizer we will again plug solution into equation 7 to find
the distance value.

                                     k
                                     X

                                               yМғi
                 dY (yМғ, T ) = min      zi f
                               zвҲҲT
                                   i=1
                                               zi
                               X q yМғi   SU   X (1 вҲ’ q)yМғi   SW + SN
                             =         f           +              f
                                   SU        q           SW + SN      1вҲ’p
                               iвҲҲU                   iвҲҲU
                                                      /

                                    SU                    SW + SN
                             = qf          + (1 вҲ’ q)f               .
                                     q                     1вҲ’q



                                          q                p
Case: 3 Suppose SU > (1 вҲ’ SW )       and SW < (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q
                                         1вҲ’p                   .
                                                      P
Let CW = SpW , CU = SqU and CN = 1вҲ’pвҲ’q   in which case i=вҲҲW zi = p (satisfying equation 10
                 P                 SN
and equation 13), i=вҲҲU zi = q (satisfying equation 11 and equation 14). The choice of CN


                                                             15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ensures that equation 9 is satisfied:
                          M
                          X             X            X             X
                                zi =          zi +          zi +          zi
                          i=1          iвҲҲCW          iвҲҲCU          iвҲҲCN
                                        X                   X                  X
                                  =           CW yМғi +          CU yМғi +              CN yМғi
                                       iвҲҲCW              iвҲҲCU                  iвҲҲCN
                                  = CW SW + CU SU + CN SN
                                  =1

Finally we show that equation 12 is satisfied. Consider

                                                                               q
                                                 SU > (1 вҲ’ SW )
                                                                              1вҲ’p
                                      SU (1 вҲ’ p) > (1 вҲ’ SW )q
                                SU вҲ’ pSU вҲ’ qSU > q вҲ’ qSW вҲ’ qSU
                                  SU (1 вҲ’ p вҲ’ q) > qSN
                                       1вҲ’pвҲ’q        q
                                                 >
                                          SN       SU
                                             CN > CU
and

                                                                                p
                                                 SW < (1 вҲ’ SU )
                                                                               1вҲ’q
                                      SW (1 вҲ’ q) < (1 вҲ’ SU )p
                               SW вҲ’ qSW вҲ’ pSU < p вҲ’ pSW вҲ’ pSU
                                  SW (1 вҲ’ p вҲ’ q) < pSN
                                       1вҲ’pвҲ’q            p
                                                     <
                                           SN          SW
                                              CN < CW .
This proves equation 18 which is equivalent to equation 12 Plugging these minimizing values of z
into equation 7 yields
                       Xk
                                 yМғi
     dY (yМғ, T ) = min     zi f
                   zвҲҲT
                       i=1
                                 zi
                   X pyМғi              X                 X
                                SW           q yМғi     SU       (1 вҲ’ p вҲ’ q)yМғi       SN
                 =         f          +            f      +                    f
                       SW        p           SU         q            SN            1вҲ’pвҲ’q
                   iвҲҲW                   iвҲҲU                iвҲҲW

                        SW            SU                        SN
                 = pf          + qf         + (1 вҲ’ p вҲ’ q)f              .
                         p             q                      1вҲ’pвҲ’q

This proves our closed form solution.
We now show that this function is both continuous and continuously differentiable.
Continuity:
To prove continuity we need only show continuity the piece-wise boundaries which we will evaluate
one at a time.

Boundary 1: SW = p. The two functions that share this boundary are 0 and pf SpW + (1 вҲ’

p)f 1вҲ’S1вҲ’p
           W
               . Plugging the boundary into the latter function yields

                      SW                 1 вҲ’ SW               p                1вҲ’p
                 pf         + (1 вҲ’ p)f                = pf        + (1 вҲ’ p)f
                       p                   1вҲ’p                p                1вҲ’p
                                                      = 0.


                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The two functions are equal on the boundary and the boundary is continuous.

Boundary 2: SU = q. The two functions that share this boundary are 0 and qf                       SU
                                                                                                   q       + (1 вҲ’

q)f 1вҲ’S
     1вҲ’q
        U
            . Plugging the boundary into the latter function yields

                         SU                        1 вҲ’ SU             q               1вҲ’q
                qf                + (1 вҲ’ q)f                    = qf     + (1 вҲ’ q)f
                          q                         1вҲ’q               q               1вҲ’q
                                                                = 0.

The two functions are equal on the boundary and the boundary is continuous.

                                   q
Boundary 3: SU = (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’p          . The two functions that share this boundary are pf SpW +

                              SW           SU                     SN
(1 вҲ’ p)f 1вҲ’S 1вҲ’p
                W
                     and pf    p   + qf     q   + (1 вҲ’ p вҲ’ q)f   1вҲ’pвҲ’q . Plugging the boundary into
the latter function yields

      SW             SU                       1 вҲ’ S W вҲ’ SU            SW                  1 вҲ’ SW
pf           + qf          + (1 вҲ’ p вҲ’ q)f                      =pf           + (1 вҲ’ p)f            .
        p             q                         1вҲ’pвҲ’q                  p                   1вҲ’p

The two functions are equal on the boundary and the boundary is continuous.

                                   p
Boundary 4: SW = (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q          . The two functions that share this boundary are qf SqU +

                             SW           SU                      SN
(1 вҲ’ q)f 1вҲ’S 1вҲ’q
                U
                    and pf    p   +  qf    q   + (1 вҲ’ p вҲ’ q)f   1вҲ’pвҲ’q . Plugging the boundary into
the latter function yields

      SU             SW                       1 вҲ’ SU вҲ’ SW             SU                  1 вҲ’ SU
 qf          + pf          + (1 вҲ’ p вҲ’ q)f                     =qf           + (1 вҲ’ q)f             .
        q             p                         1вҲ’pвҲ’q                  q                   1вҲ’q

The two functions are equal on the boundary and the boundary is continuous.
We have now shown continuity on all boundaries and the function is continuous.
Differentiability:
Finally we show are function is continuously differentiable by showing all partial derivatives exist
and are continuous. We use the closed form equation equation 6 found in the body of the paper
(which is equivalent to the one found in the beginning of the proof) that suppresses SN . This makes
it easier to differentiate with respect to yМғi , i вҲҲ W вҲӘ U.
               пЈұ
               пЈҙ
               пЈҙ 0                                                     if SW вүҘ p and SU вүӨ q
               пЈҙ
               пЈҙ
               пЈҙ
               пЈҙ      S
                 pf pW + (1 вҲ’ p)f 1вҲ’pW     1вҲ’S
                                                                       if SW < p and SU вүӨ (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’p  q
               пЈҙ
               пЈҙ
               пЈІ  S
                                          1вҲ’SU

                                                                                                        p

dY (yМғ, T ) = qf   q  + (1 вҲ’ q)f  1вҲ’q
                        U
                                                                       if SU > q and SW вүҘ (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q
               пЈҙ
               пЈҙ
               пЈҙpf SW + qf SU + (1 вҲ’ p вҲ’ q)f 1вҲ’SW вҲ’SU                                        q
               пЈҙ
               пЈҙ                                                       if SU > (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’p
               пЈҙ
               пЈҙ
                        p           q                       1вҲ’pвҲ’q
               пЈҙ
               пЈі                                                                                p
                                                                        and SW < (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q

We now take the derivative with respect to a desirable class (i вҲҲ W).

                        пЈұ
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ 0                                         if SW > p and SU < q
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ f вҖІ SW
                                   вҲ’ f вҖІ 1вҲ’SW
                                                                    if SW < p and SU < (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’pq
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ      p          1вҲ’p
       вҲӮ                пЈІ                                                                          p
           dY (yМғ, T ) = 0                                          if SU > q and SW > (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q
   вҲӮ yМғiвҲҲW              пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ f вҖІ SW
                                   вҲ’ f вҖІ 1вҲ’SW вҲ’SU                                      q
                                                                    if SU > (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’p
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ      p           1вҲ’pвҲ’q
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈҙ
                        пЈі                                                                 p
                                                                     and SW < (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q


                                                            17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now we need only ensure all pieces agree on the boundaries to shoe that the derivative exists and is
continuous.

Boundary 1: SW = p. The two functions that share this boundary are 0 and f вҖІ SpW вҲ’f вҖІ 1вҲ’S   1вҲ’p
                                                                                               W
                                                                                                   .
Plugging the boundary into the latter function yields

                      вҖІ   SW          вҖІ   1 вҲ’ SW       вҖІ  p        вҖІ   1вҲ’p
                    f            вҲ’f                 =f        вҲ’f
                           p               1вҲ’p            p            1вҲ’p
                                                       вҖІ          вҖІ
                                                    = f (1) + f (1 )
                                                    = 0.
Then setting the derivative at the boundary to 0 makes the derivative on this boundary continuous.
Boundary 2: SU = q. The two functions that share this boundary are both 0, and setting the
derivative at the boundary to 0 makes the derivative on this boundary continuous.

                                    q
Boundary 3: SU = (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’p           . The two functions that share this boundary are f вҖІ SpW вҲ’

                    вҖІ SW        вҖІ 1вҲ’SW вҲ’SU
f вҖІ 1вҲ’S
     1вҲ’p
         W
              and f     p   вҲ’ f       1вҲ’pвҲ’q     . Plugging the boundary into the latter function yields

                       SW            1 вҲ’ SW вҲ’ SU              SW            1 вҲ’ SW
                  fвҖІ         вҲ’ fвҖІ                      =f вҖІ         вҲ’ fвҖІ
                        p               1вҲ’pвҲ’q                  p             1вҲ’p

Then setting the derivative at the boundary to f вҖІ SpW вҲ’ f вҖІ 1вҲ’S  W
                                                                1вҲ’p    makes the derivative on this
boundary continuous.

                                      p
Boundary 4: SW = (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q           . The two functions that share this boundary are 0 and

f вҖІ SpW вҲ’ f вҖІ 1вҲ’S    W вҲ’SU
                   1вҲ’pвҲ’q      . We rewrite the boundary as SU = 1вҲ’q p SW + 1 and plug it into the
latter function.
                                                             пЈ«                           пЈ¶
                                                               1 вҲ’ S   вҲ’   1вҲ’q
                                                                               S   +  1
             SW           1 вҲ’ SW вҲ’ S U            SW                 W      p   W
        fвҖІ         вҲ’ fвҖІ                    =f вҖІ         вҲ’ fвҖІ пЈӯ                           пЈё
              p             1вҲ’pвҲ’q                   p                  1вҲ’pвҲ’q

                                            =0
Then setting the derivative at the boundary to 0 makes the derivative on this boundary continuous.
This yields the continuous partial derivative
                       пЈұ
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ 0                                if SW вүҘ p and SU вүӨ q
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ f вҖІ SpW вҲ’ f вҖІ 1вҲ’S      W
                                                          if SW < p and SU вүӨ (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’pq
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ                    1вҲ’p
      вҲӮ                пЈІ                                                                 p
          dY (yМғ, T ) = 0                                 if SU > q and SW вүҘ (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q     .
  вҲӮ yМғiвҲҲW              пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ                                                     q
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ f вҖІ SpW вҲ’ f вҖІ 1вҲ’S      W вҲ’SU
                                                          if SU > (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’p
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ
                                              1вҲ’pвҲ’q
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈі                                                        p
                                                           and SW < (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q
                                                                                              (19)
We now take the derivative with respect to a undesirable class (i вҲҲ U).

                         пЈұ
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ 0                              if SW > p and SU < q
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ 0                              if SW < p and SU < (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’pq
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ
        вҲӮ                пЈІ                                                               p
                             вҖІ SU     вҖІ 1вҲ’SU
            dY (yМғ, T ) = f   q   вҲ’ f   1вҲ’q               if SU > q and SW > (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q
    вҲӮ yМғiвҲҲU              пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ f вҖІ SU
                                  вҲ’ f вҖІ 1вҲ’SW вҲ’SU                             q
                                                          if SU > (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’p
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ      q         1вҲ’pвҲ’q
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈі                                                      p
                                                           and SW < (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now we need only ensure that there is agreement on the boundaries.
Boundary 1: SW = p. The two functions that share this boundary are both 0, and setting the
derivative at the boundary to 0 makes the derivative on this boundary continuous.

Boundary 2: SU = q. The two functions that share this boundary are both 0 and f вҖІ SqU вҲ’

f вҖІ 1вҲ’S
     1вҲ’q
         U
             . Plugging the boundary into the latter function yields

                                     вҖІ       SU            вҖІ       1 вҲ’ SU               q вҖІ   вҖІ   1вҲ’q
                                 f                    вҲ’f                          =f       вҲ’f
                                              q                     1вҲ’q                 q         1вҲ’q
                                                                                  = 0.
Then setting the derivative at the boundary to 0 makes the derivative on this boundary continuous.

                                       q
Boundary 3: SU = (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’p             . The two functions that share this boundary are 0 and

f вҖІ SqU вҲ’ f вҖІ 1вҲ’S   W вҲ’SU
                  1вҲ’pвҲ’q     . We rewrite the boundary as SW = 1 вҲ’ 1вҲ’p q SU and plug it into the latter
function.
                                                             пЈ«                           пЈ¶
                                                                1 вҲ’ SU вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ 1вҲ’p    SU
             S U           1 вҲ’  S W  вҲ’ S U         S U                            q
        fвҖІ         вҲ’ fвҖІ                      =f вҖІ       вҲ’ fвҖІ пЈӯ                            пЈё
              q               1вҲ’pвҲ’q                 q                   1вҲ’pвҲ’q

                                                                     =0

Then setting the derivative at the boundary to 0 makes the derivative on this boundary continuous.

                                    p
Boundary 4: SW = (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q          . The two functions that share this boundary are f вҖІ SqU вҲ’

                  вҖІ SU         вҖІ 1вҲ’SW вҲ’SU
f вҖІ 1вҲ’S
     1вҲ’q
        U
            and f     q   вҲ’  f      1вҲ’pвҲ’q     . Plugging the boundary into the latter function yields
                                                                                                     пЈ«                                   пЈ¶
                                                                                                         1 вҲ’ SU вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ SU )        p
                 SU                      1 вҲ’ S W вҲ’ SU                            SU                                               1вҲ’q
        fвҖІ                вҲ’ fвҖІ                                      =f вҖІ                  вҲ’ fвҖІ пЈӯ                                        пЈё
                  q                        1вҲ’pвҲ’q                                  q                               1вҲ’pвҲ’q

                                                                         вҖІ       SU              вҖІ   1 вҲ’ SU
                                                                    =f                    вҲ’f
                                                                                  q                   1вҲ’q

                                                                                  SU                      1вҲ’SU
Then setting the derivative at the boundary to f вҖІ                                 q          вҲ’ fвҖІ         1вҲ’q   makes the derivative on this
boundary continuous.
This yields the continuous partial derivative
                         пЈұ
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ 0                                                                  if SW вүҘ p and SU вүӨ q
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ0                                                                   if SW < p and SU вүӨ (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’pq
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ
       вҲӮ                 пЈІ  S
                                                                                                                             p

                                         вҖІ 1вҲ’SU
           dY (yМғ, T ) =   f вҖІ   U
                                     вҲ’ f                                                      if SU > q and SW вүҘ (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q     .
   вҲӮ yМғiвҲҲU               пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ       q          1вҲ’q
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ f вҖІ SU
                                     вҲ’ f вҖІ 1вҲ’SW вҲ’SU                                                              q
                                                                                              if SU > (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’p
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ       q           1вҲ’pвҲ’q
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈі                                                                                          p
                                                                                               and SW < (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q
                                                                                                                                   (20)

5.1.2   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
The following lemma shows that dY exhibits desirable behavior for any f -divergence if we restrict
ourselves to the binary classification setting.

Lemma 1 In the binary classification environment, if T = {z вҲҲ Y|z1 вүҘ p}, then dY (yМғ, T ) is
decreasing (not necessarily strictly) in yМғ1 for D(yМғ||z) any f -divergence.


                                                                             19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We prove Lemma 1.
Recall dY (yМғ, T ) = minzвҲҲT Df (yМғ||z).        For binary probability distributions a and b, the f -
divergence has the simple form

                                                 b1                          1 вҲ’ b1
                          Df (b||a) = a1 f                + (1 вҲ’ a1 )f                            (21)
                                                 a1                          1 вҲ’ a1
for a convex function f with f (1) = 0. We show a relationship between this formula and a secant
line. To refer to the secant line of a function g(x) from point x = Оұ to x = ОІ evaluated at Оі, we will
use the notation Sg (Оұ, ОІ; Оі). When using this notation we will assume that Оұ вүӨ ОІ.
We assume a1 > b1 and show that Df (b||a) is equivalent to the secant line of f (x) from x = ba11
to 1вҲ’b                        b1        1вҲ’b1
   1вҲ’a1 evaluated at 1. (Note a1 < 1 < 1вҲ’a1 .) We show this simply using the point slope form.
      1


                                                  f 1вҲ’b1 вҲ’ f b1
               b1 1 вҲ’ b1                 1 вҲ’ b1       1вҲ’a1         a1        1 вҲ’ b1
         Sf       ,        ;x = x вҲ’                    1вҲ’b1     b1
                                                                       + f
               a1 1 вҲ’ a1                 1 вҲ’ a1        1вҲ’a1 вҲ’ a1
                                                                              1 вҲ’ a1

                                                      1вҲ’b1         b1
               b1 1 вҲ’ b1                1 вҲ’ b1 f 1вҲ’a1 вҲ’ f a1                 1 вҲ’ b1
          Sf      ,        ;1 = 1 вҲ’                    1вҲ’b1    b1
                                                                      +f
               a1 1 вҲ’ a1                1 вҲ’ a1         1вҲ’a1 вҲ’ a1
                                                                             1 вҲ’ a1

                                        b1                   1 вҲ’ b1
                                = a1 f        + (1 вҲ’ a1 )f
                                         a1                  1 вҲ’ a1
                                = Df (b||a)

Now that Df (b||a) is related to a secant line we prove a few facts about secant lines of convex
functions. If g is convex, then Sg (Оұ, ОІ; Оі) is decreasing in Оұ and increasing in ОІ whenever Оұ < Оі <
ОІ. Recall that if g is convex, then by definition for any v1 < v2 < v3 , we have
                         g(v2 ) вҲ’ g(v1 )   g(v3 ) вҲ’ g(v1 )   g(v3 ) вҲ’ g(v2 )
                                         вүӨ                 вүӨ                 .                    (22)
                            v2 вҲ’ v1           v3 вҲ’ v1           v3 вҲ’ v2
Then for any ОІ < ОІМғ we have
                                  Sg (Оұ, ОІ; Оі) = (Оі вҲ’ Оұ)m + g(Оұ)                                  (23)
                                  Sg (Оұ, ОІМғ; Оі) = (Оі вҲ’ Оұ)mМғ + g(Оұ)                                (24)
for mМғ вүҘ m. It follows that for any Оі вүҘ Оұ
                                       Sg (Оұ, ОІ; x) вүӨ Sg (Оұ, ОІМғ; x),                              (25)
and Sg (Оұ, ОІ; x) is increasing in ОІ.
A similar argument shows that Sg (Оұ, ОІ; x) is decreasing in Оұ when Оі вүӨ ОІ.
We will use these facts to analyze dY (yМғ, T ) = minzвҲҲT Df (yМғ||z). The f -divergence between iden-
tical distributions is zero, so we have dY (yМғ, T ) = 0 whenever yМғ1 вүҘ p. When yМғ1 < p we have
yМғ1          1вҲ’yМғ1
 z1 < 1 < 1вҲ’z1 and

                               dY (yМғ, T ) = min Df (yМғ||z)
                                             zвҲҲT

                                                      yМғ1 1 вҲ’ yМғ1
                                           = min Sf       ,       ;1 ,
                                             zвҲҲT       z1 1 вҲ’ z1
which is decreasing in yМғz11 and increasing in 1вҲ’yМғ
                                               1вҲ’z1 , so to achieve the minimum we use the smallest
                                                   1


possible z1 , i.e. z1 = p. We may now simplify
                                           (
                                            Sf yМғp1 , 1вҲ’yМғ
                                                       1вҲ’p
                                                          1
                                                            ; 1  if yМғ < p
                             dY (yМғ, T ) =                                 .
                                            0                    if yМғ вүҘ p
Note that this is continuous at yМғ = p because Sf (1, 1; 1) = f (1) = 0. With this closed form solution
for dY (yМғ, T ) we may finish the proof.


                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We have already shown that Sf yМғp1 , 1вҲ’yМғ 1вҲ’p
                                             1
                                               ; 1  is decreasing in yМғp1 and increasing in 1вҲ’yМғ
                                                                                             1вҲ’p , so in-
                                                                                                1


creasing yМғ1 will decrease Sf yМғp1 , 1вҲ’yМғ
                                      1вҲ’p ; 1 and dY (yМғ, T ) is decreasing in yМғ1 .
                                         1



We now present a corollary to Theorem 1 that shows explicitly that dY decreases with added proba-
bility to the desirable classes and increases with added probability to the undesirable classes.

Corollary 1 If T is of form 1 and f is twice differentiable, then dY (yМғ, T ) is decreasing in yМғi if
i вҲҲ W and is increasing if i вҲҲ U.

To prove Corollary 1, we need only show equation equation 6 is decreasing in yМғi for i вҲҲ W and
increasing in yМғi for i вҲҲ U, we need only prove that the partial derivative equation 19 is non-positive
and the partial derivative equation 20 is non-negative. We will rely heavily on the fact thatf вҖІ is
increasing because f is convex.
We start with equation 19:

                         пЈұ
                         пЈҙ0
                         пЈҙ                                  if SW вүҘ p and SU вүӨ q
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙf вҖІ SpW вҲ’ f вҖІ 1вҲ’S W
                                                            if SW < p and SU вүӨ (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’pq
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ               1вҲ’p
       вҲӮ                 пЈІ                                                                 p
           dY (yМғ, T ) =   0                                if SU > q and SW вүҘ (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q     .
   вҲӮ yМғiвҲҲW               пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙf вҖІ SpW вҲ’ f вҖІ 1вҲ’S W вҲ’SU                              q
                                                            if SU > (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’p
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ                1вҲ’pвҲ’q
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈҙ
                         пЈі                                                        p
                                                             and SW < (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q

Clearly the first and third cases are non-positive, so we proceed to the second case.
Because SW < p, we have SpW < 1 < 1вҲ’S
                                   1вҲ’p and
                                      W


                                             SW           1 вҲ’ SW
                                       fвҖІ          < fвҖІ
                                              p            1вҲ’p

                            SW          1 вҲ’  S W
                       fвҖІ        вҲ’ fвҖІ              < 0.
                             p            1вҲ’p

Next we prove the partial derivative is negative in the fourth case.

                                                                              p
                                                        SW < (1 вҲ’ SU )
                                                                             1вҲ’q
                                          SW вҲ’ qSW < p вҲ’ pSU
                                  SW вҲ’ qSW вҲ’ pSW < p вҲ’ pSU вҲ’ pSW
                                                 SW     1 вҲ’ SU вҲ’ SW
                                                      <
                                                   p       1вҲ’pвҲ’q

                                                SW           1 вҲ’ SU вҲ’ SW
                                           fвҖІ         < fвҖІ
                                                 p             1вҲ’pвҲ’q

                          SW          1 вҲ’ SU вҲ’ S W
                     fвҖІ        вҲ’ fвҖІ                   <0
                           p            1вҲ’pвҲ’q
This shows that equation 19 is non-positive and equation 6 is decreasing in yМғi for i вҲҲ W.
We now consider equation 20:
                       пЈұ
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ 0                                 if SW вүҘ p and SU вүӨ q
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ 0                                 if SW < p and SU вүӨ (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’pq
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ
      вҲӮ                пЈІ                                                                  p
                           вҖІ SU     вҖІ 1вҲ’SU
          dY (yМғ, T ) = f   q   вҲ’ f   1вҲ’q                  if SU > q and SW вүҘ (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q     .
  вҲӮ yМғiвҲҲU              пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ вҖІ SU
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ f      вҲ’ f вҖІ 1вҲ’SW вҲ’SU                                q
                                                           if SU > (1 вҲ’ SW ) 1вҲ’p
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ      q         1вҲ’pвҲ’q
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈҙ
                       пЈі                                                         p
                                                            and SW < (1 вҲ’ SU ) 1вҲ’q


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Clearly the first two cases are non-negative, so we consider the third case.
Because SU > q, we have SqU > 1 > 1вҲ’S
                                   1вҲ’q and
                                      U


                                             SU          1 вҲ’ SU
                                        fвҖІ        > fвҖІ
                                              q           1вҲ’q

                             SU          1 вҲ’ SU
                        fвҖІ        вҲ’ fвҖІ            > 0.
                              q           1вҲ’q

We can no prove the fourth case is positive.


                                                                              q
                                                        SU > (1 вҲ’ SW )
                                                                             1вҲ’p
                                        SU вҲ’ pSW > q вҲ’ qSW
                                 SU вҲ’ pSW вҲ’ qSU > q вҲ’ pSW вҲ’ qSU
                                                SU     1 вҲ’ S W вҲ’ SU
                                                     >
                                                  q       1вҲ’pвҲ’q

                                           вҖІ  S U       вҖІ   1 вҲ’ S W вҲ’ SU
                                         f           >f
                                               q              1вҲ’pвҲ’q

                         SU        1 вҲ’ S W вҲ’ SU
                     fвҖІ     вҲ’ fвҖІ                     >0
                          q          1вҲ’pвҲ’q

This shows that equation 20 is non-negative and equation 6 is increasing in yМғi for i вҲҲ U.

5.2     A LTERNATIVE V ERIFICATION P ROCEDURE

We developed a second method for using V to verify an amicable perturbation, however we found
it more difficult to work with and somewhat less effective and identifying adversarial examples so it
was removed from the main paper. Nonetheless, we present it here as an alternative method.
In this method we determine an expected value for V (x, xМғ) if M has classified xМғ correctly. We call
this expectation Оіadapt and reject xМғ when V (x, xМғ) < Оіadapt (V indicates that xМғ is less effective than
M ).
To find Оіadapt , we interpolate between two points where the expected value of V is known. First,
if dY (M (xМғ), T ) = dY (M (x), T ) (such as when x = xМғ) we expect no change in the distance to
the target set and Оіadapt = 0. Second, if dY (M (xМғ), T ) = 0 (implying M (xМғ)) вҲҲ T ) we expect
V (x, xМғ) > 0.5 because we assume x вҲҲ      / T . We then set Оіadapt = 0.5 + c for some confidence
parameter 0 < c < 0.5. (Higher values of c lead to more rejections and more confidence in the xМғ
which pass verification.) Interpolating between the two points yields the formula

                                                       ОҙY (M (xМғ), T )
                              Оіadapt = (0.5 + c) вҲ— 1 вҲ’                   .                   (26)
                                                       ОҙY (M (x), T )

We found that one disadvantage of this technique is you must keep track of the T used to create xМғ.
The verification technique used in the paper does not require us to remember this information past
creating xМғ.

5.3     A DDITIONAL I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In this section we give additional details on how we implemented our methods to create the experi-
mental results found in this paper.

5.3.1    DATA S ET AND C OST F UNCTION D ETAILS
Here we give additional description of each data set and the corresponding the cost functions dX
used in our experimetns. As noted in Section 3 we must ensure dX is differentiable. When dealing


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with categorical features costs are by nature discrete (and not differentiable). We show how we
were able to write these costs in a differentiable form. Suppose v вҲҲ Rв„“ is a one-hot encoding of
a categorical feature and define the transition cost matrix A such that Ai,j as the cost of changing
from category i to category j. Then zT AzМғ represents the costs of changing this categorical feature
and is differentiable in z.
Adult Income: (Becker & Kohavi, 1996) This widely used data set contains information from
the 1994 U.S. census, with individuals labelled by whether their annual income was over $50,000
(вҲј$100,000 in 2023 adjusted for inflation). We define our target set T as over 80% probability
high income. Our actionable set allows changes in job type, education and number of hours worked
with all other attributes immutable. The cost function dY includes the expected number of years to
improve education (e.g. two years to go from associateвҖҷs degree to bachelors degree), a one-year
cost to change employer type and the 2-norm of the change in hours worked per week (weighted so
3 hours per week is equivalent to a year spent on education). Here amicable perturbations suggest
the best way to improve an individuals odds of making a large income with the least time and effort.
Specifically dX is the sum cost from changes (1) hours worked per week (2) change in employment
type (3) change in education and (4) change in field of work.
                                                  2
The cost from a change in hours is given by вҲҶh
                                             10 where вҲҶh is the change in weekly hours worked.
This will mean 3 extra hours of work are approximately equivalent to one year of schooling.
The cost from a change in employer (the options are government, private, self-employed and other)
is always 1 (equivalent to a year spent on education).
The possible levels of education are (1) any schooling, (2) High School Degree, (3) Professional
Degree, (4) some college, (5) AssociateвҖҷs Degree, (6) Bachelors Degree, (7) MasterвҖҷs Degree, (8)
Doctorate Degree. The cost transition matrix associated with the level of education (as ordered
above) is
                                     пЈ®                               пЈ№
                                       0 2 10 3 4 6 8 11
                                     пЈҜL 0 8 1 2 4 6 9 пЈә
                                     пЈҜL L 0 L L L 2 5 пЈә
                                     пЈҜ                               пЈә
                                     пЈҜL L 7 0 1 3 5 8 пЈә
                        AEducation = пЈҜ
                                     пЈҜL L 6 L 0 2 4 7 пЈә ,
                                                                     пЈә                      (27)
                                     пЈҜ                               пЈә
                                     пЈҜL L 4 L L 0 2 5 пЈә
                                     пЈ°                               пЈ»
                                      L L 4 L L L 0 3
                                      L L 4 L L L L 0
where L is a large number meant to prevent suggestions that lead to a decrease in education, which
is impossible (we use L = 1, 000). These numbers represent the expected number of years required
to gain the specified degree (i.e. the cost of going from a high school degree to a bachelors degree
is A2,6 = 4).
Finally the options for fields of work are (1) Service, (2) Sales, (3) Blue-Collar (4) White Collar, (5)
Professional, (6) Other. The cost transition matrix associated with the level of education (as ordered
above) is                                      пЈ®                     пЈ№
                                                0 1 2 3 4 1
                                               пЈҜ1 0 1 2 3 1пЈә
                                               пЈҜ                     пЈә
                                               пЈҜ1 1 0 1 2 1пЈә
                                 AProfession = пЈҜ                     пЈә.                            (28)
                                               пЈҜ1 1 1 0 1 1пЈә
                                               пЈ°1 1 1 1 0 1пЈ»
                                                1 1 1 1 1 0
This represents a cost of 1 for any change
Law School Success: (Wightman, 1998) This data set contains demographic information and aca-
demic records for over 20,000 law school students labelled by whether or not a student passed the
BAR exam. Our target set is an 85% chance of passing the BAR. To create A(x), we suppose the law
school performance is merely a projection that can be changed through more studying, allowing us
to change the law school grades and the location where the students take the BAR. The cost function
dX sums the increase in grades and the physical distance travelled to take the BAR where moving to
an adjacent region (e.g. Far West to North West) is weighted the same as increasing grades by one
standard deviation.


                                                  23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Specifically dY sums the increase in grades and the physical distance travelled to take the BAR where
moving to an adjacent region (e.g. Far West to North West) is weighted the same as increasing grades
one standard deviation. This set up returns the optimal combination of studying harder and moving
location to take the BAR.In this data set dX is sum of the change in grades (in standard deviations
from the mean) and distance traveled. The country was divided into eight regions: (1) Far West, (2)
Great Lakes, (3) Mid-South, (4) Mountain West, (5) Mid-West, (6) North East, (7) New England,
(8) North West. We use the transition cost matrix
                                        пЈ®                              пЈ№
                                          0 3 4 1 2 6 5 1
                                        пЈҜ3 0 1 2 1 2 1 3пЈә
                                        пЈҜ4 1 0 2 1 2 1 5пЈә
                                        пЈҜ                              пЈә
                                        пЈҜ1 2 2 0 1 4 3 2пЈә
                             ARegion = пЈҜпЈҜ                              пЈә                         (29)
                                                                       пЈә
                                        пЈҜ2 1 1 1 0 3 2 3пЈә
                                        пЈҜ6 2 2 4 3 0 1 5пЈә
                                        пЈ°                              пЈ»
                                          5 1 1 3 2 1 0 5
                                          1 3 5 2 3 5 5 0
Moves to adjacent regions result in a cost of 1, while the highest cost of 6 is incurred by moving
from Far West to New England or back.
Diabetes Prediction: (for Disease Control & , CDC) This data set contains information on the
demographics, health conditions and health habits of 250,000 individuals labelled by whether an
individual is diabetic extracted from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), a
health-related telephone survey that is collected annually by the CDC.. We define A(x) to allow
changes in health habits, BMI, education and income. We use a weighted 2-norm for dX to represent
the relative difficulty of making changes. For example, starting to get regular physical activity is
weighted the same as dropping one BMI point. Increasing education, income and health insurance
were weighted as more difficult that simply adjusting health habits.
German Credit: (Hofmann, 1994) This commonly used data set contains information on 1,000
loan applications in Germany labelled by their credit risk. The actionable set allows for changes in
the loan request (time and size) as well as the funds in the applicants checking and savings account
and whither the applicant has a telephone. The target set T is a greater than 80% of being a good
credit risk. The cost function dY is the direct measuring the total difference in Deutsche Marks
(DM) between all elements of the application. No cost was assigned to closing empty accounts. The
change in length of loan is converted to DM through the individualвҖҷs monthly disposable income.
Finally we set a flat cost of 50DM to acquire a telephone

5.3.2   M ODEL D ETAILS
We used fully connected feed forward neural networks. Each network used 3 hidden layers with
ReLu activation functions between each layer. For all data sets except the German Credit data
set each hidden layer had 60 nodes. The German Credit data set required 120 nodes per layer.
Additionally, for the German Credit data set only, we used dropout regularization of 20% on each
hidden layer. We trained these models using the ADAM optimizer to minimize cross entropy loss.
We used an 80 вҲ’ 10 вҲ’ 10 train-validate-test data split and implemented early stopping with the
validation data. All amicable perturbations, counterfactuals and adversarial examples were created
for the testing data. We used identical architecture for V as M , except for doubling the input size.
Accuracy data may be found in table 3.

5.3.3   O BJECTIVE F UNCTION D ETAILS
In our implementation we formulated the actionablility penalty term b as
                                 m
                                                                         !
                                X
                     b(xМғ) = G      max{0, xМғi вҲ’ ui } + max{0, li вҲ’ xМғi }                       (30)
                                   i=1
with G a sufficiently large constant.
We formulated our coherence penalty term p as
                                                    пЈ«               пЈ¶2
                                              C
                                              X            X
                                  p(xМғ) = P         пЈӯ1 вҲ’          xМғj пЈё ,                       (31)
                                              i=1          jвҲҲCi



                                                    24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with P another appropriately large constant.
The conditioner function cond simply rounded integer and Boolean values to the nearest integer
value. For one-hot encoded features categorical features, the category with the largest value set to
one and all other categories set to zero.

5.3.4   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
Here we show success bar charts similar to those found in figure 7 compare the efficacy of amicable
perturbations, counterfactuals Wachter et al. (2017); Mothilal et al. (2020) and adversarial examples
from the Carlini Wagner в„“2 attack Carlini & Wagner (2017b) for all data sets. These are similar to
Figure 5, but include all data sets and an increased number of cost (Пө) values.
Each bar chart refers to a particular data set and desired distance Оҙ to the target set T . Inside of
each chart, the bars show the percentage of individuals that a method was able to successfully move
inside the goal Оҙ at a variety of costs Пө. Figure 7 shows data before the verification procedure
has been performed and 7 shows the data after all . In these tests, the amicable perturbations (in
blue) outperform the counterfactuals (in green and orange) in nearly all cases except for when both
methods achieved 100% success or the very high-cost (large Пө) high reward (Оҙ = 0) scenarios.
Carlini Wagner attacks (red) are only effective at larger Оҙ values because they are designed to move
a data point just barely inside the target class. The Carlini Wagner attacks are not required to be
actionable (or even feasible), so they do not constitute useful advise. The verifier is able to recognize
that these adversarial examples are untrustworthy in all cases.


                                                   25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: The graphs show average success rate for moving individuals within a variety of distances
(Оҙ) to the target set. The y-axis shows the percentage of individuals within the goal distance, and the
x-axis, represents different costs (Пө values) to achieve the goal. These values were obtained before
applying the verification procedure.


                                                  26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: The graphs show average success rate for moving individuals within a variety of distances
(Оҙ) to the target set. The y-axis shows the percentage of individuals within the goal distance, and
the x-axis, represents different costs (Пө values) to achieve the goal. These values were obtained after
applying the verification procedure with a 10% chance of eliminating valid inputs.


                                                  27
