Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D OES RESISTANCE TO STYLE - TRANSFER EQUAL
S HAPE B IAS ? E VALUATING SHAPE BIAS BY DIS -
TORTED SHAPE

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Deep learning models are known to exhibit a strong texture bias, while human
         tends to rely heavily on global shape for object recognition. The current bench-
         mark for evaluating a model’s shape bias is a set of style-transferred images with
         the assumption that resistance to the attack of style transfer is related to the de-
         velopment of shape sensitivity in the model. In this work, we show that networks
         trained with style-transfer images indeed learn to ignore style, but its shape bias
         arises primarily from local shapes. We provide a Distorted Shape Testbench
         (DiST) as an alternative measurement of global shape sensitivity. Our test in-
         cludes 2400 original images from ImageNet-1K, each of which is accompanied
         by two images with the global shapes of the original image distorted while pre-
         serving its texture via the texture synthesis program. We found that (1) models
         that performed well on the previous shape bias evaluation do not fare well in the
         proposed DiST; (2) the widely adopted ViT models do not show significant ad-
         vantages over Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) on this benchmark despite
         that ViTs rank higher on the previous shape bias tests. (3) training with DiST im-
         ages bridges the significant gap between human and existing SOTA models’ per-
         formance while preserving the model’s accuracy on standard image classification
         tasks; training with DiST images and style-transferred images are complementary,
         and can be combined to train network together to enhance both the global and local
         shape sensitivity of the network. Our code will be host in the anonymous github:
         https://anonymous.4open.science/r/ICLR2024-DiST/


1    I NTRODUCTION

Deep learning models for object recognition are known to exhibit strong texture bias (Geirhos et al.,
2018; Baker & Elder, 2022). In solving problems, neural networks tend to discover easy shortcuts
that might not generalize well (Ilyas et al., 2019; Drenkow et al., 2021). Rather than learning a more
structured representation of objects, such as surfaces and shapes, convolutional neural networks
trained for classifying objects rely primarily on the statistical regularities of features discovered
along the network hierarchy. Standard networks fumbled badly when the test images were subjected
to style or texture transfer (Geirhos et al., 2018), revealing their reliance on texture and local feature
statistics, perhaps the easiest features, rather than global shape. Humans, on the other hand, are
fairly robust against such style transfer manipulation in object recognition, indicative of our explicit
utilization of shapes in object recognition (Ayzenberg & Behrmann, 2022; Ayzenberg & Lourenco,
2022; Quinn et al., 2001a;b).
To close this gap, various approaches have been developed to steer neural network learning towards
shapes from texture (Brochu, 2019; Geirhos et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023). Among which, the most
effective approach still remains to be augmenting the training data with randomized style-transfer
operation (Geirhos et al., 2018; 2021). However, the nature of shape sensitivity promoted by the
style-transfer augmented training, and the generalizability of this shape bias to other approaches for
evaluating shape sensitivity remain uncertain.
In this paper, we re-examine the role of style-augmentation training and ask whether resistance to
style-transfer really reflects models’ ability to avoid texture based recogition short-cut. In Figure 1,


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Left: Feature Attribution Analysis based SmoothGrad (Smilkov et al., 2017) on stylized
augmentation trained models. Surprisingly, models that can resist style transfers still be primarily
sensitive to local features, rather than the global shape configuration. Right: Illustration of our pro-
posed Distorted Shape Testbench (DiST). We hope machine would successfully distinct the images
with global shape distortion from the original image, achieving robust visual recognition just like
human.
we can see that a stylized trained neural network becomes resistant to the style changes, however,
its sensitivity map still shows heavy focus on the local features (the eye of the owl in this case),
rather than the global shape (See results of Feature Attribution Results in Figure 1(a), bright pixels
in the middle column indicates the area is sensitive to the model perception, we refer the details
to Section A.1). Thus, resistance to style transfer does not guarantee the development of network
sensitivity to global shapes.
To remedy this problem, we developed a TexForm-based evaluation dataset, called DiST (Distorted
Shapes Testbench), for evaluating the sensitivity to the global shapes (Figure 1(b)). In this dataset,
images were transformed to distort their global shapes while maintaining their texture statistics as
well as many of the more local shapes and forms. We used DiST to perform an odd-man-out test
on the various models and human subjects to measure their ability to distinguish the original image
from its shape-distorted variants as a metric of their global shape sensitivity. We found humans
far superior to Style-transfer-trained networks in discriminating the differences in global forms. In
fact, the Style-transfer network’s performance is no better than the standard CNN that has not been
subjected to augmented Style-transfer training. Also, we found that vision transformers (ViTs) fared
no better than standard CNN, contradicting the beliefs that ViTs had captured and utilized the global
relationship of object parts in this task.
Along with the DiST dataset, we also demonstrate that networks trained with augmented DiST data
also do well in discriminating the global shapes of objects if using a carefully designed training
approach (we name the method as DiSTinguish). It appears that neural networks, in general, tend
to take the easiest way out, learning shorter paths and more local features first, and only when they
were pressured would they start to acquire more global and structured representations for solving
problems. Finally, we found that the DiSTinguish-trained network and Style-transfer-trained net-
work are orthogonal and complementary, as one focuses on global shapes, while the other tends to
capture local shapes. Thus, our paper provides a better understanding of the nature of shape bias
in networks trained with different augmented datasets and provides a new benchmark for evaluating
and enhancing the global shape bias in deep learning models.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been the cornerstone of the revolution in computer vision,
delivering state-of-the-art performance on a wide array of tasks (Luo et al., 2021; Redmon et al.,


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2016; He et al., 2016; Brown et al., 2020). However, understanding DNNs have been a vital topic
to further advancement of these black box models (Drenkow et al., 2021; Petch et al., 2022; Gilpin
et al., 2018). One aspect of understanding DNNs in vision system is identifying the biases they might
have when classifying images. Two prominent visual cues are local texture and global shape (Garces
et al., 2012; Janner et al., 2017).
Originally, it was believed that DNNs, especially those trained on large datasets like ImageNet,
primarily learn shapes rather than textures, as visualization in convolutional neural network shows
clear hierachical composition features of various level of object shapes (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014). This
belief was also based on the intuitive understanding that shapes are more semantically meaningful
than textures for most object categories. However, Geirhos et al. (2018) challenged this belief and
showed that DNNs trained on ImageNet have a strong bias towards texture. Our work re-examine
their proposed Style-transfer based approach and propose a complementary yet important way to
further measure the models’ shape bias.
Geirhos et al. (2021) benchmarked various widely used models on the proposed Style-transfer
datasets in Geirhos et al. (2018). Among which, networks architectures plays a significant role
in improving the models’ shape bias. Comparing to the convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
newly proposed vision transformer family ViTs (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) perform significantly bet-
ter in terms of the Style-transfer based shape bias as well as other corruption based robustness test
measured by Paul & Chen (2022). However, we observe that ViTs yield no significant improvement
on our proposed global shape distorted test, contrary to both the common belief of ViT’s enhanced
global relationship modeling ability and the previous shape bias results. Hence our results call for
further investigation into methods of improving the shape bias through architecture innovation.

3     M ETHODS

3.1   D ISTORTED S HAPE T ESTBENCH (D I ST)


                 (a) Examples in DiST                    (b) The process of DiST for models

                            Figure 2: Distorted Shape Testbench (DiST)

Our Distorted Shape Testbench (DiST) deliberately compares the representation before and after we
apply the global shape distortion. One could imagine there could be many global distortion variants
of an original image as the joint spatial configuration of local parts could be arbitrary. To get a
quantative measurement of the models’ global shape sensitivity, DiST formulates the evaluation
metrics as the accuracy of an oddity detection task. The subjects to DiST (machine learning models
or human) are asked to select a distinct image from a pool of choices, which consists one original
image where the global shape is intact, and N global shape distorted variants of the original image
(each of which preserves the local patterns) . We pick N = 2 for all the DiST test as we observe
that increases N will not increase the difficulty of the task.

Shape Distortion via Texture Synthesis Program Texture Synthesis allows for the generation
of images that retain the original texture details while randomizing the global shape structures. We
utilize Gatys et al. (2015) in particular to construct the global shape distorted images for the DiST


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Mechanism of computing global shape distorted images. We implement approach pro-
posed in Gatys et al. (2015). Specifically, we optimize a randomly initialized image (yellow) so
that when it passes through a pretrained VGG network, its intermediate layers’ gram matrix match
the targeted image (blue). This results in preserving the images’ local features but randomizing the
global structures.


oddity detection task. We illustrate the process of this texture synthesis in Figure 3. For any given
target image, It ∈ R(3,H0 ,W0 ) (blue boundary image in Figure 3), we want to get Io ∈ R(3,H0 ,W0 )
that possess the same local features but distorted global shape (as shown in yellow boundary images
on the right). To achieve this, we initialize tensor I1 ∈ R(3,H0 ,W0 ) using value independently
sampled from a isotropic Gaussian distribution and complete the process of I1 → I2 → I3 ... → Io
through minimizing the L as Gram Matrix Matching Loss. Specifically,
                       ∂Loss       ∂ X
                               =           ||Gram(Al (It )) − Gram(Al (Ii ))||2
                         ∂Ii      ∂Ii
                                           l
                      (Cl ,Hl ,Wl )
, where Al (I) ∈ R              denotes the l-th layers activation tensor from which we destroy
the global spatial information by computing the channel-wise dot products, i.e. Gram(Al (It )) ∈
R(Cl ,Cl ) .

DiST Metric Formulation For each trial in the Distorted Shape Testbench (DiST), two shape-
distorted versions are generated using distinct random seeds. Each image, denoted as Ii , is then
passed through the evaluation network F to obtain a feature vector F (Ii ) from the final layer. The
model identifies the image most dissimilar to the others by calculating the cosine distance between
feature vectors. The procedure for this calculation is as follows:

                                        X               F (Ii ) · F (Ij )
                                 Di =          (1 −                         )/N                     (1)
                                                      ∥F (Ii )∥2 ∥F (Ij )∥2
                                        j̸=i

N represent the number of shape-distorted images in each traial, in DiST it would be equal to 2.
The dissimilar of the image Ii to other 2 images is calculated as the average of the pairwise cosine
distance of each two image pairs. Cosine distance of vector u and v is calculated as DC (u, v) =
1 − SC (u, v), where SC (u, v) is the cosine similarity.
Model will select the images a that is the most different from the other two images based on Di :

                                                             exp(Di )
                                      a = arg max P                                                 (2)
                                                  i          j exp(Dj ))

DiST is fundamentally different from the evaluation methods based on styler transfer or other
changes of texture details. Those methods apply style transfer operation to generate the evalua-
tion data. The model trained with stylized augmentation could get advantage in those evaluation due
to the familiarity of different style domains. In contrast, DiST involves no style transfer operations.
Instead, it directly assesses the representations learned by the model to show how sensitive it is due
to the change of global structure. This approach eliminates any biases arising from familiarity with
stylized images, offering an entirely new angle from which to evaluate shape bias.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   P SYCHOPHYSICAL E XPERIMENTS

Human vision is known to exhibit a strong bias towards shape. To quantify the gap between deep
learning models and the human visual system, we conducted a psychophysical experiment with hu-
man subjects. To align this experiment closely with deep learning evaluations, participants were
simply instructed to select the image they found to be ”the most different,” without receiving any
additional hints or context. To mimic the feedforward processes in deep learning models, we dis-
played stimulus images for a limited time, thereby restricting additional reasoning. Furthermore,
participants received no feedback on the correctness of their selections, eliminating the influence of
supervised signals.
In each trial, participants were simultaneously presented with three stimulus images for a duration of
800 ms. They then had an additional 1,200 ms, making a total of 2,000 ms, to make their selections.
Any response given after the 2,000-millisecond window was considered invalid. To mitigate the
effects of fatigue, participants were allowed breaks after completing 100 trials, which consisted of
100 sets of images. We accumulated data from 16,800 trials and 32 human subjects to calculate the
overall performance on DiST to represent human visual system. The final results, shown in Fig.5,
represent the average performance across all participating human subjects. Further detail and of the
psychophysical experiments and how the experiment is conducted can be found at the appendix.

3.3   D I ST INGUISH : D ISTINGUISH BETWEEN THE ORIGINAL SHAPE AND DISTORTED SHAPE

Deep learning models are excellent learners when we explicitly define them the learning objectives.
Stylized augmentation forces the model to learn style-agnostic representation, leading to its impres-
sive performance on stylized domain. Here we would like to directly force the model to distinguish
between original shape and distorted. We propose DiSTinguish, as shown in Fig.4, a simple su-
pervised training approach to explicitly enforce the constrain to guide the model to learn the global
structure of the object. Rather than operating within the confines of an n-class classification task,
                                                                                     P2n
we expand this to 2n classes. Where the loss of the network would be: L(θ) = − i=1 yi log(pi ),
where pi is the predicted probability of the sample belonging to class i and y is the one-hot code for
the ground truth label of 2n classes.
This expansion incorporates distorted shape versions of each original class as additional, separate
classes. In this way we force the model to learn the difference between the original shape class and
the distorted one, pushing it to not rely on the local texture detail directly.


Figure 4: Our DiSTinguish Training Approach, shape-distorted images are added as separated
classes

Due to the high time cost of the texture synthesis process (100 optimization steps would take above
55s on a single Tesla V100 GPU, which is the time cost for a single image generation). It’s infeasible
to generate a full shape-distorted version of the ImageNet1k training dataset. Therefore, we use 10-
step optimization results to approximate the 100-step optimization result in DiST, each additional
shape-distorted would have 100 images.


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


During the evaluation phase, the model reverts to n-class classification by summing the logits cor-
responding to the distorted shape and original classes: zi′ = zi + zi+n , where class i and class i + n
are the original class and its shape-distorted class, to reduce the output logits Z from 2n dimension
to n dimension. While for DiST, this remapping is unnecessary, as we directly compare the feature
vectors learned by the model rather than the classification logits..

4     R ESULTS
4.1   H UMAN V. S . M ODEL’ S SHAPE BIAS ON D I ST

One of the ideas to evaluate shape bias quantitatively is to use the Cue-Conflict dataset (Geirhos
et al. (2021)), where the style of all the images are transferred into the style of another class,
causing the conflict between the shape information and texture information. The ”shape score”
of Cue-Conflict dataset is determined by calculating the proportion of instances where shape, rather
than texture, influences the classification, which is defined as Shape Bias Score (Cue-Conflict) =
Number of Correct Shape Recognitions
   Number of Correct Recognitions    . Models trained on style-transferred images exhibit notably superior
performance on this metric. Vision Transformer (ViT) models also outperform traditional CNN
architectures, with larger models showing even better results. These findings are based solely on
assessments using style-transferred images.
To determine whether the observed trends remain consistent when different evaluation approaches
are employed, we re-evaluate the performance of multiple models across different architectures and
different training methods using DiST. Those models include: transformer architectures (e.g.
ViT, BEiT (Bao et al. (2021)), DeiT (Touvron et al. (2022)) and ConvNeXt (Woo et al. (2023))),
traditional CNN architectures (e.g. ResNet, ResNeXt (Xie et al. (2017)), Inception (Szegedy
et al. (2017)), DenseNet (Huang et al. (2017))). Mobile network searched by neutral architecture
search (e.g. MNasNet (Tan et al. (2019), MobileNet (Koonce & Koonce (2021))). We also covers
model trained with different technique, including adversarial training, sparse activation (Li et al.
(2023)) and semi-supervised training (Xie et al. (2020)).
As shown in Fig.5, where both human and model performances are ranked according to Cue-Conflict
scores, we observe that several conclusions drawn from Cue-Conflict data do not generalize to the
DiST evaluation. Firstly, ResNet50-SIN, which is trained on stylized images (Geirhos et al. (2018)),
outperforms other models on the Cue-Conflict dataset but fails to surpass the performance of a
normally trained ResNet50 on DiST. This suggests that its high performance on the Cue-Conflict
dataset may not be attributed to a better understanding of the global structure but rather to some
other learned “short-cut”.
Secondly, as shown in Table.1, ViT models do not exhibit a significant advantage over ResNet
when evaluated on DiST. Notably, ViT-B even underperforms compared to ResNet50. Additionally,
although the performance on Cue-Conflict dataset suggests that large model size leads to higher
shape bias, the results on DiST challenge this assumption. A larger model size does not guarantee
enhanced capability in perceiving global structures. The performance of various ViT sizes on DiST
is incongruent with their parameter sizes; ViT-S outperforms its counterparts, while ViT-B lags
behind.
For the human evaluation result, we average human performance data collected from 16,800 trials
to obtain the final human performance metric, which is 85.5%, outperforming all the deep learning
models. The results consistently show that humans are robust shape-based learners, irrespective of
the evaluation method used. In comparison, deep learning models still exhibit a performance gap
relative to human capabilities.

    Table 1: ResNet50 and different size of ViTs’ performance on DiST and Cue-Conflict dataset

              Model        # Param (M)     Cue-Conflict score(%)(↑)       DiST Acc(%) (↑)
              ViT-L           303.3                 53.8                       68.5
              ViT-B            85.8                 43.1                       54.8
              ViT-S            22.1                 37.7                       70.9
             ResNet50          25.5                 21.4                       69.4


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Figure 5: Human and different models’ performance on DiST and Cue-Conflict dataset.


4.2     E NHANCE SHAPE BIAS BY D I ST INGUISH

Our evaluation of current deep learning models using DiST reveals that there is still a performance
gap between human and machine capabilities in recognizing significant changes in global shape. To
address this, we employ DiSTinguish to explicitly train the model to differentiate between original
and distorted shapes. Initial experiments on a small-scale dataset demonstrate the efficacy of our
approach. Subsequently, we extend this to the large-scale ImageNet1k dataset. Experimental results
indicate that DiSTinguish enables the model to grasp the global shape of objects while maintaining
its performance on the original dataset. Notably, DiSTinguish operates orthogonally to Stylized
Augmentation techniques, highlighting that these two methods enhance shape perception ability of
the model from distinctly different angles.

4.2.1     I MAGE N ET 10
For the small-scale experiment, we select 10 classes from ImageNet1K. The choice of the classes
is the same as the Imagenette dataset. We train a ResNet50 model from scratch with the same
hyperparameter configuration using three different training methods.

        1. DiSTinguish-Complete (DiSTinguish-C): 20-class supervised learning, the additional
           classes are the shape-distorted version of the original class, the shape-distorted images
           are generated using Texture Synthesis with 100-step optimization.
        2. DiSTinguish-Approximate (DiSTinguish-A): Similar to DiSTinguish-C, while the shape-
           distorted images are generated using Texture Synthesis with only 10-step optimization.
        3. Baseline: Simple 10-class supervised learning without any special augmentation.

We evaluate the above three methods on three different evaluation datasets: DiST, style-Transferred
version of the evaluation dataset of ImageNet10 (SIN-10) and original evaluation dataset of Im-
ageNet10 (IN-10). Experiment results on ImageNet10 are shown in Table.2, all the models are
ResNet50 trained within 100 epochs. Even though it doesn’t reach the same performance of
DiSTinguish-C, DiSTinguish-A still surpasses the baseline in both SIN-10 and DiST evaluations.
This indicates that DiSTinguish-A serves as an effective approximation, particularly when it is im-
practical to generate DiSTinguish-C data on large-scale datasets.

4.2.2     I MAGE N ET 1 K
When scaling up to ImageNet1K, it would be infeasible to generate all the Shape-Distorted version
of ImageNet1K train data. Since the experiment on ImageNet10 has shown that using 10-step op-
timization as an approximation have little influence on the final performance of the model, in the
experiments of ImageNet1K, we would use DiSTinguish-A as a replacement for DiSTinguish-C.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Table 2: DiSTinguish on ImageNet10 (Top-1 Accuracy)

                                          IN-10 (↑)    SIN-10 (↑)    DiST (↑)
                       DiSTinguish-C        93.2          71.6         95.5
                       DiSTinguish-A        93.2          70.0         88.4
                          Baseline          90.2          54.4         54.9


To demonstrate that DiSTinguish is an orthogonal approach to style transfer methods, we evaluate a
ResNet50 model under four distinct training approaches. (i) Baseline: The model is trained using
pretrained weights without any specialized augmentation. (ii) Stylized Augmentation: We employ
AdaIN (Huang & Belongie (2017)) to create stylized versions of the ImageNet1K dataset. Each
class receives an additional 100 augmented images. (iii) DiSTinguish: We use DiSTinguish-A,
as employed in our ImageNet10 experiment, as an approximation. An extra 1000 shape-distorted
image classes are created, each containing 100 images, and the model is trained as part of a 2000-
class classification task. (iv) DiSTinguish + Stylized Augmentation: Combining DiSTinguish and
Stylized Augmentation together, where the model will trained with 2000-class classification task,
and the original 1000 classes images would also contain the stylized images as augmentation.
Except for the pretrained Baseline model, where we directly use the IMAGENET1K V1 weights,
all other models are trained under identical configurations. As shown in the Table.3, DiSTinguish
significantly enhances performance on the DiST evaluation while maintaining comparable results
on the original dataset. Importantly, as an alternative method for improving shape bias, DiSTin-
guish is fully compatible with Stylized Augmentation techniques. This compatibility allows for
their combined use without any performance degradation in either the stylized domain or the DiST
evaluations. This demonstrates that the two methods are orthogonal and can be integrated to com-
prehensively improve the model’s shape bias.
We further examine the feature vectors from the last layer of a ResNet50 model trained under dif-
ferent conditions by visualizing them using t-SNE. As illustrated in Fig.6, both the baseline model
and the one trained with Stylized Augmentation fail to effectively distinguish between original and
distorted shapes. Their corresponding classes in the feature space show significant overlap. In con-
trast, the model trained with DiSTinguish clearly separates feature clusters corresponding to original
shapes from those of their distorted versions.

         Table 3: DiSTinguish and Stylized Augmentation’s performance on ImageNet1K

                                           ImageNet1K (↑)   SIN-1K (↑) DiST (↑)
                                           Top-1 Top-5    Top-1 Top-5
                   Baseline                 76.1  94.0     26.1   47.6   69.4
                 Stylized Aug               78.1  94.1     52.2   75.2   73.3
                 DiSTinguish                77.7  93.8     24.9   44.7   98.6
           DiSTinguish + Stylized Aug       77.8  94.0     52.2   75.7   98.7


Figure 6: t-SNE visualizations of the feature vector of ResNet50 trained under different approaches.

4.2.3   A NALYSIS OF SENSITIVITY MAP
To investigate why Stylized Augmentation fails to significantly improve DiST and how DiSTinguish
achieves better performance, we employ SmoothGrad (Smilkov et al. (2017)) to generate sensitivity


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


maps for a ResNet50 model trained using either DiSTinguish or Stylized Augmentation. Sensitivity
maps reveal how responsive the model is to changes in pixel values. To clearly show which regions
contribute most to the model’s internal representation, we use a binary mask to mask out the pixel
that have low sensitivity value.
Across various stylized images, models trained with Stylized Augmentation tend to focus on specific
local features that remain relatively invariant to changes in style. For instance, as depicted in the
row (ii.), (iii.) and (iv.) in Fig.7, a stylized augmented model may rely heavily on a single eye
as the key feature for its decision-making. We hypothesize that the feature associated with the
eye remains stable even when the style domain undergoes significant alterations. This enables the
stylized augmented model to classify the image correctly despite changes to many texture details.
However, this strategy fail in the DiST evaluation, where the global structure is altered but local
features remain constant. Focusing on a specific local region is ineffective for distinguishing a
shape-distorted image from the original one, since the features of those local regions are unchanged.
As illustrated in the row (i.) of Fig.7, the stylized augmented model fails to account for the global
structure, concentrating solely on distinctive features like eyes and neglecting other regions.
In contrast, models trained with DiSTinguish are compelled to make use of global features to effec-
tively differentiate shape-distorted images from original ones. Consequently, the model’s sensitive
regions are not confined to small, local areas; rather, they extend to larger, global structures. As
shown in row (i.) of Fig.7, the model is highly responsive to most parts of the owl, even when they
are spatially separated, thus enabling it to perceive changes in the global structure.
This sensitivity to global features persists even in style-transferred images. Compared to stylized
augmented models, which fixate on specific local features such as an eye, models trained with DiS-
Tinguish are sensitive to the entire object. This suggests that the two training methodologies engen-
der fundamentally different feature preferences in models. While DiSTinguish encourages models
to focus on global structures to discern between distorted and original shapes, Stylized Augmen-
tation prompts the model to rely on features that remain stable across various style domains as a
defense against style transfer operations.


    Figure 7: Sensitivity map of ResNet50 trained with DiSTinguish or Stylized Augmentation


5   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced the Distorted Shape Testbench (DiST) as a novel metric to evaluate
shape bias in deep learning models more effectively than traditional style-transfer-based methods.
Our findings reveal three key insights: (i) Existing models acclaimed for shape bias perform poorly
on DiST. (ii) ViT models do not outperform CNNs on this new benchmark. (iii) A significant gap
remains between human and machine performance on shape recognition. Based on these results, we
introduced DiSTinguish, a carefully designed training approach that show significant improvements
on DiST without sacrificing accuracy on standard tasks. Our work challenges existing shape bias
assessments and provides a new avenue for future research.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Vladislav Ayzenberg and Marlene Behrmann. Does the brain’s ventral visual pathway compute
  object shape? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 26(12):1119–1132, 2022.
Vladislav Ayzenberg and Stella Lourenco. Perception of an object’s global shape is best described
  by a model of skeletal structure in human infants. elife, 11:e74943, 2022.
Nicholas Baker and James H Elder. Deep learning models fail to capture the configural nature of
  human shape perception. Iscience, 25(9), 2022.
Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Songhao Piao, and Furu Wei. Beit: Bert pre-training of image transformers.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08254, 2021.
Francis Brochu. Increasing shape bias in imagenet-trained networks using transfer learning and
  domain-adversarial methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.12892, 2019.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Nathan Drenkow, Numair Sani, Ilya Shpitser, and Mathias Unberath. A systematic review of ro-
  bustness in deep learning for computer vision: Mind the gap? arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00639,
  2021.
Elena Garces, Adolfo Munoz, Jorge Lopez-Moreno, and Diego Gutierrez. Intrinsic images by clus-
  tering. In Computer graphics forum, volume 31, pp. 1415–1424. Wiley Online Library, 2012.
Leon Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. Texture synthesis using convolutional neural
  networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. Imagenet-trained cnns are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias im-
  proves accuracy and robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12231, 2018.
Robert Geirhos, Kantharaju Narayanappa, Benjamin Mitzkus, Tizian Thieringer, Matthias Bethge,
  Felix A Wichmann, and Wieland Brendel. Partial success in closing the gap between human and
  machine vision. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:23885–23899, 2021.
Leilani H Gilpin, David Bau, Ben Z Yuan, Ayesha Bajwa, Michael Specter, and Lalana Kagal.
  Explaining explanations: An overview of interpretability of machine learning. In 2018 IEEE
  5th International Conference on data science and advanced analytics (DSAA), pp. 80–89. IEEE,
  2018.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, Laurens Van Der Maaten, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Densely connected
  convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4700–4708, 2017.
Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance normal-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 1501–1510,
  2017.
Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Logan Engstrom, Brandon Tran, and Aleksander
  Madry. Adversarial examples are not bugs, they are features. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 32, 2019.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Michael Janner, Jiajun Wu, Tejas D Kulkarni, Ilker Yildirim, and Josh Tenenbaum. Self-supervised
 intrinsic image decomposition. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Brett Koonce and Brett Koonce. Mobilenetv3. Convolutional Neural Networks with Swift for Ten-
  sorflow: Image Recognition and Dataset Categorization, pp. 125–144, 2021.
Guillaume Leclerc, Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Sung Min Park, Hadi Salman, and Aleksander
  Madry. FFCV: Accelerating training by removing data bottlenecks. In Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023. https://github.com/libffcv/ffcv/.
Tianqin Li, Ziqi Wen, Yangfan Li, and Tai Sing Lee. Emergence of shape bias in convolutional
  neural networks through activation sparsity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (Oral Presentation), -:–, 2023.
Andrew Luo, Tianqin Li, Wen-Hao Zhang, and Tai Sing Lee. Surfgen: Adversarial 3d shape syn-
  thesis with explicit surface discriminators. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-
  ference on Computer Vision, pp. 16238–16248, 2021.
Sayak Paul and Pin-Yu Chen. Vision transformers are robust learners. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 2071–2081, 2022.
Jeremy Petch, Shuang Di, and Walter Nelson. Opening the black box: the promise and limitations
   of explainable machine learning in cardiology. Canadian Journal of Cardiology, 38(2):204–213,
   2022.
Paul C Quinn, Peter D Eimas, and Michael J Tarr. Perceptual categorization of cat and dog sil-
  houettes by 3-to 4-month-old infants. Journal of experimental child psychology, 79(1):78–94,
  2001a.
Paul C Quinn, Alan M Slater, Elizabeth Brown, and Rachel A Hayes. Developmental change in
  form categorization in early infancy. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 19(2):207–
  218, 2001b.
Joseph Redmon, Santosh Divvala, Ross Girshick, and Ali Farhadi. You only look once: Unified,
  real-time object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 779–788, 2016.
Daniel Smilkov, Nikhil Thorat, Been Kim, Fernanda Viégas, and Martin Wattenberg. Smoothgrad:
  removing noise by adding noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03825, 2017.
Christian Szegedy, Sergey Ioffe, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Alexander Alemi. Inception-v4, inception-
  resnet and the impact of residual connections on learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference
  on artificial intelligence, volume 31, 2017.
Mingxing Tan, Bo Chen, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, and
 Quoc V Le. Mnasnet: Platform-aware neural architecture search for mobile. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2820–2828, 2019.
Hugo Touvron, Matthieu Cord, and Hervé Jégou. Deit iii: Revenge of the vit. In European Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision, pp. 516–533. Springer, 2022.
Sanghyun Woo, Shoubhik Debnath, Ronghang Hu, Xinlei Chen, Zhuang Liu, In So Kweon, and
  Saining Xie. Convnext v2: Co-designing and scaling convnets with masked autoencoders. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16133–
  16142, 2023.
Qizhe Xie, Minh-Thang Luong, Eduard Hovy, and Quoc V Le. Self-training with noisy student
  improves imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 10687–10698, 2020.
Saining Xie, Ross Girshick, Piotr Dollár, Zhuowen Tu, and Kaiming He. Aggregated residual trans-
  formations for deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 1492–1500, 2017.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12,
 2014, Proceedings, Part I 13, pp. 818–833. Springer, 2014.


                                             12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   F EATURE ATTRIBUTION A NALYSIS

The feature attribution analysis is done by using smoothGrad (Smilkov et al. (2017)), one of the
gradient-based sensitivity maps (a.k.a sensitivity maps) methods that are commonly used to identify
pixels that would strongly influence the decision of the model. Specifically, gradient-based sensitiv-
ity maps are trying to visualize the gradient of the class predicted probability function with respect to
the input image, which is Mc (I) = ∂Fc (I)/∂I, where Fc is the function that predict the probability
that input image I belong to class c.
Traditional methods for computing sensitivity maps often suffer from noise, making them difficult
to interpret. SmoothGrad improves the quality of these maps by taking the average of the gradients
obtained by adding noise to the input multiple times and recalculating the gradient for each noisy
version. Specifically, it generate N noisy versions of the input I (e.g. Gaussian noise). For each
noisy input, perform a forward and backward pass through the neural network to compute the gra-
dient of the output with respect to each input feature. Then average the gradients across all noisy
inputs to create a clear sensitivity map.
During our analysis, to visualize the sensitivity map, sensitivity scores are rescaled to fall within
the range of 0 and 1. To further clarify the regions of sensitivity, we apply a threshold to create a
binary mask based on these scores. In the main experimental context, this threshold is set at 0.15.
Original sensitivity maps without the binary mask will also be presented in the following section for
comparison.

A.2   M ODEL TRAINING DETAIL AND CONFIGURATION

Re-examine the models on DiST All the model we used during the evaluation on DiST and
cue-conflict dataset are directly from the public pretrained models. ResNet50-SIN is the model
trained on only stylized images in Geirhos et al. (2018). For the ResNet50 model we use the IMA-
GENET1K V1 weights from pytorch. Others are the default pretrained weight.

Experiment on ImageNet10 In the small-scale experiment of ImageNet10, the class we select
are exactly the same as the Imagenette dataset. The class label of the selected class are n01440764,
n02102040, n02979186, n03000684, n03028079 n03394916, n03417042, n03425413, n03445777,
n03888257. The model is trained by using SGD as the optimizer, with learning rate of 0.05, batch
size of 256 on a single Tesla V100 GPU for 100 epochs. To eliminate the impact of data augmenta-
tion, no special augmentation is appiled during the experiment.

Experiment on ImageNet1K The model we used in the experiment of ImageNet1K, except for
the baseline model, which directly using the IMAGENET1K V1 weights from pytorch, are trained
from scratch using ffcv (Leclerc et al. (2023)). All the models are trained for 90 epochs with the
start learning rate of 0.1 on a signle V100 GPU. Other configuration remains the same as the default
configuration in ffcv for training ResNet50.

A.3   P SYCHOPHYSICAL E XPERIMENT DETAIL

Psychophysical experiments are conducted using a front-end web application developed in
JavaScript. Subjects are instructed to ”Find the image that is different from the other two” and
can select their answers using keys ‘1’, ‘2’, or ‘3’. After making a selection, subjects press the
spacebar to proceed to the next question.
The trial procedure is illustrated in Fig.8. A set of images appears on the screen after a 300 ms delay
and remains visible for 800 ms. In a standard trial, two shape-distorted images and one original
image are presented; the correct answer is the original image. Following the 800 ms display period,
the images vanish, and subjects have an additional 1200 ms to make their selection, totaling 2 s for
decision-making. If no selection is made within this time, the trial is marked as a timeout, and the
response is considered invalid. Subjects are given the opportunity to take a break after every 100
images. To prevent the supervision signal, no feedback on answer correctness is provided during the
test.


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To mitigate the risk of the ”oddity pop-out” test devolving into a mere ”detection task”—where
subjects might focus solely on identifying the original image rather than the one that differs—we
incorporate extra catch trials into the experiments, as illustrated in Fig.9.
One catch trial is presented after every 10 standard trials. In each catch trial, two ”original images”
are displayed: one is a mirrored version of the other, accompanied by a shape-distorted image. It
is important to note that there is no overlap between the images used in catch trials and those used
in standard trials. In these catch trials, the correct answer is actually the shape-distorted image.
The rationale for incorporating such catch trials is to compel subjects to focus on identifying the
”different” image rather than the ”original” one, thereby aligning the task more closely with how
deep learning models behave during DiST evaluation. Results from the catch trials are not included
in the final performance metric.


Figure 8: Standard trial in the psychophysical experiment. Image in the red box is the correct answer.


Figure 9: Catch trial in the psychophysical experiment. Image in the red box is the correct answer



A.4   S ENSITIVITY MAP FOR FOUR TRAINING APPROACHES

In this section, we present the original sensitivity maps without binary mask for a ResNet50 model
trained using the four different approaches examined in our ImageNet1K experiment. Sensitivity
maps serve to illustrate the model’s responsiveness to pixel-level changes; a lighter pixel suggests a
more significant influence on the model’s decision-making process.
As shown in Fig.12, in line with the findings detailed in the main text, the sensitivity map of a model
trained with both DiSTinguish and stylized augmentation qualitatively demonstrates the synergistic
effect of these methods. Specifically, the model learns to focus on specialized local features that are
robust to style transfer, while also becoming attuned to the global structure of the object.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5   B ENEFIT OF S ENSITIVITY TO G LOBAL S HAPE

Current deep learning model relying on the local texture already shown impressive performance on
various tasks. Indeed, using only the local texture is sufficient for many visual tasks. However, under
some real-world scenario, having a representation that is sensitive to global shape would have more
benefit over the model that focus on the local features. The original evaluation of shape bias through
style transferred images is not able to capture such characteristics of the model, which would lead
to misunderstanding in related research. In this section, we would use a simple image retrieval task
to shows that how does the model focus on the global shape of the image benefit the performance.
The goal to retrieval the original image given the query image, where some part of the object is
occluded. The retrieval is simply based on the representation extract from the model. Model would
search for the image whose representation is the most similar to the query image according to the
cosine similarity. Notice that the original image itself is inside the dataset. The model is either
the model trained with style augmentation, believed to have a “shape bias” evaluated by the style
transferred images, or the model train with DiSTinguish, which is sensitive to the change of the
global shape. As shown in Fig.10, model trained with style augmentation fail to find the original
images of those query, while model train with DiSTinguish success.
It’s easy to understand that model relying on local feature would fail on this task if the key feature
were occluded, and model that focus on the global shape would be robust against partial occlusion.
Although as a measurement of “shape bias”, evaluated by style transferred images could not provide
insight about model’s sensitivity to global shape, this would lead to misunderstanding of model’s
bias, particularly when the real-world applications need such ability as shown in the above example.


Figure 10: Image retrieval task based on the representation. Although believed to have a ”shape
bias”, model trained with style augmentation fail to find the original images given the partial oc-
cluded image. While the model trained with DiSTinguish success on those partial occluded images.


A.6   M ORE E XAMPLE IN D I ST

In this section we will show more example in DiST. Fig.11 shows 12 sets of images in DiST, each set
consists of one original image (leftmost one) and two generated shape-distorted image. Ideally, we
would want the optimization process to generate the image that the local components of the object
are disrupted, to test if the model is sensitive to such change of the global shape. But depending
on the characteristics of the original images, a small proportion of the generated results can be
particularly hard for both humans and models. For example, results in Fig.11 (e) and Fig.11 (k)
are the challenging cases, where the objects and background are difficult to distinguish. Those


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


challenging cases might be less meaningful to evaluate the sensitivity of the global shape of the
models. Even the dataset does include some of those cases, most of the content still follow our intent.
And human is still able to distinguish most of the images in the dataset (over 85%), which outperform
all the model without training with DiSTinguish, showing that such gap about the perception of
global shape does exist.


Figure 11: More example of distorted shape images and its original images.The first image in each
image set is the original one.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             (a) Sensitivity map on Shape Distorted Image


                                 (b) Sensitivity map on Stylized Image


                                 (c) Sensitivity map on Normal Image


                             (d) Sensitivity map on Shape Distorted Image

Figure 12: Sensitivity map of ResNet50 trained under different methods, the lighter the point is, the
stronger that pixel would influence the decision of the model.


                                                  17
