Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S YNTHETIC DATA AS VALIDATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

         This study leverages synthetic data as a validation set to reduce overfitting and
         ease the selection of the best model in AI development. While synthetic data have
         been used for augmenting the training set, we find that synthetic data can also
         significantly diversify the validation set, offering marked advantages in domains
         like healthcare, where data are typically limited, sensitive, and from out-domain
         sources (i.e., hospitals). In this study, we illustrate the effectiveness of synthetic data
         for early cancer detection in computed tomography (CT) volumes, where synthetic
         tumors are generated and superimposed onto healthy organs, thereby creating an
         extensive dataset for rigorous validation. Using synthetic data as validation can
         improve AI robustness in both in-domain and out-domain test sets. Furthermore,
         we establish a new continual learning framework that continuously trains AI models
         on a stream of out-domain data with synthetic tumors. The AI model trained and
         validated in dynamically expanding synthetic data can consistently outperform
         models trained and validated exclusively on real-world data. Specifically, the DSC
         score of liver tumor segmentation improves from 26.7% (95% CI: 22.6%–30.9%)
         to 34.5% (30.8%–38.2%) when evaluated on an in-domain dataset and from 31.1%
         (26.0%–36.2%) to 35.4% (32.1%–38.7%) on an out-domain dataset. Importantly,
         the performance gain is particularly significant in identifying very tiny liver tumors
         (radius < 5mm) in CT volumes, with Sensitivity improving from 33.1% to 55.4%
         on an in-domain dataset and 33.9% to 52.3% on an out-domain dataset, justifying
         the efficacy in the early detection of cancer. The application of synthetic data,
         from both training and validation perspectives, underlines a promising avenue to
         enhance AI model robustness when dealing with data from varying domains. Our
         code is attached as supplementary and will be publicly available.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Standard AI development divides the dataset into a training set and a test set; the former is used for
model training, and the latter is for evaluation (Russell, 2010; Gareth et al., 2013). The AI model
is updated every training epochs, resulting in a number of intermediate models during the training
trajectory. The performance of these models tends to improve on the training set, but this does not
mean the performance on the test set also improves due to the over-fitting problem (Kuhn et al.,
2013). A question then arises: How do we identify the best model that performs well on the test set,
especially when it is evaluated on test sets taken from different domains? A prevalent strategy is to
delineate a validation set from the training set (Ripley, 2007). This validation set neither contributes
to training nor to evaluating the AI performance. Instead, it functions as an independent set to fix
the training hyper-parameters and, more importantly, to estimate the performance of each model on
different datasets, thus enabling the selection of the best model from the many intermediate models
during the training trajectory.
The validation set is often kept small. Naturally, we would like to maximize the use of the training data.
Annotating data for AI training is time-consuming and expensive, requiring specialized expertise,
so the annotated datasets are limited in size in many fields (Zhou, 2021). Allocating too many
annotated data for validation would inevitably diminish the training set size and compromise the
AI training. On the other hand, the validation set should be sufficiently representative to provide a
reliable performance estimate on unseen data. An overly small validation set might risk the reliability
of performance estimation and checkpoint selection. As a result, the calibration of the validation set
remains largely empirical and lacks systematic investigation for better alternatives to select the best


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


checkpoint. Fulfilling this knowledge gap is particularly important in scenarios where real-world data
are scarce, sensitive, or costly to collect and annotate, as seen in the field of AI for healthcare (Zhou
et al., 2022). Therefore, our study uses early detection of cancerous tumors in computed tomography
(CT) volumes as a demonstration. While early detection of cancer holds immense clinical potential,
it faces profound constraints like disease prevalence and annotation difficulty to collect examples of
early-stage tumors (Crosby et al., 2022). The scarcity of annotated early cancer not only constrains
the data available for validation but also amplifies the overfitting problem inherent in a small, biased
validation set, potentially causing underdiagnosis and overdiagnosis.
We propose using synthetic data as validation, a strategy that guarantees the full utilization of the
training set while ensuring ample data diversity for validation. Data synthesis has held longstanding
interest and presents numerous intriguing merits for augmenting training and test data (Hu et al.,
2023; Gao et al., 2023) as reviewed in §2, but its use in validation has seldom been explored. We find
that synthetic data can facilitate a more reliable performance estimate on unseen data and effectively
address the constraints commonly associated with small, biased validation sets. Specifically, we
synthesize tumors in the healthy liver, which gives us orders of magnitude larger datasets for training.
To ensure the realism of the synthetic tumors, we employ a modeling-based strategy (Hu et al., 2023)
to simulate cancerous tumors with controlled shape, size, texture, location, and intensity. The use of
diverse, healthy CT volumes, supplemented with synthetic tumors, as validation has demonstrated
efficacy in mitigating model overfitting and enhancing the selection of checkpoints. Furthermore,
we relieve the pressing demand for human annotations to train AI models by utilizing CT volumes
with synthetic tumors as the training set. We then assess the model’s performance using a substantial
number of publicly available, fully-annotated CT volumes with real-world cancerous tumors, showing
that our models generalize well to these volumes from different hospitals and accurately segment the
tumors at their early stage. Our findings can be summarized as follows:

1. The best model checkpoint, selected by standard AI development with an in-domain real-tumor
   validation set, may not necessarily be generalized to unseen data, especially for out-domain test
   set. This limitation arises from the validation set failing to adequately represent corner cases.
2. The best model checkpoint, selected by our strategy with a diverse synthetic-tumor validation
   set, tends to be generalized well to unseen data. This is because the validation set can cover
   theoretically infinite examples of possible cancerous tumors across diverse conditions.
3. We introduce a novel continual learning framework. This framework integrates a continuous
   stream of synthetic data, characterized by diverse data distribution, for both training and validation.
   Traditional validation sets, constrained by static and limited in-domain real tumors, fall short in
   such a setting, whereas our synthetic tumors can be dynamically tailored to align with emerging
   distributions. Importantly, our framework can continuously generate tumors spanning a spectrum
   of sizes—from small to large—enhancing the detection rate of tumors at their early stages.

Although our study focuses on AI in healthcare, the insight should be pertinent to various imaging
applications within the field of computer vision. However, at the time this paper is written, very
few studies in computer vision have provided evidence that training exclusively on generated syn-
thetic data can match or surpass the performance achieved when trained on real data (Black et al.,
2023). In specific applications, integrating synthetic data with real data—essentially acting as data
augmentation—has been found empirically to boost AI performance (Mu et al., 2020; Luzi et al.,
2022; Azizi et al., 2023; Burg et al., 2023). In this regard, data synthesis—cancerous tumor synthesis
in particular—in medical imaging is relatively more successful1 with specific applications benefiting
more from training exclusively on synthetic data than real data.

2    R ELATED W ORK
The dilemma of validation. In the field of machine learning, it is customary to use finite, static
datasets with a pre-defined data split. While this standard offers a fair benchmark for comparing
    1
      The greater success of data synthesis in medical imaging (reviewed in §2), compared with computer vision,
can be attributed to two factors from our perspective. Firstly, the focus is primarily on synthesizing tumors
rather than other components of the human anatomy. Secondly, the synthesis of tumors in 3D medical images is
less complex as it does not require considerations for intricate variables such as lighting conditions, pose, and
occlusion, which are typical in computer vision tasks.


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


different AI models, it does not accurately represent real-world learning conditions. Two more
realistic scenarios often arise in practice.

• The first scenario is the small data regime, commonly observed in medical applications due to
  constraints like disease prevalence and annotation difficulty (Liu et al., 2022). In such cases, curating
  an appropriate validation set poses a conundrum. A large validation set would compromise the size
  of the training set, whereas a small one may not sufficiently estimate the model’s performance.
  Despite its critical importance, this issue has yet to receive adequate attention in the field.
• The second scenario involves dealing with a stream of data, in a context of continual learning where
  the model encounters a continuous flow of new data (Purushwalkam et al., 2022). A finite, static
  validation set proves unsuitable as it cannot accurately assess the model’s capability in processing
  an extensive and diverse data range. We argue that a validation set—made up of real-world data—
  might not be needed during the training stage in such situations. Given the vastness of the training
  data, overfitting can be naturally avoided. Consequently, selecting the last-epoch model checkpoint
  could be a judicious choice.

Progresses in data synthesis. Real-world data often encounters challenges such as poor quality,
limited quantity, and inaccessibility. To tackle these obstacles, the notion of synthetic data has
emerged as a practical alternative, allowing for the generation of samples as needed (Chen et al.,
2021). This approach has proven valuable in addressing data limitations and facilitating machine
learning processes, including computer vision (Chen et al., 2019; Ramesh et al., 2021), natural
language processing (Collobert & Weston, 2008; Brown et al., 2020), voice (Oord et al., 2016), and
many other fields (Wiese et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2018; Zheng et al., 2023). In the medical domain,
the practice of data synthesis—tumor synthesis in particular—endeavors to produce artificial tumors
in the image, which can significantly diversify the data and annotations for AI training. Successful
works related to tumor synthesis include polyp detection from colonoscopy videos (Shin et al., 2018),
COVID-19 detection from Chest CT (Yao et al., 2021; Lyu et al., 2022), diabetic lesion detection from
retinal images (Wang et al., 2022), cancer detection from fluorescence microscopy images (Horvath
et al., 2022), and brain tumor detection from MRI (Wyatt et al., 2022). A most recent study (Hu
et al., 2023) indicated that AI trained exclusively on synthetic tumors can segment liver tumors with
accuracy comparable to AI trained on real tumors.
To the best of our knowledge, data synthesis has been widely recognized for its contribution in
enhancing training and test datasets (Liu et al., 2023). However, its capacity for improving the
validation set remains largely untapped. In this paper, we extend the application of synthetic data to
the validation set, enabling the full use of the annotated data for AI training while ensuring diverse
and comprehensive validation data in the framework of continual learning.

3     M ETHOD & M ATERIAL

3.1   O UR S ETTING FOR C ONTINUAL T UMOR S EGMENTATION

According to Van de Ven & Tolias (2019); van de Ven et al. (2022), continual learning can be
categorized into three settings: class-incremental learning, task-incremental learning, and domain-
incremental learning. In the domain-incremental learning setting, which is relevant to our situation,
the problem remains consistent while the context and input distribution change. More specifically,
the model sequentially encounters a continuum of input datasets
                                  {X1 , Y1 }, {X2 , Y2 }, ..., {XN , YN },                             (1)
where each dataset {Xi , Yi }1≤i≤N is non-iid dataset. The objective is to train a model F : X → Y
that can be effectively queried at any given time to predict the target value Y associated with a test
input pair X. In liver tumor segmentation settings, X is the input CT volume together with the
segmentation mask Y . The non-iid refers to those originating from disparate medical centers.
The fixed static setting with real data showed in Figure 1(a), where the term static denotes the
unchanged distribution of the dataset, presents several limitations:
Firstly, the real data is constrained in terms of its scales and acquisition sources. Some datasets
contain only dozens of CT volumes sourced from a single medical center (Kavur et al., 2021). This


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                     synthetic valid.                  input healthy CT
      fixed LiTS dataset                                                             (small tumors)
                                                                                                        testing
                                                          tumor                      synthetic valid.               shape            texture
                                                        generator                   (medium tumors)               generation       generation
      training         valid.
                                                                                     synthetic valid.
                                                                                     (large tumors)
                                                                                                                            location
                                                          ......                                                           selection


                                healthy dataset
                                fixed assembly
                                                                                                                             post-
                                                  continual learning with                                                 processing
                                                    synthetic training

            testing
                                                                                                                     output synthetic CT


   (a) static setting                                               (b) dynamic setting                           (c) tumor generator

Figure 1: Illustration of continual learning framework paradigm. (a) The diagram for the fixed
static setting, where the real-tumor dataset is partitioned into training and validation sets. The AI
model is then developed using these datasets and subsequently tested with unseen data. (b) Continual
learning framework integrated with synthetic data. (c) Tumor generator pipeline. By leveraging an
advanced tumor generator, we can create dynamic training set and an extensive validation set. Models
developed using dynamic setting exhibit superior performance compared to the fixed static setting.


constraint, combined with the fixed data distribution within the static setting, poses challenges in
achieving diversification. Secondly, the task of data annotation, specifically tumor annotation, is
exceptionally challenging as it often necessitates the use of corroborative pathology reports. This
requirement adds to the difficulty and complexity of extending the dataset. Furthermore, there are
specific cases, such as extremely small tumors, where obtaining real data becomes significantly
challenging, rendering it impractical or even unattainable. As a result, training and validating the AI
model on a fixed static setting is quite likely to result in biased, sub-optimal performance on unseen
data, especially for out-domain test sets.
In contrast, the dynamic setting shown in Figure 1(b), where the term dynamic denotes that the
distribution of the dataset changes all the time. We continuously creates a stream of synthetic data for
AI training, can overcome the aforementioned limitations:
Firstly, acquiring healthy CT volumes is much easier than obtaining CT volumes with annotated
cancerous tumors. As a result, our continual learning framework can start from a diverse dataset
comprising CT volumes of healthy subjects procured from multiple sources or medical centers.
Secondly, by implementing dynamic control over our pipeline, we gain the ability to generate synthetic
data according to specific demands, including those of a tiny radius. Consequently, our framework
achieves a noteworthy level of diversity, encompassing a wide array of variations. Therefore, the AI
model developed using this continual learning framework of synthetic data has potential to enhance
its performance on out-domain data.

3.2      M ODELING -BASED T UMOR G ENERATOR

Inspired by the standardized guidance, medical knowledge, and distributional characteristics of
tumors, we develop a modeling-based strategy to generate synthetic data. For example, in liver
tumors, according to the Liver Imaging Reporting and Data System (LI-RADS) (Chernyak et al.,
2018), the malignancy of hepatocellular carcinomas is determined by shape, size, location and texture,
enhancing capsule appearance. The statistical distribution of liver tumors size and intensity can be
found in Appendix A. We use a sequence of morphological image-processing operations to model
real tumors, as shown in Figure 1(c). The tumor generator consists of four steps: (1) shape generation,
(2) texture generation, (3) location selection, and (4) post-processing.

1. Shape generation. Based on clinical knowledge, a tumor is initiated from a malignant cell and
   gradually proliferates and expands, resulting in a nearly spherical shape for small tumors (≤5mm).
   On the other hand, statistical distributions of real liver tumors indicate that larger tumors tend to
   exhibit an elliptical shape. This observation has inspired us to generate a tumor-like shape using
   an ellipsoid ellip(a, b, c), where a, b, c are the length of the semi-axes. Additionally, we utilize
   elastic deformation (Ronneberger et al., 2015) to enhance the authenticity of the generated tumor


                                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Datasets description. The LiTS dataset was used to train, validate, and evaluate AI models
in segmenting liver tumors. The FLARE’23 dataset was used for external validation. An assembly
of the CHAOS, BTCV, and Pancreas-CT datasets was used for generating synthetic training and
validation sets, in which the liver in these datasets is confirmed to be healthy. For simplicity, cohorts
1–7 will be referred to throughout the remainder of this paper.

 dataset                            notation         split     annotation     # of CTs        tumor
                                    cohort 1       training        ✓             25            real
 LiTS (Bilic et al., 2019)          cohort 2      validation       ✓             5             real
                                    cohort 3        testing        ✓             70            real
                                    cohort 4       training         ✗            25         synthetic
 Assembly (Hu et al., 2023)
                                    cohort 5      validation        ✗            50         synthetic
                                    cohort 6      validation       ✗             50         synthetic
 FLARE’23 (Ma et al., 2022)
                                    cohort 7       testing         ✓            120           real


   shapes D(ellip(a, b, c), σd ), where σd control the magnitude of displacements. We show some
   examples in the Appendix B.
2. Texture generation. The generation of textures is a significant challenge due to the varied patterns
   found in tumors. Our current understanding of tumor textures is derived solely from clinical
   expertise, which considers factors such as the attenuation value and the distribution characteristics.
   To achieve the desired texture, we introduce Gaussian noise N (µ, σg ) with a predetermined mean
   attenuation value, matching the standard deviation of the liver tumors. Subsequently, we use cubic
   interpolation to smooth the texture. Furthermore, to better replicate textures obtained from CT
   imaging, we use a final step of texture blurring. Examples can be found in Appendix C.
3. Location selection. Liver tumors generally do not allow the passage of preexisting blood vessels
   from the host tissue through them. To address this concern, we initially perform voxel value
   thresholding for vessel segmentation (Gonzalez, 2009). Utilizing the vessel mask acquired from
   this step enables us to identify if a particular location can cause tumor-blood collision.
4. Post-processing. The post-processing involves evaluating image characteristics through visual
   inspection and feedback from medical professionals. The purpose of these steps is to replicate
   the phenomena of mass effect and the appearance of a capsule (Lee et al., 2004). Mass effect
   refers to the phenomenon wherein the tumor undergoes growth, resulting in the displacement
   and deformation of surrounding tissues. We utilize local scaling warping (Glasbey & Mardia,
   1998) to replicate this effect. Additionally, we brighten the edges of the tumor, thereby simulating
   the capsule appearance. The output CT volumes with synthetic data are now able to serve the
   continual learning framework, where you can find some visual examples in Appendix D.

4     E XPERIMENT
4.1   DATASET & B ENCHMARK

Table 1 summarizes a total of five publicly available datasets used in this study. We group them into
three classes as follows.

• Real-tumor dataset. We select the LiTS dataset (Bilic et al., 2019) for training and testing AI
  models. LiTS provides detailed per-voxel annotations of liver tumors. The tumor types include
  HCC and secondary liver tumors and metastasis derived from colorectal, breast, and lung cancer.
  The size of liver tumors ranges from 38mm3 to 349 cm3 , and the radius of tumors is approximately
  in the range of [2, 44] mm. LiTS is partitioned into a training set (cohort 1; 25 CT volumes),
  validation set (cohort 2; 5 CT volumes), and test set (cohort 3; 70 CT volumes).
• Healthy CT assembly. We have collected a dataset of 75 CT volumes with healthy liver assembled
  from CHAOS (Kavur et al., 2021), Pancreas-CT (Roth et al., 2016) and BTCV (Landman et al.,
  2015). This assembled dataset is partitioned into training set (cohort 4; 25 CT volumes) and
  validation set (cohort 5; 50 CT volumes). As illustrated in Figure 1(b) For the training set,
  tumors were dynamically generated within these volumes during training, resulting in a sequential


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    collection of image-label pairs comprising synthetic tumors. For the validation set, we generated
    three different tumor sizes (small, medium, and large) for each healthy CT volume offline, giving a
    total of 150 CT volumes.

• External benchmark. FLARE’23 (Ma et al., 2022) is used for external benchmark because it
  provides out-domain CT volumes from the LiTS dataset. This dataset was specifically chosen
  due to its extensive coverage, encompassing over 4000 3D CT volumes obtained from more
  than 30 medical centers. The inclusion of such a diverse dataset ensures the generalizability of
  the benchmark. The FLARE’23 dataset contains partially labeled annotations. To ensure the
  suitability of the test set, specific criteria are applied to the annotations. These criteria require
  that the annotations include per-voxel labeling for both the liver and tumors, with the additional
  constraint that the connected component of the tumor must intersect with the liver. Adhering to
  these conditions, we chose the external test set (cohort 7; 120 CT volumes). Additionally, same as
  assembly dataset, we can use the healthy cases within the FLARE’23 to generate synthetic data to
  serve as in-domain validation set (cohort 6; 50 CT volumes), which will be used in §5.5.

Experiment Setup. Our model is trained for 6,000 epochs, with a model checkpoint being saved
every 100 epochs, a total of 60 model checkpoints are saved throughout the entire training process.
To ensure robustness and comprehensiveness in obtaining results, the experiment is conducted ten
times each to perform statistical analysis. By averaging all runs, we obtain reliable results.


4.2        I MPLEMENTATION

We have implemented our codes utilizing the MONAI2 framework for the U-Net architecture (Ron-
neberger et al., 2015), a well-established network commonly employed in medical image segmentation
tasks. During the pre-processing stage, input images undergo clipping with a window range of [-
21,189]. Following this, they are normalized to achieve a zero mean and unit standard deviation (Tang
et al., 2022). For training purposes, random patches with dimensions of 96 × 96 × 96 are cropped
from the 3D image volumes. A base learning rate of 0.0002 is utilized in the training process,
accompanied by a batch size of two per GPU. To further enhance the training process, we employ
both the linear warmup strategy and the cosine annealing learning rate schedule. During the inference
phase, a sliding window strategy with an overlapping area ratio of 0.75 is adopted. The segmentation
performance is evaluated using the Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC) score, while Sensitivity is used
to evaluate the performance of detecting very tiny liver tumors.


5        R ESULT

5.1        T HE OVERFITTING IS ATTRIBUTED TO S MALL -S CALE , R EAL -T UMOR VALIDATION

To demonstrate the potential limitations of selecting the best checkpoint based on a small-scale
and biased real-tumor validation set, we evaluate all the model checkpoints on cohort 2, 3, and 7.
Cohort 3 (in-domain test set) assesses the performance of each checkpoint and aids in determining the
effectiveness of the selected best checkpoints using the validation set (cohort 2). Cohort 7 (out-domain
test set) serves as a robust benchmark, providing an enhanced evaluation of the performance of the
model checkpoints on out-domain unseen data.
Figure 2 and Table 2 show the evaluation results. Two significant observations can be made. Firstly,
the best checkpoint identified by the small real-tumor validation set exhibits considerable instability,
with notable variations observed when different validation samples are chosen. This result indicates
that the small-scale real validation is inherently biased and lacks the ability to adequately represent
the broader range of cases. Secondly, the performance of the best checkpoint determined by the real
validation set does not effectively generalize to unseen test data, particularly when confronted with
out-domain data originating from other medical centers. These observations indicate that overfitting
can be attributed to a small-scale, biased real-tumor validation set.

     2
         https://monai.io/


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: The overfitting is due to a small-scale, biased real-tumor validation set. The green
curve depicts the performance of each checkpoint on the unseen test set. (a) In-domain test set
from the LiTS dataset and (b) out-domain test set from FLARE’23 dataset. As observed, the model
initially performs well, but its performance starts to decline when trained for an extended duration.
This decline is attributed to overfitting (green dotted line), where the model becomes too specialized
on the training set and loses its ability to generalize effectively to the unseen test set. The purpose
of a validation set is to identify the peak performance of the model on unseen data. However, in
real-world scenarios, the validation set is often too small, which leads to inaccurate identification of
the best checkpoint. The curves generated by the real-tumor validation are plotted in gray. The dots
represent the best checkpoint identified by the real-tumor validation (in gray) and determined by the
test set (in green). The proximity of the two colored dots relates to the performance of validation set.


5.2   T HE OVERFITTING IS A LLEVIATED BY L ARGE -S CALE , S YNTHETIC -T UMOR VALIDATION

In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of the large-scale and diverse synthetic-tumor validation
set in mitigating the issue of overfitting, we conducted a replicated experiment. This experiment
involved evaluating all the model checkpoints on cohorts 5, 3, and 7.
The evaluation trajectory can be observed in Figure 3, with the synthetic-tumor validation set
represented by the red line. Detailed comparisons with the real-tumor validation set can be found
in Table 2. Upon analysis of Table 2, it becomes evident that the best checkpoint selected using
the synthetic-tumor validation set demonstrates significantly improved performance compared to
the best checkpoint chosen using the real-tumor validation set when tested with unseen data. This
enhanced performance is particularly notable when faced with out-domain data (cohort 7). These
findings underscore the effectiveness of our diverse and large-scale synthetic-tumor validation set as
an improved alternative to address overfitting issues.


Figure 3: The overfitting is alleviated by a large-scale, synthetic-tumor validation set. The
red curve represents the results obtained using the synthetic-tumor validation set (cohort 5). (a-b)
denotes same meaning as Figure 4. We can generate theoretically limitless tumors under diverse
conditions using the tumor generator. This extensive coverage enhances our ability to identify
the peak performance of the model on unseen datasets. The training trajectory demonstrates the
efficacy of the synthetic-tumor validation set, thus highlighting the effectiveness of using a large-scale
synthetic-tumor validation set to address the issue of overfitting.



                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.3   T HE OVERFITTING IS A DDRESSED BY C ONTINUAL L EARNING ON S YNTHETIC DATA

In the preceding section, we showcased how the utilization of a comprehensive and diverse synthetic-
tumor validation set can alleviate the concern of overfitting. Now, we will shift our attention
to emphasizing the efficacy of synthetic data in handling the overfitting problem from a training
perspective. For this purpose, we compare the performance of an AI model trained on either fixed
static real data or dynamic synthetic data.
Figure 4 illustrates the complete training trajectory, while Table 2 provides valuable insights regarding
the AI model’s performance. Specifically, the AI model trained on fixed static real data demonstrates
a DSC of 26.7% for cohort 3 and 31.1% for the out-domain test set cohort 7. In a comparative
analysis, the AI model trained on dynamic synthetic data achieves significantly higher DSC values,
specifically 34.5% for cohort 3 and 35.4% for cohort 7. These results indicate a notable improvement
compared to the AI model trained on real data. Based on these findings, we can confidently assert that
incorporating our continual learning framework with synthetic data allows us to effectively address
the issue of overfitting, encompassing both the training and validation perspectives.


Figure 4: The overfitting is addressed by continual learning on synthetic data. (a) in- and (b) out-
domain test set. The gray line corresponds to the AI model trained on fixed, static real data, while the
red line represents the model developed through continual learning on synthetic data. It is clear that
the AI model trained on synthetic data outperforms the one trained on real data.

Table 2: Demonstration on liver tumor segmentation. Cohort 3 and cohort 7 are from the LiTS and
FLARE datasets, respectively, detailed in Table 1. The best @ real or @ synt denotes the selection of
the best checkpoint based on either real- or synthetic- tumor validation set. We report the DSC score
(%) (95% CI) achieved on the test set. The result reveals that the dynamic synthetic data demonstrates
superior performance than fixed static real data, particularly in out-domain test set.

                           training on real tumors                   training on synthetic tumors
                     best @ real              best @ synt         best @ real            best @ synt
 cohort 3          26.7 (22.6-30.9)       27.0 (23.7-30.3)     33.4 (28.7-38.0)       34.5 (30.8-38.2)
 cohort 7          31.1 (26.0-36.2)       32.0 (28.5-35.5)     33.3 (30.6-36.0)       35.4 (32.1-38.7)


5.4   S YNTHETIC DATA C AN B ENEFIT E ARLY C ANCER D ETECTION

Tiny tumors (radius < 5mm) detection plays a critical role in clinical applications, providing valuable
information for early cancer diagnosis. Acquiring real data of such a small size is challenging,
often posing difficulties or even making it impossible to acquire them. However, our strategy can
dynamically generate numerous tiny tumors as required. As a result, the AI model developed within
the continual learning framework yields a significant improvement in detecting tiny liver tumors.
The improvement can be found in Figure 5. We assessed the sensitivity of the AI model under
different settings. The performance of the AI model trained and validated on the fixed static setting
with real data is 33.1% for the in-domain test set (cohort 3) and 33.9% for the out-domain test
set (cohort 7). Comparatively, the AI model developed using our continual learning framework
on synthetic data gives a sensitivity of 55.4% for cohort 3 and 52.3% for cohort 7. These results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our continual learning framework in early detection of cancer.


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Synthetic data can benefit early cancer detection. The trained@real or @synt denotes
that the training framework is based on either a fixed static real or dynamic synthetic data set. The
best@real or @synt denote the same meaning as Table 1. The numbers on the bar are sensitivities.
We show that our continual learning framework is effective in detecting tiny tumors (radius < 5mm).


5.5   C ONTINUAL LEARNING IS ENHANCED BY IN - DOMAIN S YNTHETIC - TUMOR VALIDATION

We have demonstrated that our continual learning framework yields superior performance compared
to fixed static real-tumor datasets. Moving forward, let’s consider the continual learning framework
itself. Synthetic data offer a significant advantage in that they allow for the utilization of healthy CT
volumes from various sources. This means that we can directly incorporate the healthy cases within
the dataset and generate an in-domain validation set (cohort 6). As shown in Figure 6, the continual
learning framework can lead to more favorable outcomes when we are able to generate in-domain
data from the same dataset, as opposed to out-domain synthetic data (cohort 5).


Figure 6: The continual learning is enhanced by in-domain synthetic-tumor validation. The gray
curve represents the out-domain validation set with synthetic data (cohort 5), while the red curve
corresponds to the in-domain set (cohort 6). As evidenced, the performance of our continual learning
framework exhibits improvement when utilizing in-domain synthetic data as validation set.


6     C ONCLUSION
Data synthesis strategies continue to pique the interest of researchers and practitioners, propelling
ongoing investigations within this field. This paper justifies the potential and stresses the necessity
of leveraging synthetic data as validation to select the best model checkpoint along the training
trajectory. Moreover, by employing continual learning framework on synthetic data, we realize a
marked improvement in liver tumor segmentation as well as in the early detection of cancerous
tumors compared to fixed static setting on real data, where procuring ample annotated examples can
be cost-prohibitive. It is particularly valuable in scenarios characterized by limited annotated data.
Limitation and future work. The computational cost is high when utilizing offline-generated
synthetic data for validation. Additionally, the design and implementation of the tumor generator
pipeline pose challenges when attempting to adapt it to different organs, requiring substantial design
considerations and specialized expertise. Future investigation could explore more generalized tumor
synthesis strategies to facilitate the continual learning framework.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Shekoofeh Azizi, Simon Kornblith, Chitwan Saharia, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J Fleet.
  Synthetic data from diffusion models improves imagenet classification. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.08466, 2023.
Patrick Bilic, Patrick Ferdinand Christ, Eugene Vorontsov, Grzegorz Chlebus, Hao Chen, Qi Dou,
  Chi-Wing Fu, Xiao Han, Pheng-Ann Heng, Jürgen Hesser, et al. The liver tumor segmentation
  benchmark (lits). arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.04056, 2019.
Michael J Black, Priyanka Patel, Joachim Tesch, and Jinlong Yang. Bedlam: A synthetic dataset of
 bodies exhibiting detailed lifelike animated motion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
 on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8726–8737, 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Max F Burg, Florian Wenzel, Dominik Zietlow, Max Horn, Osama Makansi, Francesco Locatello,
 and Chris Russell. A data augmentation perspective on diffusion models and retrieval. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2304.10253, 2023.
Richard J Chen, Ming Y Lu, Tiffany Y Chen, Drew FK Williamson, and Faisal Mahmood. Synthetic
  data in machine learning for medicine and healthcare. Nature Biomedical Engineering, 5(6):
  493–497, 2021.
Yuhua Chen, Wen Li, Xiaoran Chen, and Luc Van Gool. Learning semantic segmentation from
  synthetic data: A geometrically guided input-output adaptation approach. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1841–1850, 2019.
Victoria Chernyak, Kathryn J Fowler, Aya Kamaya, Ania Z Kielar, Khaled M Elsayes, Mustafa R
  Bashir, Yuko Kono, Richard K Do, Donald G Mitchell, Amit G Singal, An Tang, and Claude B
  Sirlin. Liver imaging reporting and data system (LI-RADS) version 2018: Imaging of hepatocellular
  carcinoma in at-risk patients. Radiology, 289(3):816–830, 2018.
Ronan Collobert and Jason Weston. A unified architecture for natural language processing: Deep
  neural networks with multitask learning. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on
  Machine learning, pp. 160–167, 2008.
David Crosby, Sangeeta Bhatia, Kevin M Brindle, Lisa M Coussens, Caroline Dive, Mark Emberton,
  Sadik Esener, Rebecca C Fitzgerald, Sanjiv S Gambhir, Peter Kuhn, et al. Early detection of cancer.
  Science, 375(6586):eaay9040, 2022.
Cong Gao, Benjamin D Killeen, Yicheng Hu, Robert B Grupp, Russell H Taylor, Mehran Armand,
  and Mathias Unberath. Synthetic data accelerates the development of generalizable learning-based
  algorithms for x-ray image analysis. Nature Machine Intelligence, 5(3):294–308, 2023.
James Gareth, Witten Daniela, Hastie Trevor, and Tibshirani Robert. An introduction to statistical
  learning: with applications in R. Spinger, 2013.
Chris A Glasbey and Kantilal Vardichand Mardia. A review of image-warping methods. Journal of
  applied statistics, 25(2):155–171, 1998.
Rafael C Gonzalez. Digital image processing. Pearson education india, 2009.
Izabela Horvath, Johannes Paetzold, Oliver Schoppe, Rami Al-Maskari, Ivan Ezhov, Suprosanna
  Shit, Hongwei Li, Ali Ertürk, and Bjoern Menze. Metgan: Generative tumour inpainting and
  modality synthesis in light sheet microscopy. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference
  on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 227–237, 2022.
Qixin Hu, Junfei Xiao, Yixiong Chen, Shuwen Sun, Jie-Neng Chen, Alan Yuille, and Zongwei Zhou.
  Label-free liver tumor segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wengong Jin, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Junction tree variational autoencoder for
 molecular graph generation. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2323–2332.
 PMLR, 2018.

A Emre Kavur, N Sinem Gezer, Mustafa Barış, Sinem Aslan, Pierre-Henri Conze, Vladimir Groza,
  Duc Duy Pham, Soumick Chatterjee, Philipp Ernst, Savaş Özkan, et al. Chaos challenge-combined
  (ct-mr) healthy abdominal organ segmentation. Medical Image Analysis, 69:101950, 2021.

Max Kuhn, Kjell Johnson, et al. Applied predictive modeling, volume 26. Springer, 2013.

B Landman, Z Xu, J Igelsias, M Styner, T Langerak, and A Klein. 2015 miccai multi-atlas labeling
  beyond the cranial vault workshop and challenge, 2015. doi:10.7303/syn3193805.

KHY Lee, ME O’Malley, MA Haider, and A Hanbidge. Triple-phase mdct of hepatocellular
 carcinoma. American Journal of Roentgenology, 182(3):643–649, 2004.

Cong Liu, Casey N Ta, Jim M Havrilla, Jordan G Nestor, Matthew E Spotnitz, Andrew S Geneslaw,
  Yu Hu, Wendy K Chung, Kai Wang, and Chunhua Weng. Oard: Open annotations for rare diseases
  and their phenotypes based on real-world data. The American Journal of Human Genetics, 109(9):
  1591–1604, 2022.

Qihao Liu, Adam Kortylewski, and Alan L Yuille. Poseexaminer: Automated testing of out-of-
  distribution robustness in human pose and shape estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 672–681, 2023.

Lorenzo Luzi, Ali Siahkoohi, Paul M Mayer, Josue Casco-Rodriguez, and Richard Baraniuk.
  Boomerang: Local sampling on image manifolds using diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.12100, 2022.

Fei Lyu, Mang Ye, Jonathan Frederik Carlsen, Kenny Erleben, Sune Darkner, and Pong C Yuen.
  Pseudo-label guided image synthesis for semi-supervised covid-19 pneumonia infection segmenta-
  tion. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2022.

Jun Ma, Yao Zhang, Song Gu, Xingle An, Zhihe Wang, Cheng Ge, Congcong Wang, Fan Zhang,
  Yu Wang, Yinan Xu, et al. Fast and low-gpu-memory abdomen ct organ segmentation: the flare
  challenge. Medical Image Analysis, 82:102616, 2022.

Jiteng Mu, Weichao Qiu, Gregory D Hager, and Alan L Yuille. Learning from synthetic animals.
   In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
   12386–12395, 2020.

Aaron van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves,
  Nal Kalchbrenner, Andrew Senior, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Wavenet: A generative model for raw
  audio. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03499, 2016.

Senthil Purushwalkam, Pedro Morgado, and Abhinav Gupta. The challenges of continuous self-
  supervised learning. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 702–721. Springer, 2022.

Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.12092, 2021.

Brian D Ripley. Pattern recognition and neural networks. Cambridge university press, 2007.

Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-
  Assisted Intervention, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.

Holger Roth, Amal Farag, Evrim B. Turkbey, Le Lu, Jiamin Liu, and Ronald M. Summers. Data
  from pancreas-ct, 2016. The Cancer Imaging Archive. https://doi.org/10.7937/K9/
 TCIA.2016.tNB1kqBU.

Stuart J Russell. Artificial intelligence a modern approach. Pearson Education, Inc., 2010.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Younghak Shin, Hemin Ali Qadir, and Ilangko Balasingham. Abnormal colon polyp image synthesis
  using conditional adversarial networks for improved detection performance. IEEE Access, 6:
  56007–56017, 2018.
Yucheng Tang, Dong Yang, Wenqi Li, Holger R Roth, Bennett Landman, Daguang Xu, Vishwesh
  Nath, and Ali Hatamizadeh. Self-supervised pre-training of swin transformers for 3d medical
  image analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 20730–20740, 2022.
Gido M Van de Ven and Andreas S Tolias. Three scenarios for continual learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1904.07734, 2019.
Gido M van de Ven, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Andreas S Tolias. Three types of incremental learning.
  Nature Machine Intelligence, 4(12):1185–1197, 2022.
Hualin Wang, Yuhong Zhou, Jiong Zhang, Jianqin Lei, Dongke Sun, Feng Xu, and Xiayu Xu.
 Anomaly segmentation in retinal images with poisson-blending data augmentation. Medical Image
 Analysis, pp. 102534, 2022.
Magnus Wiese, Robert Knobloch, Ralf Korn, and Peter Kretschmer. Quant gans: deep generation of
 financial time series. Quantitative Finance, 20(9):1419–1440, 2020.
Julian Wyatt, Adam Leach, Sebastian M Schmon, and Chris G Willcocks. Anoddpm: Anomaly
  detection with denoising diffusion probabilistic models using simplex noise. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 650–656, 2022.
Qingsong Yao, Li Xiao, Peihang Liu, and S Kevin Zhou. Label-free segmentation of covid-19 lesions
  in lung ct. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2021.
Chenyu Zheng, Guoqiang Wu, and Chongxuan Li. Toward understanding generative data augmenta-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17476, 2023.
Zongwei Zhou. Towards Annotation-Efficient Deep Learning for Computer-Aided Diagnosis. PhD
  thesis, Arizona State University, 2021.
Zongwei Zhou, Michael B Gotway, and Jianming Liang. Interpreting medical images. In Intelligent
  Systems in Medicine and Health, pp. 343–371. Springer, 2022.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
Table of Contents
     A Distribution of Real-tumor                 14

     B Shape Examples                             15

     C Texture Examples                           16

     D Synthetic tumor examples                   17


                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    D ISTRIBUTION OF R EAL - TUMOR


Figure 7: Intensity distribution of liver tumors and their healthy counterparts. Our tumor
generator, which is based on modeling and medical knowledge, incorporates the distributional
characteristics of real tumors. We present the intensity distributions of real tumors obtained from the
LiTS dataset.


Figure 8: Size distribution of liver tumors. We have calculated the size distribution of liver tumors
from the LiTS dataset. This tumor size distribution will serve as a guide for determining the sizes of
the synthetic tumors we generate.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    S HAPE E XAMPLES


Figure 9: Examples of the generated shape. The tumor generator pipeline enables us to control the
size and deformation of the generated tumors. Here, we present some examples of generated shapes
under different conditions.


                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C   T EXTURE E XAMPLES


Figure 10: Examples of the generated texture. Our data synthesis strategy also enables us to
generate different textures, as illustrated here for visualization.


                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    S YNTHETIC TUMOR EXAMPLES


Figure 11: Visualization of synthetic data. By combining all the pipelines together, we can obtain a
wide range of diverse synthetic data for validation and training.


                                                17
