Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D ISTRIBUTION AWARE ACTIVE L EARNING VIA G AUS -
SIAN M IXTURES

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         In active learning (AL), the distribution of labeled samples in a latent space is of-
         ten dissimilar to that of unlabeled samples, depending on various factors such as
         labeled set size or data selection strategy. This distributional discrepancy hampers
         both evaluation and estimation of informativeness on unseen data, and remains an
         important issue in AL. In this paper, we propose a robust distribution-aware learn-
         ing and sample selection strategy that employs Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM)
         to effectively encapsulate both labeled and unlabeled sets for AL. By utilizing the
         GMM statistics derived from all available data, the proposed approach is able to
         construct a more diverse feature representation, thereby reducing the risk of over-
         fitting to limited patterns. Specifically, we propose a regularization method that
         supervises GMM posteriors under the concept of metric learning, and introduce
         a semi-supervised learning method that feeds GMM statistics into an adversar-
         ial discriminator to prevent memorization of samples. Furthermore, we propose
         a new informativeness metric that utilizes GMM likelihoods to detect overfitted
         areas in the latent space, and then devise a hybrid sample selection strategy that
         takes advantage of the properties of different informativeness metrics. Extensive
         experimental results demonstrate that our GMM-based method outperforms ex-
         isting works on various balanced and imbalanced datasets, and can be readily
         integrated with other AL schemes to further improve the performance.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent advancements in machine learning have underscored the critical demand for a substantial
amount of labeled training data. However, in practical real-world applications, it is often challenging
to acquire labeled data especially in cases that require specialized expertise, such as medical diag-
noses or complex vision tasks. In this context, active learning (AL) emerges as a promising solution
to maximize annotation efficiency, where the trained model iteratively selects the most informative
subset from the unlabeled dataset to be annotated by human experts. In virtue of previous efforts,
numerous AL solutions have been proposed: prediction-based methods (Wang & Shang, 2014; Joshi
et al., 2009) measure the uncertainty of predictions; model-based methods (Caramalau et al., 2021;
Sinha et al., 2019) train separate models to measure the informativeness of samples; feature-based
methods (Sener & Savarese, 2018; Agarwal et al., 2020) utilize the relationship between feature
representations on the latent space to enhance the diversity of selected samples.
However, despite these contributions, overcoming the over-
fitting issue still remains a fundamental challenge in AL.
This issue can be observed from Fig. 1, which shows the
t-SNE visualization of latent space after training the neu-
ral network with 1,000 labeled samples of CIFAR-10 after
the first AL cycle. Although the model learns a semantically
distinguishable representation on labeled set XL , there ex-
ists a clear discrepancy between XL and unlabeled set XU L .
In other words, given a feature extractor fθ , the latent dis-
tribution becomes distorted as p(fθ (XL )) ̸= p(fθ (XU L ))). Figure 1: t-SNE visualization of latent
                                                                            st
Accordingly, the model may become overfitted to this un- space after 1 AL cycle in CIFAR-10.
representative XL , thereby compromising its ability to generalize. This discrepancy is a well-known
phenomenon in AL (Farquhar et al., 2021), which can occur due to various reasons such as a small


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


labeled set size during early AL cycles or a biased labeled set caused by a particular data selection
strategy. It is important to mitigate the distributional discrepancy between XL and XU L in AL as
it can deprive the task model of its generalization capability, which can be problematic when (i)
evaluating the task model on test data or (ii) estimating the informativeness of unlabeled samples.
Despite its importance, only a few prior works have attempted to resolve this underlying challenge
in AL. For example, (Huang et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2020; Yuan et al., 2021) propose to minimize in-
consistency between predictions on unlabeled samples and use this inconsistency as informativeness
metrics. (Kim et al., 2021; Su et al., 2020; Sinha et al., 2019) train discriminator modules to select
samples that are expected to originate from the unlabeled set. However, performances of existing
methods are potentially limited as they are not able to precisely capture the distribution statistics of
{XL , XU L }, thereby failing to effectively reduce the distributional discrepancy.
Contribution. In this paper, we propose a new direction to AL that directly calculates the distribu-
tion statistics {ψL , ψU L } of the entire dataset {XL , XU L } and suggest (i) distribution-aware training
strategies and (ii) distribution-aware informativeness metrics to mitigate the distributional discrep-
ancy. Our key idea is to leverage a solid unsupervised clustering method, Gaussian Mixture Models
(GMM), which is a useful tool to calculate statistics of the latent distribution as ψ := (π, µ, σ 2 ).
We propose a regularization method that utilizes ψ as a supervision signal to guide the learning of
robust general representations against noisy samples. Additionally, we introduce semi-supervised
learning methods that leverage the statistics of ψ to reduce the distributional discrepancy between
XL , XU L and a novel informativeness metric based on the difference in GMM likelihoods. Overall,
the incorporation of GMM serves as an effective approach to mitigate distortions in latent space,
ultimately leading to improved performance. Our contributions are as follows:

• We propose the characterization of datasets via GMM and the incorporation of the learned GMM
  statistics from the entire datasets into the supervised and semi-supervised training strategies. Our
  method aims to learn an undistorted representation to improve the generality of the latent distri-
  bution.
• Based on the distributional knowledge from GMM, we propose a novel informativeness metric
  that measures the difference in likelihoods. Additionally, we introduce a hybrid selection strategy
  that seamlessly integrates prediction-based, model-based and likelihood-based informativeness.

We demonstrate the competence of our methods on the benchmark datasets: CIFAR-10, CIFAR-
100, SVHN, FashionMNIST.Extensive experiments show that the proposed methods significantly
improve performance, achieving state-of-the-art results. We also confirm their superiority on imbal-
anced datasets which have different numbers of samples per category.

2    R ELATED W ORKS
Active learning. AL aims to select a small number of informative unlabeled samples that can maxi-
mize the efficiency of the limited annotation budget. AL can be broadly categorized into two types:
model-based methods and feature-based methods. First, model-based methods compute the informa-
tiveness scores of unlabeled samples based on the output of the neural network. Related informative-
ness metrics can be defined as the margin between the first and second confident predictions (Joshi
et al., 2009; Roth & Small, 2006); entropy of the predictive distribution (Wang & Shang, 2014;
Settles & Craven, 2008; Luo et al., 2013); variance in the model ensembles (Beluch et al., 2018;
Haussmann et al., 2020; Jung et al., 2022). Recently, there have been significant efforts to train a
separate module that predicts only the informativenss of samples. For example, (Sinha et al., 2019;
Kim et al., 2021) measure the unfamiliarity of data samples through adversarial training, while (Yoo
& Kweon, 2019) trains a loss prediction module to approximate the informativeness score. How-
ever, these model-based methods are known to be vulnerable to redundant sampling where similar
samples are chosen at the same time, decreasing total informativeness of the selected subset. Sec-
ond, feature-based methods use the relationship between feature representations on the latent space
to measure the informativeness score. For instance, (Sener & Savarese, 2018; Agarwal et al., 2020)
solve the K-center problem to enhance the diversity of a core-set, and (Parvaneh et al., 2022) uses
interpolation to detect informative areas in latent space, while (Caramalau et al., 2021) measures the
distance between features via a graph neural network. However, these existing feature-based meth-
ods have primarily focused on selecting diverse instances; these approaches are vulnerable to outlier
samples and may overlook specific regions that intensively contain informative samples, potentially

                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    𝑋𝑋𝐿𝐿                     𝑋𝑋𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈                  𝑋𝑋𝐿𝐿                 𝑋𝑋𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈                    𝑋𝑋𝐿𝐿                        𝑋𝑋𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈               𝑋𝑋𝐿𝐿                     𝑋𝑋𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈


     GMM fitting
                                                            𝐿𝐿𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑥𝑥𝑙𝑙 , 𝑦𝑦𝑙𝑙
          𝜓𝜓𝐿𝐿 = (𝜋𝜋𝐿𝐿 , 𝜇𝜇𝐿𝐿 , 𝜎𝜎𝐿𝐿2 )                     𝐿𝐿𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 𝑥𝑥𝑙𝑙 , 𝑦𝑦𝑙𝑙 , 𝜓𝜓𝐿𝐿                                                                  𝜓𝜓𝐿𝐿 = (𝜋𝜋𝐿𝐿 , 𝜇𝜇𝐿𝐿 , 𝜎𝜎𝐿𝐿2 )
                                      2                                                                𝐿𝐿𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 𝑥𝑥𝑙𝑙 , 𝑥𝑥𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 , 𝜓𝜓𝐿𝐿 , 𝜓𝜓𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈
       𝜓𝜓𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 = (𝜋𝜋𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 , 𝜇𝜇𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 , 𝜎𝜎𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 )                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                      𝜓𝜓𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 = (𝜋𝜋𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 , 𝜇𝜇𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 , 𝜎𝜎𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 )
                                                    Distributional Regularization                    Distributional Alignment
       Dataset Characterization                                                                                                                             Sample Selection
                                                        (Supervised Learning)                       (Semi-supervised Learning)


       Labeled Samples                        Unlabeled Samples                  Selected Samples                             Distribution of 𝑋𝑋𝐿𝐿                Distribution of 𝑋𝑋𝑈𝑈𝐿𝐿

Figure 2: An overview of the proposed AL framework. Our primary idea is to extract distributional statistics
from XL , XU L via GMM. This learned GMM statistics ψL , ψU L is used to train the task model and to select
informative samples. At every AL learning cycle, 1) the model is first trained during the supervised learning
stage with the aid of auxiliary distribution-aware regularizer LGM M . 2) Next, during the semi-supervised learn-
ing stage, latent distributions of XL , XU L are aligned to have small Wasserstein distance using ψL , ψU L . 3)
At the selection stage, the informativeness of unlabeled samples is measured through ψL , ψU L for annotation.

leading to the reduction of resultant performance. In contrast, our work goes beyond merely increas-
ing diversity. We directly calculate the distributional statistics ψ of datasets {XL , XU L } via GMM,
and selectively identify informative samples that minimize the distributional discrepancy between
XL and XU L to effectively mitigate overfitting and improve model performance.
Semi-supervised active learning. Early approaches to semi-supervised AL primarily treated the
task model as a black box and focused on leveraging unlabeled data solely for sample selection,
rather than utilizing it to directly train the task model. For example, VAAL (Sinha et al., 2019) and
TA-VAAL (Kim et al., 2021) trained a separate variational autoencoder exclusively for selection,
while CoreGCN (Caramalau et al., 2021) similarly trained a graph convolutional network as a sam-
pler. Although these methods employed unlabeled data to train auxiliary modules, their purpose was
for sample selection, without making any direct impact on the performance of the task model. In
contrast, recent methodologies have emerged that make use of unlabeled data to train the task model
to further enhance the performance of the task model. (Siméoni et al., 2021) pioneered this field by
exploiting pseudo labels obtained from label propagation, and TOD (Huang et al., 2021) proposed
minimizing temporal output discrepancy in unlabeled samples. WAAL (Shui et al., 2020) presented
theoretical insights based on distribution matching that unify model training and sample selection.
Compared to previous semi-supervised active learning works, our proposed approach takes a di-
rect approach by extracting distributional statistics from entire datasets via GMM. This allows us
to construct an efficient distribution-aware semi-supervised learning framework that uses the global
distributional information to mitigate the risk of overfitting the task model to scarce labeled samples,
thereby improving generalization capability of the task model in a low-data setting.

3          P ROPOSED M ETHOD
3.1         P ROBLEM S ETUP AND O RGANIZATION

Given unlabeled total dataset X, AL framework randomly samples and annotates the initial labeled
set XL0 from X while the rest remains unlabeled as XU0 L = X/XL0 . Note that the size of the initial
labeled set XL0 is much smaller than that of XU0 L (i.e., |XL0 | << |XU0 L |). In AL, DNN is repeatedly
initialized and trained during successive active learning cycles t = 0, 1, .., T . At the end of each
tth cycle, the DNN selects a small subset of unlabeled samples S t with the highest informativeness.
Then, human experts annotate S t to update the labeled set as XLt+1 = XLt ∪ S t and the unlabeled
set as XUt+1        t      t
           L = XU L \ S . The main goal of this work is to develop a learning and data selection
strategy that can effectively handle the overfitting problem of AL illustrated in Fig. 1.
Overview of our method. Fig. 2 illustrates the overview of our approach. Our core idea is to op-
timize GMM parameters {ψL , ψU L } to {XL , XU L } for the probabilistic characterization of the
global data distribution (Section 3.2). The acquired data statistics {ψL , ψU L } are then used to im-
prove training and selection stages in our framework. First, in the supervised-learning stage (Section
3.3), the task model is trained with the proposed regularization method that relocates samples to be
consistent with {ψL , ψU L }. Second, in the semi-supervised learning stage (Section 3.4), we propose


                                                                                             3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Learned GMM of 𝑋𝑋𝐿𝐿                                          Latent space
                                                                 𝑁𝑁(𝑧𝑧; 𝜇𝜇1 , 𝜎𝜎12)                                      𝑁𝑁(𝑧𝑧; 𝜇𝜇3 , 𝜎𝜎32)
                           𝜓𝜓𝐿𝐿 ≔ { 𝜋𝜋𝑘𝑘 , 𝜇𝜇𝑘𝑘 , 𝜎𝜎𝑘𝑘2 }𝐾𝐾
                                                         𝑘𝑘=1
                                                                                                           𝜇𝜇3
                                                                                𝜇𝜇1                                                           Classifier   𝑝𝑝(𝑦𝑦 = 𝑘𝑘|𝑧𝑧; 𝜔𝜔)
                                                                                                                                                 (𝜔𝜔)       𝑳𝑳𝑪𝑪𝑪𝑪 (𝒛𝒛, 𝒚𝒚)
                         Feature extractor
                                                                                            𝜇𝜇2
                                (𝑓𝑓𝜃𝜃 )                                                                 𝑁𝑁(𝑧𝑧; 𝜇𝜇2 , 𝜎𝜎22)

      Labeled samples                                            𝑝𝑝(𝑦𝑦 = 𝑘𝑘|𝑧𝑧; 𝜓𝜓𝐿𝐿 )  𝑳𝑳𝑮𝑮𝑮𝑮𝑮𝑮 (𝒛𝒛, 𝒚𝒚; 𝝍𝝍𝑳𝑳 )

Figure 3: During supervised learning, posterior probabilities p(y = k|z; ψL ) for each Gaussian component are
computed using the learned GMM parameters ψL . Whereas LCE deals with logits of the classifier, LGM M
focuses on the latent space relocating samples closer to the correct modality, yet farther away from the others.

to feed {ψL , ψU L } into a discriminator module to effectively minimizes the Wasserstein distance
between XL and XU L . Lastly, in the selection stage (Section 3.5), we propose a novel distribution-
aware informativeness metric that compares GMM likelihoods of samples to detect overfitted latent
areas, as well as a hybrid selection method that is designed to choose from uncertain yet diverse un-
labeled samples. Note that {ψL , ψU L } are updated repeatedly to reflect the change in latent spaces.
In the following sections, we present our distribution-aware training and selection methods step by
step.

3.2      C HARACTERIZATION OF DATASETS VIA GMM

We probabilistically characterize the feature representation of the training data using isotropic Gaus-
sian Mixture Models (GMM). The number of Gaussian modality in GMM is set to be matched to
each category of the training data. This characterization can be viewed as a generalization of k-means
clustering, taking into account mixing coefficients and covariance structures simultaneously. Given
samples {xi }N                                                      N
              i=1 and their feature representations {zi = fθ (xi )}i=1 , we optimize the parameter set
ψ := (π, µ, σ 2 ) of GMM using the Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm:
           (E Step) Compute the responsibility γ from the current parameter set ψ := (π, µ, σ 2 )
                                                                      πk N (zi |µk , σk2 )
                                             γik := p(yi = k|zi ) = PK
                                                                                           2
                                                                     j=1 πj N (zi |µj , σj )
                                                                                                                                                                           (1)
         (M Step) Update the parameter set ψ := (π, µ, σ 2 ) based on the current responsibilities
                      PN                      PN                      PN
                         i=1 γik                i=1 γik zi       2          γik (zi − µk )2
              πk = PK PN             , µk = PN              , σk = i=1PN
                     k=1     i=1 γik             i=1 γik                      i=1 γik

where πk , µk , σk respectively denote mixing coefficient, mean, and diagonal covariance of k th
modality while K is the number of categories. Note that γik stands for the estimated ‘responsi-
bility’ of k th Gaussian modality N (z|µk , σk2 ) for generating the data zi . When dealing with labeled
samples, we fix the values of γik to be binary (e.g., 0 or 1), since there is no need to estimate cate-
gories of labeled samples. To handle the memory constraints arising from the large size of XL and
XU L , we divide datasets into multiple batches and fit a GMM to each batch; afterwards, we com-
pute the average of learned GMM parameters ψ obtained from all batches, treating this average as
probabilistic representations of the datasets, denoted as {ψL , ψU L } for {XL , XU L } respectively. For
unlabeled samples, it is noteworthy that the order of clusters can be scrambled at every batch. Thus,
we solve a Hungarian matching problem to realign the order of each cluster consistently. Regard-
ing the cost function for the alignment, we compute Bhattacharyya distance between each Gaussian
modality. Bhattacharrya distance between two multivariate normal distribution pk = N (µk , Σk ) is
simplified as:
                                                     1                             1         det Σ
                        DB (p1 , p2 ) =                (µ1 − µ2 )T Σ−1 (µ1 − µ2 ) + ln( √               )                                                                  (2)
                                                     8                             2      det Σ1 det Σ2
where Σ = (Σ1 + Σ2 )/2. As illustrated in Fig. 2, this underlying distributional information provides
essential insights during the subsequent training and selection stages of the proposed algorithm.

3.3      D ISTRIBUTIONAL R EGULARIZATION

Based on the GMM statistics obtained above, we propose the first component of our solution to
address the overfitting issue. We utilize the concept of metric learning (Kaya & Bilge, 2019) and


                                                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                      0.45
                         GMM statistics                              Posteriors                   Likelihood


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Accuracy Gain from Random Sampling (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                               11
                       𝜓𝜓𝐿𝐿 = 𝜋𝜋𝐿𝐿 , 𝜇𝜇𝐿𝐿 , 𝜎𝜎𝐿𝐿2             𝑝𝑝 𝑦𝑦 = 𝑘𝑘 𝑧𝑧; 𝜓𝜓𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 𝐾𝐾𝑖𝑖=1        𝑝𝑝(𝑧𝑧; 𝜓𝜓𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 )                                      0.4


                                                                                                                    Entropy of Discriminator Output
                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                  2
                    𝜓𝜓𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 = (𝜋𝜋𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 , 𝜇𝜇𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 , 𝜎𝜎𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 )       𝑝𝑝 𝑦𝑦 = 𝑘𝑘 𝑧𝑧; 𝜓𝜓𝐿𝐿 𝐾𝐾
                                                                                    𝑖𝑖=1           𝑝𝑝(𝑧𝑧; 𝜓𝜓𝐿𝐿 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                               9
                                                                                                                                                      0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                               8

                                                                                                                                                       0.3
                                           Feature                                                                                                                                                             7

                                          extractor                 𝑧𝑧𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 = 𝑓𝑓𝜃𝜃 (𝑥𝑥𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 )       Discriminator                                                                                                6
           𝑋𝑋𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈                                                                                                                                     0.25

                                               (𝑓𝑓𝜃𝜃 )                                                                                                                                                         5

                                                                                                                                                       0.2                                                     4
                                          Feature                    𝑧𝑧𝑙𝑙 = 𝑓𝑓𝜃𝜃 (𝑥𝑥𝑙𝑙 )
                                         extractor                                                   Classifier                                                                                                3

            𝑋𝑋𝐿𝐿                                                                                                                                             1k   2k    3k   4k   5k   6k   7k
                                                                                                                                                                       Number of Labeled Images
                                                                                                                                                                                                 8k   9k 10k


                                                                                                                                                          Figure 5: Analysis of
      Figure 4: Proposed distribution-aware domain alignment method.                                                                                  discriminators on CIFAR-10.


introduce a distance-based regularization method to learn a more generalized representation where
similar instances are closer together while dissimilar instances are farther apart. Fig. 3 provides a
high-level description of our method within a supervised learning framework, where we propose a
distribution-aware regularization loss LGM M that utilizes GMM statistics ψL . This loss is defined
                                                                              PK
as the negative log-likelihood loss of GMM posterior: LGM M (z, y; ψL ) = k=1 −yk log(p(y =
k|z; ψL )), where k indexes Gaussian component in equation 1. It is important to note that p(y =
k|z; ψL ) denotes the probability that z was generated by the k th Gaussian component in the GMM.
As such, it serves as a soft measure of distance that captures the proximity of data point z to the
estimated Gaussian components N (µk , σk2 ). Consequently, the training objective for the supervised
learning stage is modified to LCE (z, y) + αLGM M (z, y; ψL ), where α is a constant weight.
By incorporating LGM M as a regularizer, we are able to mitigate the impact of noisy or outlier data
points by encouraging consistent similarity relationships rather than focusing on absolute values.
Additionally, supervision using the global data distribution ψ enhances robustness against noisy
local batches, which is especially effective when dealing with imbalanced datasets.

3.4    D ISTRIBUTION -AWARE A LIGNMENT WITH GMM S TATISTICS

Distributional alignment with adversarial learning. After the supervised learning stage in Sec-
tion 3.3 is completed, the semi-supervised learning stage begins subsequently. In this subsection, we
introduce a distribution-aware semi-supervised learning strategy that utilizes GMM statistics to mit-
igate the overfitting. Our strategy is based on the theoretical analysis of (Shui et al., 2020; Mahmood
et al., 2021) that the expected risk in AL is upper-bounded by a distance between the distributions
of labeled and original dataset. We consider minimizing the Wasserstein distance between XL and
XU L , W (zL , zU L ) =       inf     E(zl ,zul )∼δ [||zl − zul ||], since other popular metrics (e.g., KLD,
                                             δ∈Π(zL ,zU L )
KSD) are not tractable for GMMs as they do not exist in closed-forms. On the basis of Kantorovich-
Rubinstein Duality Theorem, this objective can be transformed into an adversarial learning form, as
done in discriminator-based AL methods (Kim et al., 2021; Shui et al., 2020):
                                     minθ maxϕ Ezul ∼fθ (XU L ) [Dϕ (zul )] − Ezl ∼fθ (XL ) [Dϕ (zl )]                                                                                                             (3)
where fθ is the feature extractor and Dϕ is the 1-Lipschitz discriminator. The above training objec-
tive guides Dϕ to output Dϕ (zl ) → 0, Dϕ (zul ) → 1, while fθ is trained to confound Dϕ . Addition-
ally, we minimize the CE loss using labeled data to ensure that the adversarial learning process in
equation 3 does not excessively compromise the performance of the main task. Note that we employ
gradient penalty of (Gulrajani et al., 2017) to enforce the 1-Lipshitz continuous constraints on Dϕ .
Distribution-aware alignment with GMM statistics. Previous discriminator-based AL methods
(Kim et al., 2021; Shui et al., 2020) often feed only the latent features z of samples into the dis-
criminator Dϕ . However, this architecture often causes Dϕ to memorize a few labeled samples
themselves, instead of capturing the overall latent structure comprehensively. In this context, as il-
lustrated in Fig. 4, we propose to feed Dϕ with distributional information from {ψL , ψU L } on top
of z, to help Dϕ aware the global data distribution. Given that ψ is a group of high-dimensional
vectors (e.g., µL ∈ R100×512 for CIFAR-100), it is hard to simply concatenate {ψL , ψU L } to z,
so we instead propose to indirectly exploit {ψL , ψU L } for the sensible implementation. Specifi-
cally, we first compute the posterior probabilities {p(y = k|z; ψL )}K                           K
                                                                       k=1 , {p(y = k|z; ψU L )}k=1


                                                                                              5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                    4


                                                                                  Average Cross-Entropy Loss (%)
                                                                                                                   3.5


                                                                                                                    3


                                                                                                                   2.5


                                                                                                                    2


                                                                                                                   1.5


                                                                                                                    1

      (a) log p(z; ψL )       (b) log p(z; ψU L )             (c) ILike                                                  1k   2k   3k   4k   5k   6k   7k
                                                                                                                                   Number of Labeled Images
                                                                                                                                                            8k   9k   10k



Figure 6: t-SNE of latent spaces where colors of markers represent (a,b) GMM                                        Figure 7: Loss ranges of
 likelihoods or (c) the proposed metric. Warmer colors indicate higher values.                                         selected samples.

and the likelihoods p(z; ψL ), p(z; ψU L ), where the likelihood p(z; ψ) reflects the probability that
data z originates from a GMM parameterized by ψ. We then concatenate logarithms of the obtained
probabilities to z and pass the concatenated vectors to the discriminator.
To gain insights into the effect of distributional information ψ, in Fig. 5, we compare the average
entropy values of Dϕ outputs. The discriminator Dϕ performs binary classification and lower en-
tropy corresponds to more confident predictions. It is observed that vanilla Dϕ without ψ manifests
considerably lower entropies in early cycles, which means that outputs consist of almost either 0 or
1 due to overconfident predictions. On the contrary, utilization of ψ mitigates overfitting of the dis-
criminator by considering global distribution and improves performance and entropy of prediction.

3.5    D ISTRIBUTION -AWARE I NFORMATIVE S AMPLE S ELECTION

In previous subsections, we described our distribution-aware model training methods designed to
reduce overfitting. In this subsection, we elaborate on our sample selection scheme for AL that aims
to mitigate overfitting by reducing distributional discrepancy between XL and XU L .
Likelihood-based informativeness metric. We propose a new informativeness metric that alle-
viates the distributional discrepancy between {XL , XU L } by comparing GMM likelihoods using
{ψL , ψU L }. Our metric is based on the insight that the latent space densely populated by labeled
samples is already been learned, resulting in lower importance; conversely, regions with a high con-
centration of unlabeled samples represent unexplored areas with higher importance. Consequently,
our metric aims to identify samples that not only best represent XU L but also differ from XL , such
that the distributional discrepancy can be effectively reduced. In this context, one natural question is
on how we can assess the informativeness of unlabeled sample zul for {XL , XU L }. To this end, we
                                           PK
utilize the GMM likelihood p(zul ; ψ) = j=1 πj N (z|µj , σj2 ) to measure how well zul represents
the dataset that is parameterized by ψ. Accordingly, we propose the likelihood-based metric ILike
to prioritize samples that best represent unfamiliar XU L while being different from familiar XL as:
                                                                                                                   K
                                                                                                                   X
   ILike (xul ; ψL , ψU L ) = log p(zul ; ψU L ) − log p(zul ; ψL ),      p(z; ψ) =                                           πj N (z|µj , σj2 )                      (4)
                                                                                                                   j=1

Our intuition can be visually confirmed in Fig. 6, where we illustrate the log-likelihood log p(z; ψ)
of data features z from the viewpoints of {XL , XU L } using the GMM parameters {ψL , ψU L }.
In Fig. 6a, it can be observed that latent distribution of XL is concentrated around limited areas
(indicated by hot colors), while that of XU L in Fig. 6b is scattered across fairly wide different
areas; we conjecture that this distortion in the latent space is a result of overfitting of the model
to XL . In Fig. 6c, ILike highlights regions with a higher concentration of unlabeled samples, but
fewer labeled samples. As a result, if a data sample is located in an area where p(zul ; ψU L ) is high
while p(zul ; ψL ) is low simultaneously, it will be selected for annotation (e.g., samples around the
green, yellow markers). Conversely, even if p(zul ; ψU L ) is high, samples with high p(zul ; ψL ) will
be ignored due to their lower information gain (e.g., samples around the navy, cyan markers).
Hybrid acquisition function. While ILike effectively detects informative latent areas by comparing
the likelihoods, it can be susceptible to redundant sampling as observed in Fig. 8a. To address the
redundancy issue, we diversify the source of informativeness by utilizing the output of different mod-
els. First, we incorporate outputs of the discriminator Dϕ that is learned during the semi-supervised


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         (a) ILike                   (b) IDis                    (c) IEnt                   (d) IT otal
Figure 8: t-SNE of latent spaces where colors of markers represent (a,b,c) three different informativeness met-
ics and (d) the final aggregated metric (warmer colors indicate higher values). Each metric has distinct yet
complementary properties, and the aggregated metric IT otal can select informative yet non-redundant samples.

learning, denoted as IDis = Dϕ (z). Similar to ILike , IDis prioritizes the samples that are expected
to be from XU L but relies on the output of Dϕ instead of ψ. Fig. 8b demonstrates that while IDis
evenly highlights regions where labeled samples do not exist, it lacks the ability to specify particu-
larly informative regions. Secondly, we leverage the Shannon entropy IEnt computed from the final
logits. As shown in Fig. 8c, it provides a distinct type of informativeness that differs from both ILike
and IDis . Finally, due to the different ranges and distribution shapes of the three information metrics
(ILike , IDis , IEnt ), we apply rank-normalization operations to each metric and then combine them
to obtain the final acquisition function for selection as:
       IT otal (xul ) = Rank(ILike (xul ; ψL , ψU L )) + Rank(IDis (xul )) + Rank(IEnt (xul )).            (5)
Note that none of the three metrics utilize label information. As observed in Fig. 8d, incorporating
information from multiple sources helps detect informative region that is both non-redundant and
compensatory. Furthermore, the analysis of loss ranges in Fig. 7 provides additional justification
for the aggregation of three metrics. In Fig. 7, we report averages of cross-entropy losses of 5K
samples selected by each metric, confirming that the importance of each metric changes throughout
the learning cycle. For example, ILike detects the most difficult samples in the early AL cycles, due
to its ability to identify overfitted regions. On the other hand, IEnt becomes more effective at finding
difficult samples in late AL cycles, as the distributions of XL and XU L become similar. After the
computation of IT otal , the candidate set S consisting of samples with the highest IT otal is sent to
the oracle for annotation. To mitigate redundancy within S, we ensure a class-wise balance using
pseudo-labels and employ K-means clustering to enhance its diversity, following the methodology
outlined in (Parvaneh et al., 2022; Ash et al., 2019).

4    E XPERIMENTS
4.1 E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Dataset. Our proposed work is evaluated on following popular benchmark datasets: SVHN (Netzer
et al., 2011), Fashion-MNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) and CIFAR-
100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009). For all datasets except CIFAR-100, 1,000 samples are initially labeled
and additionally 1,000 samples are labeled at the end of every cycle until the size of labeled set
reaches 10,000. As for CIFAR-100, size of the XL increases from 2,000 to 20,000 in steps of 2,000.
Implementation details. Following the experimental setup of (Kim et al., 2021; Caramalau et al.,
2021), we implement the main classifier using ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016) which is combined with
a single linear layer softmax classifier. The classifier is optimized via SGD optimizer with a learning
rate of 0.1; a momentum of 0.9; a batch size of 100; an epoch number of 200. The discriminator
is composed of three linear layers with a sigmoid activation and optimized by Adam optimizer for
10,000 iterations with a learning rate of 5e-4 which is decayed to 5e-5 for the last 2,000 iterations.
During the supervised learning stage in Section 3.3, ψL is newly computed at the every batch since
latent space keeps being updated as DNN is trained. To relieve computational burden, a balanced
subset Xs is sampled from XL at the every batch and GMM is fitted to Xs to get ψs ; this ψs
replaces ψL in LGM M . During the distributional alignment in Section 3.4, we alternatively update
the discriminator Dϕ and the remaining models in an adversarial manner for 10,000 iterations; GMM
statistics (ψL , ψU L ) are obtained at the every 500 out of 10,000 iterations. The number of iteration in
EM algorithm is 10, and we cut the gradient graph to ψ to reduce memory/computation complexity.


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                         70
                                                                                                                                                                 96                                                                      94
                90
                                                                                         65

                85                                                                                                                                               94                                                                      92
                                                                                         60

                80                                                                       55                                                                      92
 Accuracy (%)                                                                                                                                                                                                                            90


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Accuracy (%)
                                                                        Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                  Accuracy (%)
                                                                                         50
                75
                                                                                                                                                                 90
                                                                                         45                                                                                                                                              88
                70
                                                WAAL (AISTATS'20)                        40                               WAAL (AISTATS'20)                      88                              WAAL (AISTATS'20)                                                        WAAL (AISTATS'20)
                                                TA-VAAL (CVPR'21)                                                         TA-VAAL (CVPR'21)                                                      TA-VAAL (CVPR'21)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         86                               TA-VAAL (CVPR'21)
                65
                                                CoreGCN (CVPR'21)                        35                               CoreGCN (CVPR'21)                                                      CoreGCN (CVPR'21)                                                        CoreGCN (CVPR'21)
                                                TOD (ICCV'21)                                                             TOD (ICCV'21)                          86                              TOD (ICCV'21)                                                            TOD (ICCV'21)
                60                              ALFA-Mix (CVPR'22)                       30                               ALFA-Mix (CVPR'22)                                                     ALFA-Mix (CVPR'22)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         84                               ALFA-Mix (CVPR'22)
                                                Snapshot-AL (ICLR'23)                                                     Snapshot-AL (ICLR'23)                                                  Snapshot-AL (ICLR'23)                                                    Snapshot-AL (ICLR'23)
                55                              Random                                   25                               Random                                 84                              Random                                                                   Random
                                                Proposed                                                                  Proposed                                                               Proposed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         82                               Proposed
                                                                                         20
                     1k   2k    3k   4k   5k   6k   7k   8k   9k 10k                          2k   4k     6k   8k 10k 12k 14k 16k 18k 20k                             1k   2k    3k   4k   5k   6k   7k   8k   9k 10k                          1k   2k    3k   4k   5k   6k   7k   8k   9k 10k
                               Number of Labeled Images                                                  Number of Labeled Images                                               Number of Labeled Images                                                 Number of Labeled Images


                          (a) CIFAR-10                                                             (b) CIFAR-100                                                                (c) SVHN                                                      (d) Fashion-MNIST
                                      Figure 9: Performance comparison on balanced datasets with state-of-the-art methods.
                                                                                                                                                                 95
                85                                                                                                                                                                                                                       92
                                                                                         45
                80                                                                                                                                                                                                                       90
                                                                                                                                                                 90
                                                                                         40                                                                                                                                              88
                75
                                                                                                                                                                 85                                                                      86
                70                                                                       35


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                                  Accuracy (%)
Accuracy (%)


                                                                          Accuracy (%)


                65                                                                                                                                                                                                                       84
                                                                                         30                                                                      80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         82
                60
                                                WAAL (AISTATS'20)                                                                                                                                WAAL (AISTATS'20)                       80                               WAAL (AISTATS'20)
                55                                                                       25                               WAAL (AISTATS'20)                      75
                                                TA-VAAL (CVPR'21)                                                         TA-VAAL (CVPR'21)                                                      TA-VAAL (CVPR'21)                                                        TA-VAAL (CVPR'21)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         78
                50                              CoreGCN (CVPR'21)                                                         CoreGCN (CVPR'21)                                                      CoreGCN (CVPR'21)                                                        CoreGCN (CVPR'21)
                                                TOD (ICCV'21)                            20                               TOD (ICCV'21)                          70                              TOD (ICCV'21)                                                            TOD (ICCV'21)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         76
                45                              ALFA-Mix (CVPR'22)                                                        ALFA-Mix (CVPR'22)                                                     ALFA-Mix (CVPR'22)                                                       ALFA-Mix (CVPR'22)
                                                Snapshot-AL (ICLR'23)                                                     Snapshot-AL (ICLR'23)                                                  Snapshot-AL (ICLR'23)                   74                               Snapshot-AL (ICLR'23)
                40                                                                       15
                                                Random                                                                    Random                                 65                              Random                                                                   Random
                                                Proposed                                                                  Proposed                                                               Proposed                                72                               Proposed
                35                                                                       10
                     1k   2k    3k   4k   5k   6k   7k   8k   9k 10k                          1k    2k    3k   4k   5k   6k   7k   8k   9k 10k                        1k   2k    3k   4k   5k   6k   7k   8k   9k 10k                         1k    2k    3k   4k   5k   6k   7k   8k   9k 10k
                               Number of Labeled Images                                                  Number of Labeled Images                                               Number of Labeled Images                                                 Number of Labeled Images


                          (a) CIFAR-10                                                             (b) CIFAR-100                                                                (c) SVHN                                                      (d) Fashion-MNIST
                                  Figure 10: Performance comparison on imbalanced datasets with state-of-the-art methods.

Baselines. We compare our work with the state-of-the-art AL baselines: TA-VAAL (Kim et al.,
2021), WAAL (Shui et al., 2020), TOD (Huang et al., 2021), ALFA-MIX (Parvaneh et al., 2022),
Snapshot-AL (Jung et al., 2022) and CoreGCN (Caramalau et al., 2021), where WAAL and TOD
specifically adopt semi-supervised learning to train the task model. For fair comparisons, we train
five independent networks with different seeds and report the average performance with 95% con-
fidence interval. Additional comparisons with CoreSet (Sener & Savarese, 2018), LL4AL (Yoo &
Kweon, 2019), VAAL (Sinha et al., 2019) can be found in Supplementary Material.

4.2                       E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

Results on balanced dataset. In Fig. 9, we compare the performance of our method on balanced
datasets with various baselines. As seen, the proposed method performs the best on all datasets,
demonstrating the general applicability. In particular, the result on CIFAR100 indicates that the
proposed algorithm can capture distinct Gaussian modalities, even in datasets with a large number
of classes. Also, it is noticeable that our method exhibits a particular excellence in early AL cycles,
performing even better than existing semi-supervised AL methods, since the proposed regularization
and distributional alignment components effectively mitigate the overfitting to the small labeled set.
Results on imbalanced dataset. In Fig. 10, we consider a class-imbalance scenario where an im-
balance ratio is set to 10 (i.e., half of all classes have 10 times more samples than those of remaining
half classes). Fig. 10 shows that the proposed approach outperforms other baselines and exhibits
significantly larger performance gaps when compared to the results observed in the class-balance
scenario depicted in Fig. 9. To investigate the rationale behind this performance gain, we provide
some analyses in Fig. 11. First, Fig. 11a depicts the t-SNE of latent space from imbalanced CIFAR-
10 that all modalities (including the minor classes) are well-separated at significant distances. The
reason behind this is that employing distribution-aware training, which utilizes global data statis-
tics ψ obtained from all available data, effectively prevents the model from overfitting to the biased
knowledge present within the imbalanced minibatch. Additionally, the distribution-based informa-
tiveness metric guides the selection of unbiased samples. Second, Fig. 11b reports the entropy of
category ratios within the labeled set. It is worth noting that a higher entropy indicates better bal-
ance among the labeled samples, with the random selection method exhibiting the lowest entropy
(i.e., highest imbalance). In early cycles, it can be seen that all baselines prioritize samples from mi-
nor classes, leading to an increase in entropy. However, as a sufficient number of minor samples are
secured in late cycles, the entropy decreases again since informative samples from major classes are


                                                                                                                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                                                                                                                        70
                                                        2.25
                                                                                                                                90
                                                                                                                                                                                                        65
                                                         2.2                                                                    85
                                                                                                                                                                                                        60

                                                                                                                                80


                              Entropy of Class Counts
                                                        2.15                                                                                                                                            55


                                                                                                                 Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                         Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                75                                                                      50
                                                         2.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                        45
                                                                                                                                70
                                                        2.05
                                                                                         TA-VAAL (CVPR'21)                                                                                              40
                                                                                         CoreGCN (CVPR'21)                      65
                                                          2                              ALFA-Mix (CVPR'22)                                                                                             35
                                                                                         Snapshot-AL (ICLR'23)                  60
                                                                                         Random                                                                          Reg + DA + AS                  30                                 Reg + DA + AS
                                                        1.95                             Proposed                                                                        Reg + DA                                                          Reg + DA
                                                                                                                                55                                       Reg                            25                                 Reg
                                                                                                                                                                         Random                                                            Random
                                                         1.9                                                                    50                                                                      20
                                                               1k   2k   3k   4k    5k   6k   7k   8k   9k 10k
                                                                                                                                     1k   2k    3k   4k   5k   6k   7k   8k   9k 10k                         2k   4k    6k   8k 10k 12k 14k 16k 18k 20k
                                                                         Number of Labeled Images
                                                                                                                                               Number of Labeled Images                                                Number of Labeled Images


    (a) t-SNE visualization                                    (b) Class Entropy                                                          (a) CIFAR-10                                                        (b) CIFAR-100
      Figure 11: Analysis in imbalanced CIFAR-10.                                                                    Figure 12: Ablation studies on proposed components.


                                                                                                     Accuracy (%) on Proportion (%) of Labeled Samples
 Methods
                                                                    2.0             4.0             6.0    8.0     10.0    12.0    14.0     16.0   18.0                                                                           20.0            Avg
 ALFA-MIX (Parvaneh et al., 2022)                               35.50              56.25           63.06         70.71                    75.11           77.63            80.51         82.72                    84.13          84.35        71.00
 Reg (+ ALFA-MIX)                                               42.31              60.92           66.02         71.75                    76.27           78.50            81.79         82.92                    84.23          84.53        72.92
 Reg + DA (+ ALFA-MIX)                                          46.37              62.02           71.25         75.90                    78.88           81.50            82.88         83.63                    84.33          84.88        75.16
 TA-VAAL (Kim et al., 2021)                                     35.73              50.68           59.02         65.69                    71.23           75.98            78.89         81.73                    82.98          83.49        68.54
 Reg (+ TA-VAAL)                                                40.46              55.26           63.20         68.11                    74.72           77.83            79.51         82.10                    83.51          83.92        70.86
 Reg + DA (+ TA-VAAL)                                           46.37              59.10           68.11         72.16                    78.46           80.61            81.96         83.13                    83.94          84.13        73.50
 Proposed                                                       46.37              66.48           74.57         78.33                    80.61           82.67            83.64         84.78                    84.95          85.38        76.78

Table 1: Compatibility analysis of our regularization (Reg) and distributional alignment (DA) strategies with
other AL methods using imbalanced CIFAR-10.

preferred. Throughout each cycle, our proposed approach consistently achieves higher entropy val-
ues by selecting a significant number of minor samples. This observation highlights how leveraging
distributional information ψ guides the model away from bias and helps select balanced samples.
Ablation studies on proposed components. Fig. 12 shows ablation studies conducted on our pro-
posed methods. For brevity, we abbreviate the distribution-aware regularization in Section 3.3 as
Reg; distribution alignment in Section 3.4 as DA; active sample selection in Section 3.5 as AS. In
every cycle, the results consistently demonstrate the gradual improvement in performance achieved
by the proposed methods. Notably, Reg and DA significantly contribute to the performance gain in
early cycles, alleviating overfitting to the smaller labeled sets. Conversely, AS steadily enhances
performance even in later cycles by employing the hybrid informativeness metric for selection.
Compatibility with other AL methods. Our proposed learning strategies (Reg, DA) can be eas-
ily combined with existing AL methods. In Table 1, we incorporate Reg and DA into the learning
stages of ALFA-MIX (Parvaneh et al., 2022) and TA-VAAL (Kim et al., 2021) while keeping the
selection stages unchanged. Similar to Fig. 12, it can be seen that proposed distribution-aware learn-
ing methods improve performance by mitigating the overfitting inherent in existing AL works, and
this phenomenon is especially noticeable in early cycles where the size of the labeled set is small.
Furthermore, it is observed that the performance of the proposed methods (shown in the lowest
row) surpasses that of previous works combined with Reg and DA. This observation suggests that
our distribution-aware hybrid selection methods are better suited for choosing informative subsets,
leading to enhanced overall performance.

5     C ONCLUSION
In this study, we introduced a unified framework for active learning that leverages Gaussian Mixture
Models (GMMs). Our approach involves fitting GMMs to both the labeled and unlabeled sets, effec-
tively extracting distributional information. This information is utilized in various ways within the
active learning process, including distribution-aware regularization, distributional alignment, and
informativeness metrics. Through extensive comparisons with baselines and ablation studies, we
demonstrate the superiority of our proposed methods. In the future, we plan to extend our research
to diverse computer vision tasks such as object detection (Haussmann et al., 2020), as well as differ-
ent settings like open set (Park et al., 2022) and model evaluation (Kossen et al., 2022).


                                                                                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Sharat Agarwal, Himanshu Arora, Saket Anand, and Chetan Arora. Contextual diversity for active
  learning. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 137–153. Springer, 2020.
Jordan T Ash, Chicheng Zhang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, John Langford, and Alekh Agarwal.
  Deep batch active learning by diverse, uncertain gradient lower bounds. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1906.03671, 2019.
William H Beluch, Tim Genewein, Andreas Nürnberger, and Jan M Köhler. The power of ensembles
 for active learning in image classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
 vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9368–9377, 2018.
Javad Zolfaghari Bengar, Joost van de Weijer, Laura Lopez Fuentes, and Bogdan Raducanu. Class-
  balanced active learning for image classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter
  Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 1536–1545, 2022.
Razvan Caramalau, Binod Bhattarai, and Tae-Kyun Kim. Sequential graph convolutional network
  for active learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 9583–9592, 2021.
Yin Cui, Menglin Jia, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yang Song, and Serge Belongie. Class-balanced loss based on
  effective number of samples. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 9268–9277, 2019.
Sebastian Farquhar, Yarin Gal, and Tom Rainforth. On statistical bias in active learning: How and
  when to fix it. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.11665, 2021.
Mengying Fu, Tianning Yuan, Fang Wan, Songcen Xu, and Qixiang Ye. Agreement-discrepancy-
 selection: active learning with progressive distribution alignment. In Proceedings of the AAAI
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 7466–7473, 2021.

Mingfei Gao, Zizhao Zhang, Guo Yu, Sercan Ö Arık, Larry S Davis, and Tomas Pfister.
 Consistency-based semi-supervised active learning: Towards minimizing labeling cost. In
 Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020,
 Proceedings, Part X 16, pp. 510–526. Springer, 2020.
Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron C Courville. Im-
   proved training of wasserstein gans. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30,
   2017.
Elmar Haussmann, Michele Fenzi, Kashyap Chitta, Jan Ivanecky, Hanson Xu, Donna Roy, Akshita
  Mittel, Nicolas Koumchatzky, Clement Farabet, and Jose M Alvarez. Scalable active learning for
  object detection. In 2020 IEEE intelligent vehicles symposium (iv), pp. 1430–1435. IEEE, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Siyu Huang, Tianyang Wang, Haoyi Xiong, Jun Huan, and Dejing Dou. Semi-supervised ac-
  tive learning with temporal output discrepancy. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 3447–3456, 2021.
Ajay J Joshi, Fatih Porikli, and Nikolaos Papanikolopoulos. Multi-class active learning for image
  classification. In 2009 ieee conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2372–
  2379. IEEE, 2009.
Seohyeon Jung, Sanghyun Kim, and Juho Lee. A simple yet powerful deep active learning with
  snapshots ensembles. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.
Mahmut Kaya and Hasan Şakir Bilge. Deep metric learning: A survey. Symmetry, 11(9):1066,
 2019.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kwanyoung Kim, Dongwon Park, Kwang In Kim, and Se Young Chun. Task-aware variational
 adversarial active learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8166–8175, 2021.
Jannik Kossen, Sebastian Farquhar, Yarin Gal, and Tom Rainforth. Active surrogate estimators: An
  active learning approach to label-efficient model evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06881,
  2022.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Wenjie Luo, Alex Schwing, and Raquel Urtasun. Latent structured active learning. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.
Rafid Mahmood, Sanja Fidler, and Marc T Law. Low budget active learning via wasserstein distance:
  An integer programming approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.02968, 2021.
Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y Ng. Reading
  digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning. 2011.
Dongmin Park, Yooju Shin, Jihwan Bang, Youngjun Lee, Hwanjun Song, and Jae-Gil Lee. Meta-
  query-net: Resolving purity-informativeness dilemma in open-set active learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.07805, 2022.
Amin Parvaneh, Ehsan Abbasnejad, Damien Teney, Gholamreza Reza Haffari, Anton van den Hen-
 gel, and Javen Qinfeng Shi. Active learning by feature mixing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12237–12246, 2022.
Dan Roth and Kevin Small. Margin-based active learning for structured output spaces. In Machine
  Learning: ECML 2006: 17th European Conference on Machine Learning Berlin, Germany,
  September 18-22, 2006 Proceedings 17, pp. 413–424. Springer, 2006.
Ozan Sener and Silvio Savarese. Active learning for convolutional neural networks: A core-set
  approach. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Burr Settles and Mark Craven. An analysis of active learning strategies for sequence labeling tasks.
  In proceedings of the 2008 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, pp.
  1070–1079, 2008.
Changjian Shui, Fan Zhou, Christian Gagné, and Boyu Wang. Deep active learning: Unified and
  principled method for query and training. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 1308–1318. PMLR, 2020.
Oriane Siméoni, Mateusz Budnik, Yannis Avrithis, and Guillaume Gravier. Rethinking deep active
  learning: Using unlabeled data at model training. In 2020 25th International conference on pattern
  recognition (ICPR), pp. 1220–1227. IEEE, 2021.
Samarth Sinha, Sayna Ebrahimi, and Trevor Darrell. Variational adversarial active learning. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5972–5981,
  2019.
Jong-Chyi Su, Yi-Hsuan Tsai, Kihyuk Sohn, Buyu Liu, Subhransu Maji, and Manmohan Chan-
  draker. Active adversarial domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter
  Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 739–748, 2020.
Dan Wang and Yi Shang. A new active labeling method for deep learning. In 2014 International
  joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN), pp. 112–119. IEEE, 2014.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Donggeun Yoo and In So Kweon. Learning loss for active learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 93–102, 2019.
Tianning Yuan, Fang Wan, Mengying Fu, Jianzhuang Liu, Songcen Xu, Xiangyang Ji, and Qixiang
  Ye. Multiple instance active learning for object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5330–5339, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

In this section, we describe various details involved in implementing the proposed algorithm:

• Data preprocessing followed the setting of TA-VAAL (Kim et al., 2021), that is only composed of
  input normalization and random augmentation with horizontal flipping and cropping.
• The task model utilized ResNet18, as commonly employed in previous works (He et al., 2016;
  Kim et al., 2021). It consisted of four resblocks followed by a linear layer. All operations related
  to GMM were performed on the 512-dimensional latent space (i.e., output of the fourth resblock).
  Number of EM iterations to optimize GMM parameters ψ is set to 10.
• During supervised learning stage, a batch size of 100 was used, and training was conducted for
  200 epochs. The learning rate was initialized to be 0.01 and decreased to 0.001 at the 160th epoch.
  Cross-entropy loss was adopted for training the classifier, same as the other works. Additionally,
  an SGD optimizer with momentum of 0.9 and a decay rate of 5e-4 were applied to train the clas-
  sifier. Aside from a minibatch of size 100 used for the backpropagation, we additionally sample a
  balanced subset Xs of size 1,000 from the labeled set solely for the computation of GMM statistics
  ψL (e.g., for CIFAR10, Xs contains 100 samples for each of 10 classes; for CIFAR100, Xs con-
  tains 10 samples for each of 100 classes). In cases where there are fewer than 10 labeled samples
  in a minor class (e.g., during early AL cycles in CIFAR-100), we randomly select existing labeled
  samples and augment them through random cropping/horizontal-flipping to construct a balanced
  set Xs . GMM is fitted to Xs to get ψs and this ψs replaces ψL in LGM M . We cut the gradient
  graph to GMM statistics ψ when computing the regularization loss LGM M , preventing gradients
  from flowing back through it during backpropagation to reduce memory and computational re-
  quirements. Additionally, the balanced subset Xs has labels assigned to it, allowing us to directly
  compute class-mean µ and class-variance σ 2 without a demand of computation for EM algorithm.
  The constant weight α for GMM loss with respect to cross-entropy loss is set to 0.0001.
• During semi-supervised learning stage, the task model and the discriminator Dϕ are trained for a
  total of 10,000 iterations, where we sampled 100 labeled and unlabeled samples in each iteration.
  We used the Adam optimizer to train the discriminator with an initial learning rate of 5e-4 that is
  decayed by the factor of 0.1 at the 8, 000th iteration. Throughout the 10,000 iterations, we com-
  puted GMM statistics ψL , ψU L using the entire dataset at every 500th iteration. It is noteworthy
  that although GMM statistics ψ were computed using a subset Xs in every iteration during the su-
  pervised learning stage, the statistics ψ were calculated less frequently but using the entire dataset
  during the semi-supervised learning stage. It is because the neural network becomes much more
  stable and updates of model parameters become less drastic after the supervised learning stage.
  This approach significantly reduced computational complexity while still obtaining accurate dis-
  tributional information by performing GMM fitting using all available data. The constant weight
  α for discriminator loss (i.e, LDis = Dϕ (zu l) − Dϕ (zl )) with respect to cross-entropy loss is 1.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2    A LGORITHM D ESCRIPTION

Algorithm 1 Proposed Method : Distribution Aware Active Learning via Gaussian Mixtures
Input: Initialized task model fθ , initialized discriminator model Dϕ , initial labeled set XL0 and unlabeled set
XU0 L , constant weight α, β, number of category K, iteration N of the semi-supervised learning stage, interval
M to fit GMM during the semi-supervised learning stage
Output: Trained models fθT , DϕT after T active learning cycles
for each active learning cycle t = 0, 1, ..., T − 1 do
Step 1: Supervised learning stage to train fθt using XLt
 1: for each minibatch B ⊂ XLt do
 2:     Draw an auxiliary balanced subset Xs ⊂ XLt
                                                           2         t
 3:     Optimize GMM parameters ψs := (π        s , µs , σts ) using
                                                                  Xs
 4:     Compute cross-entropy loss Exl ∈B LCE (fθ , xl )
        Compute GMM-based NLL loss Exl ∈B LGM M (fθt , xl ; ψs )

 5:
        Train fθt to minimize Exl ∈B LCE (fθt , xl ) + αLGM M (fθt , xl ; ψs )

 6:
 7: end for
Step 2: Semi-supervised learning stage to train fθt , Dϕt using XLt , XUt L
 1: for each each iteration n = 1, ..., N do
 2:     if n mod M = 0 then
 3:        Optimize GMM parameters ψL , ψU L using XLt , XUt L
 4:     end if
 5:     Draw batches BL , BU L respectively  from XLt , XUt  L
 6:     Compute cross-entropy loss Exl ∈BL LCE (fθt , xl )
        Compute discriminator loss Exl ∈BL ,xul ∈BU L Dϕt (xul ) − Dϕt (xl ) w.r.t. fθt

 7:
        Train fθt to minimize Exl ∈BL ,xul ∈BU L LCE (fθt , xl ) + Dϕt (xul ) − Dϕt (xl )

 8:
                                                               t       t
                                                                                        t
 9:     Compute discriminator loss Exl ∈BL ,xul ∈BU L Dϕ (xl ) − Dϕ (xul ) w.r.t. Dϕ
         Train Dϕt to minimize Exl ∈BL ,xul ∈BU L Dϕt (xl ) − Dϕt (xul )

10:
11: end for
Step 3: Data selection stage to choose informative data and update XLt , XUt L
 1: Compute informativeness ILike (xul ), IDis (xul ), IEnt (xul ) for xul ∈ XUt L
 2: Apply rank-normalized informativeness
    Itotal = Rank(ILike (xul )) + Rank(IDis (xul )) + Rank(IEnt (xul ))
 3: Select the most informative data I t ⊂ XUt L based on Itotal
 4: Human oracles annotates I t
 5: Update labeled set, XLt+1 = XLt ∪ I t
 6: Update unlabeled set, XUt+1         t
                               L = XU L nI
                                               t


The detailed procedure of the proposed Distribution-Aware Active Learning via Gaussian Mix-
tures is given in Algorithm 1. Proposed algorithm consists of two learning stages (supervised, semi-
supervised) and one selection stage. Both of these learning stages commonly utilize GMM statistics
ψ. During the supervised learning stage, in addition to calculating the CE loss using the data batch B,
a regularization loss is computed using ψs obtained from a balanced subset Xs . This regularization
loss helps improve the robustness of the task model fθ against noisy local batches by incorporating
supervision based on the global data distribution ψ. Semi-supervised learning reduces the distance
between the latent spaces of XL and XU L through adversarial training between fθ and Dϕ . Our
proposed method first computes GMM likelihood and GMM posteriors using ψL , ψU L and feeds
them into Dϕ , preventing Dϕ from memorizing individual samples and enabling consideration of
general distributional information.

A.3    A BLATION STUDIES ON INFORMATIVENESS METRICS

In the proposed selection strategy, we measure the informativeness of unlabeled samples by Itotal
that is the summation of three rank-normalized informativeness metrics (ILike , IDis , IEnt ). In this
section, to gain insights into the combination of three informativeness metrics, we conduct ablation
studies by varying the combinations and report the corresponding results in Fig. 13. All experimental
settings are same as in the main paper, with the only difference being the resulting informativeness
metric Itotal . At most cycles, combinations of metrics tend to show better performance than if only
single information source is considered. Also, while distribution-aware metric (ILike , IDis ) con-
tribute additional improvement than IEnt at early cycles, this trend is reversed at later cycles as the


                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


distributions of XL , XU L become similar. This result demonstrates that dispositions of each met-
ric are disparate across the learning cycles, confirming the importance of multiple sources to avoid
unnecessary redundancy.

                                                12
Accuracy Improvement from Random Sampling (%)


                                                                                                                                                       Accuracy Improvement from Random Sampling (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                       11

                                                11
                                                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                       9
                                                9

                                                8                                                                                                                                                      8

                                                7
                                                                                                                                                                                                       7

                                                6
                                                                                                                                                                                                       6
                                                5
                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                4

                                                3                                                                                                                                                      4

                                                        1k                  2k     3k    4k         5k        6k    7k      8k        9k      10k                                                                 2k    4k         6k      8k    10k     12k    14k   16k   18k   20k
                                                                                         Number of Labeled Images                                                                                                                          Number of Labeled Images


                                                                                        (a) CIFAR-10                                                                                                                                     (b) CIFAR-100

                                                     Figure 13: Accuracy gain from random sampling by the combination of three informativeness metrics.



A.4                                                     A DDITIONAL EXPERIEMNTS IN CATEGORY MISMATCH SETTING ( UNSEEN CLASSES )

Due to the nature of active learning, small labeled sets may not include all categories of the entire
dataset during early learning cycles. In such cases, the task model (i.e., classifier) is trained using
only partial category information, and previously unseen classes are gradually added to the labeled
set through subsequent learning cycles. In this scenario, the selection strategy of the active learning
algorithm plays a crucial role in assigning high informativeness to samples from unseen classes, en-
abling the rapid incorporation of unseen classes into the labeled set. To verify whether our proposed
algorithm exhibits robust performance in realistic settings as described above, we defined a new
setting called ’category mismatch.’ In this setting, we ensured that only 70% of the total categories
were included in the labeled set during the first cycle. Specifically, we included only the labels cor-
responding to the first 70% of the categories. For example, in the case of CIFAR10, categories 0,
1, 2, ..., 6 would be included in the initial labeled set. We conducted experiments on the CIFAR10
and CIFAR100 datasets to measure the performance of active learning with the category mismatch
scenario. in Fig. 14, we report the accuracy improvement from random sampling. It can be observed
that the proposed methods outperform the baselines and demonstrate consistent results with those
mentioned in the manuscript.

                                                                                 Accuracy improvement from Random sampling                                                                                      Accuracy improvement from Random sampling

                                                                            7                                            TA-VAAL (CVPR'21)                                                                                                             TA-VAAL (CVPR'21)
                                                                                                                         TOD (ICCV'21)                                                                 12                                              TOD (ICCV'21)
                                                                                                                         ALFA-Mix (CVPR'22)                                                                                                            ALFA-Mix (CVPR'22)
                                                                            6
                                                                                                                         Proposed                                                                                                                      Proposed
                                                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                            5
                                                             Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                     Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                            8
                                                                            4

                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                                                            3


                                                                            2                                                                                                                               4


                                                                            1                                                                                                                               2

                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                   1k   2k     3k        4k    5k   6k    7k     8k        9k 10k                                                                 2k   4k     6k        8k 10k 12k 14k 16k 18k 20k
                                                                                              Number of Labeled Images                                                                                                       Number of Labeled Images

                                                                                                (a) CIFAR-10                                                                                                                  (b) CIFAR-100

                                                     Figure 14: Accuracy gain from random sampling by the combination of three informativeness metrics.


                                                                                                                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The superior performance of the proposed method compared to the baseline can be attributed to the
ability to estimate the distribution of the entire dataset, even with a shortage of certain categories in
the labeled set, using Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) and the intact unlabeled set. The estimated
GMM statistics can be effectively used to align the distributions of XL and XU L when training the
model or selecting data. For example, in the first cycle of CIFAR10, the GMM ψL of the labeled set
may have only seven modes, resulting in a low likelihood for the latent space where three unseen
classes exist. On the other hand, the GMM ψU L of the unlabeled set may have ten modes and
a high likelihood for the latent space where unseen classes exist. Therefore, Ilike predicts high
informativeness for unseen classes and helps the distribution of the labeled set to quickly catch up
with the distribution of the unlabeled set.

A.5   A DDITIONAL EXPERIEMNTS IN LONG - TAILED IMBALANCE SETTING

To demonstrate the robustness of our proposed algorithm in various realistic scenarios, we conducted
additional experiments in the long-tailed imbalance setting. Following the experimental setup of (Cui
et al., 2019; Bengar et al., 2022), we performed experiments on the long-tailed versions of CIFAR10
and CIFAR100 datasets. Specifically, the number of training samples for each category decreases
exponentially according to the function n = ni µi , where ni is the original number of samples for
category i and µ is the imbalance factor, which we chose to be 0.1. We compared the results of
our proposed algorithm with CBAL in Fig. 15. CBAL is an active learning method that proposes a
class-balancing loss to alleviate imbalance in long-tail distributions. The experimental results show
that the proposed methods significantly outperform CBAL, which is consistent with the findings in
Fig. 10 of the main text, where the baseline was outperformed in the imbalance setting.


                                                                                                 60
                        85

                                                                                                 55
                        80

                        75                                                                       50
                                                                                  Accuracy (%)
         Accuracy (%)


                        70                                                                       45


                        65                                                                       40


                        60                                                                       35

                        55                                                                       30
                                                                      CBAL                                                                 CBAL
                        50                                            Random                     25                                        Random
                                                                      Proposed                                                             Proposed
                        45                                                                       20
                             1k   2k    3k   4k   5k   6k   7k   8k   9k 10k                          2k   4k    6k   8k 10k 12k 14k 16k 18k 20k
                                       Number of Labeled Images                                                 Number of Labeled Images

                                         (a) CIFAR-10                                                            (b) CIFAR-100

      Figure 15: Performance comparison on long-tailed imbalanced datasets (imbalance factor = 0.1).


Our performance gains are the result of the collaborative action of three proposed schemes. In par-
ticular, the distribution-aware regularization estimates the data distribution of the entire labeled set
using a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) and generates supervisory signals using a distance-based
loss calculated from GMM statistics. This helps mitigate the overfitting of the task model to major
classes and improves performance. Additionally, the likelihood-based metric Ilike in equation 4 as-
signs high informativeness to minor classes, increasing their chances of being selected during the
selection process.

A.6   C OMPARISON AND COMPATIBILITY ANALYSIS WITH OTHER DISTRIBUTIONAL
      ALIGNMENT METHODS

To validate the superiority of the proposed algorithm, we conducted additional comparison exper-
iments with ADS (Fu et al., 2021), which performs distributional alignment through adversarial
training, on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets. The results of these experiments are reported in


                                                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Fig. 16. Both methods perform distributional alignment through adversarial training, but the larger
performance gain in our works is attributed to the fact that our key idea supports distributional
alignment using distributional information obtained through GMM, rather than relying solely on
adversarial learning for distributional alignment. As shown in Fig.5 5, as can be seen, existing
adversarial training tends to overfit the discriminator to small XL , causing it to memorize the la-
beled/unlabeled samples themselves and consequently generating overconfident predictions (i.e.,
low entropy), which undermines the reliability of informativeness. On the other hand, the proposed
method feeds GMM statistics to the discriminator, allowing it to consider the distributions of XL
and XU L as a whole to predict informativeness. As a result, we observed that the predictions of the
discriminator were calibrated, leading to improved performance.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      70
                                                                         90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      65
                                                                         85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60

                                                                         80                                                                                                                                                                           55
                                                          Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                        Accuracy (%)
                                                                         75                                                                                                                                                                           50

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      45
                                                                         70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40
                                                                         65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      35
                                                                         60
                                                                                                                                                                                     Random                                                           30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Random
                                                                                                                                                                                     ADS
                                                                         55                                                                                                                                                                           25                                                                                                         ADS
                                                                                                                                                                                     Proposed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Proposed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                    1k       2k      3k    4k                                       5k    6k         7k    8k       9k 10k                                                                           2k     4k       6k        8k 10k 12k 14k 16k 18k 20k
                                                                                                  Number of Labeled Images                                                                                                                                                       Number of Labeled Images

                                                                                                     (a) CIFAR-10                                                                                                                                                                    (b) CIFAR-100

                                                                                                  Figure 16: Performance comparison with ADS (Fu et al., 2021).



To validate that our proposed GMM-aided distributional alignment brings about general perfor-
mance improvement, we infused GMM information into TA-VAAL and WAAL, which perform
alignment through the discriminator in a similar manner. Specifically, we applied the EM algo-
rithm to the output of each method’s feature extractor to calculate GMM statistics. We then fed
the GMM-based posterior probabilities {p(y = k|z; ψL )}K                               K
                                                           k=1 , {p(y = k|z; ψU L)}k=1 , and likeli-
hoods p(z; ψL ), p(z; ψU L) to the discriminator using the approach shown in Fig. 4. In Fig. 17, it is
observed that the discriminator outputs higher prediction entropy when using GMM-based distribu-
tional information. This is because the discriminator considers the overall distributional information
rather than memorizing labeled samples themselves when making decisions. As a result, we can
confirm that both accuracy and performance are further improved.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8
                                                                                                                                             0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Accuracy Gain from Random Sampling (%)
 Accuracy Gain from Random Sampling (%)


                                           4
                                                                                                                                              0.4                                                                                                 7
                                          3.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Entropy of Discriminator Output
                                                                                                           Entropy of Discriminator Output


                                           3                                                                                                 0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.35
                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                              0.3

                                           2                                                                                                                                                                                                      5                                                                                             0.3
                                                                                                                                             0.25
                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4                                                                                            0.25
                                                                                                                                              0.2
                                           1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3                                                                                             0.2
                                          0.5                                                                                                0.15

                                           0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.15
                                                                                                                                              0.1
                                                1k   2k       3k         4k   5k   6k   7k   8k   9k 10k                                             1k   2k    3k   4k   5k   6k   7k   8k   9k 10k                                                       1k   2k    3k   4k   5k   6k   7k   8k   9k 10k                                            1k   2k   3k   4k   5k   6k   7k   8k   9k 10k
                                                      Number of Labeled Images                                                                                 Number of Labeled Images                                                                              Number of Labeled Images                                                                   Number of Labeled Images


                               (a) Accuracy analysis in                                                                                      (b) Entropy analysis in                                                               (c) Accuracy analysis in                                                                                    (d) Entropy analysis in
                                     TA-VAAL                                                                                                       TA-VAAL                                                                                 WAAL                                                                                                        WAAL

Figure 17: compatibility analyis of the proposed infusion of GMM statistics with adversarial active learning
works (TA-VAAL, WAAL) on CIFAR-10


                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.7                   A DDITIOINAL EXPERIMENTS USING R ES N ET 50 AND T INY I MAGE N ET

To further validate the generality of the proposed algorithm and GMM, we conducted additional
experiments in more challenging settings. We reported the experimental results using ResNet50 in
Fig. 18, and the experimental results using ResNet18 backbone on TinyImageNet in Fig. 19. We
used a batch size of 100 and trained for 200 epochs, following the experimental settings of (Jung
et al., 2022), using the OneCycleLR scheduler with a max lr of 0.1 and a div factor of 25. To re-
duce computational burden, we performed forward propagation, including the computation of GMM
statistics, using PyTorch’s automatic mixed precision, with floating point 16. The experimental re-
sults were consistent with the results in the main paper, confirming the general superiority of the
proposed algorithm.


                                                                                  70                                                                 39
               90
                                                                                  65                                                                 38
               85
                                                                                  60                                                                 37
               80
                                                                                  55                                                                 36
Accuracy (%)


                                                                   Accuracy (%)


               75


                                                                                                                                      Accuracy (%)
                                                                                  50                                                                 35
               70
                                                                                  45
                                                                                                                                                     34
               65
                                                                                                                                                     33
                                                                                  40
               60                                                                                                TA-VAAL (CVPR'21)
                                            TA-VAAL (CVPR'21)                                                                                        32
                                            ALFA-Mix (CVPR'22)                    35                             ALFA-Mix (CVPR'22)                                            TOD (ICCV'21)
               55                           Random                                                               Random                              31                        ALFA-Mix (CVPR'22)
                                            Proposed                              30                             Proposed
                                                                                                                                                                               Snapshot-AL (ICLR'23)
               50                                                                                                                                    30                        Random
                      2000       4000    6000     8000     10000                       2k   4k    6k   8k 10k 12k 14k 16k 18k 20k                                              Proposed
                             Number of Labeled Images                                            Number of Labeled Images                            29
                                                                                                                                                          10k 11k 12k 13k 14k 15k 16k 17k 18k 19k
                    (a) ResNet50 + CIFAR10                                         (b) ResNet50 + CIFAR100                                                       Number of Labeled Images

                    Figure 18: Comparison with other baslines using ResNet50.                                                                    Figure 19: ResNet18 + CIFAR100


A.8                   T IME COMPLEXITY ABOUT THE COMPUTATION OF GMM

In this work, GMM ψ is computed in both the “supervised learning stage” and the “semi-supervised
learning stage” and GMM calculations impose an increased computational burdens of approximately
5.66% and 15.19% in each respective stage. For detailed explanations, refer to the information pro-
vided below.
Supervised learning stage. We calculate the GMM parameters ψL for the labeled set (XL ) once per
minibatch (we do not compute the GMM for XU L at this stage). As we have label information, we
can directly compute ψs = (πs , µs , σs2 ) without multiple iterations of the EM algorithm. Detailed
analysis on the operational time can be seen in Table 2.


                        Remarks                                                Method                                                                                        Time required
                          —                                  Draw a minibatch (B) from the dataloader                                                                       33.1505 msec.
                                                            Draw a i.i.d. subset (Xs ) from the dataloader                                                                   4.5133 msec.
                    GMM computation                    Pass Xs through the feature extractor fθ to get fθ (Xs )                                                              6.1559 msec.
                                                                 Caclulate GMM ψs from fθ (Xs )                                                                              0.0470 msec.
                               —                   Compute LossCE , LossGM M using minibatch (B) and GMM ψs                                                                  3.7744 msec.
                               —                         Update model by minimizing LossCE , LossGM M                                                                       141.7344 msec.

                        Table 2: Analysis of the required time to process one batch in the supervised learning stage.



Semi-supervised learning stage.: This stage consists of a total of 10,000 iterations (batches), and
GMMs ψL , ψU L are computed at the every 500 iterations for semi-supervised learning. Similarly
with the above, ψL can be directly computed using the labels and only ψU L is computed via an
iterative EM algorithm. The computation of GMM accounts for 15.19% of the entire time required
for semi-supervised learning, and a detailed time analysis is provided in Table 3


                                                                                                            17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        Method                                              Time required
             Time required for 500 iterations (including GMM calculation)                   144.9939 sec.
                           Time required for GMM calculation                                 22.0256 sec.
      Ratio of time required for GMM calculation during semi-supervised learning              15.1906%

       Table 3: Analysis of the required time to process one batch in the semi-supervised learning stage.


Thoretical analysis about time complexity of GMM computation. Basically, the time complex-
ity for the computation of vanilla GMM is O(N KID2 ), where N, K, I, D represent the number
of data, number of Gaussian modes, number of EM iterations, and the dimensionality of the data.
However, we reduced the complexity to O(N KID) by making the isotropic Gaussian assumption,
which helps accelerate GMM computation. Moreover, as evident from the above experimental anal-
ysis, the time required for GMM computation is not significantly demanding compared to the time
spent on forward/backward propagation for model update.

A.9     A NALYSIS OF HYPERPARAMETERS THAT BALANCE MULTIPLE LOSSES

The value of hyperparameter α that balances LossCE and LossGM M is fixed to be 1e-4, and de-
tails on hyperparameter including α can be seen in Section A.2. We compared the performance by
varying the value of α from 0.00001 to 0.001, and reported the results below. When α is too large,
distributional regularization on the latent space compromises the performance of the main task. On
the other hand, when α is too small, the effect of regularization and performance improvement di-
minishes.

                                   Accuracy (%) on Proportion (%) of Labeled Samples
  Value of α
                   2.0       4.0      6.0     8.0    10.0     12.0    14.0    16.0   18.0               20.0
  0.001           59.24    73.96     77.81    82.81     85.22    85.88     87.60    88.13     88.96    89.53
  0.0005          59.21    74.07     78.98    82.73     85.40    86.67     87.57    89.04     89.57    90.19
  0.0001          60.64    74.15     79.21    83.42     85.63    86.75     88.09    89.39     90.01    90.87
  0.00005         58.98    73.63     77.45    82.16     84.76    85.88     87.43    88.95     89.63    90.38
  0.00001         59.58    73.41     76.52    81.78     84.25    86.22     87.32    88.83     89.44    90.01
                     Table 4: Analysis of the effect of α to the performance on CIFAR10
As for the loss functions during adversarial training, we use two losses : cross-entropy loss LCE and
discriminator loss Dϕ (xul ) − Dϕ (xl ). Without a special constant weight to balance them, we added
two losses in a 1:1 ratio and conducted the adversarial semi-supervised leraning.

A.10     T-SNE VISUALIZATION OF SELECTIONS FROM VARIOUS AL METHODS

In Fig.20, we illustrate the intuitive patterns of candidate set selected by various AL methods via
t-SNE visualization. Before t-SNE, we first train a feature extractor and classifier using randomly
selected 2,000 samples from imbalanced CIFAR10 (imbalance ratio = 10). Afterward, we depict
the candidate set selected by various AL methods. From the observations, we can take a hint of
properties that various AL method have for selection. For instance, Snapshot (Jung et al., 2022) that
calculates uncertainty using the output of classifier exhibits redundancy by selecting multiple sam-
ples from narrow regions. Coreset that considers only diversity can select diverse samples in broad
areas but it lacks the ability to specify certain informative regions. CoreGCN that prefers samples
expected be from unlabeled set, is observed to select samples from already familiar areas with dense
labeled samples, as well as outlier samples that hardly represent XU L . In contrast, the candidate
set from the proposed method demonstrates desired properties: 1) it is diverse enough to encom-
pass broad area while 2) represents the distribution of XU L well. Our method compares GMMs
of XL , XU L to select samples that are unfamiliar in XL , but representative of XU L ; especially in
the imbalanced setting, this comparison leads to select minor classes that are rare in XL , thereby
contributing to the significant performance gain as seen in Fig.10


                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        (a) Snapshot AL (Jung et al., 2022)                    (b) CoreSet (Sener & Savarese, 2018)


      (c) CoreGCN (Caramalau et al., 2021)                                 (d) Proposed

Figure 20: t-SNE visualization of selected samples by various AL methods. t-SNE was applied to the latent
space from imbalanced CIFAR10 (imbalance ratio = 10). Colors of markers represent the category of samples,
and markers △, ⃝, □ denote labeled samples, unlabeled samples and selected samples, respectively. For every
AL method, 20 selected samples □ are depicted.


                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.11    P RECISE ACCURACIES WITH MORE BASELINES



In the main paper, we displayed the performance of only a subset of baselines (WAAL (Shui et al.,
2020), TA-VAAL (Kim et al., 2021), CoreGCN (Caramalau et al., 2021), TOD (Huang et al., 2021),
ALFA-MIX (Parvaneh et al., 2022), SnapshotAL (Jung et al., 2022)) in line graph format for read-
ability. In this section, we additionally report the performance of Coreset (Sener & Savarese, 2018),
VAAL (Kim et al., 2021), and LL4AL (Yoo & Kweon, 2019) in tabular form, which was not pre-
viously reported in the main paper. The experimental settings, including task model architecture,
data augmentation methods, hyperparameter settings, and annotation budget per learning cycle, are
consistent with those described in the main paper.


                                      Accuracy (%) on Proportion (%) of Labeled Samples
    Methods
                   2.0     4.0       6.0    8.0     10.0    12.0     14.0    16.0   18.0    20.0    Avg
    Random        51.76   63.50     72.17   76.94   80.56   82.32   84.17   85.00   86.11   87.27   76.98
    CoreSet       51.76   66.56     75.94   80.44   82.39   85.00   86.61   88.06   88.89   89.67   79.53
    LL4AL         51.06   62.86     74.49   79.21   81.69   83.57   86.71   88.21   88.56   89.24   78.56
    VAAL          51.06   64.28     72.50   77.94   81.17   82.83   84.93   85.71   87.15   87.63   77.52
    Snapshot-AL   51.76   63.42     73.44   79.31   82.10   84.57   85.91   87.34   88.15   88.98   78.49
    TA-VAAL       51.78   66.42     75.98   80.42   83.53   85.20   87.03   88.03   88.87   89.78   79.70
    CoreGCN       51.76   62.35     73.04   79.80   82.79   84.49   86.88   88.07   88.71   89.66   78.76
    TOD           54.19   68.37     76.42   80.28   83.57   85.76   87.00   88.57   89.00   90.02   80.31
    ALFA-Mix      51.76   65.53     74.95   79.91   83.34   84.78   86.46   87.89   89.47   90.12   79.42
    WAAL          54.86   70.73     77.06   80.81   84.51   85.64   86.48   88.24   89.47   90.11   80.79
    Proposed      58.98   74.15     79.21   83.42   85.63   86.75   88.09   89.39   90.01   90.87   82.65

                                  Table 5: Results on balanced CIFAR-10.


                                      Accuracy (%) on Proportion (%) of Labeled Samples
    Methods
                   2.0     4.0       6.0    8.0     10.0    12.0     14.0    16.0   18.0    20.0    Avg
    Random        20.68   31.76     41.34   47.56   51.65   55.80   58.07   59.66   61.53   63.07   49.11
    CoreSet       20.68   31.16     42.67   49.03   54.94   58.35   61.08   63.30   64.89   66.08   51.22
    LL4AL         20.68   30.80     40.85   49.26   54.83   58.98   61.65   63.13   65.23   66.53   51.19
    VAAL          20.68   33.13     42.27   50.23   54.60   57.24   59.97   62.01   63.72   65.36   50.92
    Snapshot-AL   20.68   34.13     45.26   51.32   56.46   59.02   62.71   64.18   65.56   67.97   52.73
    TA-VAAL       20.68   31.99     42.05   50.68   56.08   59.49   62.33   63.92   66.32   67.74   52.13
    CoreGCN       20.86   36.54     44.85   52.61   57.22   60.41   62.57   64.54   66.41   67.06   53.31
    TOD           23.42   35.91     45.37   51.91   56.03   58.74   61.43   63.80   65.22   67.14   52.90
    ALFA-Mix      20.68   33.02     44.14   52.00   57.38   59.91   63.29   65.47   66.66   68.68   53.12
    WAAL          24.24   39.10     47.05   52.02   56.89   58.36   61.78   63.86   64.70   65.70   53.37
    Proposed      28.42   41.82     51.14   56.13   59.37   61.94   63.89   66.14   67.38   68.85   56.51

                                  Table 6: Results on balanced CIFAR-100.


                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     Accuracy (%) on Proportion (%) of Labeled Samples
   Methods
                  2.0     4.0       6.0    8.0     10.0    12.0     14.0    16.0   18.0    20.0    Avg
   Random        82.56   87.89     89.73   91.04   91.86   92.40   92.67   93.22   93.50   94.00   90.89
   CoreSet       82.56   88.43     90.48   91.72   92.79   93.36   93.75   94.08   94.32   94.79   91.63
   LL4AL         82.56   88.04     89.50   91.24   92.26   92.81   93.51   94.13   94.12   94.73   91.29
   VAAL          82.56   88.68     90.69   91.82   92.71   93.30   93.78   94.18   94.48   94.89   91.71
   Snapshot-AL   82.56   89.04     90.86   92.13   92.95   93.61   94.31   94.57   94.96   95.36   92.04
   TA-VAAL       82.56   88.39     90.39   91.61   92.98   93.66   93.99   94.13   94.36   94.85   91.69
   CoreGCN       82.56   89.13     91.02   91.92   92.75   93.48   94.09   94.44   94.84   95.17   91.94
   TOD           83.43   88.83     91.63   93.04   93.70   94.09   94.70   94.96   95.19   95.46   92.50
   ALFA-Mix      82.56   89.01     91.31   92.51   93.52   94.02   94.58   94.88   95.10   95.51   92.30
   WAAL          84.28   89.42     91.80   92.81   93.62   94.18   94.76   95.01   95.15   95.34   92.64
   Proposed      85.62   90.19     92.00   93.57   94.40   94.66   95.04   95.31   95.67   95.86   93.23

                                   Table 7: Results on balanced SVHN.


                                     Accuracy (%) on Proportion (%) of Labeled Samples
   Methods
                  2.0     4.0       6.0    8.0     10.0    12.0     14.0    16.0   18.0    20.0    Avg
   Random        81.73   87.11     89.07   89.69   89.92   90.26   90.56   90.94   91.28   91.53   89.21
   CoreSet       81.73   86.97     89.59   90.24   90.40   90.94   91.24   91.95   92.49   92.45   89.80
   LL4AL         81.73   85.90     88.40   89.40   90.10   90.56   91.02   91.49   91.85   92.06   89.25
   VAAL          81.73   87.40     89.54   90.28   90.73   91.22   91.55   92.01   92.37   92.52   89.93
   Snapshot-AL   81.73   86.57     88.75   90.25   91.13   91.61   92.32   92.78   93.01   93.11   90.13
   TA-VAAL       81.73   86.61     89.74   90.25   91.31   91.72   91.93   92.34   92.80   92.86   90.13
   CoreGCN       81.73   86.30     88.78   90.14   90.95   91.39   91.78   92.27   92.44   92.74   89.85
   TOD           83.52   88.51     89.57   91.17   91.81   92.55   92.77   93.10   93.16   93.37   90.95
   ALFA-Mix      81.73   88.13     89.95   90.91   91.88   92.46   92.84   93.13   93.33   93.57   90.79
   WAAL          84.20   88.87     90.14   91.34   91.51   92.27   92.46   93.08   93.11   93.37   91.04
   Proposed      85.31   89.51     90.67   91.52   92.29   92.79   93.03   93.19   93.48   93.69   91.55

                            Table 8: Results on balanced FashionMNIST.


                                     Accuracy (%) on Proportion (%) of Labeled Samples
   Methods
                  2.0     4.0       6.0    8.0     10.0    12.0     14.0    16.0   18.0    20.0    Avg
   Random        35.50   47.98     54.83   62.57   66.27   69.90   72.66   74.15   75.92   77.11   63.69
   CoreSet       35.50   50.33     58.88   66.27   70.18   73.85   77.08   79.46   81.09   81.81   67.45
   LL4AL         35.50   51.94     58.59   65.81   70.21   74.85   78.28   80.01   80.84   82.06   67.81
   VAAL          35.50   51.64     58.97   66.32   70.87   74.50   77.35   79.53   81.01   81.65   67.74
   Snapshot-AL   35.50   53.18     61.04   67.16   71.88   75.91   78.34   82.01   83.46   84.06   69.25
   TA-VAAL       35.50   50.68     59.02   65.69   71.23   75.98   78.89   81.73   82.98   83.49   68.52
   CoreGCN       35.50   49.83     60.77   69.08   72.40   75.75   80.25   82.23   83.90   84.27   69.40
   TOD           42.02   57.75     65.59   70.01   71.42   74.62   76.48   79.42   80.74   81.84   69.99
   ALFA-Mix      35.50   56.25     63.06   70.71   75.11   77.63   80.51   82.72   84.13   84.35   71.00
   WAAL          43.08   59.57     68.59   72.18   75.12   78.26   79.60   80.83   81.22   81.45   71.99
   Proposed      46.37   66.48     74.57   78.33   80.61   82.67   83.64   84.78   84.95   85.38   76.78

                                 Table 9: Results on imbalanced CIFAR10.


                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     Accuracy (%) on Proportion (%) of Labeled Samples
   Methods
                  2.0     4.0       6.0    8.0     10.0    12.0     14.0    16.0   18.0    20.0    Avg
   Random        11.31   16.20     21.61   25.44   29.18   32.83   35.18   37.10   39.17   39.76   28.78
   CoreSet       11.31   17.01     23.30   27.48   31.76   34.96   37.85   40.32   42.88   43.73   31.06
   LL4AL         11.31   17.71     21.73   27.05   30.54   35.58   37.96   40.42   42.80   44.27   30.94
   VAAL          11.31   17.17     22.39   26.79   30.58   35.44   37.77   40.45   42.50   43.44   30.79
   Snapshot-AL   11.31   17.05     22.65   26.77   31.01   35.51   38.42   41.45   43.95   45.21   31.33
   TA-VAAL       11.31   17.41     22.70   28.05   32.28   35.37   38.68   41.40   44.81   45.55   31.76
   CoreGCN       11.31   17.41     25.60   28.94   33.83   36.69   39.70   42.45   44.67   45.88   32.65
   TOD           12.66   19.37     25.20   30.56   34.21   37.03   39.96   42.26   44.52   45.72   33.15
   ALFA-Mix      11.31   17.61     23.83   27.89   32.01   37.91   40.18   43.84   45.54   46.30   32.64
   WAAL          13.25   21.05     26.18   31.56   34.61   37.89   40.87   43.15   44.49   45.53   33.86
   Proposed      15.11   23.51     27.60   32.70   35.86   39.39   41.46   44.14   45.84   46.10   35.17

                                Table 10: Results on imbalanced CIFAR100.



                                     Accuracy (%) on Proportion (%) of Labeled Samples
   Methods
                  2.0     4.0       6.0    8.0     10.0    12.0     14.0    16.0   18.0    20.0    Avg
   Random        62.84   69.51     72.33   76.91   79.48   81.32   81.61   83.83   84.20   84.65   77.67
   CoreSet       62.84   76.07     80.16   83.27   85.47   86.50   87.20   88.30   88.62   89.02   82.75
   LL4AL         62.84   75.84     83.28   84.99   86.86   86.87   87.73   87.93   87.96   88.72   83.30
   VAAL          62.84   76.30     81.12   83.52   85.45   86.50   87.03   87.92   88.12   88.64   82.75
   Snapshot-AL   62.84   79.49     83.43   86.13   88.43   89.31   90.67   91.34   91.54   92.13   85.53
   TA-VAAL       62.84   77.71     82.70   85.79   87.58   88.99   89.49   90.36   90.53   90.74   84.67
   CoreGCN       62.84   79.20     84.72   86.78   88.51   88.87   89.33   89.74   90.13   90.29   85.04
   TOD           62.83   81.51     84.27   86.02   87.04   87.25   88.46   88.91   89.95   90.07   84.63
   ALFA-Mix      62.84   78.60     86.57   87.82   89.75   91.17   91.57   91.83   92.36   92.64   86.52
   WAAL          65.34   83.56     87.76   88.66   90.02   91.32   91.76   92.01   92.21   92.56   87.52
   Proposed      69.79   86.08     90.32   91.72   91.88   92.40   92.53   92.75   92.94   93.31   89.37

                                 Table 11: Results on imbalanced SVHN.



                                     Accuracy (%) on Proportion (%) of Labeled Samples
   Methods
                  2.0     4.0       6.0    8.0     10.0    12.0     14.0    16.0   18.0    20.0    Avg
   Random        72.24   73.48     77.39   80.16   81.62   82.91   83.30   83.93   84.19   84.27   80.35
   CoreSet       72.24   79.88     83.86   85.62   86.50   87.52   87.84   88.11   88.48   88.61   84.87
   LL4AL         72.24   77.30     81.76   83.80   85.42   86.21   87.00   87.31   87.81   88.50   83.73
   VAAL          72.24   76.92     81.10   83.48   84.80   85.95   86.40   86.88   87.21   87.55   83.25
   Snapshot-AL   72.24   82.61     86.61   87.53   88.13   89.43   89.66   89.77   90.43   90.66   86.71
   TA-VAAL       72.24   79.24     83.47   85.63   86.62   87.53   88.15   88.40   88.50   89.18   84.90
   CoreGCN       72.24   79.99     84.16   86.49   87.37   88.72   88.90   89.39   89.63   89.88   85.68
   TOD           73.55   83.35     86.65   87.45   87.99   88.32   88.43   88.74   89.00   89.08   86.26
   ALFA-Mix      72.24   83.56     87.58   89.18   89.76   90.23   90.56   90.64   90.83   90.91   87.55
   WAAL          74.07   85.76     88.16   89.23   89.68   89.92   90.13   90.29   90.41   90.42   87.81
   Proposed      78.22   87.37     89.03   90.11   90.60   90.72   90.91   91.26   91.43   91.74   89.14

                          Table 12: Results on imbalanced FashionMNIST.


                                                    22
