Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S AMPLE E FFICIENT M YOPIC E XPLORATION T HROUGH
M ULTITASK R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING WITH D I -
VERSE TASKS

 Ziping Xu∗,1 , Zifan Xu2 , Runxuan Jiang3 , Peter Stone2,4 & Ambuj Tewari3
 1
   Harvard University, 2 The University of Texas at Austin, 3 University of Michigan, 4 Sony AI
 ∗
   This work was done while Z.X. was a Ph.D. student at the University of Michigan.


                                            A BSTRACT

         Multitask Reinforcement Learning (MTRL) approaches have gained increasing
         attention for its wide applications in many important Reinforcement Learning (RL)
         tasks. However, while recent advancements in MTRL theory have focused on
         the improved statistical efficiency by assuming a shared structure across tasks,
         exploration–a crucial aspect of RL–has been largely overlooked. This paper ad-
         dresses this gap by showing that when an agent is trained on a sufficiently diverse
         set of tasks, a generic policy-sharing algorithm with myopic exploration design like
         ϵ-greedy that are inefficient in general can be sample-efficient for MTRL. To the
         best of our knowledge, this is the first theoretical demonstration of the "exploration
         benefits" of MTRL. It may also shed light on the enigmatic success of the wide
         applications of myopic exploration in practice. To validate the role of diversity, we
         conduct experiments on synthetic robotic control environments, where the diverse
         task set aligns with the task selection by automatic curriculum learning, which is
         empirically shown to improve sample-efficiency.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement Learning often involves solving multitask problems. For instance, robotic control
agents are trained to simultaneously solve multiple goals in multi-goal environments (Andreas et al.,
2017; Andrychowicz et al., 2017). In mobile health applications, RL is employed to personalize
sequences of treatments, treating each patient as a distinct task (Yom-Tov et al., 2017; Forman et al.,
2019; Liao et al., 2020; Ghosh et al., 2023). Many algorithms (Andreas et al., 2017; Andrychowicz
et al., 2017; Hessel et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020) have been designed to jointly learn from multiple
tasks. These show significant improvement over those that learn each task individually. To provide
explanations for such improvement, recent advancements in Multitask Reinforcement Learning
(MTRL) theory study the improved statistical efficiency in estimating unknown parameters by
assuming a shared structure across tasks (Brunskill & Li, 2013; Calandriello et al., 2014; Uehara
et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021; Zhang & Wang, 2021; Lu et al., 2021; Agarwal et al., 2022; Cheng et al.,
2022; Yang et al., 2022a). Similar setups originate from Multitask Supervised Learning, where it√has
been shown that learning from multiple tasks reduces the generalization error by a factor of 1/ N
compared to single-task learning with N being the total number of tasks (Maurer et al., 2016; Du
et al., 2020). Nevertheless, these studies overlook an essential aspect of RL, namely exploration.
To understand how learning from multiple tasks, as opposed to single-task learning, could potentially
benefit exploration design, we consider a generic MTRL scenario, where an algorithm interacts with
a task set M in rounds T . In each round, the algorithm chooses an exploratory policy π that is used
to collect one episode worth of data in a task M ∈ M of its own choice. A sample-efficient algorithm
should output a near-optimal policy for each task in a polynomial number of rounds.
Exploration design plays an important role in achieving sample-efficient learning. Previous sample-
efficient algorithms for single-task learning (|M| = 1) heavily rely on strategic design on the
exploratory policies, such as Optimism in Face of Uncertainty (OFU) (Auer et al., 2008; Bartlett
& Tewari, 2009; Dann et al., 2017) and Posterior Sampling (Russo & Van Roy, 2014; Osband &
Van Roy, 2017). Strategic design is criticized for either being restricted to environments with strong
structural assumptions, or involving intractable computation oracle, such as non-convex optimization
(Jiang, 2018; Jin et al., 2021a). For instance, GOLF (Jin et al., 2021a), a model-free general function


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


approximation online learning algorithm, involves finding the optimal Q-value function f in a function
class F. It requires the following two intractable computation oracles in (1).
    F t = {f ∈ F : f has low empirical Bellman error} and f (t) = arg max f (s1 , π(s1 | f )).             (1)
                                                                             f ∈F t

In contrast, myopic exploration design like ϵ-greedy that injects random noise to a current greedy
policy is easy to implement and performs well in a wide range of applications (Mnih et al., 2015;
Kalashnikov et al., 2018), while it is shown to have exponential sample complexity in the worst case
for single-task learning (Osband et al., 2019). Throughout the paper, we ask the main question:

           Can algorithms with myopic exploration design be sample-efficient for MTRL?

In this paper, we address the question by showing that a simple algorithm that explores one task with
ϵ-greedy policies from other tasks can be sample-efficient if the task set M is adequately diverse.
Our results may shed some light on the longstanding mystery that ϵ-greedy is successful in practice,
while being shown sample-inefficient in theory. We argue that in an MTRL setting, ϵ-greedy policies
may no longer behave myopically, as they explore myopically around the optimal policies from other
tasks. When the task set is adequately diverse, this exploration may provide sufficient coverage. It is
worth-noting that this may partially explain the success of curriculum learning in RL (Narvekar et al.,
2020), that is the optimal policy of one task may easily produce a good exploration for the next task,
thus reducing the complexity of exploration. This connection will be formally discussed later.
To summarize our contributions, this work provides a general framework that converts the task of
strategic exploration design into the task of constructing diverse task set in an MTRL setting, where
myopic exploration like ϵ-greedy can also be sample-efficient. We discuss a sufficient diversity
condition under a general value function approximation setting (Jin et al., 2021a; Dann et al.,
2022). We show that the condition guarantees polynomial sample-complexity bound by running
the aforementioned algorithm with myopic exploration design. We further discuss how to satisfy
the diversity condition in different case studies, including tabular cases, linear cases and linear
quadratic regulator cases. In the end, we validate our theory with experiments on synthetic robotic
control environments, where we observe that a diverse task set is similar to the task selection of
the state-of-the-art automatic curriculum learning algorithm, which has been empirically shown to
improve sample efficiency.

2     P ROBLEM S ETUP

The following are notations that will be used throughout the paper.
Notation. For a positive integer H, we denote [H] := {1, . . . , H}. For a discrete set A, we denote
∆A by the set of distributions over A. We use O and Ω to denote the asymptotic upper and lower
bound notations and use Õ and Ω̃ to hide the logarithmic dependence. Let {1i }i∈[d] be the standard
basis that spans Rd . We let NF (ρ) denote the ℓ∞ covering number of a function class F at scale ρ.
For a class F, we denote the N -times Cartesian product of F by (F)⊗N .

2.1   P ROPOSED M ULTITASK L EARNING S CENARIO

Throughout the paper, we consider each task as an episodic MDP denoted by M =
(S, A, H, PM , RM ), where S is the state space, A is the action space, H ∈ N represents the
horizon length in each episode, PM = (Ph,M )h∈[H] is the collection of transition kernels, and
RM = (Rh,M )h∈[H] is the collection of immediate reward functions. Each Ph,M : S × A 7→ ∆(S)
and each Rh,M : S × A 7→ [0, 1]. Note that we consider a scenario in which all the tasks share the
same state space, action space, and horizon length.
An agent interacts with an MDP M in the following way: starting with a fixed initial state s1 , at
each step h ∈ [H], the agent decides an action ah and the environment samples the next state
sh+1 ∼ Ph,M (· | sh , ah ) and next reward rh = Rh,M (sh , ah ). An episode is a sequence of states,
actions, and rewards (s1 , a1 , r1 , . . . , sH , ah , rH , sH+1 ). In general, we assume that the sum of rh is
upper bounded by 1 for any action sequence almost surely. The goal of an agent is to maximize the
                   PH
cumulative reward h=1 rh by optimizing their actions.


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The agent chooses actions based on Markovian policies denoted by π = (πh )h∈[H] and each πh is a
mapping S 7→ ∆A , where ∆A is the set of all distributions over A. Let Π denote the space of all
such policies. For a finite action space, we let πh (a | s) denote the probability of selecting action
a given state s at the step h. In case of the infinite action space, we slightly abuse the notation by
letting πh (· | s) denote the density function.
Proposed multitask learning scenario and objective. We consider the following multitask RL
learning scenario. An algorithm interacts with a set of tasks M sequentially for T rounds. At the each
round t, the algorithm chooses an exploratory policy, which is used to collect data for one episode
in a task M ∈ M of its own choice. At the end of T rounds, the algorithm outputs a set of policies
{πM }M ∈M . The goal of an algorithm is to learn a near-optimal policy πM for each task M ∈ M.
The sample complexity of an algorithm is defined as follows.
Definition 1 (MTRL Sample Complexity). An algorithm L is said to have sample-complexity of
  L
CM   : R × R 7→ N for a task set M if for any β > 0, δ ∈ (0, 1), it outputs a β-optimal policy πM
                                                                                              L
for each MDP M ∈ M with probability at least 1 − δ, by interacting with the task set for CM      (β, δ)
rounds. We omit the notations for L and M when they are clear from the context to ease presentation.

A sample-efficient algorithm should have a sample-complexity polynomial in the parameters of
interests. For the tabular case, where the state space and action space are finite, C(β, δ) should
be polynomial in |S|, |A|, |M|, H, and 1/β for a sample-efficient learning. Current state-of-the-
art algorithm (Zhang et al., 2021) on a single-task tabular MDP achieves sample-complexity of
Õ(|S||A|/β 2 )1 . This bound translates to a MTRL sample-complexity bound of Õ(|M||S||A|/β 2 )
by running their algorithm individually for each M ∈ M. However, their exploration design
closely follows the principle of Optimism in Face of Uncertainty, which is normally criticized for
over-exploring.

2.2      VALUE F UNCTION A PPROXIMATION

We consider the setting where value functions are approximated by general function classes. Denote
the value function of an MDP M with respect to a policy π by
                    Qπh,M (s, a) = EM          π

                                    π rh + Vh+1,M (sh+1 ) | sh = s, ah = a
                         π
                            (s) = EM
                                         π
                       Vh,M         π Qh,M (sh , ah ) | sh = s ,

where by EM π , we take expectation over the randomness of trajectories sampled by policy π on MDP
                 π
M and we let VH+1,M     (s) ≡ 0 for all s ∈ S and π ∈ Π. We denote the optimal policy for MDP
         ∗                                                        ∗
M by πM . The corresponding value functions are denoted by Vh,M        and Q∗h,M , which is shown to
                            M ∗              ∗

satisfy Bellman Equation Th Qh+1,M = Qh,M , where for any g : S × A 7→ [0, 1], ThM g (s, a) =
E[rh + maxa′ ∈A g (sh+1 , a′ ) | sh = s, ah = a].
The agent has access to a collection of function classes F = (Fh : S × A 7→ [0, H])h∈[H+1] . We
assume that different tasks share the same set of function class. For each f ∈ F, we denote by
fh ∈ Fh the h-th component of the function f . We let π f = {πhf }h∈[H] be the greedy policy with
πhf (s) = arg maxa∈A fh (s, a). When it is clear from the context, we slightly abuse the notation and
let f ∈ (F)⊗|M| be a joint function for all the tasks. We further let fM denote the function for the
task M and fh,M denote its h-th component.
Define Bellman error operator EhM such that EhM f = fh − ThM fh+1 for any f ∈ F. The goal of
the learning algorithm is to approximate Q∗h,M through the function class Fh by minimizing the
empirical Bellman error for each step h and task M .
To provide theoretical guarantee on this practice, we make the following realizability and completeness
assumptions. The two assumptions and their variants are commonly used in the literature (Dann et al.,
2017; Jin et al., 2021a).
Assumption 1 (Realizability and Completeness). For any MDP M considered in this paper, we
assume F is realizable and complete under the Bellman operator such that Q∗h,M ∈ Fh for all
h ∈ [H] and for every h ∈ [H], fh+1 ∈ Fh+1 there is a fh ∈ Fh such that fh = ThM fh+1 .
   1
       This bound is under the regime with 1/β ≫ |S|


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.3       M YOPIC E XPLORATION D ESIGN

As opposed to carefully designed exploration, myopic exploration injects random noise to the current
greedy policy. For a given greedy policy π, we use expl(π) to denote the myopic exploration policy
based on π. Depending on the action space, the function expl can take different forms. The most
common choice for finite action spaces is ϵ-greedy, which mixes the greedy policy with a random
action: expl(πh )(a | s) = (1−ϵh )πh (a | s)+ϵh /A.2 As it is our main study of exploration strategies,
we let expl be ϵ-greedy function if not explicitly specified. For a continuous action space, we p
                                                                                                consider
exploration with Gaussian noise: expl(πh )(a | s) = (1−ϵh )πh (a | s)+ϵh exp(−a2 /2σh2 )/ 2πσh2 .
Gaussian noise is useful for Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) setting (discussed in Appendix F.)


3       M ULTITASK RL A LGORITHM WITH P OLICY-S HARING

In this section, we introduce a generic algorithm (Algorithm 1) for the proposed multitask RL scenario
without any strategic exploration, whose theoretical properties will be studied throughout the paper. In
a typical single-task learning, a myopically exploring agent samples trajectories by running its current
greedy policy estimated from the historical data equipped with naive explorations like ϵ-greedy.
In light of the exploration benefits of MTRL, we study Algorithm 1 as a counterpart of the single-task
learning scenario in the MTRL setting. Algorithm 1 maintains a dataset for each MDP separately and
different tasks interact in the following way: in each round, Algorithm 1 explores every MDP with an
exploratory policy that is the mixture (defined in Definition 2) of greedy policies of all the MDPs in
the task set (Line 8). One way to interpret Algorithm 1 is that we share knowledge across tasks by
policy sharing instead of parameter sharing or feature extractor sharing in the previous literature.
Definition 2 (Mixture Policy). For a set of policies {πi }N                              N
                                                            i=1 , we denote Mixture({πi }i=1 ) by the
mixture of N policies, such that before the start of an episode, it samples I ∼ Unif([N ]), then runs
policy πI for the rest of the episode.
The greedy policy is obtained from an offline learning oracle Q (Line 4) that maps a dataset D =
{(si , ai , ri , s′i )}N
                       i=1 to a function f ∈ F, such that Q(D) is an approximate solution to the following
                                           PN                                               2
minimization problem arg minf ∈F i=1 (fhi (si , ai ) − ri − maxa′ ∈A fhi +1 (s′i , a′ )) . In practice,
one can run fitted Q-iteration for an approximate solution.
Connection to Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) and multi-goal RL. We provide some
justifications for the choice of the mixture policy. HER is a common practice (Andrychowicz et al.,
2017) in the multi-goal RL setting (Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Chane-Sane et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2022), where the reward distribution is a function of goal-parameters. HER relabels the rewards in
trajectories in the experience buffer such that they were as if sampled for a different task. Notably,
this exploration strategy is akin to randomly selecting task and collecting a trajectory on using its own
epsilon-greedy policy, followed by relabeling rewards to simulate a trajectory on, which is equivalent
to Algorithm 1. Yang et al. (2022b); Zhumabekov et al. (2023) also designed an algorithm with
ensemble policies, which is shown to improve generalizability. It is worth noting that the ensemble
implementation of Algorithm 1 and that of Zhumabekov et al. (2023) differs. In Algorithm 1, policies
are mixed trajectory-wise, with one policy randomly selected for the entire episode. In contrast,
Zhumabekov et al. (2023) mixes policies on a step-wise basis for a continuous action space, selecting
actions as a weighted average of actions chosen by different policies. This distinction is vital in
showing the rigorous theoretical guarantee outlined in this paper.
Connection to curriculum learning. Curriculum learning is the approach that learns tasks in
a specific order to improve the multitask learning performance (Bengio et al., 2009). Although
Algorithm 1 does not explicitly implement curriculum learning by assigning preferences to tasks,
improvement could be achieved through adaptive task selection that may reflect the benefits of
curriculum learning. Intuitively, any curricula that selects tasks through an order of M1 , . . . , MT
is implicitly included in Algorithm 1 as it explores all the MDPs in each round with the mixture
of all epsilon-greedy policies. This means that the sample-complexity of Algorithm 1 provides an
upper bound on the sample complexity of underlying optimal task selection. A formal discussion is
deferred to Appendix B.

    2
        Note that we consider a more general setup, where the exploration probability ϵ can depend on h.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Generic Algorithm for MTRL with Policy-Sharing
 1: Input: function class F = F1 × · · · × FH+1 , task set M, exploration function expl
 2: Initialize D0,M ← ∅ for all M ∈ M
 3: for round t = 1, 2, . . . , ⌊T /|M|⌋ do
 4:     Offline learning oracle outputs fˆt,M ← Q(Dt−1,M ) for each M           ▷ Offline learning
                                                               ˆ
 5:    Set myopic exploration policy π̂t,M ← expl(π ft,M ) for each M
 6:    Set π̂t ← Mixture({π̂t,M }M ∈M )                                                    ▷ Share policies
 7:    for M ∈ M do
 8:        Sample one episode τt,M on MDP M with policy π̂t                         ▷ Collect new trajectory
 9:        Add τt,M to the dataset: Dt,M ← Dt−1,M ∪ {τt,M }
10:    end for
11: end for
12: Return π̂M = Mixture({π̂t,M }t∈⌊T /|M|⌋ ) for each M


                                                                     𝑁 + 1 States


                                                                            …                 𝑀"
                           𝑁 + 1 States          𝑁 tasks

                                                                            …                 𝑀#
                                    …


                                                                                             …
            Single task: 𝜖-greedy visits                                    …
            goal state with a prob. 𝜖 !                                                       𝑀!


Figure 1: A diverse grid-world task set on a long hallway with N + 1 states. From the left to the right,
it represents a single-task and a multitask learning scenario, respectively. The triangles represent the
starting state and the stars represent the goal states, where an agent receives a positive reward. The
agent can choose to move forward or backward.

4     G ENERIC S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY G UARANTEE
In this section, we rigorously define the diversity condition and provide a sample-complexity upper
bound for Algorithm 1. We start with introducing an intuitive example on how diversity encourages
exploration in a multitask setting.
Motivating example. Figure 1 introduces a motivating example of grid-world environment on a long
hallway with N + 1 states. Since this is a deterministic tabular environment, whenever a task collects
an episode that visits its goal state, running an offline policy optimization algorithm with pessimism
will output its optimal policy.
Left penal of Figure 1 is a single-task learning, where the goal state is N steps away from the initial
state, making it exponentially hard to visit the goal state with ϵ-greedy exploration. Figure 1 on the
right demonstrates a multitask learning scenario with N tasks, whose goal states "diversely" distribute
along the hallway. A main message of this paper is the advantage of exploring one task by running the
ϵ-greedy policies of other tasks. To see this, consider any current greedy policies (π1 , π2 , . . . , πN ).
Let i be the first non-optimal policy, i.e. all j < i, πj is optimal for Mj . Since πi−1 is optimal, by
                                                                         Qi−1
running an ϵ-greedy of πi−1 on MDP Mi , we have a probability of h=1 (1 − ϵh )ϵi to visit the goal
state of Mi , allowing it to improve its policy to optimal in the next round. Such improvement can only
happen for N times and all policies will be optimal within polynomial (in N ) number of rounds if we
choose ϵh = 1/(h + 1). Hence, myopic exploration with a diverse task set leads to sample-efficient
learning. The rest of the section can be seen as generalizing this idea to function approximation.

4.1   M ULTITASK M YOPIC E XPLORATION G AP

Dann et al. (2022) proposed an assumption named Myopic Exploration Gap (MEG) that allows
efficient myopic exploration for a single MDP under strong assumptions on the reward function, or
on the mixing time. We extend this definition to the multitask learning setting. For the conciseness
of the notation, we let expl(f ) denote the following mixture policy Mixture({expl(π fM )}M ∈M )


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for a joint function f ∈ (F)⊗|M| . Intuitively, a large myopic exploration gap implies that within
all the policies that can be learned by the current exploratory policy, there exists one that can make
significant improvement on the current greedy policy.
Definition 3 (Multitask Myopic Exploration Gap (Multitask MEG)). For any M, a function class
F, a joint function f ∈ (F)⊗|M| , we say that f has α(f, M, F)-myopic exploration gap, where
α(f, M, F) is the value to the following maximization problem:
                                1    f˜     fM
                 max        sup √ (V1,M − V1,M ), s.t. for all f ′ ∈ F and h ∈ [H],
                 M ∈M ˜
                      f ∈F ,c≥1  c

                           EM
                            π f˜
                                 [(EhM f ′ )(sh , ah )]2 ≤ cEM           M ′
                                                             expl(f ) [(Eh f )(sh , ah )]
                                                                                         2

                                M ′                              M ′
                       EM                       2    M                           2
                        π fM [(Eh f )(sh , ah )] ≤ cEexpl(f ) [(Eh f )(sh , ah )] .
Let M (f, M, F), c(f, M, F) be the corresponding M ∈ M and c that attains the maximization.
Design of myopic exploration gap. To illustrate the spirit of this definition, we specialize to the
tabular case, where conditions in Definition 3 can be replaced by the concentrability (Jin et al., 2021b)
condition: for all s, a, h ∈ S × A × [H], we require
                      f˜                expl(f )                fM              expl(f )
                    π
                   µh,M (s, a) ≤ cµh,M             (s, a) and µπh,M (s, a) ≤ cµh,M         (s, a),     (2)
where µπh,M (s, a) is the occupancy measure, i.e. the probability of visiting (s, a) at the step h by
running policy π on MDP M . The design of myopic exploration gap connects deeply to the theory
of offline Reinforcement Learning. For a specific MDP M , Equation (2) defines a set of policies
with concentrability assumption (Xie et al., 2021) that can be accurately evaluated through the offline
data collected by the current behavior policy. As an extension to the Single-task MEG in Dann et al.
(2022), Multitask MEG considers the maximum myopic exploration gap over a set of MDPs and the
behavior policy is a mixture of all the greedy policies. Definition 3 reduces to the Single-task MEG
when the task set M is a singleton.
4.2   S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY G UARANTEE

We propose Diversity in Definition 5, which relies on having a lower bounded Multitask MEG for
any suboptimal policy. We then present Theorem 1 that shows an upper bound for sample complexity
of Algorithm 1 by assuming diversity.
Definition 4 (Multitask Suboptimality). For a multitask RL problem with MDP set M and value
function class F. Let Fβ ⊂ (F)⊗|M| be the β-suboptimal class, such that for any f ∈ Fβ , there
                                                       π fM
exists fM and π fM is β-suboptimal for MDP M , i.e. V1,M                π
                                                            ≤ maxπ∈Π V1,M   − β.
Definition 5 (Diverse Tasks). For some function α̃ : [0, 1] 7→ R, and c̃ : [0, 1] 7→ R, we say that a
tasks set is (α̃, c̃)-diverse if any f ∈ Fβ has multitask myopic exploration gap α(f, M, F) ≥ α̃(β)
and c(f, M, F) ≤ c̃(β) for any constant β > 0.

To simplify presentation, we state the result here assuming parametric growth of the Bellman eluder
                                                                                               ′
dimension and covering number, that is dBE (F, ΠF , ρ) ≤ dBE            F log(1/ρ) and log(N (F)(ρ)) ≤
dcover
 F     log(1/ρ), where dim BE (F, Π  F , ρ) is the Bellman-Eluder       dimension  of class F and NF′ (ρ) =
P  H−1
   h=1 NFh (ρ)NFh+1 (ρ). A formal definition of Bellman-Eluder dimension is deferred to Appendix
H. This parametric growth rate holds for most of the regular classes including tabular and linear
(Russo & Van Roy, 2013). Similar assumptions are made in Chen et al. (2022a).
Theorem 1 (Upper Bound for Sample Complexity). Consider a multitask RL problem with MDP
set M and value function class F such that M is (α̃, c̃)-diverse. Then Algorithm 1 with ϵ-greedy
exploration function has a sample-complexity

                                                         cover ln c̃(β)
                        C(β, δ) = Õ |M|2 H 2 dBE   F Fd                 ln (1/δ)  .
                                                                α̃2 (β)

4.3   C OMPARING S INGLE - TASK AND M ULTITASK MEG

The sample complexity bound in Theorem 1 reduces to the single-task sample complexity in Dann et al.
(2022) when M is a singleton. To showcase the potential benefits of multitask learning, we provide


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a comprehensive comparison between Single-task and Multitask MEG. We focus our discussion
                                                  π               π fM                     2
on α(f, M, F) because c(f, M, F) ≤ ((maxπ V1,M       (f,M,F ) − V1,M (f,M,F ) )/α(f, M, F)) ≤
    2
1/α (f, M, F) and c(f, M, F) only impacts sample complexity bound through a logarithmic term.
                                                                                         p
We first show that Multitask MEG is lower bounded by Single-task MEG up to a factor of 1/ |M|.
Proposition 1. LetpM be any set of MDPs and F be any function class. We have that α(f, M, F) ≥
α(fM , {M }, F)/ |M| for all f ∈ (F)⊗|M| and M ∈ M.

Proposition 1 immediately implies that whenever all tasks in a task set can be learned with myopic
exploration individually (see examples in Dann et al. (2022)), they can also be learned with myopic
exploration through MTRL with Algorithm 1 with an extra factor of |M|2 , which is still polynomial
in all the related parameters.
We further argue that Single-task MEG can easily be exponentially small in H, in which case, myopic
exploration fails.
Proposition 2. Let M be a tabular sparse-reward MDP, i.e., Rh,M (s, a) = 0 at all (s, a, h) except
for a goal tuple (st , at , ht ) and Rht ,M (st , at ) = 1. Recall µπh,M (s, a) = EM       π [1sh =s,ah =a ]. Then
                                                          q                                           q
                                             f                expl(π f )                                 expl(π f )
α(f, {M }, F) ≤ max(µπ̃ht (st , at )−µπht (st , at )) µht                (st , at )/µπ̃ht (st , at ) ≤ µht          (st , at ).
                        π̃
Sparse-reward MDP is widely studied in goal-conditioned RL, where the agent receives a non-zero
reward only when it reaches a goal-state (Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Chane-Sane et al., 2021).
Proposition 2 implies that a single-task MEG can easily be exponentially small in H as long as
one can find a policy π such that its ϵ-greedy version, expl(π), visits the goal tuple (st , at , ht )
with a probability that is exponentially small in H. This is true when the environment requires the
agent to execute a fixed sequence of actions to reach the goal tuple as it is the case in Figure 1.
Indeed, in the environment q described in the left panel
                                                       q of Figure 1, a policy that always moves left
                                expl(π f )                              −H/2
will have α(f, {M }, F) ≤ µht              (st , at ) ≤ ΠH
                                                         h=1 (ϵh /2) ≤ 2      . This is also consistent
with our previous discussion that ϵ-greedy requires Ω(2H ) number of episodes to learn the optimal
policy in the worst case. As wepwill show later in Section 5.1, Multitask MEG for the tabular case
can be lowered bounded by Ω( 1/(|A||M|H)) for adequately diverse task set M, leading to an
exponential separation between Single-task and Multitask MEG.

5       L OWER B OUNDING M YOPIC E XPLORATION G AP
Following the generic result in Theorem 1, the key to the problem is to lower bound myopic
exploration gap α̃(β). In this section, we lower bound α̃(β) for the linear MDP case. We defer an
improved analysis for the tabular case and the Linear Quadratic Regulator cases to Appendix F.
Linear MDPs have been an important case study for the theory of RL (Wang et al., 2019; Jin et al.,
2020b; Chen et al., 2022b). It is a more general case than tabular MDP and has strong implication for
Deep RL. In order to employ ϵ-greedy, we consider finite action space, while the state space can be
infinite.
Definition 6 (Linear MDP Jin et al. (2020b)). An MDP is called linear MDP if its transition
probability and reward function admit the following form. Ph (s′ | s, a) = ⟨ϕh (s, a), µh (s′ )⟩ for
some known function ϕh : S × A 7→ (R+ )d and unknown function µh : S 7→ (R+ )d . Rh (s, a) =
⟨ϕh (s, a), θh ⟩ for unknown parameters θh 3 . Without loss of
                                                             √ generality, we assume ∥ϕh (s, a)∥ ≤ 1
for all s, a, h ∈ S × A × H and max {∥µh (s)∥ , ∥θh ∥} ≤ d for all s, h ∈ S × [H].
An important property of Linear MDPs is that the value function also takes the linear form and the
linear function class defined below satisfies Assumption 1.
Proposition 3 (Proposition 2.3 (Jin et al., 2020b)). ForRlinear MDPs, we have for any policy π,
Qπh,M (s, a) = ⟨ϕh (s, a), wh,M
                            π               π
                                 ⟩, where wh,M  = θh,M + S Vh+1,Mπ
                                                                     (s′ )µh (s′ )ds′ ∈ Rd . Therefore,
                                                                   d
                                                                               √
we only need to consider Fh = {(s, a) 7→ ⟨ϕh (s, a), w⟩ : w ∈ R , ∥w∥2 ≤ 2 d}.

Now we are ready to define a diverse set of MDPs for the linear MDP case.
    3
        Note that we consider non-negative measure µh .


                                                            7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 7 (Diverse MDPs for linear MDP case). We say M is a diverse set of MDPs for the linear
MDP case, if they share the same feature extractor ϕh and the same measure µh (leading to the same
transition probabilities) and for any h ∈ [H], there exists a subset {Mi,h }i∈[d] ⊂ M, such that the
reward parameter θh,Mi,h = 1i and all the other θh′ ,Mi,h = 0 with h′ ̸= h, where 1i is the onehot
vector with a positive entry at the dimension i.
We need the assumption that the minimum eigenvalue of the covariance matrix is strictly lower
bounded away from 0. The feature coverage assumption is commonly use in the literature that
studies Linear MDPs (Agarwal et al., 2022). Suppose Assumption 2 hold, we have Theorem 2,
which lower bounds the multitask myopic exploration gap. Combined with Theorem 1, we have a
sample-complexity bound of Õ(|M|3 H 3 d2 |A|/(β 2 b21 )) with |M| ≥ d.
Assumption 2 (Feature coverage). For any ν ∈ Sd−1 and [ν]i > 0 for all i ∈ [d], there exists a
policy π such that Eπ [ν ⊤ ϕh (sh , ah )] ≥ b1 , for some constant b1 > 0.
Theorem 2. Consider M to be a diverse set as in Definition 7. pSuppose Assumption 2 holds
and β ≤ b1 /2, then we have for any f ∈ Fβ , α(f, F, M) = Ω( β 2 b21 /(|A||M|H) by setting
ϵh = 1/(h + 1).
Proof of Theorem 2 critically relies on iteratively showing the following lemma, which can be
interpreted as showing that the feature covariance matrix induced by the optimal policies is full rank.
Lemma 1. Fix a step h and fix a β < b1 /2. Let {πi }di=1 be d policies such that πi is a β-
optimal policy for Mi,h as in Definition 7. Let π̃ = Mixture({expl(πi )}di=1 ). Then we have
                   Qh−1
λmin (Φπ̃h+1 ) ≥ ϵh h′ =1 (1 − ϵh′ )b21 /(2dA).
5.1 D ISCUSSIONS ON THE TABULAR C ASE
Diverse tasks in Definition 7, when specialized to the tabular case, corresponds to S × H sparse-
reward MDPs. Interestingly, similar constructions are used in reward-free exploration (Jin et al.,
2020a), which shows that by calling an online-learning oracle individually for all the sparse reward
MDPs, one can generate a dataset that outputs a near-optimal policy for any given reward function.
We want to point out the intrinsic connection between the two settings: our algorithm, instead of
generating an offline dataset all at once, generates an offline dataset at each step h that is sufficient to
learn a near-optimal policy for MDPs that corresponds to the step h + 1.
Relaxing coverage assumption. Though feature coverage Assumption (Assumption 2) is handy for
our proof as it guarantees that any β-optimal policy (with β < b1 /2) has a probability at least b1 /2 to
visit their goal state, this assumption may not be reasonable for the tabular MDP case. Intuitively,
without this assumption, a β-optimal policy can be an arbitrary policy and we can have at most S
such policies in total leading to a cumulative error of Sβ. A naive solution is to request a S −H β
accuracy at the first step, which leads to exponential sample-complexity. In Appendix G, we show
that an improved analysis can be done for the tabular MDP without having to make the coverage
assumption. However, an extra price of SH has to be paid.
6    I MPLICATIONS OF D IVERSITY IN D EEP RL
Though this is a paper focusing on the theoretical justification, we add some preliminary discussion
on what diversity means in Deep RL. Thus far, we have provided concrete example for diverse task
set in tabular and linear MDPs with lower bounded Multitask MEG. It is often the case that in Deep
RL, a pretrained feature extractor is used to generate embeddings for Q-value function and then a
linear mapping is applied to generate the final output (Bhateja et al., 2023; Hejna III & Sadigh, 2023).
This manner is similar to the setup in linear MDPs. We have shown that to achieve diversity for linear
MDPs, one important property is to have a full rank covariance matrix of the embeddings at each step
h if the optimal policy is executed (Lemma 1). In this section, we conduct simple simulation studies
on BipedalWalker (Portelas et al., 2020), a robotic control environment, to verify that whether a more
spread spectrum of the covariance matrix of the embeddings would lead to better sample efficiency.
We found in the experiments that the subset of tasks that leads to more spread spectrum is similar to
the task selection of automatic curriculum learning, which has been empirically shown to learn more
sample efficiently. Due to the page limit we provide a high-level summary of the simulation study
and the readers can find full details in Appendix I.
Experiment setup. The learning agent is embodied into a bipedal walker whose motors are controlled
by continuous actions of torques. The objective of the agent is to move forward as far as possible,


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


while crossing stumps with varying heights at regular intervals. An environment or task, denoted as
Mp,q , is controlled by a parameter vector (p, q), where p and q denote the heights of the stumps and
the spacings between the stumps, respectively. Intuitively, challenging environments have higher and
denser stumps. The agent is trained by Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017)
with a standard actor-critic framework (Konda & Tsitsiklis, 1999) and with Boltzmann exploration
that regularizes entropy. Detailed training setup can be found in Appendix I.
Proper level of heights leads to more spread spectrum. We evaluate the extracted feature at the
end of the training generated by near-optimal policies on 100 tasks with different parameter vectors
(p, q). We then compute the covariance matrix of the features for each task, whose spectrum are
shown in Figure 2 (a). We observe that the eigenvalues can be 10 times higher for environments with
an appropriate height (1.0-2.3), compared to extremely high and low heights, while they are roughly
the same at different levels of spacings. This indicates that choosing an appropriate height is the key
to properly scheduling tasks.
Coincidence with automatic curriculum learning. In fact, the task selection is similar to the tasks
selected by the state-of-the-art Automatic Curriculum Learning (ACL). We investigate the curricula
generated by ALP-GMM (Portelas et al., 2020), a well-established curriculum learning algorithm,
for training an agent in the BipedalWalker environment for 20 million timesteps. Figure 2 (b) gives
the density plots of the ACL task sampler during the training process, which shows a significant
preference over heights in the middle range, with little preference over spacing. Since ACL has been
shown to significantly improve the learning performance in BipedalWalker, this is a strong evidence
that the diversity notation discussed in this paper truly leads to a better sample complexity even when
Deep RL is employed.


Figure 2: (a) Boxplot of the log-scaled eigenvalues of sample covariance matrices of the trained
embeddings generated by the near optimal policies for different environments. (b) Task preference of
automatically generated curriculum at 5M and 10M training steps respectively. The red regions are
the regions where a task has a higher probability to be sampled.

7    D ISCUSSIONS
In this paper, we propose a new perspective to understand the sample efficiency of myopic exploration
design through diverse multitask learning. We show that by learning a diverse set of tasks, a multitask
RL algorithm with myopic exploration design can be sample-efficient. This paper is a promising first
step towards understanding the exploration benefits of MTRL.
Towards diversity for general function classes. Despite the rich discussion on explicit form of
diversity set for tabular and linear MDP cases, how to achieve diversity for any general function class
is an open problem. Recalling our proof for the Linear MDP case, a sufficient condition is to include
a set of MDPs for each step h, such that the state distribution generated by their optimal policies
satisfy the concentrability assumptions. In other words, any MDP with positive reward only at the
step h + 1 can be offline-learned through the dataset collected by these optimal policies. The diversity
for general function classes poses the question on the number of tasks it takes to have sufficient
coverage at the each step. We give a more detailed discussion of this topic in Appendix H.
Improving sample-complexity bound. Our sample complexity bound can be sub-optimal. For
instance, Theorem 1 specialized to the tabular case has an upper sample complexity bound of
|M|2 S 3 H 5 A2 /β 2 , and the current optimal bound is |M|SA/β 2 if tasks are learned independently.
We conjecture that this gap may originate from two factors. First, the nature of the myopic exploration
makes it less efficient because the exploration are conducted in a layered manner. Second, our
algorithm collects trajectories for every MDP with the mixture of all the policy in each round, which
may be improved if a curriculum is known beforehand.



                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


8   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Prof. Tewari acknowledges the support of NSF via grant IIS-2007055. Prof. Stone runs the Learning
Agents Research Group (LARG) at UT Austin. LARG research is supported in part by NSF (FAIN-
2019844, NRT-2125858), ONR (N00014-18-2243), ARO (E2061621), Bosch, Lockheed Martin, and
UT Austin’s Good Systems grand challenge. Prof. Stone also serves as the Executive Director of
Sony AI America and receives financial compensation for this work. The terms of this arrangement
have been reviewed and approved by the University of Texas at Austin in accordance with its policy
on objectivity in research.
Part of this work is completed while Dr. Ziping Xu is a postdoc at Harvard University. He is supported
by Prof. Susan A. Murphy through NIH/NIDA P50DA054039, NIH/NIBIB, OD P41EB028242 and
NIH/NIDCR UH3DE028723.

R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal, Yuda Song, Wen Sun, Kaiwen Wang, Mengdi Wang, and Xuezhou Zhang. Provable
  benefits of representational transfer in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14571,
  2022.
Jacob Andreas, Dan Klein, and Sergey Levine. Modular multitask reinforcement learning with policy
  sketches. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 166–175. PMLR, 2017.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay.
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Peter Auer, Thomas Jaksch, and Ronald Ortner. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement
  learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 21, 2008.
Peter Bartlett and Ambuj Tewari. Regal: a regularization based algorithm for reinforcement learning
  in weakly communicating mdps. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence: Proceedings of the 25th
  Conference, pp. 35–42. AUAI Press, 2009.
Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. Curriculum learning. In
  Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine learning, pp. 41–48, 2009.
Chethan Bhateja, Derek Guo, Dibya Ghosh, Anikait Singh, Manan Tomar, Quan Vuong, Yevgen
  Chebotar, Sergey Levine, and Aviral Kumar. Robotic offline rl from internet videos via value-
  function pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.13041, 2023.
Emma Brunskill and Lihong Li. Sample complexity of multi-task reinforcement learning. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1309.6821, 2013.
Daniele Calandriello, Alessandro Lazaric, and Marcello Restelli. Sparse multi-task reinforcement
  learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 27, 2014.
Elliot Chane-Sane, Cordelia Schmid, and Ivan Laptev. Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning with
  imagined subgoals. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1430–1440. PMLR,
  2021.
Jinglin Chen, Aditya Modi, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Nan Jiang, and Alekh Agarwal. On the statistical
   efficiency of reward-free exploration in non-linear rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10770, 2022a.
Liyu Chen, Rahul Jain, and Haipeng Luo. Improved no-regret algorithms for stochastic shortest
  path with linear mdp. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3204–3245. PMLR,
  2022b.
Yuan Cheng, Songtao Feng, Jing Yang, Hong Zhang, and Yingbin Liang. Provable benefit of multitask
  representation learning in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05900, 2022.
Will Dabney, Georg Ostrovski, and André Barreto. Temporally-extended {epsilon}-greedy explo-
 ration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.01782, 2020.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chris Dann, Yishay Mansour, Mehryar Mohri, Ayush Sekhari, and Karthik Sridharan. Guarantees for
  epsilon-greedy reinforcement learning with function approximation. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 4666–4689. PMLR, 2022.

Christoph Dann, Tor Lattimore, and Emma Brunskill. Unifying pac and regret: Uniform pac bounds
  for episodic reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30,
  2017.

Simon S Du, Wei Hu, Sham M Kakade, Jason D Lee, and Qi Lei. Few-shot learning via learning the
  representation, provably. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.09434, 2020.

Milad Farjadnasab and Maryam Babazadeh. Model-free lqr design by q-function learning. Automatica,
 137:110060, 2022.

Evan M Forman, Stephanie G Kerrigan, Meghan L Butryn, Adrienne S Juarascio, Stephanie M
  Manasse, Santiago Ontañón, Diane H Dallal, Rebecca J Crochiere, and Danielle Moskow. Can the
  artificial intelligence technique of reinforcement learning use continuously-monitored digital data
  to optimize treatment for weight loss? Journal of behavioral medicine, 42:276–290, 2019.

Susobhan Ghosh, Raphael Kim, Prasidh Chhabria, Raaz Dwivedi, Predrag Klasjna, Peng Liao,
  Kelly Zhang, and Susan Murphy. Did we personalize? assessing personalization by an online
  reinforcement learning algorithm using resampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05365, 2023.

Alex Graves, Marc G Bellemare, Jacob Menick, Remi Munos, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Automated
  curriculum learning for neural networks. In international conference on machine learning, pp.
  1311–1320. PMLR, 2017.

Donald Joseph Hejna III and Dorsa Sadigh. Few-shot preference learning for human-in-the-loop rl.
  In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 2014–2025. PMLR, 2023.

Matteo Hessel, Hubert Soyer, Lasse Espeholt, Wojciech Czarnecki, Simon Schmitt, and Hado
 van Hasselt. Multi-task deep reinforcement learning with popart. In Proceedings of the AAAI
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 3796–3803, 2019.

Lu Jiang, Deyu Meng, Qian Zhao, Shiguang Shan, and Alexander Hauptmann. Self-paced curriculum
  learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 29, 2015.

Nan Jiang. Pac reinforcement learning with an imperfect model. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32, 2018.

Chi Jin, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Max Simchowitz, and Tiancheng Yu. Reward-free exploration for
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4870–4879. PMLR,
  2020a.

Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2137–2143.
  PMLR, 2020b.

Chi Jin, Qinghua Liu, and Sobhan Miryoosefi. Bellman eluder dimension: New rich classes of rl
  problems, and sample-efficient algorithms. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  34:13406–13418, 2021a.

Ying Jin, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Is pessimism provably efficient for offline rl? In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5084–5096. PMLR, 2021b.

Dmitry Kalashnikov, Alex Irpan, Peter Pastor, Julian Ibarz, Alexander Herzog, Eric Jang, Deirdre
 Quillen, Ethan Holly, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Vincent Vanhoucke, et al. Scalable deep reinforcement
 learning for vision-based robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 651–673.
 PMLR, 2018.

Vijay Konda and John Tsitsiklis. Actor-critic algorithms. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 12, 1999.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Man Li, Jiahu Qin, Wei Xing Zheng, Yaonan Wang, and Yu Kang. Model-free design of stochastic
 lqr controller from a primal–dual optimization perspective. Automatica, 140:110253, 2022a.
Qiyang Li, Yuexiang Zhai, Yi Ma, and Sergey Levine. Understanding the complexity gains of
  single-task rl with a curriculum. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.12809, 2022b.
Peng Liao, Kristjan Greenewald, Predrag Klasnja, and Susan Murphy. Personalized heartsteps: A
  reinforcement learning algorithm for optimizing physical activity. Proceedings of the ACM on
  Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, 4(1):1–22, 2020.
Minghuan Liu, Menghui Zhu, and Weinan Zhang. Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning: Problems
 and solutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08299, 2022.
Yao Liu and Emma Brunskill. When simple exploration is sample efficient: Identifying sufficient
  conditions for random exploration to yield pac rl algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09045,
  2018.
Rui Lu, Gao Huang, and Simon S Du. On the power of multitask representation learning in linear
  mdp. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08053, 2021.
Andreas Maurer, Massimiliano Pontil, and Bernardino Romera-Paredes. The benefit of multitask
  representation learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(81):1–32, 2016.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare,
  Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control
  through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Sanmit Narvekar, Bei Peng, Matteo Leonetti, Jivko Sinapov, Matthew E Taylor, and Peter Stone.
  Curriculum learning for reinforcement learning domains: A framework and survey. The Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 21(1):7382–7431, 2020.
Ian Osband and Benjamin Van Roy. Why is posterior sampling better than optimism for reinforcement
  learning? In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2701–2710. PMLR, 2017.
Ian Osband, Benjamin Van Roy, Daniel J Russo, Zheng Wen, et al. Deep exploration via randomized
  value functions. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 20(124):1–62, 2019.
Anastasia Pentina, Viktoriia Sharmanska, and Christoph H Lampert. Curriculum learning of multiple
  tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  5492–5500, 2015.
Rémy Portelas, Cédric Colas, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Teacher algorithms for
  curriculum learning of deep rl in continuously parameterized environments. In Conference on
  Robot Learning, pp. 835–853. PMLR, 2020.
Clément Romac, Rémy Portelas, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Teachmyagent: a
  benchmark for automatic curriculum learning in deep rl. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 9052–9063. PMLR, 2021.
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. Learning representations by
  back-propagating errors. Nature, 323(6088):533–536, 1986.
Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Eluder dimension and the sample complexity of optimistic
  exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.
Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Learning to optimize via posterior sampling. Mathematics of
  Operations Research, 39(4):1221–1243, 2014.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Max Simchowitz and Dylan Foster. Naive exploration is optimal for online lqr. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8937–8948. PMLR, 2020.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nilesh Tripuraneni, Michael Jordan, and Chi Jin. On the theory of transfer learning: The importance
  of task diversity. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:7852–7862, 2020.
Masatoshi Uehara, Xuezhou Zhang, and Wen Sun. Representation learning for online and offline rl
 in low-rank mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04652, 2021.
Ruosong Wang, Simon S Du, Lin Yang, and Russ R Salakhutdinov. On reward-free reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  33:17816–17826, 2020.
Xin Wang, Yudong Chen, and Wenwu Zhu. A survey on curriculum learning. IEEE Transactions on
  Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 44(9):4555–4576, 2021.
Yining Wang, Ruosong Wang, Simon S Du, and Akshay Krishnamurthy. Optimism in reinforcement
  learning with generalized linear function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04136, 2019.
Tengyang Xie, Ching-An Cheng, Nan Jiang, Paul Mineiro, and Alekh Agarwal. Bellman-consistent
  pessimism for offline reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  34:6683–6694, 2021.
Ziping Xu and Ambuj Tewari. Representation learning beyond linear prediction functions. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:4792–4804, 2021.
Ziping Xu and Ambuj Tewari. On the statistical benefits of curriculum learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 24663–24682. PMLR, 2022.
Ziping Xu, Amirhossein Meisami, and Ambuj Tewari. Decision making problems with funnel
  structure: A multi-task learning approach with application to email marketing campaigns. In
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 127–135. PMLR, 2021.
Jiaqi Yang, Qi Lei, Jason D Lee, and Simon S Du. Nearly minimax algorithms for linear bandits with
   shared representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15664, 2022a.
Ruihan Yang, Huazhe Xu, Yi Wu, and Xiaolong Wang. Multi-task reinforcement learning with soft
  modularization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:4767–4777, 2020.
Zhengyu Yang, Kan Ren, Xufang Luo, Minghuan Liu, Weiqing Liu, Jiang Bian, Weinan Zhang,
  and Dongsheng Li. Towards applicable reinforcement learning: Improving the generalization and
  sample efficiency with policy ensemble. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09284, 2022b.
Elad Yom-Tov, Guy Feraru, Mark Kozdoba, Shie Mannor, Moshe Tennenholtz, and Irit Hochberg.
  Encouraging physical activity in patients with diabetes: intervention using a reinforcement learning
  system. Journal of medical Internet research, 19(10):e338, 2017.
Chicheng Zhang and Zhi Wang. Provably efficient multi-task reinforcement learning with model
  transfer. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:19771–19783, 2021.
Zihan Zhang, Xiangyang Ji, and Simon Du. Is reinforcement learning more difficult than bandits?
  a near-optimal algorithm escaping the curse of horizon. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp.
  4528–4531. PMLR, 2021.
Abilmansur Zhumabekov, Daniel May, Tianyu Zhang, Aakash Krishna GS, Omid Ardakanian, and
  Matthew E Taylor. Ensembling diverse policies improves generalizability of reinforcement learning
  algorithms in continuous control tasks. 2023.


                                                 13
