Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L EVERAGING W ORD G UESSING G AMES TO A SSESS
THE I NTELLIGENCE OF L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         The automatic evaluation of LLM-based agent intelligence is critical in develop-
         ing advanced LLM-based agents. Although considerable effort has been devoted
         to developing human-annotated evaluation datasets, such as AlpacaEval, existing
         techniques are costly, time-consuming, have limited scalability, and lack adapt-
         ability. In this paper, inspired by the popular language games “Who is Spy” and
         “SpyFall”, we propose to use the word guessing game to assess the intelligence
         performance of LLMs. Given a word, the LLM is asked to describe the word and
         determine its identity (spy or not) based on its and other players’ descriptions. Ide-
         ally, an advanced agent should possess the ability to accurately describe a given
         word using an aggressive description while concurrently maximizing confusion
         in the conservative description, enhancing its participation in the game. To this
         end, we first develop SpyGPT to evaluate LLMs’ expression and disguising abil-
         ities. SpyGPT requires the target LLM to describe the given word in aggressive
         and conservative modes and utilizes the SOTA GPT-4 to determine whether the
         descriptive sentences can accurately describe the given word. We then introduce
         SpyGame, an interactive multi-agent framework designed to assess LLMs intel-
         ligence through participation in a competitive language-based board game. In-
         corporating multi-agent interaction, SpyGame requires the target LLM to possess
         linguistic skills and strategic thinking, providing a more comprehensive evaluation
         of LLMs’ human-like cognitive abilities and adaptability in complex communica-
         tion situations. The proposed evaluation framework is very easy to implement.
         We collected words from multiple sources, domains, and languages and used the
         proposed evaluation framework to conduct experiments. Extensive experiments
         demonstrate that the proposed SpyGPT and SpyGame effectively evaluate the ca-
         pabilities of various LLMs, capturing their ability to adapt to novel situations and
         engage in strategic communication.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT, GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) and Bard, have recently
shown remarkable performance across a wide range of tasks, significantly advancing the field of
artificial general intelligence (Bubeck et al., 2023). Concurrently, there has been an increasing fo-
cus on developing LLM-based agents for applications in social science (Park et al., 2022; 2023)
and engineering (Li et al., 2023a; Qian et al., 2023) domains, with the aim of addressing real-world
challenges or social simulation. The most fundamental capabilities required for these LLM-based
agent applications are language intelligence and theory of mind intelligence (Kosinski, 2023).
As a result, the automatic evaluation of LLM-based agent intelligence has become crucial for
further advancements. The evaluation of LLMs has evolved from focusing on NLP tasks (e.g.,
GLUE (Wang et al., 2018), MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020)) to alignment evaluation (e.g., Al-
pacaEval (Li et al., 2023b), ) and, ultimately to complex real-world tasks (e.g., Webshop (Yao et al.,
2022), Webarena (Zhou et al., 2023)). Generally, these evaluation benchmarks are built on estab-
lished annotated datasets to assess and analyze the performance of LLMs. However, traditional
human-annotated evaluation techniques face challenges such as high costs, time-consuming pro-
cesses, limited scalability, lack of adaptability, and susceptibility to data leakage.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In contrast to conventional human-annotated evaluation, recent attempts have been to utilize game-
playing for assessing the intelligence of LLMs, such as GameEval (Qiao et al., 2023). These ap-
proaches aim to provide a more engaging and interactive means of evaluating LLM performance in
various tasks and scenarios. In this study, we propose a novel approach to assess the intelligence
of LLMs through word guessing games, focusing on two distinct aspects: 1) the ability to accu-
rately describe words for enhancing self-understanding and 2) the ability to intentionally disguise
descriptions by being deliberately conservative. These two aspects are related because they evaluate
the LLM’s capability to generate meaningful and contextually appropriate descriptions. However,
they focus on different dimensions of the LLM’s intelligence and can be seen as complementary
rather than contradictory. The relationship between the two aspects can be seen as a balance be-
tween providing information (accurate descriptions) and maintaining intrigue (disguising through
conservative descriptions).
In this paper, we propose two frameworks, SpyGPT and SpyGame, to evaluate the capabilities of
LLMs in various aspects. SpyGPT, a single-agent direct evaluation method, focuses on assessing
LLMs’ expression and disguising abilities by requiring the target LLM to describe a given word
in both aggressive and conservative modes, while utilizing the state-of-the-art GPT-4 to determine
the accuracy of these descriptions. On the other hand, SpyGame is a highly interactive multi-agent
framework designed to evaluate LLMs’ intelligence through their participation in language-based
board game “Who is Spy”. By incorporating multi-agent interactions, SpyGame requires the target
LLM to exhibit expressive language skills and strategic thinking abilities, thereby providing a more
comprehensive assessment of LLMs’ human-like cognitive capabilities and adaptability in complex
communication situations.
In summary, the contributions of this work are detailed as follows:

• We propose to use word guessing games to assess the intelligence of LLMs. We develop a single-
  agent framework SpyGPT and a novel interactive multi-agent framework SpyGame, to build a
  more comprehensive evaluation with a focus on their human-like cognitive abilities and adapt-
  ability in complex scenarios.
• We demonstrate the effectiveness of SpyGPT and SpyGame in differentiating the intelligence
  levels of various LLMs, providing valuable insights for future research and development in the
  field of artificial general intelligence.
• Experimental results reveal that our proposed frameworks successfully distinguish between the
  performance of open-source and closed-source LLMs, highlighting the strengths and weaknesses
  of each model in terms of context comprehension, description accuracy, and the ability to gen-
  erate ambiguous representations. These findings contribute to a deeper understanding of LLM
  capabilities and inform the development of more advanced and intelligent language models.

2     P RELIMINARY STUDY: S PY GPT
In this section, we present a straightforward and efficient approach, SpyGPT, as a preliminary inves-
tigation to examine the capacity of LLMs for providing accurate word descriptions and intentional
disguise descriptions.

2.1   M ETHODOLOGY

The SpyGPT methodology comprises two stages: 1) prompting, in which we prompt the LLM to
describe the target word using both aggressive and conservative modes, and 2) judging, where we
use GPT-4 as a referee to automatically assess whether the descriptions generated by the LLM match
the target word.

Prompting SpyGPT requires the LLM to describe a given word in two distinct modes. 1) ag-
gressive mode. In the aggressive mode, the LLM is prompted to provide a clear and comprehensive
description of the word {word template} using the following prompt:
       Please provide a focused, detailed, and accurate description of {word template}
       within a limit of 100 words, so that someone can easily guess {word template} based
       on the description provided.


                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and 2) conservative mode. The LLM is instructed to provide a more ambiguous description of the
word {word template}, to accomplish disguise capability.
We employ the chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting for the LLM to perform the conservative descrip-
tion. First, the LLM is prompted to infer possible candidate words that are conceptually similar to
the target words with the prompting:

         Imagine other words that might share a common characteristic based on
         {word template}. The candidate words may possess the same or similar attributes,
         and are closely related to the field of {word template}.

then, the LLM is instructed to generate a short description based on the common properties of
generated words and the target word.

         Please provide a conservative description of {word template} within a limit of 10
         words. You can describe the most significant commonality of these words so that
         others cannot guess {word template} based on the description provided.

Through this process, the LLM generates a description that cannot be directly inferred from the
target word.

Judging LLMs have demonstrated significant capabilities in automatically assessing the quality of
the generated text (Kocmi & Federmann, 2023; Fernandes et al., 2023). Consequently, we employ
GPT-4 to evaluate the degree of correspondence between the generated descriptions and the words
(the target word and the pre-defined distractor words) with the following prompts:

         You can only reply to numbers from 1 to 5 in the following statements. Please evalu-
         ate the extent to which the description in this sentence matches the word. 1 denotes
         “very inaccurate” and 5 denotes “very accurate”.

Evaluation Metrics Target words are gathered from various sources, domains, and languages. To
assess the overall performance of LLMs, we utilized two metrics: the average score on target words,
and the average score on distractor words.

2.2      E XPERIMENT

In this study, we assess four open-source and two closed-source LLMs. The open-source models
include Baichuan-7B1 , ChatGLM2-6B (Du et al., 2022), Vicuna-7B-v1.5 (Chiang et al., 2023) and
Llama-2-7B-chat-hf (Touvron et al., 2023). The closed-source LLMs are GPT-3.5 (Brown et al.,
2020), which utilizes Text-Davinci-002, Text-Davinci-003, and GPT-3.5-Turbo, and GPT-4, which
employs GPT-4. We collect a substantial corpus of 40 target words, covering both Chinese and
English languages and spanning a diverse array of fields, including social and scientific domains.
We sample from the models via greedy decoding.

2.3      R ESULT

Table 1 lists the experimental results, revealing that: 1) The closed-source GPT-4 and GPT-3.5 LLMs
are significantly better than the open-source models. 2) As expected, the GPT-4 achieves the best
performance in aggressive and conservative modes. Our observations are consistent with previous
findings in Bubeck et al. (2023) and Qiao et al. (2023).
The advanced LLM, GPT-4, achieves a higher score of 5.00 on target words and a lower score of 1.22
for distractor words in the aggressive mode prompting. This suggests that the GPT-4 comprehends
the concept associated with the target words and demonstrates the ability to describe the words
accurately. On the other hand, in conservative mode prompting, the GPT-4 obtains a lower score of
4.38 for target words and a higher score of 3.06 on distractor words, indicating its ability to infer
possible candidate words and its capacity to create ambiguous representations as a form of disguise.
   1
       https://github.com/baichuan-inc/Baichuan-7B/


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             Aggressive Mode          Conservative Mode
             Model
                                  Target↑ Distractor↓ Target↓                   Distractor↑
                               Open Source Models
             Baichuan-7B           4.08      1.35      3.27                         1.44
             ChatGLM2-6B           4.49      1.45      3.89                         2.07
             Vicuna-7B-v1.5        4.78      1.31      3.81                         2.35
             Llama-2-7B-chat-hf    4.78      1.29      3.89                         2.15
                              Closed Source Models
             Text-Davinci-002      5.00      1.28      4.27                         2.49
             Text-Davinci-003      5.00      1.38      3.68                         2.50
             GPT-3.5-Turbo         5.00      1.32      4.76                         2.68
             GPT-4                 5.00      1.22      4.38                         3.06
                                   Human Evaluation Scores
             Vicuna-7B-v1.5              4.79    2.15     3.83                      2.15
             GPT-3.5-Turbo               4.82    2.14     3.46                      2.44
             GPT-4                       4.87    2.08     2.85                      2.83

          Table 1: The average scores on target words and the corresponding distractor words.


Furthermore, to address concerns regarding potential bias in using GPT-4 as an evaluation tool, we
conduct a human evaluation to score the performance of various LLMs in word guessing games. The
average scores of the annotators are shown in the last block of Table 1, and we include the scoring
details of each annotator in Table 8 in the Appendix. The comparison validate the effectiveness
of our proposed SpyGPT frameworks and ensure that the assessment results were consistent with
human judgments.

3       A N I NTERACTIVE M ULTI -AGENT F RAMEWORK : S PY G AME
In this section, we first introduce the competitive language board game “Who is Spy”, which is a
multi-player word guessing game. Next, we describe the proposed SpyGame, an interactive multi-
agent framework designed to assess the intelligence of LLMs. Finally, we present empirical results
from our experiments.

3.1      W HO IS S PY

“Who is spy” is a strategic word game made by Happy Camp2 in 2012. In this game, N players
are divided into two distinct teams: the spy team with fewer M players and the villager team with
the remaining (N − M ) players. Two conceptually similar words, e.g., “BERT” and “GPT”, are
distributed to players. Players cannot directly identify each other, i.e., whether they are spies or not,
as they do not know the specific keywords held by others.

Game flow The game consists of two stages in each round: speaking and voting. In the speaking
phase, players describe their keyword without revealing any characters in their keyword or deviating
from it. Each player’s description must be unique and not repetitive. In the voting phase, players
guess the keywords of other players based on their descriptions in the speaking phase, and infer
the identities of all players, including themselves. Utilizing the inferred information, they vote for
a player they suspect to be the spy. The player with the most votes will be eliminated. The game
continues until only the members of one team are left.

3.2      M ETHODOLOGY

Motivated by the preliminary study and “Who is Spy,” we propose the interactive multi-agent frame-
work SpyGame to evaluate the intelligence of LLMs. The SpyGame framework comprises four
primary components: keyword set, host and guest agents, agent action, and victory conditions.
    2
        https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Happy_Camp_(TV_series)


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Keyword Set To ensure the validity and fairness of the evaluation, we collect multiple keyword
pairs, e.g., “BERT” and “GPT”, from different sources. These keyword pairs cover various lan-
guages, topics, and domains to evaluate the LLM performance in diverse scenarios.

Host and Guest Agents SpyGame utilizes several host agents (GPT-3.5-Turbo in this work) and
a guest agent to participate in the game, with the guest agent assigned the role of the spy. As a
participant, the guest agent remains unaware of its role as the spy, since it is not informed beforehand.

Agent Action Agent action refers to the interactions among LLM-based agents. These actions are
conveyed through the utterance responses generated by the LLMs. SpyGame has four distinct cate-
gories of agent actions: word guessing, speaking, reasoning, and voting. These categories facilitate
effective communication and decision-making among agents.

       • Word Guessing The agent attempts to guess another keyword based on the previous in-
         formation gathered from other agents’ descriptions. This requires the LLM-based agent to
         have a strong understanding of the context.
       • Speaking The agent speaks based on the assigned keyword. If the agent believes it is the
         spy, it should describe the keyword ambiguously to hinder other players from inferring its
         spy identity. Otherwise, it should strategically remind its teammates of its villager identity.
       • Reasoning In the real-world game playing scenario, human participants infer the identities
         of their counterparts by scrutinizing verbal and non-verbal cues, such as facial expressions
         and speaking tempo. Within the SpyGame framework, each LLM-based agent infers the
         keywords and identities of other agents based on their utterances. This necessitates a high
         reasoning ability of the guest agent.
       • Voting Agents cast their votes for the agent they think is most likely to be the spy player.
         The agent who receives the highest number of votes is subsequently eliminated. The
         SpyGame’s voting mechanism is performed through the LLM-based agent’s responses.

Victory Conditions
       • Spy Victory The guest agent, acting as the spy, successfully blends in with the host agents
         by generating relevant and conservative descriptions to avoid suspicion. The spy wins if it
         is not voted out until only two participants remain in the game.
       • Villager Victory The host agents identify the spy by analyzing its responses and recogniz-
         ing inconsistencies about their given keyword. The villagers win if they vote out the spy
         by a majority vote.
Due to the space limit, we list Algorithm 1 in the Appendix to illustrate the detailed process of
SpyGame.

3.3   M ODEL B IAS

Recent studies (Robinson et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2021) have shown that LLMs exhibit an inherent
selection bias in multi-choice questions. The preferences of LLMs can be influenced by the ID
symbols associated with the options or the content of the prompts. Similarly, we observe the bias
issue in SpyGame and identify three main bias issues, i.e., name, speaking order, and option order
bias, in the SpyGame framework. To isolate the effect of variable information from the speaking
phase, we test a configuration where all agents are prompted to output only a sequence of “dots”
(...). The key idea is that the LLM-based agent’s bias towards certain factors can be estimated using
a content-free output.

Name Bias LLM-based agents tend to vote for players with specific names. We design three
different naming methods to evaluate the impact of name bias in SpyGame. Table 2 shows the
conventional names methods. As illustrated in Figure 1, LLM-based agents tend to vote for names
in positions 3 and 4 in Method 2 (“Charlie Three” and “David Four”), while showing a preference for
names in positions 1 and 4 in Method 3 (“Jack” and “Tom”). Although there are slight fluctuations
in Method 1, the overall variance is the smallest among the three methods. Therefore, we selected
naming method 1 for our main experiments.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Name 1                                        Name 2                  Name 3              Name 4
             Method 1         Player 1                                      Player 2                Player 3            Player 4
             Method 2        Aaron One                                    Barbara Two             Charlie Three        David Four
             Method 3           Jack                                         Mary                    Alice                Tom

                  Table 2: Examples for our three conventional naming methods.

                                                                        Method1         Method2      Method3
                                                          50
                                                                                                        43.2%


                              Suspicion Probability (%)
                                                                       35.4%                                 34.6%
                                                                                            31.9%
                                                                          28.1%                      29.0%
                                                               21.0%                   21.9%
                                                                                   18.1%
                                                                  12.5%        12.3%         12.0%


                                                           0
                                                                 Name 1        Name 2       Name 3     Name 4


                   Figure 1: The suspicion probability of three naming methods.
Speaking Order Bias LLM-based agents exhibit a tendency to vote for players who speak earlier
in the conversation, revealing a bias towards those who first share their thoughts or opinions. The
probability of being voted regarding the speaking position can be seen in Table 3. Despite the
equal frequency of speakers in all positions within our permutation data-free experimental setup, we
observe that agents prefer voting players in earlier positions. To mitigate this issue, we randomize the
speaking order in SpyGame to ensure that agents consider all players’ responses equally, regardless
of their speaking position.

Option Order Bias LLM-based agents tend to vote for specific options. In the voting phase, we
query the agents about their suspicions and offer voting options. For instance, when inquiring about
Player 1’s voting preference, we use the following prompt:

      Who do you suspect is the spy player? Player 1, it’s your turn to make a choice from
      [’Player 2’, ’Player 3’, ’Player 4’] based on your previous thoughts.

As shown in Table 3, the probability of being voted varies greatly depending on the position of
the options in the given array. In our experiments, we find that the first option (Position 1) has a
significantly higher probability (43.40%) of being chosen by the agents, while the second option
(Position 2) holds a much lower probability (6.60%). In this experiment, each agent can only vote
for the other three players, and there is no fourth position (indicated as “-”). Similar to speaking
order bias, we randomize the option order in SpyGame to mitigate this issue.
In summary, addressing these biases is crucial for ensuring a fair and accurate evaluation of the
LLM-based agents’ intelligence in the SpyGame framework. By randomizing speaking and option
orders, and using a diverse set of names, we can effectively mitigate these biases and improve the
overall fairness and validity of the evaluation process.

3.4   E XPERIEMNT

Setup We establish a four-player setting for SpyGame in which three host agents are consistently
designated as GPT-3.5-Turbo LLMs. Subsequently, we assess different LLMs by assigning them
the role of the spy. For the keyword set, we gather 50 pairs (50 x 2 = 100) of keywords. For each
LLM under evaluation, we conduct 100 experiments for each keyword allocated to the LLM.


                 Bias Type                                Position 1           Position 2           Position 3       Position 4
                 Speaking                                   32.47                27.60                20.31            19.62
                 Option                                     43.40                 6.60                50.00              -

         Table 3: The probability of being voted regarding speaking and option order bias.


                                                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Evaluation Metrics We define three metrics to evaluate the performance of the guest agent LLMs:
1) Win represents the average win rate of the guest agent in 100 games. 2) Round indicates the
average number of rounds the guest agent survives. 3) Voted refers to the average number of votes
the guest agent receives per round.

3.5   R EUSLT

                                                               Spy
                       Method
                                                   Win↑      Round↑    Voted↓
                       Text-Davinci-002            0.16      1.99      1.49
                       Text-Davinci-003            0.18      2.03      1.40
                       GPT-3.5-Turbo               0.21      2.04      1.47
                       GPT-4                       0.33      2.18      1.31

           Table 4: The performance of different LLM-based guest agents in SpyGame.

Table 4 presents the results of the SpyGame experiments. GPT-4 outperforms other models in terms
of all three metrics, indicating its superior ability to deceive host agents and avoid suspicion as the
spy. Meanwhile, the performance of the Text-Davinci series models is consistent with the single-
round SpyGPT results shown in Table 1. These models are less effective in generating relevant and
ambiguous responses to conceal their spy identity. Our experiment showcases the potential of using
SpyGame as a framework for evaluating LLM-based agents’ intelligence and reasoning capabilities
in a competitive and interactive setting.

4     A NALYSIS

4.1   A BLATION S TUDY

                                                                 Spy
                     Method
                                                      Win↑    Round↑     Voted↓
                     GPT-4                            0.33    2.18       1.31
                       w/o Word Guessing              0.26    2.12       1.34
                       w/o Reasoning                  0.21    2.08       1.40

Table 5: Ablation study on the impact of word guessing and reasoning actions in the SpyGame for
the guest agent GPT-4.

In the ablation study, we analyze the impact of word guessing and reasoning actions as described
in Section 3.2. The results of the ablation study are shown in Table 5. We can observe that the
performance of the guest agent GPT-4 without word guessing drops in terms of Win (from 0.33
to 0.26) and Round (from 2.18 to 2.12). Without word guessing action, the guest agent is not
aware of other people’s keyword and is more likely to speak aggressively, which could potentially
reveal its spy identity. Similarly, when the reasoning action is removed, the overall performance
significantly declines in all three metrics. Reasoning reflects the agent’s ability to infer the other
players’ identities and is beneficial for making better decisions in the next round.

4.2   ROBUSTNESS

To evaluate the robustness of the SpyGame, we perform the SpyGame experiment with GPT-4 as
the guest agent and conduct another two group experiments in the same experimental settings (i.e.,
three GPT-3.5-Turbo as host agents). Considering the bias issues mentioned in Section 3.3, we
utilize different random seeds in each series to ensure that the order of agent responses changes.
As shown in Table 6, SpyGame achieves stable performance in both victory rate and the number of
survival rounds. Although there is variance among the more fine-grained Voted metric, all sets of


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


GPT-4 outperform other LLMs consistently (refer to Table 4). This demonstrates the effectiveness
of SpyGame in providing a reliable result of different models.

                                                              Spy
                         Method
                                                   Win↑     Round↑     Voted↓
                         GPT-4                     0.33     2.18       1.31
                         GPT-4 / seed-1            0.34     2.19       1.22
                         GPT-4 / seed-2            0.32     2.18       1.28

      Table 6: Robustness experiment of the SpyGame with GPT-4 with different random seeds.


4.3    T HEORY OF M IND

Spy agents must accurately infer their spy role and win the game by concealing their true intentions,
which is challenging even for human players. The entire process involves one crucial ability that we
are particularly interested in the reasoning ability to deduce the identities of all the participants. As
pointed out by Bubeck et al. (2023), the reasoning ability mentioned in this work has a more precise
and clear definition in psychology, known as the Theory of Mind (ToM).
Cognitive ToM is divided into first-order, which involves reflecting on someone else’s mental states,
and second-order, which involves reflecting on someone’s perception of another person’s mental
state Doody et al. (1998). In this context, we define the first-order ToM as understanding another
person’s thoughts (e.g., What is Player 1’s keyword?), and the second-order ToM as inferring what
one person thinks about another person’s thoughts (e.g., What is the identity does Player 1 guesses
for Player 2?)

Setup We conduct the ToM analysis using the game history log in the main experiments (Sec-
tion 3.4). Specifically, we analyzed the historical memory prior to the first round of voting, as all
players had already made their first speaking and no players had been eliminated at that point.

First-Order ToM For the first-order, we gain insight into the guest’s inference regarding the key-
words and identities of others with the prompting:

       It is your turn to guess the keywords and identities of all players, including yourself.
       You must identify only one spy player.

Through the reasoning strategy, We define the inference of others’ keyword as 1-word metric, the
inference of others’ identity as 1-identity. In addition, we also prompt the guest agent to infer its
own identity, referred to as self-identity.

Second-Order ToM For the second-order ToM, we prompt the guest agent with the following
instructions:

       Based on your description, what do you think other players will guess your keyword
       and identity to be? Please put yourself in the shoes of other players and guess your
       own keyword and identity.


                                                          Theory of Mind
       Method
                                  Self-Identity    1-Word     1-Identity    2-Word     2-Identity
       Text-Davinci-002               0.20          0.22         0.72        0.27         0.47
       Text-Davinci-003               0.14          0.25         0.72        0.35         0.61
       GPT-3.5-Turbo                  0.23          0.17         0.77        0.37         0.59
       GPT-4                          0.17          0.38         0.72        0.35         0.67

                       Table 7: Theory of mind performance of guest agents.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We use the first-order inference of other host agents as ground truth, aiming to evaluate the target
LLM’s ability to infer the thoughts of other agents accurately.
As is shown in Table 7, the performance of different models varies across different ToM metrics.
For self-identity, GPT-3.5-Turbo performs the best with a score of 0.23. In terms of first-order ToM,
GPT-4 has the highest score in 1-word with 0.38, while GPT-3.5-Turbo leads in 1-identity with
a score of 0.77. For second-order ToM, GPT-4 also performs well in both 2-word and 2-identity
metrics, with scores of 0.35 and 0.67. These results indicate that LLM-based agents have varying
levels of success in understanding and attributing mental states to themselves and others.


5   R ELATED W ORK

Evaluation of LLMs The evaluation of LLMs has become an essential area of research, covering
three primary categories. Firstly, NLP tasks involve diverse applications aimed at understanding
and generating textual data. Prominent benchmarks in this category include include GLUE (Wang
et al., 2018), SuperGLUE (Wang et al., 2019) MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020). Secondly, alignment
evaluation assesses the helpfulness and harmlessness of LLM-generated text (Bai et al., 2022)with
examples such as instruction-following assessments like AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2023b). Lastly, the
third category involves complex real-world tasks, as exemplified by Webshop (Yao et al., 2022),
AgentBench (Liu et al., 2023), Webarena (Zhou et al., 2023), which test LLMs ability to handle
intricate and practical scenarios. As discussed in Section 1, creating these human-annotated bench-
marks can be time-consuming and costly, as it requires domain expertise and extensive manual labor.
More critically, this category of methods is plagued by data leakage issues (Schaeffer, 2023).

LLM-based Agent More recently, the LLM-based agent has drawn significant attention with the
rapid development of LLMs. In the field of NLP, communicative agents that leverage the power of
LLMs to generate coherent responses and engage in multi-turn conversations, simulating human-
like communication patterns, have been proposed to improve the reasoning and factuality in natural
language generation (Du et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2023). The communicative agents can also be
applied across a wide range of real-world applications, including software development (Qian et al.,
2023; Hong et al., 2023), social simulation (Park et al., 2022; 2023) and robot assistance (Brohan
et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023).

Game Playing with LLMs Several recent studies have attempted to incorporate LLMs into
games, e.g., GameEval (Qiao et al., 2023), and Werewolf (Xu et al., 2023). These efforts aim to
explore the potential of LLMs in-game settings, examining their adaptability, strategic thinking, and
ability to engage in complex interactions with other players. The core differences between our work
and GameEval are two-fold: 1) the objective of our work is to evaluate the expression and disguising
abilities of LLMs, and 2) we observe biases in the multi-agent interaction framework and propose a
more comprehensive evaluation framework to address the issue.


6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose employing the word guessing game to assess the LLM-based agent intel-
ligence automatically. To this end, we develop a single-agent assessment method, SpyGPT, and an
interactive multi-agent framework, SpyGame. The proposed SpyGPT and SpyGame can be easily
migrated to various tasks, domains and languages. SpyGPT requires the target LLM to describe the
given word in the aggressive and conservative modes and utilizes the SOTA GPT-4 to determine
whether the descriptive sentences can accurately describe the given word. Empirical experimental
results and human evaluation demonstrate that the SpyGPT can effectively evaluate the intelligence
of LLMs. SpyGame leverages the agent competition to facilitate the exploration of LLMs’ expres-
sive language abilities and their theory of mind intelligence in intricate communication contexts. We
identify three primary bias issues in multi-agent gameplay experiments and propose a simple and
effective strategy for mitigating these biases. Extensive experiments and analysis demonstrate that
the proposed SpyGame can effectively evaluate the capabilities of various LLMs in multi-agent in-
teraction, capturing their ability to adapt to novel situations and engage in strategic communication.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv, 2022.

Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho,
  Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding
  language in robotic affordances. In Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2023.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33, 2020.

Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Ka-
   mar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general
   intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv, 2023.

Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023.

GA Doody, M Götz, EC Johnstone, CD Frith, and DG Cunningham Owens. Theory of mind and
 psychoses. Psychological medicine, 28(2), 1998.

Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improving
  factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. arXiv, 2023.

Zhengxiao Du, Yujie Qian, Xiao Liu, Ming Ding, Jiezhong Qiu, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. Glm:
  General language model pretraining with autoregressive blank infilling. In Proceedings of the
  60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  2022.

Patrick Fernandes, Daniel Deutsch, Mara Finkelstein, Parker Riley, André FT Martins, Graham
  Neubig, Ankush Garg, Jonathan H Clark, Markus Freitag, and Orhan Firat. The devil is in the
  errors: Leveraging large language models for fine-grained machine translation evaluation. arXiv,
  2023.

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. arXiv, 2020.

Sirui Hong, Xiawu Zheng, Jonathan Chen, Yuheng Cheng, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven
  Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, et al. Metagpt: Meta programming for
  multi-agent collaborative framework. arXiv, 2023.

Tom Kocmi and Christian Federmann. Large language models are state-of-the-art evaluators of
  translation quality. arXiv, 2023.

Michal Kosinski. Theory of mind might have spontaneously emerged in large language models,
 2023.

Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem.
  Camel: Communicative agents for” mind” exploration of large scale language model society.
  arXiv, 2023a.

Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following
  models, 2023b.

Tian Liang, Zhiwei He, Wenxiang Jiao, Xing Wang, Yan Wang, Rui Wang, Yujiu Yang, Zhaopeng
  Tu, and Shuming Shi. Encouraging divergent thinking in large language models through multi-
  agent debate. arXiv, 2023.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding,
  Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Chenhui
  Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang.
  Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents. arXiv, 2023.
OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. arXiv, 2023.
Joon Sung Park, Lindsay Popowski, Carrie Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S
  Bernstein. Social simulacra: Creating populated prototypes for social computing systems. In
  Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology,
  2022.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv, 2023.
Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Juyuan Xu, Zhiyuan Liu, and
  Maosong Sun. Communicative agents for software development. arXiv, 2023.
Dan Qiao, Chenfei Wu, Yaobo Liang, Juntao Li, and Nan Duan. Gameeval: Evaluating llms on
  conversational games. arXiv, 2023.
Joshua Robinson, Christopher Michael Rytting, and David Wingate. Leveraging large language
  models for multiple choice question answering, 2023.
Rylan Schaeffer. Pretraining on the test set is all you need. arXiv, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv, 2023.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R Bowman.
  Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
  Levy, and Samuel Bowman. Superglue: A stickier benchmark for general-purpose language
  understanding systems. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Jimmy Wu, Rika Antonova, Adam Kan, Marion Lepert, Andy Zeng, Shuran Song, Jeannette Bohg,
  Szymon Rusinkiewicz, and Thomas Funkhouser. Tidybot: Personalized robot assistance with
  large language models. arXiv, 2023.
Yuzhuang Xu, Shuo Wang, Peng Li, Fuwen Luo, Xiaolong Wang, Weidong Liu, and Yang Liu.
  Exploring large language models for communication games: An empirical study on werewolf.
  arXiv, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable
  real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 35, 2022.
Tony Z. Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and Sameer Singh. Calibrate before use: Improv-
  ing few-shot performance of language models, 2021.
Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng,
  Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. Webarena: A realistic web environ-
  ment for building autonomous agents, 2023.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    A PPENDIX

                                       Aggressive Mode         Conservative Mode
             Model
                                     Target↑    Distractor ↓   Target↓   Distractor↑
                                     Human Annotator 1
             Vicuna-7B-v1.5           4.92    2.11     3.24                 1.89
             GPT-3.5-Turbo            4.95    2.11     3.08                 2.14
             GPT-4                    5.00    2.08     2.08                 2.38
                                     Human Annotator 2
             Vicuna-7B-v1.5           4.65    2.19     4.41                 2.41
             GPT-3.5-Turbo            4.68    2.16     3.84                 2.73
             GPT-4                    4.73    2.08     3.62                 3.27

  Table 8: The Human Evaluation scores on target words and the corresponding distractor words.

Algorithm 1 SpyGPT: Interactive Multi-Agent Framwork
Require: Keyword pair {i, j}, number of all agents N and guest agent X
Ensure: Final winning team t
 1: procedure S PY GPT({i, j}, N , X)
 2:    Wspy ← Random Selection(i, j)                             ▷ Initialize spy team’s keyword
 3:    Wvillager ← Select w ∈ {i, j} ∩ w ̸= Wspy            ▷ Initialize villager team’s keyword
 4:    Hspy ← [Wspy , N ]; Hvillager ← [Wvillager , N ]                  ▷ Initialize game history
 5:    X ← [Hspy ]; Y1 , · · · , YN −1 ← [Hvillager ]                           ▷ Initialize agents
 6:    P ← [X, Y1 , · · · , YN −1 ]; Nsurvive ← N                              ▷ Record all agents
 7:    while Nsurvive > 2 do
 8:        for each Pi in P do                                                   ▷ Speaking phase
 9:            s ← Pi (H)                                                  ▷ Generate desciptions
10:            H ← H + [s]                                                       ▷ Append s to H
11:        V ← []                                                    ▷ Initialize number of votes
12:        for each Pi in P do                                                      ▷ Voting phase
13:            v ← Pi (H)                                                  ▷ Generate voted agent
14:            H ← H + [v]                                                       ▷ Append v to H
15:            V ← V + [v]                                                       ▷ Append v to V
16:        Pvoted ← M ax p ∈ V                                           ▷ Select the voted agent
17:        if Pvoted = X then
18:            break                                                  ▷ Spy agent out, game over
19:        else
20:            P ← P − Pvoted ; Nsurvive ← Nsurvive − 1 ▷ Villager agent out, game continue
21:    return t


                                                12
