Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A NALYTIC DAG C ONSTRAINTS FOR D IFFERENTIABLE
DAG L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Recovering underlying Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) structures from observa-
         tional data presents a formidable challenge due to the combinatorial nature of
         the DAG-constrained optimization problem. Recently, researchers have identi-
         fied gradient vanishing as one of the primary obstacles in differentiable DAG
         learning and have proposed several DAG constraints to mitigate this issue. By
         developing the necessary theory to establish a connection between analytic func-
         tions and DAGP    constraints, we demonstrate that analytic functions from the set
         {f (x) = c0 + i=1 ci xi |c0 Ôęż 0; ÔłÇi > 0, ci > 0; r = limiÔćĺÔł× ci /ci+1 > 0} can
         be employed to formulate effective DAG constraints. Furthermore, we establish
         that this set of functions is closed under several functional operators, including
         differentiation, summation, and multiplication. Consequently, these operators can
         be leveraged to create novel DAG constraints based on existing ones. Addition-
         ally, we emphasize the significance of the convergence radius r of an analytic
         function as a critical performance indicator. An infinite convergence radius is
         susceptible to gradient vanishing but less affected by nonconvexity. Conversely, a
         finite convergence radius aids in mitigating the gradient vanishing issue but may be
         more susceptible to nonconvexity. This property can be instrumental in selecting
         appropriate DAG constraints for various scenarios.


1   I NTRODUCTION

DAG learning aims to recover Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) from observational data, which is
a core problem in many fields, including bioinformatics (Sachs et al., 2005; Zhang et al., 2013),
machine learning (Koller & Friedman, 2009), and causal inference (Spirtes et al., 2000). Under
certain assumptions (Pearl, 2000; Spirtes et al., 2000), the recovered DAGs can constitute a causal
graphical model (CGM) (Koller & Friedman, 2009) and hold causal interpretations.
There are two main categories of DAG learning approaches: constraint-based and score-based
methods. Most constraint-based approaches, e.g., PC (Spirtes & Glymour, 1991), FCI (Spirtes et al.,
1995; Colombo et al., 2012), rely on conditional independence tests, which typically necessitate a
large sample size (Shah & Peters, 2020; Vowels et al., 2021). The score-based approaches, including
exact methods based on dynamic programming (Koivisto & Sood, 2004; Singh & Moore, 2005;
Silander & Myllym├Ąki, 2006), A* search (Yuan et al., 2011; Yuan & Malone, 2013), and integer
programming (Cussens, 2011), as well as greedy methods like GES (Chickering, 2002), model
the validity of a graph according to some score function and are often formulated and solved as
discrete optimization problems. A key challenge for score-based methods is the super-exponential
combinatorial search space of DAGs w.r.t number of nodes(Chickering, 1996; Chickering et al.,
2004).
Recently, Zheng et al. (2018) developed a continuous DAG learning approach using Langrange
Multiplier methods and a differentiable DAG constraint based on the trace of the matrix exponential
of the weighted adjacency matrix. The resulting method, named NOTEARS, demonstrated superior
performance in estimating linear DAGs with equal noise variances. Very recently, Zhang et al. (2022)
and Bello et al. (2022) suggest that one main issue for NOTEARS and its derivatives, such as Yu et al.
(2019), is gradient vanishing for linear DAG model with equal variance. They have thus proposed
new continuous DAG constraints by based on geometric series of matrices and log-determinant of
matrices.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In fact, most of the proposed DAG constraints can be written in a unified form as in Wei et al. (2020),
which shows that for a d ├Ś d adjacency matrices, an order-d polynomial is sufficient and necessary to
enforce DAGness. However, from the computational perspective, polynomials of matrices are difficult
to compute efficiently. Given the close relation between continuous differentiable functions and
analytic functions, we raise the question whether it is possible to use analytic functions to construct
DAG constraints, and further more if it is possible to use techniques typically applied to analytic
functions to analyze continuous DAG constraints.
The answer is yes. We demonstrate
                          PÔł×         that any analytic function within the class of functions denoted
as F = {f |f (x) = c0 + i=0 ci xi ; c0 Ôęż 0; ci > 0, ÔłÇi > 0; limiÔćĺÔł× ci /ci+1 > 0} can be utilized
to formulate Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) constraints. In fact, the DAG constraints introduced
in Zheng et al. (2018), Zhang et al. (2022), and Bello et al. (2022) can all be interpreted as being
based on analytic functions from F. Furthermore, we establish that the function class F remains
closed under various function operators, including differentiation, function addition, and function
multiplication. Leveraging this insight, we can construct novel DAG constraints based on pre-
existing ones. Additionally, we can analyze the performance of these derived DAG constraints using
techniques rooted in analytic functions.

2    P RELIMINARIES
DAG Model and Linear SEM Given a DAG model G defined over random vector x =
[x1 , x2 , . . . , xd ]ÔŐĄ the corresponding distribution P (x) is assumed to satisfy the Markov assumption
(Spirtes et al., 2000; Pearl, 2000). We consider x to follow a linear Structural Equation Model (SEM):
                                                 x = BÔŐĄ x + e .                                        (1)
Here, B Ôłł Rd├Śd represents the weighted adjacency matrix that characterizes the DAG G, and
e = [e1 , e2 , . . . , ed ]ÔŐĄ represents the exogenous noise vector, comprising d independent random
variables. To simplify notation, we use G(B) to denote the graph induced by the weighted adjacency
matrix B, and we interchangeably use the terms ÔÇśrandom variablesÔÇÖ and ÔÇśverticesÔÇÖ or ÔÇśnodesÔÇÖ.
We aim to estimate the DAG G from n i.i.d. examples of x, denoted by X Ôłł Rn├Śd . Generally, the
DAG G can be identified only up to its Markov equivalence class under the faithfulness (Spirtes
et al., 2000) or the sparsest Markov representation assumption (Raskutti & Uhler, 2018). It has been
demonstrated that for linear SEMs with homoscedastic errors, where the noise terms are specified up
to a constant (Loh & B├╝hlmann, 2013), and for linear non-Gaussian SEMs, where no more than one
of the noise terms is Gaussian (Shimizu et al., 2006), the true DAG can be fully identified. In our
study, we specifically focus on linear SEMs with equal noise variances (Peters & B├╝hlmann, 2013),
where the scale of the data may be either known or unknown. When the scale is known, it is possible
to fully recover the DAG. However, in the case of an unknown scale, the DAG may only be identified
up to its Markov equivalence class.

Continuous DAG learning In recent years, a series of continuous Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)
learning algorithms Bello et al. (2022); Ng et al. (2020); Zhang et al. (2022); Yu et al. (2021; 2019);
Zheng et al. (2018) has been introduced, demonstrating superior performance when applied to linear
Structural Equation Models (SEMs) with equal noise variances and known data scale. These methods
can be expressed as follows:
                                   argmin S(B, X), s.t. h(B) = 0.                                   (2)
                                      B
Here, S is a scoring function, which can take the form of mean square error or negative log-likelihood.
The function h is continuous and equal to 0 if and only if B defines a valid DAG. Previous approaches
have employed various techniques, such as matrix exponential (Zheng et al., 2018), log-determinants
(Bello et al., 2022), and polynomials (Zhang et al., 2022), to construct the function h. However,
these methods are known to perform poorly when applied to normalized data since they rely on scale
information across variables for complete DAG recovery (Reisach et al., 2021).

3    A NALYTIC DAG CONSTRAINTS
In this section, we demonstrate that the diverse set of continuous DAG constraints proposed in
previous work can be unified through the use of analytic functions. We will begin by offering a brief


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


introduction to analytic functions and then illustrate how they can be employed to establish DAG
constraints.

3.1   A NALYTIC FUNCTIONS AS DAG CONSTRAINTS

In mathematics, a power series
                                                          Ôł×
                                                          X
                                           f (x) = c0 +         ci xi ,                               (3)
                                                          i=1
which converges for |x| ÔęŻ r = lim |ci /ci+1 |, defines an analytic function f on the interval (Ôłĺr, r),
                                  iÔćĺÔł×
and r is known as the convergence radius. When we replace x with a matrix A, we obtain an analytic
function f of a matrix as follows:
                                                          Ôł×
                                                          X
                                        f (A) = c0 I +          ci Ai ,                               (4)
                                                          i=1

where I is the identity matrix. Equation (4) will converge if the largest absolute value of eigenvalues
of A, known as the spectral radius and denoted by ¤ü(A), is smaller than r.
We are particularly interested in the following specific class of analytic functions
                                    Ôł×
                                    X
             F = {f |f (x) = c0 +          ci xi ; c0 Ôęż 0; ÔłÇi > 0, ci > 0; lim ci /ci+1 > 0},         (5)
                                                                          iÔćĺÔł×
                                     i=1

as any analytic function belongs to F can be applied to construct a continuous DAG constraint.
                             d├Śd
Proposition 1. Let B╠â Ôłł RÔëą0      with ¤ü(B╠â) ÔęŻ r be the weighted adjacency matrix of a directed graph
G, and let f be an analytic function in the form of (3), where we further assume ÔłÇi > 0 we have
ci > 0, then G is acyclic if and only if
                                             h      i
                                           tr f (B╠â) = c0 d.                                      (6)

An interesting property the DAG constraint (6) is that its gradients can also be represented as transpose
of an analytic function as follows.
Proposition 2. There exists some real number r, where for all {B╠â Ôłł Rd├Śd
                                                                     Ôęż0 |¤ü(B╠â) < r}, the derivative
     h      i
of tr f (B╠â) w.r.t. B╠â is
                                      h     i
                                                                 ÔŐĄ
                               ÔłçB╠â tr f (B╠â) = [ Ôłçx f (x)|x=B╠â ] .                              (7)

It is notable that for a d ├Ś d adjacency matrix B╠â, an order-d polynomial of B╠â is sufficient to enforce
DAGness (Wei et al., 2020; Ng et al., 2022). Computing matrix polynomials efficiently is highly
nontrivial (Higham, 2008). For matrix analytic functions such as exponentials or logarithms, however,
efficient algorithms exist (Higham, 2008).
The connection between matrix analytic functions and real analytic functions means that various
properties of the matrix function can be obtained from a simple real valued function. To pursue DAG
constraints with better computational efficiency, we seek an analytic function whose derivative can
be represented by itself to reduce the computation of different analytic functions. If a function do
have such property, various intermediate results can be saved for future computation of gradients.
The exponential function exp(x) with Ôłé exp(x)/Ôłéx = exp(x), is a natural contender, and this leads
to the well-known exponential function based DAG constraints (Zheng et al., 2018)
                                  Ôł×
                                 X    i
                                    B╠â /i! = d, Gradient: ÔłçB╠â exp(B╠â) = exp(B╠â)ÔŐĄ ,

        Constraints: tr exp(B╠â) =                                                                     (8)
                                        i=0

which will converge for any B╠â.
Recently Bello et al. (2022) and Zhang et al. (2022) have suggested that exponential based DAG
constraints suffers from gradient vanishing. One cause of gradient vanishing arises from the


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


small coefficients of high order terms. The convergence radius for the exponential is Ôł×, that
is lim |ci /ci+1 | = lim |(i + 1)!/i!| = Ôł×, which suggests that, compared to the lower order terms,
  iÔćĺÔł×                 iÔćĺÔł×
the higher order terms contribute almost nothing in the DAG constraints.
Due to the fact that the adjacency matrix of a DAG must form a nilpotent matrix, we do not need
a function with infinite convergence radius. Instead, we can use an analytic function with finite
convergence radius r = lim |ci /ci+1 | < Ôł×. Thus by using a sequence ci with geometric progression
                           iÔćĺÔł×
ci = 1/siÔłĺ1 or harmonic-geometric progression ci = 1/isiÔłĺ1 we can obtain two analytic functions,
                                       Ôł×                                                        Ôł×
                                       X                                                       X     xi
           s
          finv (x) = (s Ôłĺ x)Ôłĺ1 =                 xi /siÔłĺ1 ,        s
                                                                  flog (x) = Ôłĺs log(s Ôłĺ x) =             .     (9)
                                           i=0                                                 i=1
                                                                                                   isiÔłĺ1
Then by our Proposition 1 and Proposition 2, two dag constraints can be obtained as follows:
                        s
        Constraints: trfinv (B╠â) = d,                                     s
                                                         Gradient: ÔłçB╠â trfinv          s
                                                                              (B╠â) = [finv (B╠â)2 ]ÔŐĄ ,        (10a)
                        s
        Constraints: trflog (B╠â) = 0,                                     s
                                                         Gradient: ÔłçB╠â trflog          s
                                                                              (B╠â) = [finv (B╠â)]ÔŐĄ ,          (10b)
                                s                                                s
where a truncated version of finv    is applied in Zhang et al. (2022), and the flog based constraints are
equivalent to those in Bello et al. (2022). One key difference between Zhang et al. (2022); Bello et al.
(2022) and the exponential-based DAG constraints (Zheng et al., 2018) is their finite convergence
radius, which requires an additional constraints ¤ü(B╠â) < s. Meanwhile, the adjancency matrix of a
DAG must be nilpotent, and thus its spectral radius must be 0. In this case, such additional constraints
would not affect the feasible set.

3.2   C ONSTRUCTING DAG CONSTRAINTS BY FUNCTIONAL OPERATOR

One can easily observe a coincidence between flog and finv as follows,
                          s
                       Ôłéflog (x)
                                                        Z
                                    s          s             s
                                 = finv (x), flog (x) = finv    (t)dt + C,                                    (11)
                          Ôłéx
which suggests that it may be possible to derive a group of DAG constraints from an analytic function
by applying integration or differentiation. This is because derivatives of any order of an analytic
function is also analytic. More formally, if a function is analytic at some point x0 , then its nth
derivative for any integer n exists and is also analytic at x0 . Thus we can derive DAG constraints
from any f Ôłł F as follows.
                                 PÔł×
Proposition 3. Let f (x) = c0 + i=1 ci xi Ôłł F be analytic on (Ôłĺr, r), and let n be arbitary integer
larger than 1, then B╠â Ôłł Rd├Śd
                           Ôęż0 with spectral radius ¤ü(B╠é) ÔęŻ r forms a DAG if and only if
                                          n
                                          Ôłé f (x)
                                     tr                  = n!cn .                                (12)
                                           Ôłéxn x=B╠â

The above proposition suggests that the differential operator can be applied to an analytic function to
form a new DAG constraints. Besides the differential operator, the addition and multiplication of
analytic functions can also be applied to generate new DAG constraints. That is
                                 PÔł×                                   PÔł×
Proposition 4. Let f1 (x) = c10 + i=1 c1i xi Ôłł F, and f2 (x) = c20 + i=1 c2i xi Ôłł F. Then for an ad-
jancency matrix B╠â Ôłł Rd├Śd                                                  1 1                2 2
                         Ôęż0 with spectral radius ¤ü(B╠â) ÔęŻ min(limiÔćĺÔł× ci /ci+1 , limiÔćĺÔł× ci /ci+1 )},
the following three statements are equivalent:

      1. B╠â forms a DAG;

      2. tr[f1 (B╠â) + f2 (B╠â)] = (c10 + c20 )d;

      3. tr[f1 (B╠â)f2 (B╠â)] = c10 c20 d.
                  s            s                                         s
Particularly for flog (x) and finv (x), due to the specific property of finv (x), we have
                    Ôłé n+1 flog
                           s
                               (x)   Ôłé n finv
                                          s
                                              (x)
                          n+1
                                   =              ÔłŁ (s Ôłĺ x)Ôłĺ(n+1) = [finv
                                                                      s
                                                                          (x)]n+1 .                           (13)
                       Ôłéx                Ôłéxn


                                                              4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here we can see another very good property of the function 1/(s Ôłĺ x), that is its nth derivative is
proportional to the order-(n + 1) power of 1/(s Ôłĺ x). With this property, (I Ôłĺ ╦ť( B)/s)Ôłĺ1 can be
cached during the evaluation of DAG constraints, and later they can be applied for efficient evaluation
of gradients. Furthermore, the gradients of the DAG constraints will also increase as n increases.
Proposition 5. Let n be any positive integer, the adjancency matrix B╠â Ôłł {B╠é Ôłł Rd├Śd
                                                                                Ôęż0 |¤ü(B╠é) ÔęŻ s}
forms a DAG if and only if              h            i
                                      tr (I Ôłĺ B╠â)Ôłĺn = d.

Furthermore, the gradients of the DAG constraints satisfies that ÔłÇB╠â Ôłł {B╠é Ôłł Rd├Śd
                                                                              Ôęż0 |¤ü(B╠é) ÔęŻ s}

                              ÔłąÔłçB╠â tr(I Ôłĺ B╠â)Ôłĺn Ôłą ÔęŻ ÔłąÔłçB╠â tr(I Ôłĺ B╠â)ÔłĺnÔłĺk Ôłą,
where k is an arbitrary positive integer, and Ôłą ┬Ě Ôłą an arbitrary matrix norm.

As gradient vanishing is one main challenges for differentiable DAG learning, we may prefer larger
n to get better performance in practice. The performance gap between different n may not be
significant, however, because the convergence radius s is constant, which means that in the limiting
case the contribution from higher order terms and lower orders are in the same ratio. Moreover, the
performance gap between this series of DAG constraints and the exponential-based approaches may
be large due to the infinite convergence radius of the exponential function.

3.3   OVERALL OPTIMIZATION FRAMEWORK

The DAG constraints above are applicable only to positive adjancency matrices, so we use the
Hadamard product to map a real adjancency matrix to a positive one. Thus Equation (2) becomes:
                        argmin S(B, X), s.t. trf (B ÔŐÖ B) = c0 d, ¤ü(B ÔŐÖ B) < r,                        (14)
                          B
                                            PÔł×         i
where the analytic function f (x) = c0 +       i=1 x       Ôłł F, and ÔŐÖ denotes the Hadamard product.
In our work, we choose to use the path-following approach with an Ôäô1 regularizer, as in Bello et al.
(2022). This is because in the Lagrange approaches applied in Zhang et al. (2022); Yu et al. (2021);
Zheng et al. (2018); Yu et al. (2019), the Lagrangian multiplier must be set to very large value
to enforce DAGness, which may result in numerical instability. In the path-following approach,
instead of using large Lagrangian multipliers, a small coefficients are added to the score function S
as follows1
                argmin ┬Á[S(B, X) + ╬╗1 Ôłą B Ôłą1 ] + trf (B ÔŐÖ B), s.t. ¤ü(B ÔŐÖ B) < r,                      (15)
                    B

where ╬╗1 is the user-specified weight for the Ôäô1 regularizer. For the additional constraints ¤ü(B ÔŐÖ B) <
r, with properly chosen initial value and step-length, it can usually be satisfied. Also it is notable that
Ôłą B Ôłą1 < r is a sufficient condition for ¤ü(B ÔŐÖ B) < r, and thus the sparsity constraints also encourage
this condition to be satisfied. Based on Bello et al. (2022), we implemented a path-following shown
in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 Path following algorithm
Input: The observational data X Ôłł Rn├Śd ; a differentiable score function S; an analytic function f Ôłł F; the
weight ╬╗1 for Ôäô1 regularizer; an initial coefficients ┬Á0 ; a decay factor ╬▒; Number of iterations T ;
Output: Estimated B
 1: i ÔćÉ 0, ┬Á ÔćÉ ┬Á0 , B0 = 0
 2: while i < T do
 3:    Obtain Bi+1 by solving argminB ┬Á[S(B, X) + ╬╗1 Ôłą B Ôłą1 ] + trf (B ÔŐÖ B) by gradient based approaches
       using Bi as starting point.
 4:    ┬ÁÔćÉ┬Á├Ś╬▒
 5:    iÔćÉi+1
 6: end while
 7: Output BT

   1
     the constant c0 d can be dropped because trf (B ÔŐÖ B) is bounded below by c0 d, detailed derivation is
provided in the supplementary file.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      objective               constraints              Lagrangian


Figure 1: Illustration of different objective, DAG constraints and Lagrangian. The differentiable DAG
learning problem can be viewed as optimize over a Lagrangian which is a summation objective plus a
invex constraints. For DAG learning with known data scale, the objective function provides sufficient
information (illustrated in top two rows), and DAG constraints with larger gradients to is preferred
to provide a sharper curve (middle rows). Meanwhile, for DAG learning problem with unknown
scale (bottom row), the information from objective is quite limited, DAG constraints with smaller
gradients are preferred to avoid highly non-convex Lagrangian.


Choosing a score function. For linear SEMs with equal variances, choosing mean square error
(MSE) as a score function should be sufficient to recover the true DAG. In this case, the optimization
problem becomes:

                        argmin ┬Á[Ôłą X Ôłĺ X B Ôłą2F + ╬╗1 Ôłą B Ôłą] + trf (B ÔŐÖ B),                           (16)
                           B

then for any f Ôłł F we can apply the same path-following procedure as Bello et al. (2022) to estimate
the DAG from observational data X.
However if there is unknown scaling applied to the data X, using MSE will not guarantee recovery
of the true DAG, and its performance is usually much worse than in the known scale case. We can
use maximium likelihood based losses such as the GOLEM-NV loss, which is specifically designed
for data with unknown scale (Ng et al., 2020). However, the performance of these approaches is
still worse than that of constraint-based approaches such as PC (Spirtes & Glymour, 1991; Ng et al.,
2023). This is partially because the invex property of the DAG constraints (Bello et al., 2022). The
DAG constraints have many local minimal, whose projective is similar to the plot in Figure 1. Thus
if the objective value can not provide enough information, the final Lagrangian in Equation (15)
becomes highly nonconvex. We observed that by encouraging the correlation coefficients of the
residuals between each ei and ej to be small(recall e = x Ôłĺ BÔŐĄ x), the performance of continuous
DAG learning can be improved to a similar level as that of constraint-based approaches.

Choosing DAG constraints for different scenarios The optimization problem (16) can be viewed
as a convex objective plus one invex constraints. The non-convexity of the DAG constraint term can
be roughly measured by the Frobenius norm, or the largest off-diagonal entry of its Hessian. We
provide the Hessian in Equation (33) and show that the Frobenius norm/the largest off-diagonal is
closely related the coefficients ci . Larger ci will cause larger Frobenius norm/the largest off-diagonal
of the Hessian, and thus may cause more severe non-convexity. In this case, for data with known
scale, the objective term contains enough information and thus the non-convexity may not be a
serious issue. Thus DAG constraints with finite convergence radius is preferred to provide larger
gradients. Meanwhile, Meanwhile, for DAG learning problem with unknown scale, the information
from objective is quite limited. Thus we may prefer DAG constraints with infinite convergence radius
to escape from the non-convexity. More discussion is provided in Appendix B.


4   E XPERIMENTS

In the experiment, we compared the performance of different analytic DAG constraints in the same
path-following optimization framework. We implemented the path-following algorithm (provided in
Algorithm 1) using PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) based on the path-following optimizer in Bello et al.
(2022). For analytic DAG constraints with infinite convergence radius, we consider the exponential
based DAG constraints. For analytic DAG constraints with finite convergence radius, we consider the
follow 4 different DAG constraints generated by the differentiation operator or multiply operator:


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   VKG


                                                                             VKG


                                                                                                                                                      VKG



                                         1RGHV                                                              1RGHV                                                           1RGHV


   UWLPH


                                                                             UWLPH


                                                                                                                                                      UWLPH


                                         1RGHV                                                              1RGHV                                                           1RGHV



   VKG


                                                                             VKG


                                                                                                                                                      VKG


                                         1RGHV                                                              1RGHV                                                           1RGHV


   UWLPH


                                                                             UWLPH


                                                                                                                                                      UWLPH


                                         1RGHV                                                              1RGHV                                                           1RGHV
                             Gaussian                                             Gumbel               Exponential
Figure 2: DAG learning performance of different DAG constraints on ER3 (Top 2 rows) and ER4 (Bottom 2
rows) graphs. In terms of SHD (shown in the First and the Third row, the lower the better), all DAG constraints
with finite convergence radius performs better than the Exponential based approach, and the Order-4 (i.e. the
one with largest Gradient norm) usually performs better than others. In terms of running time (shown in the
Second and the Forth row, the lower the better), the Exponential based approach has the shortest running time,
and all other approach has similar running time.
                                      s
                        ÔÇó Order-1: trflog (B ÔŐÖ B) = 0;                                                                                  s
                                                                                                                         ÔÇó Order-3: tr[finv (B ÔŐÖ B /s)]2 = d;
                                                                                                                                        s
                        ÔÇó               s
                            Order-2: trfinv (B ÔŐÖ B /s) = d;                                                              ÔÇó Order-4: tr[finv (B ÔŐÖ B /s)]3 = d.
As stated in previous section, the gradients of these four DAG constraints will be larger than
the gradients of the exponential based DAG constraints. We compare the performance of these
DAG constraints using two different settings: linear SEM with known ground truth scale and with
unknown ground truth scale. We also compare these methods with constraint based PC (Spirtes &
Glymour, 1991) algorithm and score based combinatorial search algorithm GES (Chickering, 2002)
implemented by Kalainathan et al. (2020).

4.1               L INEAR SEM WITH KNOWN GROUND TRUTH SCALE

For linear SEM with known ground truth scale, our experimental setting is similar to Bello et al.
(2022); Zhang et al. (2022); Zheng et al. (2018). We generated two different type of random graphs:
ER (Erdo╠ős-R├ęnyi) and SF (Scale-Free) graphs with different number of expected edges. We use ERn
(SFn) to denote graphs with d nodes and nd expected edges. Edge weights generated from uniform
distribution over the union of two intervals [Ôłĺ2, Ôłĺ0.5] Ôł¬ [0.5, 2.0] are assigned to each edge to form
a weighted adjacency matrix B. Then n samples are generated from the linear SEM x = B x + e
to form an n ├Ś d data matrix X, where the noise e are i.i.d. sampled from Gaussian, Exponential,


                                                                                                               7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: DAG learning performance of different algorithms on linear SEM with unknown ground truth scale
(measuredby SHD of CPDAGs denoted by SHDC, the lower the better). We compare differential DAG learning
approaches with conditional independent test based PC (Spirtes & Glymour, 1991) algorithm and score based
GES (Chickering, 2002) algorithm. The result is reported in the format of average┬▒ standard derivation gathered
from 10 different simulations.
                                   PC             GE          Exponential      Order-1       Order-2
        15-node ER2 (SHDC)        24.9┬▒8.8    30.2┬▒17.4      23.2 ┬▒ 10.1    23.8 ┬▒ 10.6    25.6 ┬▒ 9.4
        50-node ER1 (SHDC)        7.8┬▒3.4     22.9┬▒6.9        11.6┬▒4.3       14.2┬▒8.5       21.8┬▒9.3


or Gumbel distribution. We set the sample size n = 1000 and consider 6 different number of nodes
d = 200, 400, 600, 800, 1000, 2000. For each setting, we conduct 20 random simulations to obtain
an average performance. All these experiments are done using A100 GPU, and all computations are
done in double precision.
The result on ER3 and ER4 graphs is shown in Figure 2. In both ER3 and ER4 the constraints
with finite convergence radius performs better than the one with infinite convergence radius in terms
of Structural Hamming Distance (SHD). For ER3 graph, the Order-4 constraints usually performs
slightly better than the others. For ER4 graphs, all constraints with finite convergence radius have
similar performance in terms of SHD, and the Order-4 constraints performs slightly better than others
with node number 2000. For the running time, all algorithms have similar running time and the
one with exponential based constraints run slightly faster than others. Previously Bello et al. (2022)
reported that the expoential constraints based approach NOTEARS (Zheng et al., 2018) runs much
more slower than other scalable methods, which is because of the slow optimization methods in
NOTEARS.
The result on SF3 and SF4 graphs is shown in Figure 3. In terms of SHD, the constraints with finite
convergence radius performs slightly better than the one with infinite convergence radius, and all
constraints with finite convergence radius achieves very similar performance. In terms of running
time, ther performance of all approaches are very similar. This results suggest that on ER graph, the
gradient vanishing problem may be more serius than the SF graph, and thus for ER graphs higher
order constraints with larger gradient may be preferred. Meanwhile for SF graphs any analytic
constraints with finite convergence radius would results similar performance.
We also conducted experiments on smaller ER and SF graphs and the results is provided in the
supplementary file.

4.2   L INEAR SEM WITH UNKNOWN GORUND TRUTH SCALE

For linear SEM with unknown ground truth scale, we applied the same data generation process as the
linear SEM with known ground truth scale and Gaussian noise, but normalize the generate data X to
zero mean with unit variance. In this normalization procedure, the scale information of variable is
stripped from data. Particularly for gaussian noise, in this case the true DAG is not identifiable we
may only identify it to a Markov Equivalent Class. We considered two cases: 15-nodes ER2 graphs
and 50-node ER1 graphs. For the 15-nodes ER2 graphs, 200 observational samples are generated and
for the 50-node ER1 graphs, 1000 observational samples are generated. For each case, we conduct
10 different simulation to report the average performance. Here instead of using MSE loss as score,
we further add the F -norm of the correlation coefficients matrix of residuals X Ôłĺ X B as stated in
previous section.
In this experiment, for continuous DAG learnign approaches we first learn a DAG from data and
then convert the DAG to completed partially directed acyclic graph(CPDAG) to measure the SHD
between the estimated CPDAG and the ground truth CPDAG. The results is shown in Table 2. While
previously it is observed by Ng et al. (2023); Reisach et al. (2021) that the performance of continuous
DAG learning is often far worse than PC(Spirtes & Glymour, 1991) and GES(Chickering, 2002). We
show that it may be possible for continuous learning approaches to achieve similar performance as
PC and GES. The result is shown in Table 2, where on 15-node ER2 graphs, the exponential based
DAG constraints achieves similar performance as PC, while for 50-node ER1 graph, the result of
exponential DAG constraints is slightly worse than PC. Furthermore, here the performance of DAG
constraints with finite converge radius performances worse than the exponential based approach.


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      VKG


                                                                             VKG


                                                                                                                                                       VKG


                                       1RGHV                                                               1RGHV                                                            1RGHV


     UWLPH


                                                                            UWLPH


                                                                                                                                                      UWLPH



                                       1RGHV                                                               1RGHV                                                            1RGHV


      VKG


                                                                             VKG


                                                                                                                                                       VKG


                                       1RGHV                                                               1RGHV                                                            1RGHV


    UWLPH


                                                                           UWLPH


                                                                                                                                                     UWLPH


                                       1RGHV                                                               1RGHV                                                            1RGHV
                           Gaussian                                                                     Exponential                                                                  Gumbel
Figure 3: DAG learning performance of different DAG constraints on SF3 (Top 2 rows) and SF4 (Bottom 2
rows) graphs.In terms of SHD (shown in the First and the Third row, the lower the better), all DAG constraints
with finite convergence radius has similar performance and they performs slightly better than the Exponential
based approach. In terms of running time (shown in the Second and the Forth row, the lower the better), all
approaches have similar running time.


One possible reason is that for these DAG learning problem, instead of gradient vanishing, the
non-convexity of the optimization problem may be the main issue. The higher order terms, although
diminishes in the exponential constraints, however this also makes the constraints less non-convex.


5                C ONCLUSION

The continuous differentiable DAG constraints play an important role in the continuous DAG learning
algorithms. We show that many of these DAG constraints can be formulated using analytic functions.
Those analytic function based DAG constraints can be categorized into two classes: analytic functions
with infinite convergence
                      PÔł×radius and ones with finite convergence radius. Viewing analytic function
as power series c0 + i=1 ci xi , a main difference between the former ones and the later ones is if
limiÔćĺÔł× ci /ci+1 diverges to infinity or not. This results in different behavior of DAG constraints.
For the former one, limiÔćĺÔł× ci /ci+1 diverges to infinity, which indicates it must suffers more from
gradient vanishing due to the small coefficients on higher order terms. However, it may be less
nonconvex as the coefficients of highly nonconvex higher order terms are smaller. On the contrary,
the constraints based on analytic functions with finite convergence radius suffers less from gradient
vanishing, but more from nonconvexity.


                                                                                                               9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Kevin Bello, Bryon Aragam, and Pradeep Kumar Ravikumar. Dagma: Learning dags via m-matrices and a
  log-determinant acyclicity characterization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
David Maxwell Chickering. Learning Bayesian networks is NP-complete. In Learning from Data: Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics V. Springer, 1996.
David Maxwell Chickering. Optimal structure identification with greedy search. Journal of machine learning
  research, 3(Nov):507ÔÇô554, 2002.
Max Chickering, David Heckerman, and Chris Meek. Large-sample learning of bayesian networks is np-hard.
 Journal of Machine Learning Research, 5, 2004.
Diego Colombo, Marloes H Maathuis, Markus Kalisch, and Thomas S Richardson. Learning high-dimensional
  directed acyclic graphs with latent and selection variables. The Annals of Statistics, pp. 294ÔÇô321, 2012.
James Cussens. Bayesian network learning with cutting planes. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
  Intelligence, 2011.
Nicholas J Higham. Functions of matrices: theory and computation. SIAM, 2008.
Diviyan Kalainathan, Olivier Goudet, and Ritik Dutta. Causal discovery toolbox: Uncovering causal relationships
  in python. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):1406ÔÇô1410, 2020.
Mikko Koivisto and Kismat Sood. Exact Bayesian structure discovery in Bayesian networks. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 5(Dec):549ÔÇô573, 2004.
Daphne Koller and Nir Friedman. Probabilistic graphical models: principles and techniques. MIT press, 2009.
Po Ling Loh and Peter B├╝hlmann. High-dimensional learning of linear causal networks via inverse covariance
  estimation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2013.
Jan R Magnus, Henk GJ Pijls, and Enrique Sentana. The jacobian of the exponential function. Journal of
  Economic Dynamics and Control, 127:104122, 2021.
Ignavier Ng, AmirEmad Ghassami, and Kun Zhang. On the role of sparsity and DAG constraints for learning
   linear DAGs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
Ignavier Ng, S├ębastien Lachapelle, Nan Rosemary Ke, Simon Lacoste-Julien, and Kun Zhang. On the conver-
   gence of continuous constrained optimization for structure learning. In International Conference on Artificial
   Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 8176ÔÇô8198. PMLR, 2022.
Ignavier Ng, Biwei Huang, and Kun Zhang. Structure learning with continuous optimization: A sober look and
   beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02146, 2023.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen,
  Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Judea Pearl. Models, reasoning and inference. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 19, 2000.
Jonas Peters and Peter B├╝hlmann. Identifiability of Gaussian structural equation models with equal error
  variances. Biometrika, 101(1):219ÔÇô228, 2013.
Garvesh Raskutti and Caroline Uhler. Learning directed acyclic graph models based on sparsest permutations.
  Stat, 7(1):e183, 2018.
Alexander Reisach, Christof Seiler, and Sebastian Weichwald. Beware of the simulated dag! causal discovery
  benchmarks may be easy to game. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27772ÔÇô27784,
  2021.
Karen Sachs, Omar Perez, Dana PeÔÇÖer, Douglas A Lauffenburger, and Garry P Nolan. Causal protein-signaling
  networks derived from multiparameter single-cell data. Science, 308(5721):523ÔÇô529, 2005.
Rajen D Shah and Jonas Peters. The hardness of conditional independence testing and the generalised covariance
  measure. The Annals of Statistics, 48(3):1514ÔÇô1538, 2020.
Shohei Shimizu, Patrik O Hoyer, Aapo Hyv├Ąrinen, and Antti Kerminen. A linear non-Gaussian acyclic model
  for causal discovery. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7(Oct):2003ÔÇô2030, 2006.


                                                      10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tomi Silander and Petri Myllym├Ąki. A simple approach for finding the globally optimal Bayesian network
  structure. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2006.

Ajit P. Singh and Andrew W. Moore. Finding optimal Bayesian networks by dynamic programming. Technical
  report, Carnegie Mellon University, 2005.

Peter Spirtes and Clark Glymour. An algorithm for fast recovery of sparse causal graphs. Social science
  computer review, 9(1):62ÔÇô72, 1991.

Peter Spirtes, Chris Meek, and Thomas Richardson. Causal inference in the presence of latent variables and
  selection bias. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 1995.

Peter Spirtes, Clark N Glymour, Richard Scheines, and David Heckerman. Causation, prediction, and search.
  MIT press, 2000.
Matthew J Vowels, Necati Cihan Camgoz, and Richard Bowden. DÔÇÖya like dags? a survey on structure learning
  and causal discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.02582, 2021.

Dennis Wei, Tian Gao, and Yue Yu. Dags with No Fears: A closer look at continuous optimization for learning
  bayesian networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3895ÔÇô3906, 2020.

Yue Yu, Jie Chen, Tian Gao, and Mo Yu. DAG-GNN: Dag structure learning with graph neural networks. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7154ÔÇô7163. PMLR, 2019.

Yue Yu, Tian Gao, Naiyu Yin, and Qiang Ji. DAGs with no curl: An efficient dag structure learning approach. In
  Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.

Changhe Yuan and Brandon Malone. Learning optimal Bayesian networks: A shortest path perspective. Journal
  of Artificial Intelligence Research, 48(1):23ÔÇô65, 2013.
Changhe Yuan, Brandon Malone, and Xiaojian Wu. Learning optimal Bayesian networks using A* search. In
  International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2011.

Bin Zhang, Chris Gaiteri, Liviu-Gabriel Bodea, Zhi Wang, Joshua McElwee, Alexei A Podtelezhnikov, Chun-
  sheng Zhang, Tao Xie, Linh Tran, Radu Dobrin, et al. Integrated systems approach identifies genetic nodes
  and networks in late-onset alzheimerÔÇÖs disease. Cell, 153(3):707ÔÇô720, 2013.

Zhen Zhang, Ignavier Ng, Dong Gong, Yuhang Liu, Ehsan Abbasnejad, Mingming Gong, Kun Zhang, and
  Javen Qinfeng Shi. Truncated matrix power iteration for differentiable dag learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:18390ÔÇô18402, 2022.

Xun Zheng, Bryon Aragam, Pradeep K Ravikumar, and Eric P Xing. DAGs with No Tears: Continuous
  optimization for structure learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.


                                                     11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         Appendices
A     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITIONS
Our proof are also based on the well-known properties of analytic functions listed as follows:

      1. Let f1 (x), f2 (x) be analytic functions on (Ôłĺr1 , r1 ) and (Ôłĺr2 , r2 ), then f1 (x) + f2 (x) and
         f1 (x)f2 (x) are analytic functions on (Ôłĺ min(r1 , r2 ), min(r1 , r2 ));
      2. Let f (x) be analytic function on (Ôłĺr, r), then Ôłéf (x)/Ôłéx is an analytic function on (Ôłĺr, r).

A.1   L EMMAS REQUIRED FOR PROOFS

Lemma 6. Let B╠â Ôłł Rd├Śd
                   Ôęż0 be the weighted adjacency matrix of a graph G with d vertices, G is a
                     d
DAG if and only if B╠â = 0.

Proof. See Proposition 3.1 of Zhang et al. (2022).
Lemma 7. Let B╠â Ôłł Rd├Śd
                   Ôęż0 be the weighted adjacency matrix of a graph G with d vertices, G is a
DAG if and only
                                      d
                                     X       i
                                  tr(   ci B╠â ) = 0,
                                                i=1
where ci > 0ÔłÇi.

Proof. See Wei et al. (2020).

A.2   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1
                             d├Śd
Proposition 1. Let B╠â Ôłł RÔëą0      with ¤ü(B╠â) ÔęŻ r be the weighted adjacency matrix of a directed graph
G, and let f be an analytic function in the form of (3), where we further assume ÔłÇi > 0 we have
ci > 0, then G is acyclic if and only if
                                             h      i
                                           tr f (B╠â) = c0 d.

Proof. Without loss of generality, assume that f can be formulated as:
                                        Ôł×
                                        X
                         f (x) = c0 +         ci xi ; ÔłÇi, ci > 0; lim ci /ci+1 > 0.                  (17)
                                                                   iÔćĺÔł×
                                        i=1


First if G is acyclic, by Lemma 6 we must have
                                                k
                                              B╠â = 0ÔłÇk Ôęż d,                                          (18)
which also indicates that ¤ü(B╠â) = 0. Thus we have
                                      ´ú«                                                     ´ú╣
                                       ´ú»        d                           Ôł×               ´ú║
                                                        i                               i
                           h      i    ´ú»       X                            X               ´ú║
                         tr f (B╠â) =tr ´ú»c
                                       ´ú» 0 I +     ci B╠â +                          ci B╠â   ´ú║
                                                                                            ´ú║
                                       ´ú░       i=1                          i=d+1           ´ú╗
                                                                            |   {z      }
                                                                    Equals 0, By Lemma 6
                                                         " d            #                            (19)
                                                          X         i
                                   =tr[c0 I] + tr               ci B╠â
                                                          i=1
                                                     |        {z        }
                                                    Equals 0, By Lemma 7

                                   =c0 d.

                                                         12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                        h      i
On the other hand, if tr f (B╠â) = c0 d, we must have that
                                           "Ôł×         #
                                            X       i
                                        tr     ci B╠â = 0.
                                                i=1

By the fact all entries of B╠â are positive, we have that
                                        " d          # "Ôł×         #
                                          X        i     X      i
                                 0 ÔęŻ tr       ci B╠â ÔęŻ      ci B╠â = 0.                                (20)
                                        i=1                         i=1
Then we must have                             " d                   #
                                               X                i
                                         tr            ci B╠â            = 0.
                                                i=1
Finally by Lemma 7 we have that G is a DAG.

A.3   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2

In all the paper, we consider analytic functions f from the functional class F defined in (5).
Proposition 2. There exists some real number r, where for all {B╠â Ôłł Rd├Śd
                                                                     Ôęż0 |¤ü(B╠â) < r}, the derivative
     h      i
of tr f (B╠â) w.r.t. B╠â is
                                      h     i
                                                                 ÔŐĄ
                               ÔłçB╠â tr f (B╠â) = [ Ôłçx f (x)|x=B╠â ] .

Proof. Without loss of generality, assume that f can be formulated as:
                                      XÔł×
                       f (x) = c0 +      ci xi ; ÔłÇi, ci > 0; lim ci /ci+1 > 0.                       (21)
                                                                          iÔćĺÔł×
                                       i=1

For some i by basic matrix differentiation we have
                                                 i
                                       ÔłétrB╠â
                                               = (i BiÔłĺ1 )ÔŐĄ ,                                        (22)
                                         Ôłé B╠â
and then by the properties of power series we have
                                                   Ôł×
                                           "                 #
                                                           i
                          h     i                 X
                   ÔłçB╠â tr f (B╠â) =ÔłçB╠â tr c0 I +       ci B╠â
                                                            i=1
                                       Ôł×
                                       X                    i
                                   =         ÔłçB╠â trci B╠â
                                       i=1
                                       "Ôł×                   #ÔŐĄ                                       (23)
                                        X             iÔłĺ1
                                   =          ci iB╠â
                                        i=1
                                       " Ôł×                              #ÔŐĄ
                                                                                               ÔŐĄ
                                        X
                                                      iÔłĺ1
                                   =          ci ix                          = [ Ôłçx f (x)|x=B╠â ] ,
                                        i=1                 x=B╠â
                                 PÔł×
where we can exchange Ôłç and i=1 because after the exchanging the new power series will still
converge (by properties of analytic functions).

A.4   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3
                                   PÔł×
Proposition 3. Let f (x) = c0 + i=1 ci xi Ôłł F be a analytic function on (Ôłĺr, r), and let n be
arbitary integer larger than 1, then B╠â Ôłł Rd├Śd
                                            Ôęż0 | with spectral radius ¤ü(B╠é) ÔęŻ r forms a DAG if and
only if
                                          n
                                         Ôłé f (x)
                                     tr                 = n!cn .
                                          Ôłéxn x=B╠â

                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. By properties of analytic functions, the nth order derivative of an analytic
                                                                               PÔł× function f (x) on
(Ôłĺr, r) is still an analytic function on (Ôłĺr, r). Particularly for f (x) = c0 + i=1 ci xi Ôłł F, we have
                                              Ôł×
                                  Ôłé n f (x) X Ôłé n ci xi
                                           =
                                    Ôłéxn      i=1
                                                 Ôłéxn
                                                Ôł×
                                                X Ôłé n ci xi
                                            =
                                                i=n
                                                        Ôłéxn
                                                 Ôł×
                                                    "                n
                                                                                    #             (24)
                                                X                    Y
                                                            iÔłĺn
                                            =         ci x                      k
                                                i=n                k=iÔłĺn+1
                                                         Ôł×
                                                               "               n+i
                                                                                        #
                                                         X                     Y
                                                                           i
                                            =n!cn +               ci+n x             k ,
                                                         i=1                   k=i
                                                        n
where by the fact ci > 0ÔłÇi > 1, we have that Ôłé Ôłéx
                                                f (x)
                                                  n   Ôłł F. Then by Proposition 1 we immediately
proved the proposition.

A.5    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4
                                 PÔł×                                 PÔł×
Proposition 4. Let f1 (x) = c10 + i=1 c1i xi Ôłł F, and f2 (x) = c20 + i=1 c2i xi Ôłł F. Then for an ad-
jancency matrix B╠â Ôłł Rd├Śd                                              1 1                2 2
                         Ôęż0 with spectral radius ¤ü(B╠â) ÔęŻ min(limiÔćĺÔł× ci /ci+1 , limiÔćĺÔł× ci /ci+1 )},
the following three statements are equivalent:

      1. B╠â forms a DAG;

      2. tr[f1 (B╠â) + f2 (B╠â)] = (c10 + c20 )d;

      3. tr[f1 (B╠â)f2 (B╠â)] = c10 c20 d.

Proof. By properties of analytic functions, we have
                                                                    Ôł×
                                                                    X
                               f1 (x) + f2 (x) = c10 + c20 +          (c1i + c2i )xi              (25)
                                                                    i=1

is an analytic function, and its convergence radius is given by
                   lim (c1i + c2i )/(c1i+1 + c2i+1 ) = min( lim c1i /c1i+1 , lim c2i /c2i+1 ),    (26)
                  iÔćĺÔł×                                              iÔćĺÔł×                      iÔćĺÔł×

and thus by Proposition 1 the statement 1 and 2 are equivalent. Similarly by properties of analytic
functions statement 1 and 3 are equivalent. Thus the 3 statements are equivalent.

A.6    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 5

Proposition 5. Let n be any positive integer, the adjancency matrix B╠â Ôłł {B╠é Ôłł Rd├Śd
                                                                                Ôęż0 |¤ü(B╠é) ÔęŻ s} if
and only if
                                        tr(I Ôłĺ B╠â)Ôłĺn = d,
                                                                     d├Śd
and the gradients of the DAG constraints satisfies that ÔłÇB╠â Ôłł {B╠é Ôłł RÔęż0  |¤ü(B╠é) ÔęŻ s}

                              ÔłąÔłçB╠â tr(I Ôłĺ B╠â)Ôłĺn Ôłą ÔęŻ ÔłąÔłçB╠â tr(I Ôłĺ B╠â)ÔłĺnÔłĺk Ôłą,
where k is an arbitrary positive integer, and Ôłą ┬Ě Ôłą an arbitrary matrix norm.

Proof. By Proposition 4 or Proposition 3, it would be straightforward that tr(I Ôłĺ B╠â)Ôłĺn = d is a
necessary and sufficient condition for an adjacency matrix B╠â Ôłł {B╠é Ôłł Rd├Śd
                                                                       Ôęż0 |¤ü(B╠é) ÔęŻ s} to form a
DAG.


                                                        14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the norm of gradients, it is straightforward that
                                    Ôłé(1 Ôłĺ x)Ôłĺn
                                               = n(1 Ôłĺ x)ÔłĺnÔłĺ1 .                                      (27)
                                        Ôłéx
For arbitrary n we have                                           ´ú«             ´ú╣
                                                           Ôł×
                                                           X           n+iÔłĺ1
                                                                        Y
                                 (1 Ôłĺ x)Ôłĺn = 1 +                  ´ú░            j ´ú╗ xi ,              (28)
                                                           i=1          j=n

and obviously the coefficients is monotonic increasing w.r.t. n. Thus by the fact ÔłÇB╠â Ôłł {B╠é Ôłł
Rd├Śd
  Ôęż0 |¤ü(B╠é) ÔęŻ s} we have for any j > 0, k > 0

                                   Ôłą(I Ôłĺ B╠â)Ôłĺj Ôłą ÔęŻ Ôłą(I Ôłĺ B╠â)ÔłĺjÔłĺk Ôłą.                                  (29)
As a result, we have
             ÔłąÔłçB╠â tr(I Ôłĺ B╠â)Ôłĺn Ôłą =nÔłą(I Ôłĺ B╠â)ÔłĺnÔłĺ1 Ôłą ÔęŻ (n + k)Ôłą(I Ôłĺ B╠â)ÔłĺnÔłĺ1
                                                                                                     (30)
                                   ÔęŻ(n + k)Ôłą(I Ôłĺ B╠â)ÔłĺnÔłĺkÔłĺ1 = ÔłąÔłçB╠â tr(I Ôłĺ B╠â)ÔłĺnÔłĺk Ôłą.


B    A NALYZE N ON - CONVEXITY OF D IFFERENT DAG C ONSTRAINTS
In this section, we compare the non-convexity of different DAG constraints. Consider a DAG
constraint (regularizer) derived from analytic function as follows:
                                                     X        i
                                       trf (B╠â) = tr     ci B╠â ,                        (31)
                                                                  i

we can analyze its convexity by analyzing its Hessian.
Firstly, the derivative of matrix power can be obtained using the following equation,
                                                    kÔłĺ1
                                             k      X         j             kÔłĺ1Ôłĺj
                                     ÔłçB╠â B╠â =             B╠â ÔŐŚ B╠â                   ,                (32)
                                                    j=0

where ÔŐŚ denotes the Hardmard product. Thus the Hessian of (31) can be obtained as follows:
                                             Ôł×          iÔłĺ1 h
                                                                      j ÔŐĄ
                                             X          X              i     h iÔłĺ1Ôłĺj iÔŐĄ
                           Ôłç2B╠â trf (B╠â) =         ci           B╠â          ÔŐŚ B╠â        ,            (33)
                                             i=1        j=0

To exactly evaluate and analyze the Hessian exactly is highly non-trivial even for simplest function
such as exponential if we do not have further assumption on matrix B╠â (Magnus et al., 2021).
Obviously, the Hessian Equation (33) is symmetric and not positive semi-definite. One widely used
way to convexify Hessian is to find a positive scalar ╬Ě such that
                                        Ôłć = Ôłç2B╠â trf (B╠â) + ╬ĚI,
becomes positive semidefinite. Obviously, once ╬Ě is larger than the absolute value of largest Eigen
value of Ôłç2B╠â . Particularly for real symmetric matrices, the absolute value of largest Eigen value is the
spectral norm, and it is up bounded by the Frobenius norm. Thus we can use the Frobenius norm of
Hessian to roughly measure the non-convexity of a DAG constraints.
Besides the Frobenius norm, another way to obtain a lower bound of ╬Ě is to use the result that diagonal
dominant matrix must be positive semi-definite. By the fact that all entries of B╠â is positive, obviously
all entries of the Hessian are positive. In this case, a lower bound of ╬Ě convexify the problem is the
maximum off-diagonal entries of the Hessian.


                                                         15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By Equation (33), by the fact all entries of B╠â is positive, obviously at some point B╠â the Frobenius
norm, or the maximum off-diagonal entries of Hessian only depends on ci . Thus it would be very
straightforward that for the Order-{1,2,3,4} constraints used in our experiments, the higher order
will results in stronger non-convexity. Furthermore, all these 4 constraints suffer from stronger
non-convexity but gain less gradient vanishing than constraints with infinite convergence radius as
they have large coefficients ci .

C     T IME C OMPLEXITY OF D IFFERENT DAG CONSTRAINTS
In our methodology, we deliberately steer clear of employing general polynomials as the efficient
evaluation of general polynomials of matrices is highly non-trivial. Instead, our focus centers on
specific polynomials like the inverse function, which can be evaluated with commendable efficiency,
demanding only O(d3 ) computations. Remarkably, the efficiency extends to evaluating the gradient
of the inverse function, a process also attainable within a O(d3 ) framework. Meanwhile, for a general
polynomial, it requires at least complexity O(d4 ).
Besides the

D     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS AND H YPER PARAMETERS
In terms of hyper-parameters, our selection involves ╬▒ = 0.1, ╬╗1 = 0.05, and T = 5.
In this section, we provide additional experiments on linear SEM with equal variance and known
ground truth scale. Additional experimental results on large scale graphs (including false positive rate
and true positive rate) is provided in Figure 4 and Figure 5, which is consistent with results of SHD.
We also conducted small scale experiments on ER2, ER3, ER4, SF2, SF4 and SF4 graphs, and the
results is provides in Figure 6 and 7, where the DAG constraints with finite convergence radius
performs better than the infinite convergence radius one (i.e. the exponential based constraint), and
all of them have similar performance.
In all experiments in this paper, for continuous based approaches we use exactly the same hyper
parameter as Bello et al. (2022), for conditional independent test and score based approaches we use
the default parameter in Causal Discovery Toolbox2 .

D.1    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS ON U NKNOWN SCALE DATA

To eliminate the influence of Signal-to-Noise ratio, we futher did an experiment, where the variance
of noise on each node is randomly sampled from uniform distribution U (1, 10) and the results is
shown in the following table. The other protocal is the same as our original experiment.


Table 2: DAG learning performance of different algorithms on linear SEM with unknown ground truth scale
(measuredby SHD of CPDAGs denoted by SHDC, the lower the better). The result is reported in the format of
average┬▒ standard derivation gathered from 10 different simulations.
                                  GES           PC       Exponential      Order-1       Order-2
       15-node ER2 (SHDC)      27.1┬▒11.0     26.0┬▒8.1     25.6 ┬▒ 9.8    26.3 ┬▒ 10.1   26.9 ┬▒ 8.2
       50-node ER1 (SHDC)      23.9┬▒7.34     14.1┬▒7.8      25.5┬▒8.0     29.3┬▒10.7     37.0 ┬▒10.3


On 15-node ER2 graph, the exponential constraint attains better performance than PC and GES, while
other two approaches performs worse. For 50-node ER1 graph, the exponential constraint attains
comparable performance as GES, but worse than PC. These results are consistency with our intuition
that for this kind of problem non-convexity is the main issue and constraints with finite spectral radius
would suffer more from non-convexity.

  2
    https://fentechsolutions.github.io/CausalDiscoveryToolbox/html/index.
html


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   ISU


                                                                                         ISU


                                                                                                                                                                               ISU



                                                     1RGHV                                                                           1RGHV                                                                           1RGHV


                ├«                                                                              ├«                                                                              ├«
                ├«                                                                              ├«                                                                              ├«
                ├«                                                                              ├«                                                                              ├«
                ├«                                                                              ├«                                                                              ├«
   WSU


                                                                                                                                                                               WSU
                                                                                         WSU


                  ├«                                                                                ├«
                                                                                                                                                                                              ├«
                ├«                                                                              ├«
                                                                                                                                                                                            ├«
                ├«                                                                              ├«
                ├«                                                                              ├«                                                                              ├«

                                                       1RGHV                                                                           1RGHV                                                                           1RGHV


   ISU


                                                                                         ISU


                                                                                                                                                                               ISU


                                                     1RGHV                                                                           1RGHV                                                                           1RGHV


              ├«                                                                                ├«                                                                                ├«
                                                                                                                                                                               WSU
                                                                                         WSU
   WSU


              ├«                                                                                ├«
                                                                                                                                                                                          ├«

                                                      1RGHV                                                                           1RGHV                                                                           1RGHV

                                Gaussian                                                                               Exponential                                                                                            Gumbel

Figure 4: Additional experimental results on large scale ER3 (Top 2 rows) and ER4 (Bottom 2 rows) graphs.
In terms of false positive rate (shown in the First and the Third row, the lower the better), all DAG constraints
with finite convergence radius performs better than the Exponential based approach, and the Order-4 (i.e. the
one with largest Gradient norm) usually performs better than others. In terms of true positive rate (shown in the
Second and the Forth row, the higher the better), all DAG constraints with finite convergence radius performs
better than the Exponential based approach, and the Order-4 (i.e. the one with largest Gradient norm) usually
performs better than others.


                                                                                                                                        17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   ISU


                                                                                             ISU


                                                                                                                                                                                        ISU



                                                        1RGHV                                                                               1RGHV                                                                                1RGHV


                ├«
                                                                                                          ├«                                                                                   ├«
                ├«                                                                                  ├«                                                                                   ├«
                ├«                                                                                  ├«


                                                                                                                                                                                        WSU
                                                                                             WSU


                                                                                                                                                                                                     ├«
   WSU


                ├«                                                                                  ├«                                                                                   ├«
                 ├«                                                                                    ├«
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ├«
                                                                                                          ├«

                                                          1RGHV                                                                               1RGHV                                                                                1RGHV


   ISU


                                                                                             ISU


                                                                                                                                                                                        ISU


                                                        1RGHV                                                                               1RGHV                                                                                1RGHV


                 ├«                                                                                 ├«                                                                                  ├«
                  ├«                                                                                  ├«                                                                                   ├«
                 ├«                                                                                 ├«                                                                                  ├«
                                                                                                                                                                                        WSU
   WSU


                                                                                             WSU


                    ├«                                                                                    ├«                                                                                     ├«
                 ├«                                                                                 ├«                                                                                  ├«
                  ├«                                                                                  ├«                                                                                   ├«
                 ├«                                                                                 ├«                                                                                  ├«

                                                           1RGHV                                                                                1RGHV                                                                               1RGHV

                                  Gaussian                                                                                   Exponential                                                                                                  Gumbel

Figure 5: Additional experimental results on large scale SF3 (Top 2 rows) and SF4 (Bottom 2 rows) graphs. In
terms of false positive rate (shown in the First and the Third row, the lower the better), all DAG constraints with
finite convergence radius performs better than the Exponential based approach, and the Order-4 (i.e. the one
with largest Gradient norm) usually performs a little bit worse others. In terms of true positive rate (shown in the
Second and the Forth row, the higher the better), all DAG constraints with finite convergence radius performs
better than the Exponential based approach, and the Order-4 (i.e. the one with largest Gradient norm) usually
performs better than others.


                                                                                                                                               18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   VKG


                                                                        VKG


                                                                                                                                                 VKG


                                          1RGHV                                                              1RGHV                                                        1RGHV


   UWLPH


                                                                        UWLPH


                                                                                                                                                 UWLPH



                                          1RGHV                                                              1RGHV                                                        1RGHV


   VKG


                                                                        VKG


                                                                                                                                                 VKG


                                          1RGHV                                                              1RGHV                                                        1RGHV


   UWLPH


                                                                        UWLPH


                                                                                                                                                 UWLPH


                                          1RGHV                                                              1RGHV                                                        1RGHV


   VKG


                                                                        VKG


                                                                                                                                                 VKG


                                          1RGHV                                                              1RGHV                                                        1RGHV


   UWLPH


                                                                        UWLPH


                                                                                                                                                 UWLPH


                                          1RGHV                                                              1RGHV                                                        1RGHV

                            Gaussian                                                                    Exponential                                                              Gumbel

Figure 6: Additional experimental results on small scale ER2 (Top 2 rows), ER3 (Top 2 rows) and ER4
(Bottom 2 rows) graphs. In terms of SHD (shown in the First, the Third and the Fifth row, the lower the better),
all DAG constraints with finite convergence radius performs better than the Exponential based approach, and
they have similar performance. In terms of running time (shown in the Second, the Forth and the Sixth row, the
lower the better), all DAG constraints with finite convergence radius performs better than the Exponential based
approach, and they have similar performance.


                                                                                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   VKG


                                                                      VKG


                                                                                                                                               VKG


                                        1RGHV                                                              1RGHV                                                          1RGHV


   UWLPH


                                                                      UWLPH


                                                                                                                                               UWLPH



                                        1RGHV                                                             1RGHV                                                           1RGHV



   VKG


                                                                      VKG


                                                                                                                                               VKG


                                        1RGHV                                                             1RGHV                                                           1RGHV


   UWLPH


                                                                      UWLPH


                                                                                                                                               UWLPH


                                        1RGHV                                                             1RGHV                                                           1RGHV


   VKG


                                                                      VKG


                                                                                                                                               VKG


                                        1RGHV                                                             1RGHV                                                           1RGHV


   UWLPH


                                                                      UWLPH


                                                                                                                                               UWLPH


                                        1RGHV                                                             1RGHV                                                           1RGHV

                           Gaussian                                                                  Exponential                                                                 Gumbel

Figure 7: Additional experimental results on small scale SF2 (Top 2 rows), SF3 (Top 2 rows) and SF4 (Bottom
2 rows) graphs. In terms of SHD (shown in the First, the Third and the Fifth row, the lower the better), all
DAG constraints with finite convergence radius performs better than the Exponential based approach, and they
have similar performance. In terms of running time (shown in the Second, the Forth and the Sixth row, the
lower the better), all DAG constraints with finite convergence radius performs better than the Exponential based
approach, and they have similar performance.


                                                                                                               20
