Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B EST R ESPONSE S HAPING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         We investigate the challenge of multi-agent deep reinforcement learning in par-
         tially competitive environments, where traditional methods struggle to foster
         reciprocity-based cooperation. LOLA and POLA agents learn reciprocity-based
         cooperative policies by differentiation through a few look-ahead optimization
         steps of their opponent. However, there is a key limitation in these techniques.
         Because they consider a few optimization steps, a learning opponent that takes
         many steps to optimize its return may exploit them. In response, we introduce a
         novel approach, Best Response Shaping (BRS), which differentiates through an
         opponent approximating the best response, termed the ”detective.” To condition
         the detective on the agent’s policy for complex games we propose a state-aware
         differentiable conditioning mechanism, facilitated by a question answering (QA)
         method that extracts a representation of the agent based on its behaviour on spe-
         cific environment states. To empirically validate our method, we showcase its en-
         hanced performance against a Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) opponent, which
         serves as an approximation to the best response in the Coin Game. This work
         expands the applicability of multi-agent RL in partially competitive environments
         and provides a new pathway towards achieving improved social welfare in general
         sum games.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms have enabled agents to perform well in complex high-
dimensional games like Go (Silver et al., 2016) and StarCraft (Vinyals et al., 2019). The end goal
of RL is to train agents that can help humans solve challenging problems. Inevitably, these agents
will need to integrate in real-life scenarios that require interacting with humans and other learning
agents. While multi-agent RL training shines in fully cooperative or fully competitive environments,
it often fails to find reciprocity-based cooperation in partially competitive environments. One such
example is the failure of multi-agent RL (MARL) agents to learn policies like tit-for-tat (TFT) in the
Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma (IPD) (Foerster et al., 2018).
Despite the toy-ish character of common general-sum games such as IPD, these sorts of problems
are ubiquitous in both society and nature. Consider a scenario where two countries (agents), strive
to maximize their industrial output while also ensuring a suitable climate for production by limiting
carbon emissions. On the one hand, each country (agent) would like to see the other country fulfill
it’s obligations to limit carbon emissions. Yet on the other hand, each one is motivated to emit more
carbon themselves to achieve higher industrial yields. An effective climate treaty would compel each
country – likely through the threat of penalties – to abide by the agreed limits to carbon emissions. If
these agents fail to develop such tit-for-tat-like strategies they will likely converge to an unfortunate
mutual escalation of consumption and carbon emission.
Foerster et al. (2018) proposed Learning with Opponent-Learning Awareness (LOLA), an algorithm
that successfully learns TFT behavior in the IPD setting by differentiating through an assumed sin-
gle naive gradient step taken by the opponent. Building upon this, Zhao et al. (2022) introduced
proximal LOLA (POLA), which further enhances LOLA by assuming a proximal policy update for
the opponent. This improvement allows for the training of Neural Network (NN) policies in more
complex games, such as the Coin Game (Foerster et al., 2018). To the best of our knowledge, POLA
is the only method that reliably trains reciprocity-based cooperative agents in the Coin Game.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Despite its success on the Coin Game, POLA has its limitations. While POLA is learning with
opponent-learning awareness, its modeling of opponent learning is limited to a few look-ahead opti-
mization steps. This renders POLA vulnerable to exploitation by opponents engaging in additional
optimization. In particular, our analysis of POLA agents trained on the Coin Game demonstrates
that POLA is susceptible to exploitation by the best response opponent. When the opponent is
specifically trained to maximize its own return against a fixed policy trained by POLA, the first ex-
ploits the former. Also, this limitation can hinder POLA’s scalability; it can’t differentiate through
all opponent optimization steps. This is particularly problematic if the opponent is a complex neural
network, as many optimization steps are needed to approximate its learning.
In this paper, we present a novel approach called Best Response Shaping (BRS). Our method is
based on the construction of an opponent that approximates the best response policy against a given
agent. We refer to this opponent as the ”detective.” The overall concept is depicted in Figure 1: the
detective undergoes training against agents sampled from a diverse distribution. To train the agent,
we differentiate through the detective opponent. Unlike approaches such as LOLA and POLA,
which assume few look-ahead optimization steps, our method relies on the detective issuing the best
response to the current agent through policy conditioning.
The detective conditions on an embedding of the agent’s policy that effectively captures its behav-
ior across various states of the environment. Extracting such a representation is a non-trivial task
(Harb et al., 2020). A straightforward approach of concatenating all policy parameters into a single
representation results in a loss of architectural information and requires a large number of samples
to be effective. Alternatively, conditioning the representation on the agent’s behavior in specific
query states, as done in Harb et al. (2020), can be attempted. However, learning these query states
to enable generalization of the agent’s behavior is, by itself, a difficult problem. To address this, we
introduce a question-answering (QA) mechanism dependent on the current state of the environment,
which serves as a means to extract a representation of the agent policy. The detective evaluates the
agent’s policy (answers) based on specific environment states (questions) given the current state.
We empirically validate our method on Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma (IPD) and the Coin Game.
Given the dependency on the opponent’s policy for an agent’s outcomes, it is not always straight-
forward to evaluate and compare policies of different agents in games. This is especially true in
non-zero-sum games that exhibit both cooperative and competitive aspects. In this paper, we ad-
vocate that a reasonable point of comparison is the agent’s outcome when facing a best response
opponent, which we approximate by Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS). We show that while the
MCTS does not fully cooperate with POLA agents, they fully cooperate with our BRS agent.
Main Contributions. We summarize our main contributions below:
• We identify that the best response opponent, as approximated by Monte Carlo Tree Search
  (MCTS), does not cooperate with POLA agents. MCTS exploits the POLA agents achieving
  a higher return than it would through complete cooperation.
• To address this vulnerability, we introduce the BRS method, which trains an agent by differentiat-
  ing through an opponent approximating the best response (referred to as the ’detective opponent’).
  We empirically validate our method and demonstrate that the best response to BRS agents is in-
  deed full cooperation as shown in Figure 3.
• Additionally, we propose a state-aware differentiable conditioning mechanism for the detective
  opponent, enabling it to condition on the agent’s policy.


2     BACKGROUND

2.1   M ULTI AGENT R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
                                                                  N           N
An N -agent Markov Games is denoted by a tuple ( N, S, {Ai }i=1 , P, {ri }i=1 , γ)). Here, N repre-
sents the number of agents, S the state space of the environment, and A ∶= A1 × ⋯ × AN the set of
actions for each agent. Transition probabilities are denoted by P ∶ S × A → ∆(S) and the reward
function by ri ∶ S × A → R. Lastly, γ ∈ [0, 1] is the discount factor. In a multi-agent reinforcement
learning problem each agent attempts to maximize their return Ri = ∑∞         t i
                                                                         t=0 γ rt . The policy of agent
i is denoted by πθi i where θi are policy parameters. In Deep RL these policies are neural networks.
These policies will be trained via gradient estimators such as REINFORCE (Sutton et al., 1999).


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.2   S OCIAL D ILEMMAS AND THE I TERATED P RISONER ’ S D ILEMMA

In the context of general sum games, social dilemmas emerge when individual agents striving to
optimize their personal rewards inadvertently undermine the collective outcome or social welfare.
This phenomenon is most distinct when the collective result is inferior to the outcome that could
have been achieved through full cooperation. Theoretical studies, such as the Prisoner’s Dilemma,
illustrate scenarios where each participant, though individually better off confessing, collectively
achieves a lower reward compared to remaining silent.
However, in the Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma (IPD), unconditional defection ceases to be the dom-
inant strategy. For instance, against an opponent following a tit-for-tat (TFT) strategy, perpetual
cooperation results in a higher return for the agent. It might be expected that MARL, designed to
maximize each agent’s return, would discover the TFT strategy, as it enhances both collective and
individual returns, and provides no incentive for policy change, embodying a Nash Equilibrium.
Yet, empirical observations reveal that standard RL agents, trained to maximize their own return,
typically converge to unconditional defection.
This exemplifies one of the key challenges of multi-agent RL in general sum games: during training,
agents often neglect the fact that other agents are also in the process of learning. To address this
issue, and if social welfare is the primary consideration, one could share the rewards among the
agents during training. For instance, training both agents in an IPD setup to maximize the collective
return would lead to a constant cooperation. However, this approach is inadequate if the goal is to
foster reciprocation-based cooperation. A policy is sought that incites the opponent to cooperate in
order to maximize their own return. While TFT is one such policy, manually designing a similar
TFT policies in other domains is neither desirable nor feasible, underscoring the necessity to develop
novel training algorithms that can discover these policies.


3     R ELATED W ORK

LOLA Foerster et al. (2018) attempts to shape the opponent by taking the gradient of the value with
respect to a one-step look ahead of the opponent’s parameters. Instead of considering the expected
return under the current policy parameter pair, V 1 (θi1 , θi2 ), LOLA optimizes V 1 (θi1 , θi2 + ∆θi2 )
where ∆θi2 denotes a naive learning step of the opponent. To make a gradient calculation of the
update ∆θi2 , LOLA considers the surrogate value given by the first order Taylor approximation of
V 1 (θi1 , θi2 + ∆θi2 ). Since for most games the exact value cannot be calculated analytically, the
authors introduce a policy gradient formulation that relies on environment roll-outs to approximate
it. This method is able to find tit-for-tat strategies on the Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma.
POLA Zhao et al. (2022) introduces an idealized version of LOLA that is invariant to policy param-
eterization. To do so, each player attempts to increase the probability of actions that lead to higher
returns while penalizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence in policy space relative to their policies
at the previous time step. Similar to the proximal point method, each step of POLA constitutes an
optimization problem that is solved approximately through gradient descent. Like LOLA, POLA
uses trajectory roll-outs to estimate the value of each player and applies the reinforce estimator to
compute gradients. POLA effectively achieves non exploitable cooperation on the IPD and the Coin
Game improving on the shortcomings of its predecessor.
Lu et al. (2022) considers a meta-game where at each meta-step a full game is played and the
meta-reward is the return of that game. The agent is then a meta-policy that learns to influence the
opponent’s behaviour over these rollouts. M-FOS changes the game and is not comparable to our
method which considers learning a single policy. Baker (2020) changes the structure of the game
where each agent is sharing reward with other agents. The agents are aware of this grouping of
rewards via a noisy version of the reward sharing matrix. In the test time, the representation matrix
is set to no reward sharing and no noise is added to this matrix.
Some methods in the literature strive to add behavioral diversity to train strong agents for games
using Determinantal Point Processes (DPPs) (Nieves et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2020). A DPP is a
probabilistic method, commonly used in physics, to sample diverse variations from a ground set
proportionally to a similarity metric. This technique resembles our agent replay buffer, which is
intended to add behavioral diversity that is relatively close to the current policy.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: The detective is trained using agents sampled from a replay buffer, which contains agents
encountered during training. Additional noise is incorporated to broaden the range of policies.


Policy Evaluation Networks (PVN) conditions a neural network on a policy by considering the
policy’s behavior on a set of learned states from the environment Harb et al. (2020). This aligns
closely with our QA idea for conditioning the detective opponent on the agent’s policy. However,
the PVN representation is not dependent on the current state.
The concept of sequential social dilemmas is introduced in Leibo et al. (2017), as a temporally ex-
tended game with specific value constraints under the cooperate and defect policies. Due to its tem-
poral extension and reward structure, the Coin Game is an instance of a sequential social dilemma.
Stackelberg Games Colman & Stirk (1998) revolve around a leader’s initial action selection followed
by a follower’s subsequent move. The Bi-Level Actor-Critic(Bi-AC) Zhang et al. (2020) framework
introduces an innovative approach for training both leader and follower simultaneously during the
training period while maintaining independent executability, making it well-suited for addressing
coordination challenges in MARL. In contrast to our setup, where the detective functions as a train-
ing harness discarded post-training, the Bi-AC varies by deploying both leader and follower jointly
during test time (as the main concern is coordination between the leader and the follower). The
interactions between the agent and the detective mirror the foundational Stackelberg setup, casting
the agent as the leader and the detective as the follower.
Good Shepherd Balaguer et al. (2022) trains a best response to a learning agent, mirroring the best
response to the best response idea. The authors offer two methods for training against this optimal
response. First, by creating an expansive computational graph for the agent’s optimization. Sec-
ond, employing evolutionary strategies. Neither of these methods is scalable. Constructing a full
optimization computational graph for every agent’s optimization step is very inefficient. Moreover,
evolutionary strategies require training the opponent against new data points each time. Our ap-
proach circumvents this problem by using a neural network to amortize the optimization process.
PSRO Lanctot et al. (2017) unifies many MARL training frameworks like Independent RL, Iterated
Best Response, and Fictitious Self-Play. PSRO-family methods iteratively extend a set of past poli-
cies, by adding the best response to a mixture of those past policies. In contrast to BRS, PSRO does
not differentiate through the best response.


4   B EST R ESPONSE S HAPING

Our Best Response Shaping (BRS) algorithm trains an agent by differentiating through an approx-
imation to the best response opponent (as described in Section 4.1). This opponent, called the
detective, conditions on the agent’s policy via a question answering mechanism to select its actions
(Section 4.2). Subsequently, we train the agent by differentiating through the detective using the RE-


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


INFORCE gradient estimator (Sutton et al., 1999) (Section 4.2.2). Also, to encourage cooperative
behaviour, we propose Self-Play as a regularization method, encouraging the agent to explore coop-
erative policies. We further prove that this self-play is equivalent to self-play with reward sharing.
The pseudo-code for BRS is provided in Algorithm 1.

4.1     B EST R ESPONSE AGENT TO THE B EST R ESPONSE O PPONENT

Our notation and definitions follow from Agarwal et al. (2021), we denote τ as a trajectory whose
distribution, Prθµ1 ,θ2 (τ ), with initial state distribution µ, is given by

                   Prθµ1 ,θ2 (τ ) = µ(s0 )πθ1 (a0 ∣s0 )πθ2 (b0 ∣πθ1 , s0 )P (s1 ∣s0 , a0 , b0 )⋯
Here a denotes the action taken by the agent and b the action taken by the opponent. The best
response opponent is the policy that gets the highest expected return against a given agent. Formally,
given θ1 , the best response opponent policy θ2∗ solves for the following:
                                     θ2∗ = arg max Eτ ∼Prθ1 ,θ2 [R2 (τ )]                             (1)
                                                             µ
                                               θ2

Subsequently, we train the agent’s policy to get the highest expected return against the best response
agent. This training of the agent’s policy is solving for the following:
                                    θ1∗∗ = arg max E             θ1 ,θ ∗   [R1 (τ )]                  (2)
                                                θ1       τ ∼Prµ       2



Note that this is a bi-level optimization problem. We hypothesize that the agent πθ∗∗ 1
                                                                                         exhibits char-
acteristics of a non-exploitable agent, as it learns retaliatory strategies in response to a defecting
opponent, thereby creating incentives for a rational opponent to cooperate.

4.2     D ETECTIVE O PPONENT T RAINING

In deep reinforcement learning, the training of agents relies on the utilization of gradient-based
optimization. Consequently, we need a differentiable opponent approximating a best response op-
ponent. We call this opponent the detective. The detective’s policy conditions on the agent’s policy
in addition to the state of the environment, which we denote πθ2 (a∣πθ1 , s). We train the detective to
maximize its own return against various agents. Formally, the detective is trained by the following
gradient step:
                                          ∇θ 2 E        E         [R2 (τ )]                           (3)
                                              θ1 ∼Bτ ∼Prθ1 ,θ2
                                                        µ


where B represents a distribution of diverse policies for agent 1. It should be noted that the detective
is trained online and the replay buffer, B, is being updated with the current agent parameters.

4.2.1    C ONDITIONING ON AGENT ’ S P OLICY
To effectively train the agent’s policy against the detective using gradient ascent on the agent’s return,
it is essential to establish a differentiable mechanism for the detective’s conditioning. In scenarios
involving toy environments with simple policy spaces, a straightforward approach of directly incor-
porating the agent’s parameters as an input to the detective’s policy works. However, it proves to be
infeasible for larger policy spaces. This becomes particularly challenging when the agent’s policy
is represented by a neural network, as conditioning on the parameters would require an impractical
number of samples. To address this limitation in more complex cases, we employ two strategies:
State aware conditioning. Extracting a general representation of the agent’s behavior is a complex
task. Instead, the detective extracts a representation for the current state of the game.
Conditioning on behavior. The detective queries the behaviour of the agent on various states of
the game. To do so, it evaluates the agent’s action probabilities (answers) on a state of the game
(questions). Formally, let Qψ (θ1 , s) be the function used by the detective to extract a state-aware
representation of the agent. We call Q a question answering (QA) function if Q can be expressed
as only having access to the policy function, i.e. Qψ (πθ1 , s). There are many possible ways to
architect a QA function. Next, we outline a method that has shown success in the Coin Game.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2.2            S IMULATION BASED Q UESTION A NSWERING
The behavior of the agent in possible continuations of the game starting from state s holds valuable
information. More specifically, we can assess the behavior of the agent against a random agent
starting from game state s. Formally Let δA be defined as the following where τ is a trajectory
starting from state s at time t:
                                   δA ∶=    E [Rr (τ )∣st = s]                                   (4)
                                                                                       τ ∼Prµ1
                                                                                               θ ,θr


 where πθr is an opponent that chooses action A at time t and afterwards samples from a uniform
distribution over all possible actions:
                                                                  if i > t                                   1
                                                                   πθr (ai = A∣si ) = { ∣A∣           (5)
                                                       1{ai =A} if i = t
Detective estimates δA by monte-carlo rollouts of the game to a certain length between the agent
and the random opponent, πθr . We denote the estimate of δA by δ̂A . Then we define Qsimulation =
[δ̂A1 , δ̂A2 , ⋯, δ̂A∣A∣ ]. The number of samples used to estimate the returns of the game and the length
of the simulated games are considered hyperparameters of Qsimulation QA. Note that the Qsimulation
can be differentiated with respect to agent’s policy parameters via REINFORCE (Sutton et al., 1999)
term. Specifically, we use the DICE operator (Foerster et al., 2018).

4.2.3            D IFFERENTIATING T HROUGH THE D ETECTIVE
The agent’s policy is trained to maximize its return against the detective opponent via REINFORCE
gradient estimator. However, because the detective’s policy is taking the agent’s policy as input,
the REINFORCE term will include an additional detective-backpropagation term over the usual
REINFORCE term:
                        ⎡           ⎡                                                                                                                                                                         ⎤⎤
                        ⎢        T ⎢                                                                                                                                                                          ⎥⎥
                        ⎢ 1         ⎢                                                                                                                                                                         ⎥⎥
                  E ⎢⎢R (τ ) ∑ ⎢⎢∇θ1 log(πθ1 (at ∣st )) + ∇θ1 log(πθ2 (bt ∣πθ1 , st ))⎥⎥⎥⎥                                                                                                                       (6)
              τ ∼Prµ1 2 ⎢       t=1 ⎢                       ´¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¸ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¶⎥⎥
                   θ ,θ
                        ⎢           ⎢                                                                                                                                                                         ⎥⎥
                        ⎣           ⎣                         detective-backpropagation term ⎦⎦

This extra term can be thought of as the direction in policy space in which changing the agent’s
parameters encourages the detective to take actions that increase the agent’s own return.

4.2.4            C OOPERATION R EGULARIZATION VIA S ELF -P LAY WITH R EWARD S HARING
Agents that are trained against rational opponents tend to rely on the assumption that the opposing
agent is lenient towards their non-cooperative actions. This reliance on rational behavior allows them
to exploit the opponent to some extent. Consequently, they may not effectively learn to cooperate
with their own selves. In scenarios where the objective is to foster more cooperative behavior,
particularly encouraging the agent to cooperate with itself, a straightforward approach is to train the
agent in a self-play setting, assuming that the opponent’s policy mirrors the agent’s policy. Formally,
we update the agent using the following update rule:
                                         ∇θ1 E [R1 (τ )]                                            (7)
                                                                                           τ ∼Prµ1
                                                                                                   θ ,θ1


We prove that in symmetric games like IPD and Coin Game, this is equivalent to training an agent
with self-play with reward sharing (see proof in §D). This training brings out the cooperative element
of general-sum games. In zero-sum games, this update will have no effect as the gradient would be
zero (see proof in §D). We refer to this regularization loss term as Self-Play with reward sharing
throughout the paper. We also ablate BRS-NOSP where we skip the self-play loss to study its effect.


5         E XPERIMENTS
5.1         I TERATED P RISONER ’ S D ILEMMA

Following Foerster et al. (2018), we study Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma (IPD) game where the agents
observe the last actions taken by the agents. Therefore, all possible agent observations are S =


                                                                                                        6
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Algorithm 1 BRS pseudo code: a single iteration
      Input: Replay Buffer of Agent Parameters B, Agent parameters θ1 , Detective parameters θ2 ,
      learning rates α1 , α2 , α3 , Standard Error of Noise σ
      Train Detective vs. Sampled Agent:
      Sample agent parameter θ1 ′ from B
      θ1 ′ ← θ1 ′ + z, where z ∼ N (0, σ)
      Rollout trajectory τ2 using policies (πθ1 ′ , πθ2 )
      θ2 ← θ2 + α2 R2 (τ2 ) ∑Tt=1 ∇θ2 log(πθ2 (at ∣πθ1 ′ , st ))
      Train Agent vs. Detective:
      Rollout trajectory τ1 using policies (πθ1 , πθ2 )
      θ1 ← θ1 + α1 R1 (τ ) ∑Tt=1 ∇θ1 log(πθ1 (at ∣st )) + ∇θ1 log(πθ2 (bt ∣πθ1 , st ))
      Train Agent in Self Play:
      Rollout trajectory τ3 using policies (πθ1 , πθ1 )
      θ1 ← θ1 + α3 R1 (τ3 ) ∑Tt=1 ∇θ1 [log(πθ1 (at ∣st )) + log(πθ1 (bt ∣st ))]
      Update Replay Buffer:
      Push θ1 to B
      Output: θ1 , θ2


    {C, CC, CD, DC, DD}, where C is the initial state, and each agent’s policy can be described by the
    probability of cooperation for each s ∈ S. We consider the IPD game that is six steps long. As shown
    by Foerster et al. (2018) and Zhao et al. (2022), training two naı̈ve-learning agents leads to strategies
    that always defect. Although this is a Nash Equilibrium, both agents receive negative returns.
    We test our method by training the agent against a tree search detective. The tree search detec-
    tive constructs a tree, commencing from the current state. During this process, the agent’s actions
    are sampled from the agent’s policy, while the tree branches explore all possible choices for the
    detective’s actions. The detective selects the actions that maximize its return, i.e. the actions that
    construct the best response path within the tree. The agent receives the return that corresponds to
    this particular path (see §F for details). Our agent is a two-layer MLP that receives the five possible
    states and outputs the probability of cooperation. We choose an MLP to showcase the possibility
    of training neural networks via BRS. We update our agent policy via policy gradient. As shown in
    Figure 2 the BRS agent learns tit-for-tat(TFT) policy.

                                               BRS (Ours)                           BRS-NOSP (Ours)
                             1.0                                          1.0
Probability of Cooperation


                             0.8                                          0.8
                             0.6                                          0.6
                             0.4                                          0.4
                             0.2                                          0.2
                             0.0                                          0.0
                                    C     CC      CD        DC   DD             C   CC    CD    DC    DD

    Figure 2: Illustration of the policies of agents trained with BRS and BRS-NOSP in a finite Iterated
    Prisoner’s Dilemma game of length 6. The agents are trained against a tree search detective max-
    imizing its own return. BRS agents learn tit-for-tat, a policy that cooperates initially and mirrors
    the opponent’s behavior thereafter. BRS-NOSP agents learn cynic-tit-for-tat (CTFT), they defect
    initially but mirror the opponent’s behavior thereafter.


     5.2                       T HE C OIN G AME

    The Coin Game, introduced by Foerster et al. (2018), is a two-player general sum game that takes
    place in a grid. The game involves two players: the red player and the blue player. At each episode,
    a coin, either red or blue, spawns somewhere in the grid and players compete to pick it up. The


                                                                      7
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               AD                           AC                               MCTS                          Self
                    Opponent
          0.6       Agent


          0.4


          0.2
Returns


          0.0


          0.2


          0.4
           BRS (Ours) POLA      AC   AD   BRS (Ours) POLA    AC   AD       BRS (Ours) POLA     AC   AD   BRS (Ours) POLA      AC   AD


 Figure 3: Comparison of BRS and POLA on Coin Game. We evaluate the agent’s returns versus
 different opponents: Always Defect opponent (AD); Always Cooperate opponent (AC), A Monte
 Carlo Tree Search opponent (MCTS) and agent’s performance against itself (Self).


 color of the spawning coin changes after each coin is taken. If a player picks any coin, they receive a
 positive reward of +1. If the coin corresponding to their color is picked by the other player, they are
 punished with a negative reward of −2. Ideally, players should cooperate by taking only the coins of
 their associated color in fear of future retaliation from the other agent.
 We follow Zhao et al. (2022) in training a GRU (Cho et al., 2014) agent on a 3 × 3 sized Coin Game
 with a game length of 50 and a discount factor of 0.96. The detective opponent is also a GRU agent
 with an MLP that conditions on the result of the QA (for more details see §A). We evaluate BRS
 and POLA agents against four policies: an opponent that always takes the shortest path towards the
 coin regardless of the coin’s color (Always Defect), an opponent that takes the shortest path towards
 its associated coin but never picks up the agent’s associated coin (Always Cooperate), a Monte
 Carlo Tree Search opponent that evaluates multiple rollouts of the game against the agent in order
 to take an action (MCTS), and itself (Self). Note that the MCTS will approximate the best response
 opponent. Figure 3 visually presents the evaluation metrics for the BRS and POLA agents. In the
 subsequent paragraphs, we present a comprehensive analysis and interpretation of these results.
 Does a best response opponent cooperate with the agent? For a given environment, the opponents
 will learn the best response to our agent. We want those opponents to figure out that they cannot do
 better than Always Cooperate against. In other words, defecting against our agent would decrease
 their return. The MCTS approximates the best response opponent. As shown in Figure 3, the MCTS
 and BRS are always cooperating with each other1 . In contrast, the MCTS does not fully cooperate
 with POLA. The MCTS secured a higher return than Always Cooperate against POLA via defecting.
 Does the agent retaliate against Always Defect? If an agent never retaliates against Always De-
 fect, its maximum return would be close to Always Cooperate against Always Defect which is -0.31,
 shown in Figure 5. BRS gets an average return of -0.11 against Always Defect indicating it retaliates
 v.s. defects. However, POLA gets -0.03 against Always Defect indicating stronger retaliation.
 Does the agent cooperate with itself? As shown in Figure 3 BRS agents get a return of 0.33 against
 themselves which is very close to Always Cooperate vs Alwayas Cooperate return of 0.34. POLA
 agents get a retun of 0.23 against themselves indicating less cooperation. In summary, BRS agents
 are more suitable as a retaliatory cooperative policy. While the best response to them is always
 cooperation, they also fully cooperate with themselves. In contrast, the best response to POLA
 agents is not full cooperation, and also they do not fully cooperate with themselves.
 In summary, BRS resembles TFT more closely than POLA. First, the best response to TFT is co-
 operation, which is true for BRS but not POLA. Second, unlike POLA, BRS agents (like TFT)
 cooperate well among themselves.

           1
               Note that the return of both agents is very close to Always Cooperate vs Always Cooperate.


                                                                       8
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     BRS (Ours)                     BRS-NORB                 BRS-NOSP                      POLA
          0.5                     Opponent
                                  Agent
          0.4
          0.3
Returns


          0.2
          0.1
          0.0
          0.1
          0.2 Self   AC   AD      MCTS       Self   AC   AD    MCTS   Self   AC   AD    MCTS   Self   AC     AD   MCTS

 Figure 4: BRS-NORB is equivalent to BRS, with no replay buffer and no added noise. Its perfor-
 mance is close to BRS with more variance. BRS-NOSP is equivalent to BRS but with no self-play.


 5.3            R EPLAY B UFFER A BLATION

 As shown in Algorithm 1 we train the detective against agents sampled from a replay buffer. Also,
 we add a small noise to the sampled agent parameters. If we had no replay buffer and we did not
 add any noise, would BRS still achieve the same results? In Figure 4 BRS-NORB has the same
 training setup as BRS with no replay buffer and no noise. While BRS-NORB has higher variance in
 performance than BRS, its performance is close to BRS.

 5.4            S ELF -P LAY A BLATION

 As show in Algorithm 1 self-play guides the search towards cooperative policies. What policies
 would BRS learn if we exclude the self-play? We find that BRS-NOSP learns policies that resemble
 ZD-Extortion Press & Dyson (2012). They exploit opponent’s rationality to increase their return
 and don’t cooperate with themselves(see details in §E) which renders them suboptimal for scenarios
 where social-welfare is important.

 6              L IMITATIONS
 This paper focuses on the implementation of our proposed idea in two-player games. Extending this
 approach to more than two players is non-trivial2 . Additionally, the detective agent approximates
 the best response opponent by training against a diverse set of agents. In this study, we introduce a
 replay buffer that contains previous agents encountered during training as a proxy for a diverse agent
 set. In 5.3 we showed BRS works even with no replay buffer on the Coin Game. Nevertheless, for
 more complex settings, this level of diversity may be insufficient.

 7              C ONCLUSION
 Motivated by learning with learning awareness as a framework to learn reciprocity-based cooper-
 ative policies, we introduced BRS. BRS differentiates through an opponent that approximates the
 best response. To enable the opponent to condition on agent’s policy, we introduced a novel differen-
 tiable state-aware conditioning mechanism. Additionally, self-play was incorporated to constrain the
 search space to self-cooperative policies. We evaluated BRS agents in detail on the Coin game. The
 BRS agent reaches a policy where always cooperate is the best response. We hope this work helps
 improving the scalability and non-exploitability of agents in Multi Agent Reinforcement Learning
 enabling agents that learn reciprocation-based cooperation in complex games.



     2
       One idea to extend BRS to more than two players is to assume all the opponents as a single combined
 ”detective” opponent. However, we have not studied the effect of such an assumption and we leave that to
 future work.


                                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Agarwal, A., Jiang, N., Kakade, S., and Sun, W. Reinforcement Learning: Theory and Algorithms.
  2021.
Baker, B. Emergent reciprocity and team formation from randomized uncertain social preferences,
  2020.
Balaguer, J., Koster, R., Summerfield, C., and Tacchetti, A. The good shepherd: An oracle agent for
  mechanism design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.10135, 2022.
Cho, K., van Merriënboer, B., Bahdanau, D., and Bengio, Y. On the properties of neural machine
  translation: Encoder–decoder approaches. In Proceedings of SSST-8, Eighth Workshop on Syn-
  tax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Translation, pp. 103–111, Doha, Qatar, October 2014.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.3115/v1/W14-4012.
Colman, A. M. and Stirk, J. A. Stackelberg reasoning in mixed-motive games: An experimental
  investigation. Journal of Economic Psychology, 19(2):279–293, 1998.
Foerster, J. N., Chen, R. Y., Al-Shedivat, M., Whiteson, S., Abbeel, P., and Mordatch, I. Learning
  with opponent-learning awareness, 2018.
Harb, J., Schaul, T., Precup, D., and Bacon, P.-L. Policy evaluation networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2002.11833, 2020.
Lanctot, M., Zambaldi, V., Gruslys, A., Lazaridou, A., Tuyls, K., Pérolat, J., Silver, D., and Graepel,
  T. A unified game-theoretic approach to multiagent reinforcement learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Leibo, J. Z., Zambaldi, V., Lanctot, M., Marecki, J., and Graepel, T. Multi-agent reinforcement
  learning in sequential social dilemmas, 2017.
Lu, C., Willi, T., de Witt, C. S., and Foerster, J. Model-free opponent shaping, 2022.
Nieves, N. P., Yang, Y., Slumbers, O., Mguni, D. H., Wen, Y., and Wang, J. Modelling behavioural
  diversity for learning in open-ended games, 2021.
Press, W. H. and Dyson, F. J. Iterated prisoner’s dilemma contains strategies that dominate any
  evolutionary opponent. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(26):10409–10413,
  2012.
Schulman, J., Moritz, P., Levine, S., Jordan, M., and Abbeel, P. High-dimensional continuous
  control using generalized advantage estimation, 2018.
Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L., Van Den Driessche, G., Schrittwieser,
   J., Antonoglou, I., Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., et al. Mastering the game of go with deep
   neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
Sutton, R. S., McAllester, D., Singh, S., and Mansour, Y. Policy gradient methods for reinforcement
  learning with function approximation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 12,
  1999.
Vinyals, O., Babuschkin, I., Czarnecki, W. M., Mathieu, M., Dudzik, A., Chung, J., Choi, D. H.,
  Powell, R., Ewalds, T., Georgiev, P., et al. Grandmaster level in starcraft ii using multi-agent
  reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Yang, Y., Wen, Y., Chen, L., Wang, J., Shao, K., Mguni, D., and Zhang, W. Multi-agent determi-
  nantal q-learning, 2020.
Zhang, H., Chen, W., Huang, Z., Li, M., Yang, Y., Zhang, W., and Wang, J. Bi-level actor-critic
  for multi-agent coordination. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 34, pp. 7325–7332, 2020.
Zhao, S., Lu, C., Grosse, R. B., and Foerster, J. N. Proximal learning with opponent-learning
  awareness. In Oh, A. H., Agarwal, A., Belgrave, D., and Cho, K. (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  PrkarCHiUsg.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

A.1   IPD

In IPD experiments, we are experimenting on IPD with 6 steps and discount factor of 1., i.e. no
discount factor. The payoff matrix of the IPD game is shown in 1.

                                                                                         Player 1
                                                                                                                                               Cooperate                                                                      Defect
                                            Player 2
                                                                                                                                                                                      −1                                                                            0
                                                               Cooperate
                                                                                                                                      −1                                                                      −3
                                                                                                                                                                                      −3                                                                      −2
                                                                      Defect
                                                                                                                                      0                                                                       −2

                                           Table 1: Payoff matrix for the prisoner’s dilemma game

Our agent’s policy is parameterized by a two-layer MLP (Multi-Layer Perceptron) with a tanh non-
linearity. The choice of tanh non-linearity is motivated by its smoothing effect and its ability to
prevent large gradient updates.
During training, the agent is trained against the Tree Search Detective (TSD) (see Appendix F)
using a policy gradient estimator. We employ a learning rate of 3e − 4 with the SGD (Stochastic
Gradient Descent) optimizer. In the BRS experiments, the Self-Play with reward sharing loss is
optimized using SGD with the same learning rate of 3e − 4. To reduce variance, the policy gradients
incorporate a baseline.
For replicating the exact results presented in the paper, we provide the code in Appendix B. Running
the code on an A100 GPU is expected to take approximately an hour. The plots and error bars are
averaged over 10 seeds for both BRS and BRS-NOSP. The hyperparameter search was conducted
by iterating over various learning rates including (1e − 4, 3e − 4, 1e − 3), and the optimizers were
explored between SGD and Adam.

A.2   C OIN G AME

The game. Our coin game implementation exactly follows the POLA implementation Zhao et al.
(2022). Similar to POLA, we also experiment with the game length of 50 and a discount factor of
0.96.
Agent’s architecture. In the coin game, we have an actor-critic setup. The policy of our agent is
parameterized by a GRU (Gated Recurrent Unit) architecture, following the approach outlined in the
POLA repository (source). However, we introduce a modification compared to POLA by including
a two-layer MLP on top of the observations before they are fed into the GRU instead of a single-
layer MLP. Additionally, we utilize two linear heads to facilitate separate learning for policy and
value estimation.
Detective’s architecture. The architecture of the detective is as follows: The sequence of observa-
tions is fed into a GRU (Gated Recurrent Unit), which is the same architecture used by the agent.
At each time step, the agent’s representation is extracted using the QA (Question-Answering) mod-
ule of the detective. In our experiments, we employed 16 samples of continuing the game for the
next 4 steps from the current state. Subsequently, the output of the QA module and the GRU are
concatenated and passed through a two-layer MLP with ReLU non-linearities. The resulting output
from this MLP is then fed into a linear layer for estimating the value (critic), and a linear layer for
determining the policy (actor).
Separate optimizers for the two terms. The agent uses separate optimizers for the two terms in
the policy gradient. That is, it uses two separate optimizers for the two terms indicated in 8.
                          ⎡       ⎡                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ⎤⎤
                          ⎢    T ⎢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ⎥⎥
                          ⎢ 1     ⎢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ⎥⎥
                  E ⎢R (τ ) ∑ ⎢∇θ1 log(πθ1 (at ∣st )) + ∇θ1 log(πθ2 (bt ∣πθ1 , st ))⎥⎥⎥⎥
                          ⎢       ⎢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (8)
              τ ∼Prµ
                   θ1 ,θ2
                          ⎢   t=1 ⎢´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¸¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¶ ´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¸ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¶⎥⎥
                          ⎢       ⎢                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ⎥⎥
                          ⎣       ⎣                                               Term 1                                                                                                                           Term 2                                                                             ⎦⎦

                                                                                                                                                      11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Losses and optimizers. The value functions in our setup are trained using the Huber loss. On the
other hand, the policies are trained using the standard policy gradient loss with Generalized Advan-
tage Estimation (GAE) (Schulman et al., 2018). However, it is important to note that our hyperpa-
rameter search led us to set the GAE parameter, λ, to 1, which results in an equivalent estimation
of the advantage using the Monte-Carlo estimate. This choice is similar to the hyperparameters
reported by POLA (source).
In the BRS-NOSP experiments, the agent’s policy is trained using a learning rate of 1e − 3, while
in the BRS experiments, an Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 3e − 4 is utilized. The value
functions of both the agent and the detective in all experiments are trained using Adam with a
learning rate of 3e − 4. Similarly, the detective’s policy is trained using Adam with a learning rate of
3e − 4 in all experiments.
Replay buffer of previous agents. During the training, we keep a replay buffer of previous agents
seen during the training. In BRS-NOSP experiments we keep 2048 previous agents and in BRS
experiments we keep the last 512 agents. For training the detective, we sample a batch from this
replay buffers uniformly. We add a normal noise with variance of 0.01 to the parameters of these
agents to ensure the detective is trained against a diverse set of agents.
Hyperparameter search. We conducted a hyperparameter search using random search over the
configurations explained Table 2. the entropy coefficient β, which is multiplied by the entropy of
the log probabilities associated with the actions of the corresponding player, is added to the policy
gradient loss of the corresponding player for controlling the exploration-exploitation trade-off.
Plots and error bars. The results on the paper are computed over three seeds for the BRS, BRS-
NOSP, BRS-NOSP-NORB, and BRS-NOSP-NORB and six seeds for POLA. It is worth noting that
the error bars are calculate over seeds, i.e. checkpoints. The result of games between each pair of
agents is averaged over 32 independent games between those two agents.

                   Hyperparameter                           Values
                   inner game length in QA                  4, 8, 12, 16
                   samples in QA                            16, 64, 256, 1024
                   replay buffer of agent’s size            10, 512, 4096, 16384
                   value learning algorithm                 TD-0, Monte-Carlo
                   GAE λ                                    0.9, 0.96, 0.99, 0.999, 1.0
                   agent policy gradient learning rate      0.001, 0.0003
                   agent entropy β                          0.0, 1.0, 2.0, 5.0, 10.0
                   detective entropy β                      0.0, 1.0, 2.0, 5.0, 10.0

                                Table 2: Hyperparameter search options


Compute. Our runs are run for 48 hours on a single A100 GPU with 40 Gigabytes of RAM3 .
Batch size. We use a batch size of 128.
POLA agent’s training. To evaluate the POLA agents, we trained them by executing the POLA
repository here (Zhao et al., 2022).


B       R EPRODUCING R ESULTS

B.1     IPD

To replicate the results on IPD (Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma), please refer to the instructions avail-
able at here. By running the provided Colab notebook, you will obtain the IPD plot that is included
in the paper.

    3
     A single A100 gpu is 80 Gigabyte, but it can be split into two equivalent 40 Gigabyte equivalents and we
train on one of these splits


                                                     12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      B
                                                                      OR
                                                                    P-N
                                       B



                                                       P
                                   OR



                                                   OS



                                                                 OS
                                 S-N



                                                 S-N



                                                               S-N


                                                                                                                                TS
                                                                                 LA
                    S
                                                                                                                                           Return


                                                                                                                              MC
                                                                               PO
                   BR



                                BR



                                               BR



                                                               BR


                                                                                               AC



                                                                                                               AD
                        0.33           0.33            0.21           0.21           0.28           0.34            0.22            0.35
          BRS
                 0.33           0.33           -0.01           0.05           0.18           0.34           -0.11           0.31                0.5

                        0.33           0.34            0.20           0.21           0.29           0.34            0.21            0.33        0.4
      BRS-NORB
                 0.33           0.34           -0.00           0.04           0.19           0.35           -0.10           0.28
                                                                                                                                                0.3
                        -0.01          -0.00           0.01           0.01           0.03           -0.01           0.04            0.05
      BRS-NOSP
                 0.21           0.20           0.01            0.03           0.09           0.50           -0.04           0.23                0.2

                        0.05           0.05            0.03           0.02           0.06           0.07            0.05            0.12        0.1
BRS-NOSP-NORB
                 0.21           0.22           0.01            0.03           0.11           0.46           -0.04           0.34
                                                                                                                                                0.0
                        0.18           0.19            0.09           0.11           0.23           0.28            0.08            0.35
         POLA
                 0.28           0.29           0.03            0.06           0.23           0.38           -0.03           0.09                    0.1

                        0.34           0.35            0.50           0.46           0.38           0.35            0.66            0.64            0.2
           AC
                 0.34           0.34           -0.01           0.07           0.28           0.35           -0.31           -0.27
                                                                                                                                                    0.3
                        -0.11          -0.10           -0.04          -0.04          -0.03          -0.31           -0.00           -0.04
           AD
                 0.22           0.21           0.04            0.05           0.08           0.66           0.00            0.05                    0.4

                        0.31           0.28            0.23           0.34           0.09           -0.27           0.05                            0.5
         MCTS
                 0.35           0.33           0.05            0.12           0.35           0.64           -0.04
                                                                                                                                                    0.6

Figure 5: The presented figure illustrates the outcomes of 1-vs-1 Coin games lasting 50 rounds,
involving a range of agents. The return achieved by each agent is documented within the corre-
sponding cell. The reported returns are an average across 32 independent games. It is important to
note that there are no games recorded between the MTCS agent and itself as it is not possible.


B.2    C OIN G AME

To replicate the outcomes of the coin game, please refer to the instructions available at here. In
essence, the provided guidelines encompass training scripts designed for the purpose of training
agent checkpoints. Subsequently, there is an exporting phase in which these checkpoints are trans-
formed into their lightweight counterparts. Finally, a script is provided to facilitate the execution of
a league involving multiple agents.


C     L EAGUE R ESULTS

In order to visualize the results of our training in complete detail, in Figure 5 we visualize a matrix,
in the format of a heatmap, of the returns of various agents against each other. All the results are
averaged over 32 independent games between the corresponding agents. The game is the Coin game
of length 50. 4
   4
     Note that there is no meaning to train MCTS against MCTS because the MCTS needs to roll-out the
agent’s policy to choose an action. However, MCTS against MCTS implies an infinite loop of rolling out the
other agent’s policy


                                                                      13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D       S ELF -P LAY

Lemma D.1. Denote o ∈ S to be the state s ∈ S from the perspective of the opponent. For a
symmetric game, if it holds that µ(s0 ) = µ(o0 ) for all s0 , o0 ∈ S, then

                                                    E           [R1 (τ )] =            E        [R2 (τ )]
                                               τ ∼Prµ1 1                           τ ∼Prµ1 1
                                                    θ ,θ                                θ ,θ



where R2 ∶= ∑∞
             t=0 γ r (ot , bt , at ) and r denotes r from the perspective of the opponent.
                  t 2                     2         1


Proof. Denote τ̄ = o0 , b0 , a0 , o1 , ⋯, then notice that
    µ(s0 )πθ11 (a0 ∣s0 )πθ11 (b0 ∣o0 )P (s1 ∣s0 , a0 , b0 )⋯ = µ(o0 )πθ11 (b0 ∣o0 )πθ11 (a0 ∣s0 )P (o1 ∣o0 , b0 , a0 )⋯
                                                ⇐⇒ Prθµ1 ,θ1 (τ ) = Prθµ1 ,θ1 (τ̄ )

now by symmetry we have that r1 (st , at , bt ) = r2 (ot , bt , at ), therefore
                                                                                           ∞
                               Eτ ∼Prθ1 ,θ1 [R1 (τ )] = Eτ ∼Prθ1 ,θ1 [ ∑ γ t r1 (st , at , bt )]
                                        µ                                      µ
                                                                                          t=0
                                                                                                ∞
                                                                   = ∑ Prθµ1 ,θ1 (τ ) ∑ γ t r1 (st , at , bt )
                                                                      τ                        t=0
                                                                                                ∞
                                                                   = ∑ Prθµ1 ,θ1 (τ̄ ) ∑ γ t r2 (ot , bt , at )
                                                                      τ̄                     t=0
                                                                   = Eτ ∼Prθ1 ,θ1 [R (τ )]  2
                                                                               µ


where we just rename τ̄ in the last equality.                                                                                    ∎
Proposition D.2 states that the gradient in Equation 7 is equivalent to that of self-play with reward-
sharing.
Proposition D.2. For a symmetric game,
                                 ⎡                                                              ⎤
                                 ⎢                                                              ⎥
 ∇θ 1        E      [R1 (τ )] ∝ ⎢⎢∇θ1     E [R1 (τ ) + R2 (τ )] + ∇θ2     E [R1 (τ ) + R2 (τ )]⎥⎥       .
        τ ∼Prµ
             θ1 ,θ1
                                 ⎢    τ ∼Prµ
                                           θ1 ,θ2
                                                                      τ ∼Prµ
                                                                           θ1 ,θ2
                                                                                                ⎥
                                 ⎣                                                              ⎦θ2 =θ1
Proof. We write the gradient as follows:

     ∇θ 1        E       [R1 (τ )]     =         ∑ R (τ )∇θ1 Prµ1 1 (τ )
                                                            1                 θ ,θ
            τ ∼Prµ1
                 θ ,θ1
                                                    τ

                                       =         ∑ R (τ )Prµ1 1 (τ )∇θ1 log Prµ1 1 (τ )
                                                            1         θ ,θ                           θ ,θ
                                                    τ

                                       =         ∑ R (τ )Prµ1 1 (τ )∇θ1 log µ(p0 )πθ1 (a0 ∣s0 )πθ1 (b0 ∣o0 )⋯
                                                            1         θ ,θ                                    1   1
                                                    τ
                                                                                       ∞
                                       =         ∑ R (τ )Prµ1 1 (τ ) ∑ ∇θ1 log πθ1 (at ∣st ) + ∇θ1 log πθ1 (bt ∣ot )
                                                            1         θ ,θ                              1             1
                                                    τ                                 t=0
                                                                                ∞
                                       =                E         [R (τ ) ∑ ∇θ1 log πθ11 (at ∣st ) + ∇θ1 log πθ11 (bt ∣ot )] .
                                                                      1
                                                 τ ∼Prµ1 1
                                                      θ ,θ
                                                                               t=0

Now by symmetry and Lemma D.1. we have

                                                    E           [R1 (τ )] =           E         [R2 (τ )] ,
                                             τ ∼Prµ1                            τ ∼Prµ1
                                                    θ ,θ1                              θ ,θ1



and by linearity of expectation,

                                         E          [R1 (τ )] ∝                E       [R1 (τ ) + R2 (τ )] .
                                     τ ∼Prµ1                               τ ∼Prµ1
                                            θ ,θ1                              θ ,θ1


                                                                             14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hence
                                                                                                                                                ∞
∇θ 1              E            [R1 (τ )]                     ∝                   E            [(R1 (τ ) + R2 (τ )) ∑ ∇θ1 log πθ11 (at ∣st ) + ∇θ1 log πθ11 (bt ∣ot )]
          τ ∼Prµ1 1                                                      τ ∼Prµ1 1
               θ ,θ                                                           θ ,θ
                                                                                                                                               t=0
                                                                         ⎡                             ∞                                             ⎤
                                                                         ⎢                                                                           ⎥
                                                             =           ⎢ E [(R1 (τ ) + R2 (τ )) ∑ ∇θ log π 1 (at ∣st ) + ∇θ log π 2 (bt ∣ot )]⎥
                                                                         ⎢ θ1 ,θ2                                    θ1                 θ2           ⎥
                                                                         ⎢τ ∼Prµ                                                                     ⎥
                                                                                                             1                   2

                                                                         ⎣                            t=0
                                                                                                                                                     ⎦θ2 =θ1
                                                                         ⎡                                                                         ⎤
                                                                         ⎢                                                                         ⎥
                                                             =           ⎢ E [(R1 (τ ) + R2 (τ )) (∇θ log Prθ1 ,θ2 (τ ) + ∇θ log Prθ1 ,θ2 (τ ))]⎥
                                                                         ⎢ θ1 ,θ2                                  µ                  µ            ⎥
                                                                         ⎢τ ∼Prµ                                                                   ⎥
                                                                                                           1                  2

                                                                         ⎣                                                                         ⎦θ2 =θ1
                                                                         ⎡                                                                 ⎤
                                                                         ⎢                                                                 ⎥
                                                             =           ⎢∇θ        E [R1 (τ ) + R2 (τ )] + ∇θ2      E [R1 (τ ) + R2 (τ )]⎥⎥
                                                                         ⎢ 1                                                                       ,
                                                                         ⎢      τ ∼Prµ1 2
                                                                                     θ ,θ
                                                                                                                τ ∼Prµ1 2
                                                                                                                     θ ,θ
                                                                                                                                           ⎥
                                                                         ⎣                                                                 ⎦θ2 =θ1

which was to be shown.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ∎

Corollary D.3. For a symmetric, zero-sum game it holds that
                                   ∇θ 1   E [R1 (τ )] = 0
                                                                                                       τ ∼Prµ1
                                                                                                                θ ,θ1


Proof. By definition of zero-sum game, we have that
                                       r1 (st , at , bt ) + r2 (st , bt , at ) = 0
                                                                                  ∞
                                                                   Ô⇒ ∑ γ t (r1 (st , at , bt ) + r2 (st , bt , at )) = 0
                                                                                 t=0
                                                                                             ⇐⇒ R1 (τ ) = −R2 (τ ) for all τ
From proposition D.2. we get
                            ⎡                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ⎤
                            ⎢                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ⎥
                            ⎢                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ⎥
∇θ 1     E [R (τ )] ∝ ⎢⎢∇θ1
               1
                                   E [R (τ ) + R (τ )] +∇θ2
                                                      1                                                2
                                                                                                                                             E [R (τ ) + R (τ )]⎥⎥
                                                                                                                                                                1                                                2
     τ ∼Prµ1 1
          θ ,θ
                            ⎢  τ ∼Prµ1 2 ´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹¸ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹¶
                                    θ ,θ
                                                                                                                                         τ ∼Prµ1 2 ´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹¸ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹¶⎥
                                                                                                                                              θ ,θ
                            ⎢                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ⎥
                            ⎣                                                           =0                                                                                                        =0                                              ⎦θ2 =θ1
                       = [∇θ1 0 + ∇θ2 0]θ2 =θ1
                                                             =          0,
completing the proof.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ∎

E           S ELF -P LAY A BLATION
E.0.1                IPD
In IPD, as shown in Figure 2 the BRS-NOSP agents learn a variant of tit-for-tat that defects initially
but has the same probability of cooperation as tit-for-tat in {CC, CD, DC, DD}. We name this policy
cynic-tit-for-tat (CTFT). The best response to a cynic-tit-for-tat in an infinite IPD game is always
cooperating because if the opponent defects initially, the agent will defect in the next turn. Also,
CTFT does not cooperate with itself.
Furthermore, if we use the analytical differentiable returns in IPD, BRS-NOSP learns a ZD-extortion
policy Press & Dyson (2012) similar to Lu et al. (2022) as shown in Figure 8. ZD-Extortion policy
gains advantage by defecting to the extent that best response of the opponent is still cooperation.

E.0.2                C OIN G AME
In the Coin Game, as shown in Figure 4, the BRS-NOSP agents get a high return against the MCTS.
However, the MCTS opponent gets considerably less return against BRS-NOSP than against BRS.
This indicates BRS exploited the MCTS’s rationality. While MCTS does better than Always Defect
against the BRS-NOSP, it trades a high amount of cooperation to elicit a slight cooperation from
the BRS-NOSP. In other words, teh BRS-NOSP exploites the rationality of the MCTS. Also, BRS-
NOSP agents do not cooperate with themselves and they exploit Always Cooperate.


                                                                                                                        15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: This figure illustrates the training of the IPD agent against the TSD. TSD samples from
the agent’s policy, represented by red arrows in the plot, while exploring all possible actions when
considering its own actions, represented by black arrows in the plot. The agent treats the TSD as a
black-box algorithm and differentiates through it via REINFORCE. Note that the summation is over
all log probabilities and not only over the log probabilities presnet in the path.


F    T REE S EARCH D ETECTIVE

In this section, we describe the Tree Search Detective (TSD) used in the IPD experiments.The in-
tuition behind TSD is that by simulating all possible trajectories based on the agent’s policy, the
opponent can select the path that maximizes its own returns. Consequently, the agent achieves the
return associated with that specific path.
TSD implements this idea. TSD builds a tree structure in which the agent’s actions are directly
sampled from its policy. When it comes to TSD’s action, a branch is formed for each action to
explore the potential outcomes of that specific action.
The agent will treat TSD as a black-box algorithm that queries the agent’s policy on a set of states
and returns a single return, i.e. the return that corresponds to the agent’s return in the path that
yielded the highest return for the TSD. This black-box can be differentiated through via policy
gradient estimators. It is worth noting that when calculating the policy gradient loss, the sum of all
log probabilities should be considered, not just the ones present in the chosen path. This is crucial
because the agent’s actions in states outside of the selected path are significant in TSD’s decision-
making process for selecting that particular path. This idea has been depicted in Figure 6.

G    D ETAILED RESULTS OF GAMES BETWEEN AGENTS

In Figure 7 we visualized the average result of 32 games between different agents. Note that for
BRS agents we used three seeds per agent type and for POLA we used six seeds. Indeed, the POLA


                                                 16
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                0.6                                                       0.6                                                       0.6                                                            0.6                                                   0.6                                                               0.6                                                                 0.6


                                                                                                                                                                         Return of BRS-NOSP-NORB


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Return of Always Cooperate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Return of Always Defect
                0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4                                                            0.4                                                   0.4                                                               0.4                                                                 0.4
                                                     Return of BRS-NORB


                                                                                                               Return of BRS-NOSP
                                           Mean                                                      Mean                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mean


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Return of POLA
Return of BRS


                                                                                                                                                     Mean                                                            Mean                                                                                                                                                                                    Mean
                0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2                                                            0.2                                                   0.2                                                               0.2                                                                 0.2

                0.0                                                       0.0                                                       0.0                                                            0.0                                                   0.0                                                               0.0                                                                 0.0

                0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2                                                            0.2                                                   0.2                                                               0.2                                                                 0.2

                0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4                                                            0.4                                                   0.4                                                               0.4                                                                 0.4
                      0.25     0.00 0.25 0.50                                   0.25     0.00 0.25 0.50                                   0.25     0.00 0.25 0.50                                        0.25     0.00 0.25 0.50                               0.25     0.00 0.25 0.50                                           0.25     0.00 0.25 0.50                                             0.25     0.00 0.25 0.50
                               Return of BRS                                             Return of BRS                                             Return of BRS                                                  Return of BRS                                         Return of BRS                                                     Return of BRS                                                       Return of BRS


                0.6                                                       0.6                                                       0.6                                                            0.6                                                   0.6                                                               0.6                                                                 0.6


                                                                                                                                                                         Return of BRS-NOSP-NORB


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Return of Always Cooperate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Return of Always Defect
                0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4                                                            0.4                                                   0.4                                                               0.4                                                                 0.4
                                                     Return of BRS-NORB


                                                                                                               Return of BRS-NOSP


                                           Mean                                                      Mean                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mean


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Return of POLA
Return of BRS


                                                                                                                                                     Mean                                                            Mean                                                                                                                                                                                    Mean
                0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2                                                            0.2                                                   0.2                                                               0.2                                                                 0.2

                0.0                                                       0.0                                                       0.0                                                            0.0                                                   0.0                                                               0.0                                                                 0.0

                0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2                                                            0.2                                                   0.2                                                               0.2                                                                 0.2

                0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4                                                            0.4                                                   0.4                                                               0.4                                                                 0.4
                      0.25      0.00 0.25 0.50                                  0.25      0.00 0.25 0.50                                  0.25      0.00 0.25 0.50                                       0.25      0.00 0.25 0.50                              0.25      0.00 0.25 0.50                                          0.25      0.00 0.25 0.50                                            0.25      0.00 0.25 0.50
                             Return of BRS-NORB                                        Return of BRS-NORB                                        Return of BRS-NORB                                             Return of BRS-NORB                                    Return of BRS-NORB                                                Return of BRS-NORB                                                  Return of BRS-NORB


                0.6                                                       0.6                                                       0.6                                                            0.6                                                   0.6                                                               0.6                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                         Return of BRS-NOSP-NORB


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Return of Always Cooperate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Return of Always Defect
                0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4                                                            0.4                                                   0.4                                                               0.4                                                                 0.4
                                                     Return of BRS-NORB


                                                                                                               Return of BRS-NOSP


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Return of POLA
Return of BRS


                0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2                                                            0.2                                                   0.2                                                               0.2                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                                     Mean                                                            Mean                                                   Mean                                                                                                                               Mean
                0.0                    Mean                               0.0                   Mean                                0.0                                                            0.0                                                   0.0                                                               0.0                             Mean                                0.0

                0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2                                                            0.2                                                   0.2                                                               0.2                                                                 0.2

                0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4                                                            0.4                                                   0.4                                                               0.4                                                                 0.4
                      0.25      0.00 0.25 0.50                                  0.25      0.00 0.25 0.50                                  0.25      0.00 0.25 0.50                                       0.25      0.00 0.25 0.50                              0.25      0.00 0.25 0.50                                          0.25      0.00 0.25 0.50                                            0.25      0.00 0.25 0.50
                             Return of BRS-NOSP                                        Return of BRS-NOSP                                        Return of BRS-NOSP                                             Return of BRS-NOSP                                    Return of BRS-NOSP                                                Return of BRS-NOSP                                                  Return of BRS-NOSP


                0.6                                                       0.6                                                       0.6                                                            0.6                                                   0.6                                                               0.6                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                         Return of BRS-NOSP-NORB


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Return of Always Cooperate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Return of Always Defect
                0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4                                                            0.4                                                   0.4                                                               0.4                                                                 0.4
                                                     Return of BRS-NORB


                                                                                                               Return of BRS-NOSP


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Return of POLA
Return of BRS


                0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2                                                            0.2                                                   0.2                                                               0.2                                                                 0.2
                                       Mean                                                      Mean                                                Mean                                                                                                                    Mean                                                                         Mean                                                 Mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mean
                0.0                                                       0.0                                                       0.0                                                            0.0                                                   0.0                                                               0.0                                                                 0.0

                0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2                                                            0.2                                                   0.2                                                               0.2                                                                 0.2

                0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4                                                            0.4                                                   0.4                                                               0.4                                                                 0.4
                      0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                       0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                       0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                            0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                   0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                               0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                                 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50
                       Return of BRS-NOSP-NORB                                   Return of BRS-NOSP-NORB                                   Return of BRS-NOSP-NORB                                        Return of BRS-NOSP-NORB                               Return of BRS-NOSP-NORB                                           Return of BRS-NOSP-NORB                                             Return of BRS-NOSP-NORB


                0.6                                                       0.6                                                       0.6                                                            0.6                                                   0.6                                                               0.6                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                         Return of BRS-NOSP-NORB


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Return of Always Cooperate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Return of Always Defect
                0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4                                                            0.4                                                   0.4                                                               0.4                                                                 0.4
                                                     Return of BRS-NORB


                                                                                                               Return of BRS-NOSP


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Return of POLA
Return of BRS


                                                                                                   Mean                                                                                                                                                                         Mean
                0.2                      Mean                             0.2                                                       0.2                                                            0.2                                                   0.2                                                               0.2                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                                      Mean                                                           Mean                                                                                                                                                                                      Mean
                0.0                                                       0.0                                                       0.0                                                            0.0                                                   0.0                                                               0.0                                                                 0.0

                0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2                                                            0.2                                                   0.2                                                               0.2                                                                 0.2

                0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4                                                            0.4                                                   0.4                                                               0.4                                                                 0.4
                      0.25     0.00 0.25 0.50                                   0.25     0.00 0.25 0.50                                   0.25     0.00 0.25 0.50                                        0.25     0.00 0.25 0.50                               0.25     0.00 0.25 0.50                                           0.25     0.00 0.25 0.50                                             0.25     0.00 0.25 0.50
                               Return of POLA                                            Return of POLA                                            Return of POLA                                                 Return of POLA                                        Return of POLA                                                    Return of POLA                                                      Return of POLA

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mean
                0.6                                                       0.6                                                       0.6                                                            0.6                                                   0.6                                                               0.6                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                     Mean                                                             Mean
                                                                                                                                                                         Return of BRS-NOSP-NORB


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Return of Always Cooperate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Return of Always Defect


                0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4                                                            0.4                                                   0.4                        Mean                                   0.4                                                                 0.4
                                                     Return of BRS-NORB


                                                                                                               Return of BRS-NOSP


                                           Mean                                                      Mean                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Return of POLA
Return of BRS


                0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2                                                            0.2                                                   0.2                                                               0.2                                                                 0.2

                0.0                                                       0.0                                                       0.0                                                            0.0                                                   0.0                                                               0.0                                                                 0.0

                0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2                                                            0.2                                                   0.2                                                               0.2                                                                 0.2

                0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4                                                            0.4                                                   0.4                                                               0.4                                                                 0.4
                      0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                       0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                       0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                            0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                   0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                               0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                                 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50
                        Return of Always Cooperate                                Return of Always Cooperate                                Return of Always Cooperate                                     Return of Always Cooperate                            Return of Always Cooperate                                        Return of Always Cooperate                                          Return of Always Cooperate


                0.6                                                       0.6                                                       0.6                                                            0.6                                                   0.6                                                               0.6                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                         Return of BRS-NOSP-NORB


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Return of Always Cooperate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Return of Always Defect


                0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4                                                            0.4                                                   0.4                                                               0.4                                                                 0.4
                                                     Return of BRS-NORB


                                                                                                               Return of BRS-NOSP


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Return of POLA
Return of BRS


                0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2                                                            0.2                                                   0.2                                                               0.2                                                                 0.2

                0.0                                                       0.0                                                       0.0               Mean                                         0.0               Mean                                0.0                Mean                                           0.0                                                                 0.0              Mean
                                       Mean                                                      Mean
                0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2                                                            0.2                                                   0.2                                                               0.2                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mean
                0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4                                                            0.4                                                   0.4                                                               0.4                                                                 0.4
                      0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                       0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                       0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                            0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                   0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                               0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50                                                 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50
                          Return of Always Defect                                   Return of Always Defect                                   Return of Always Defect                                        Return of Always Defect                               Return of Always Defect                                           Return of Always Defect                                             Return of Always Defect


  Figure 7: This figure illustrates the performance of all the agents (Including Always Cooperate and
  Always Defect) against each other.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  agents have more variance in their performance therefore we used more seeds to compute the error
  bars for them.

  H         ZD-E XTORTION

  Figure 8 shows that BRS without self-play learns a ZD-extortion policy as expected.


                   BRS Policy Visualization on IPD
                  0.5
BRS-NOSP Reward


                  1.0

                  1.5

                  2.0

                  2.5

                  3.0
                        3.0     2.5        2.0         1.5        1.0        0.5
                                     Opponent Reward
  Figure 8: Visualization of BRS-NOSP’s policy. Similar to Lu et al. (2022) our agent when trained
  to find the best response to the best response discovers a ZD-extortion policy.


  I       T RAINING CURVES OF BRS AND BRS-NOSP

  Figure 9 shows the training curves of BRS and BRS-NOSP seeds.

  J       BRS VS POLA: H EAD TO H EAD R ESULTS

  In this section, we delve into the details of POLA vs. BRS. We sampled 32 trajectories between each
  POLA seed and each BRS seeds. In summary, we observe: 1) POLA seeds have higher variance in


                                                  18
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     agent average reward in training                agent average reward vs AD                     agent average reward vs AC
           0.6                                             0.6                                            0.6

           0.4                                             0.4                                            0.4
BRS


           0.2                                             0.2                                            0.2

           0.0                                             0.0                                            0.0

           0.2                                             0.2                                            0.2

                 0      10000 20000 30000 40000 50000            10000    20000           30000   40000         10000    20000           30000   40000
                                  Steps                                           Steps                                          Steps
                     agent average reward in training                agent average reward vs AD                     agent average reward vs AC
           0.6                                             0.6                                            0.6

           0.4                                             0.4                                            0.4
BRS-NOSP


           0.2                                             0.2                                            0.2

           0.0                                             0.0                                            0.0

           0.2                                             0.2                                            0.2

                 0      10000 20000 30000 40000 50000            10000    20000           30000   40000         10000    20000           30000   40000
                                  Steps                                           Steps                                          Steps


 Figure 9: Training curves of BRS and BRS-NOSP during training and their evaluation against Al-
 ways Defect(AD) and Always Cooperate(AC) opponent


 behaviour. 2) POLA seeds break the cooperation loop much more often than BRS agents. 3) POLA
 agents retaliate weakly when BRS breaks the cooperation by defecting. In overall, that indicates that
 BRS agents are more suitable than POLA agents as reciprocation-based cooperative agents.
 J.1             R ECIPROCATION - BASED C OOPERATION C OMPARISON

             Agent            Start                     Opponent              Opponent Defects                      Opponent Defects
                                                        Cooperates                                                  while Agent Coop-
                                                                                                                    erated
             POLA             0.5614                    0.8705                0.1350                                0.6944
             BRS              0.9957                    0.9894                0.2599                                0.1600

 Table 3: This table indicates the empirically estimated probability that each agent cooperates after a
 specific condition is met. For example, POLA cooperated with 0.6944 probability in trajectories in
 which BRS defected while POLA’s last action was cooperation.

 We now consider empirical statistics of the observed trajectories between POLA and BRS agents
 in the Coin Game. Here we define cooperation as a turn in which the opponent does not take the
 agent’s coin (and vice versa for the agent). We define for both opponent and agent defection as a
 turn in which they take the other’s coin.
 A shown in Table 3 in contrast to BRS which almost always starts with cooperation, POLA starts
 cooperation 0.56 of times deviating from a TFT policy. Both POLA and BRS cooperate with high
 probability in case of observing that the opponent cooperated. However, BRS’s policy cooperates
 with higher probability. Both POLA and BRS cooperate with little probability after they observe the
 opponent defected. While POLA cooperates with less probability than BRS which seems desirable,
 it should be noted that POLA seeds defect more compared to BRS seeds in general. The next column
 sheds lights on this. A cooperation reciprocation-based policy should defect after its cooperation is
 faced with opponent defection. POLA will cooperate 0.70 times in those situations indicating lack of
 strong retaliation. BRS seeds cooperate 0.16 times indicating strong retaliation. Note that these are
 conditional probabilities. As shown in Table 4 in these 32 trajectories we observe only 72 situations


                                                                             19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in which POLA cooperated first and BRS defected. In 22 out of those POLA defected next and the
other 50 POLA cooperated. This is a sign of weak retaliation. In contrast, we observe 950 situations
in which BRS cooperated and POLA defected. In 798 out of those, BRS defected next indicating
strong retaliation. In summary, these results show that POLA agents are inclined towards defecting
and also they weakly retaliate while BRS agents show strong inclination towards cooperation while
showing strong signs of retaliation when the opponent defects.


                       Table 4: Retaliation Behaviors of POLA and BRS Agents
       POLA Cooperates & BRS Defects: 72 times                  BRS Cooperates & POLA Defects: 950 times
      POLA Defects Next       POLA Cooperates Next              BRS Defects Next           BRS Cooperates Next
 22 times, 0.31 probability   50 times, 0.69 probability    798 times, 0.84 probability   152 times, 0.16 probability


Table 5: Shows the empirical frequency of various retaliations behaviours of POLA and BRS seeds
in 32 rollouts of length 50 in the Coin Game. In 72 times BRS defected after POLA cooperated.
Only 22 times out of those, POLA retaliates. In 950 times POLA defected after BRS cooperated.
BRS retaliated on 798 of those.


J.2    L EAGUE R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

Figure 10 shows the head to head results of BRS and POLA seeds. We observe that while BRS
agents robustly cooperate with themselves, MCTS, and Always Cooperate the behaviour of POLA
agents varies. We observe two main patterns in POLA seeds. POLA-3 and POLA-4 are exploitative,
exploiting other POLA seeds and Always Cooperate. But, they cannot cooperate with themselves.
While they are not exploited by MCTS in the sense of getting lower return than MCTS, their return
against MCTS indicates non-cooperative rollouts. POLA-1, POLA-2, POLA-5, and POLA-6 are
more cooperative - even cooperating with themselves - at the expense of being exploited by other
POLA seeds and MCTS. It should be noted that for all POLA seeds the best response, approximated
by the MCTS agent, is never to always cooperate. This is in contrast with BRS which not only
always cooperates with itself, but also convinces the MCTS agent to always cooperate with them.


                                                           20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         1


                                                                        2


                                                                                       3


                                                                                                       4


                                                                                                                    5


                                                                                                                                   6
                                                       LA-


                                                                      LA-


                                                                                     LA-


                                                                                                    LA-


                                                                                                                  LA-


                                                                                                                                 LA-
           S-1


                          S-2


                                         S-3


                                                                                                                                                                               TS
                                                                                                                                                                                       Return


                                                                                                                                                                             MC
                                                      PO


                                                                     PO


                                                                                    PO


                                                                                                   PO


                                                                                                                 PO


                                                                                                                                PO
         BR


                        BR


                                       BR


                                                                                                                                                AC


                                                                                                                                                               AD
                0.34           0.33           0.32           0.32           0.33           0.25           0.28          0.32           0.28           0.33           0.28           0.35
 BRS-1
         0.34           0.33           0.33           0.33           0.33           0.01          -0.04          0.33           0.13           0.34          -0.13           0.32
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
                0.33           0.34           0.33           0.31           0.32           0.23           0.28          0.31           0.32           0.34           0.28           0.34
 BRS-2
         0.33           0.33           0.33           0.34           0.32          -0.00          -0.06          0.28           0.18           0.35          -0.15           0.28
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.4
                0.33           0.33           0.34           0.33           0.32           0.13           0.11          0.30           0.25           0.34           0.11           0.35
 BRS-3
         0.32           0.33           0.34           0.34           0.32           0.02          -0.02          0.29           0.18           0.33          -0.04           0.32
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.3
                0.33           0.34           0.34           0.34           0.35           0.45           0.30          0.36           0.35           0.34           0.16           0.49
POLA-1
         0.32           0.31           0.33           0.34           0.32           0.12           0.09          0.32           0.32           0.35          -0.07          -0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.2
                0.33           0.32           0.32           0.32           0.34           0.41           0.14          0.35           0.36           0.33           0.11           0.47
POLA-2
         0.33           0.32           0.32           0.35           0.34           0.14          -0.05          0.33           0.33           0.36          -0.04           0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.1
                0.01           -0.00          0.02           0.12           0.14           0.04           0.03          0.17           0.14           0.14           0.01           0.08
POLA-3
         0.25           0.23           0.13           0.45           0.41           0.03          -0.02          0.37           0.17           0.44           0.00           0.14
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.0
                -0.04          -0.06          -0.02          0.09           -0.05          -0.02          0.00          0.09           -0.03          0.21           -0.01          0.25
POLA-4
         0.28           0.28           0.11           0.30           0.14           0.03          -0.00          0.23           0.09           0.41           0.01           0.22
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.1
                0.33           0.28           0.29           0.32           0.33           0.37           0.23          0.34           0.34           0.32           0.13           0.42
POLA-5
         0.32           0.31           0.30           0.36           0.35           0.17           0.09          0.34           0.33           0.35          -0.05           0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2
                0.13           0.18           0.18           0.32           0.33           0.17           0.09          0.33           0.28           0.32           0.09           0.37
POLA-6
         0.28           0.32           0.25           0.35           0.36           0.14          -0.03          0.34           0.26           0.36          -0.03           0.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.3
                0.34           0.35           0.33           0.35           0.36           0.44           0.41          0.35           0.36           0.35           0.66           0.64
   AC
         0.33           0.34           0.34           0.34           0.33           0.14           0.21          0.32           0.32           0.35          -0.31          -0.27
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.4
                -0.13          -0.15          -0.04          -0.07          -0.04          0.00           0.01          -0.05          -0.03          -0.31          -0.00          -0.04
   AD
         0.28           0.28           0.11           0.16           0.11           0.01          -0.01          0.13           0.09           0.66           0.00           0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                0.32           0.28           0.32           -0.01          0.00           0.14           0.22          0.05           0.14           -0.27          0.05
 MCTS
         0.35           0.34           0.35           0.49           0.47           0.08           0.25          0.42           0.37           0.64          -0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6

Figure 10: Head to head results of BRS and POLA seeds. Each entry is averaged over 32 indepen-
dent rollouts.


                                                                                                  21
