I F THERE IS NO UNDERFITTING , THERE IS NO C OLD
P OSTERIOR E FFECT
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         The cold posterior effect (CPE) (Wenzel et al., 2020) in Bayesian deep learning
         shows that, for posteriors with a temperature T < 1, the resulting posterior pre-
         dictive could have better performances than the Bayesian posterior (T = 1). As
         the Bayesian posterior is known to be optimal under perfect model specification,
         many recent works have studied the presence of CPE as a model misspecification
         problem, arising from the prior and/or from the likelihood function. In this work,
         we provide a more nuanced understanding of the CPE as we show that misspecifi-
         cation leads to CPE only when the resulting Bayesian posterior underfits. In fact,
         we theoretically show that if there is no underfitting, there is no CPE.


1    I NTRODUCTION
In Bayesian deep learning, the cold posterior effect (CPE) (Wenzel et al., 2020) refers to the phe-
nomenon in which if we artificially “temper” the posterior by either p(✓|D) / (p(D|✓)p(✓))1/T or
p(✓|D) / p(D|✓)1/T p(✓) with a temperature T < 1, the resulting posterior enjoys better predictive
performance than the standard Bayesian posterior (with T = 1). The discovery of the CPE has
sparked debates in the community about its potential contributing factors.
If the prior and likelihood are properly specified, the Bayesian solution (i.e., T = 1) should be
optimal (Gelman et al., 2013), assuming approximate inference is properly working. Hence, the
presence of the CPE implies either the prior (Wenzel et al., 2020; Fortuin et al., 2022), the likelihood
(Aitchison, 2021; Kapoor et al., 2022), or both are misspecified. This has been, so far, the main
argument of many works trying to explain the CPE.
One line of research examines the impact of the prior misspecification on the CPE (Wenzel et al.,
2020; Fortuin et al., 2022). The priors of modern Bayesian neural networks are often selected for
tractability. Consequently, the quality of the selected priors in relation to the CPE is a natural concern.
Previous research has revealed that while adjusting priors can help alleviate the CPE in certain cases,
there are instances where the effect persists despite such adjustments (Fortuin et al., 2022). Some
studies even show that the role of priors may not be critical (Izmailov et al., 2021). Therefore, the
impact of priors on the CPE remains an open question.
Furthermore, the influence of likelihood misspecification on CPE has also been investigated (Aitchi-
son, 2021; Noci et al., 2021; Kapoor et al., 2022; Fortuin et al., 2022), and has been identified to
be particularly relevant in curated datasets (Aitchison, 2021; Kapoor et al., 2022). Several studies
have proposed alternative likelihood functions to address this issue and successfully mitigate the CPE
(Nabarro et al., 2022; Kapoor et al., 2022). However, the underlying relation between the likelihood
and CPE remains a partially unresolved question. Notably, the CPE usually emerges when data
augmentation (DA) techniques are used (Wenzel et al., 2020; Izmailov et al., 2021; Fortuin et al.,
2022; Noci et al., 2021; Nabarro et al., 2022; Kapoor et al., 2022). A popular hypothesis is that using
DA implies the introduction of a randomly perturbed log-likelihood, which lacks a clear interpretation
as a valid likelihood function (Wenzel et al., 2020; Izmailov et al., 2021). However, Nabarro et al.
(2022) demonstrates that the CPE persists even when a proper likelihood function incorporating DA
is defined. Therefore, further investigation is needed to fully understand their relationship.
Other works argued that CPE could mainly be an artifact of inaccurate approximate inference methods,
especially in the context of neural networks, where the posteriors are extremely high dimensional
and complex (Izmailov et al., 2021). However, many of the previously mentioned works have also


                                                    1
found setups where the CPE either disappears or is significantly alleviated through the adoption of
better priors and/or better likelihoods with approximate inference methods. In these studies, the
same approximate inference methods were used to illustrate, for example, how using a standard
likelihood function leads to the observation of CPE and how using an alternative likelihood function
removes it (Aitchison, 2021; Noci et al., 2021; Kapoor et al., 2022). In other instances, under the
same approximate inference scheme, CPE is observed when using certain types of priors but it is
strongly alleviated when an alternative class of priors is utilized (Wenzel et al., 2020; Fortuin et al.,
2022). Therefore, there is compelling evidence suggesting that approximate methods are not, at least,
a necessary condition for the CPE.
This work theoretically and empirically shows that the presence of the CPE implies the existence of
underfitting, i.e., if there is no underfitting, there is no CPE. This perspective, in combination with
the previous evidence that CPE implies that either the likelihood, the prior or both are misspecified
(Gelman et al., 2013), allows us to deduce that CPE implies both misspecification and underfitting.
And, in consequence, the underfitting of the Bayesian posterior would be induced by the very
misspecification itself. This provides a more nuance perspective about the factors contributing to CPE.
This conclusion can not be directly deduced from the misspecification argument itself, because prior
and/or likelihood misspecification can lead Bayesian methods to both underfitting or overfitting. Both
cases have been widely discussed in the literature (Domingos, 2000; Immer et al., 2021; Kapoor et al.,
2022). As a result, according to our work, mitigating CPE requires addressing both misspecification
and underfitting at the same time or, equivalently, designing more flexible likelihood functions and/or
prior distributions. Importantly, we also show that this insight directly applies to exact Bayesian
inference, discarding that the connection between CPE and underfitting is simply a side-effect of the
use of approximate inference methods (Wenzel et al., 2020).

Contributions (i) We theoretically demonstrate that the presence of the CPE implies there is
underfitting in Section 3. (ii) We show that likelihood misspecification and prior misspecification
result in CPE only if they also induce underfitting in Section 4. (iii) We show that data augmentation
results in CPE only if it also induces underfitting in Section 5. In summary, we demonstrate
theoretically and empirically that the presence of the CPE implies that the Bayesian posterior is
underfitting. Therefore, addressing CPE requires addressing the underfitting of the Bayesian posterior.


2     BACKGROUND

2.1   N OTATION

Let us start by introducing basic notation. Consider a supervised learning problem with the sample
space Y ⇥ X . Let D = {(y i , xi )}ni=1 denote the training data, which we assume to be generated from
an unknown data-generating distribution ⌫ on Y⇥X . We also assume we have a family of probabilistic
models parameterized by ⇥, where each ✓ defines a conditional probability distribution denoted by
p(y|x, ✓). The standard metric to measure the quality of a probabilistic model ✓ on a sample (y, x)
is the (negative) log-loss ln p(y|x, ✓). The expected (or population) loss of a probabilistic model
✓ is defined as L(✓) = E(y,x)⇠⌫ [ ln p(y|x, ✓)], and the empirical loss of the model ✓ on the data
                                  P
D is defined as L̂(D, ✓) = n1 i2[n] ln p(y i |xi , ✓) = n1 ln p(D|✓). We might interchange the
loss expression, L̂(D, ✓), and the negative log-likelihood expression, n1 ln p(D|✓), in the paper for
presentation. Also, if induce no ambiguity, we use E⌫ [·] as a shorthand for E(y,x)⇠⌫ [·].

2.2   (G ENERALIZED ) BAYESIAN L EARNING

In Bayesian learning, we learn a probability distribution ⇢(✓|D), often called a posterior, over the
parameter space ⇥ from the training data D. Given a new input x, the posterior ⇢ makes the
prediction about y through (an approximation of) Bayesian model averaging (BMA) p(y|x, ⇢) =
E✓⇠⇢ [p(y|x, ✓)], where the posterior ⇢ is used to combine the predictions of the models. Again, if
induce no ambiguity, we use E⇢ [·] as a shorthand for E✓⇠⇢ [·]. The predictive performance of such
BMA is usually measured by the Bayes loss, defined by

                                   B(⇢) = E⌫ [ ln E⇢ [p(y|x, ✓)]] .                                  (1)


                                                   2
For some > 0 and a prior p(✓), the so-called tempered posteriors (or the generalized Bayes
posterior) (Barron and Cover, 1991; Zhang, 2006; Bissiri et al., 2016; Grünwald and van Ommen,
2017), are defined as a probability distribution
                                       p (✓|D) / p(D|✓) p(✓) .                                         (2)

Even though many works on CPE use the parameter T = 1/ instead, we adopt in the rest of the
work for the convenience of derivations. Therefore, the CPE (T < 1) corresponds to when > 1.
We also note that while some works study CPE with a full-tempering posterior, where the prior is also
tempered, many works also find CPE for likelihood-tempering posterior (see (Wenzel et al., 2020)
and the references therein). Also, with some widely chosen priors (e.g., zero-centered Gaussian
priors), the likelihood-tempering posteriors are equivalent to full-tempering posteriors with rescaled
prior variances (Aitchison, 2021; Bachmann et al., 2022).
When = 1, the tempered posterior equals the (standard) Bayesian posterior. The tempered posterior
can be obtained by optimizing a generalization of the so-called (generalized) ELBO objective (Alquier
et al., 2016; Higgins et al., 2017), which, for convenience, we write as follows:
                                                             1
                 p (✓|D) = arg min E⇢ [ ln p(D|✓)] +             KL(⇢(✓|D), p(✓)) .                    (3)
                                 ⇢

The first term is known as the (un-normalized) reconstruction error or the empirical Gibbs loss of
the posterior ⇢ on the data D, denoted as Ĝ(⇢, D) = E⇢ [ n1 ln p(D|✓)], which further equals to
E⇢ [L̂(D, ✓)]. Therefore, it is often used as the training loss in Bayesian learning (Morningstar et al.,
2022). The second term in Eq. (3) is a Kullback-Leibler divergence between the posterior ⇢(✓|D)
and the prior p(✓) scaled by a hyper-parameter .
If it induces no ambiguity, we will use p as a shorthand for p (✓|D). So, for example, B(p ) would
refer to the expected Bayes loss of the tempered-posterior p (✓|D). In the rest of this work, we will
interpret the CPE as how changes in the parameter affect the test error and the training error of p
or, equivalently, the Bayes loss B(p ) and the empirical Gibbs loss Ĝ(p , D).

3    T HE PRESENCE OF THE CPE IMPLIES UNDERFITTING
A standard understanding for underfitting refers to a situation when the trained model is not able to
properly capture the relationship between input and output in the data-generating process, and results
in high errors on both the training data and testing data. In the context of highly flexible model classes,
like neural networks, underfittings refers to the phenomenon of learning a model having training and
testing losses (much) higher than they could be, i.e., there exists another models in the model class
having simultaneously lower training and testing losses. In the context of Bayesian inference, we
argue that the Bayesian posterior is underfitting if there exists another posterior distribution with
lower empirical Gibbs and Bayes losses at the same time.
As previously discussed, the CPE describes the phenomenon of getting better predictive performance
when we make the parameter of the tempered posterior, , higher than 1. The next definition
introduces a formal characterization. We do not claim this is the best possible formal characterization.
However, through the rest of the paper, we will show that this simple characterization is enough to
understand the relationship between CPE and underfitting.
Definition 1. We say there is a CPE for Bayes loss if and only if the gradient of the Bayes loss of the
posterior p , B(p ), evaluated at = 1 is negative. That is,
                                          r B(p )| =1 < 0 ,                                            (4)
where the magnitude of the gradient r B(p )         =1
                                                         defines the strength of the CPE.

According to the above definition, a (relatively large) negative gradient r B(p )| =1 implies that by
making slightly greater than 1, we will have a (relatively large) reduction in the Bayes loss with
respect to the Bayesian posterior. Note that if the gradient r B(p )| =1 is not relatively large and
negative, then we can not expect a relatively large reduction in the Bayes loss and, in consequence,
the CPE will not be significant. Obviously, this formal definition could also be extended to other


                                                    3
specific values different from 1, or even consider some aggregation over different > 1 values.
We will stick to this definition because it is simpler, and the insights and conclusions extracted here
can be easily extrapolated to other similar definitions involving the gradient of the Bayes loss.
Next, we present another critical observation. We postpone the proofs in this section to Appendix A.
Theorem 2. The gradient of the empirical Gibbs loss of the tempered posterior p satisfies
                         8      0    r Ĝ(p , D) =       Vp   ln p(D|✓)  0 ,                        (5)
where V(·) denotes the variance.

As shown in Proposition 5 in Appendix A, to achieve Vp ln p(D|✓) = 0, we need p (✓|D) =
p(✓), implying that the data has no influence on the posterior. In consequence, in practical scenarios,
Vp ln p(D|✓) will always be greater than zero. Thus, increasing will monotonically reduce
the empirical Gibbs loss Ĝ(p , D) (i.e., the train error) of p . The next result also shows that the
empirical Gibbs loss of the Bayesian posterior Ĝ(p =1 ) cannot reach its floor to observe the CPE,
Proposition 3. A necessary condition for the presence of the CPE, as defined in Definition 1, is that
                                    Ĝ(p =1 , D) > min    ln p(D|✓) .
                                                     ✓

Insight 1. Definition 1 in combination with Theorem 2 state that if the CPE is present, by making
  > 1, the test loss B(p ) and the empirical Gibbs loss Ĝ(p , D) will be reduced at the same time.
Furthermore, Proposition 3 states that the Bayesian posterior still has room to fit the training data
further (e.g., by placing more probability mass on the maximum likelihood estimator). From here,
we can deduce that the presence of CPE implies that the Bayesian posterior ( = 1) is underfitting,
because there exists another posterior (i.e, ⇢ (✓|D) with > 1) that has lower training (Proposition
3) and testing (Definition 1) loss at the same time. In short, if there is CPE, the Bayesian posterior is
underfitting. Or, equivalently, if the Bayesian posterior does not underfit, there is no CPE.

However, a final question arises: when is = 1 (the Bayesian posterior) optimal? More precisely,
when does the gradient of the Bayes loss with respect to evaluated at                = 1 become zero
(r B(p )| =1 = 0)? This would imply that neither (infinitesimally) increasing nor decreasing
   changes the predictive performance. We will see that this condition is closely related to the
situation that updating the Bayesian posterior with more data does not enhance its fit to the original
training data better. In other words, when the Bayesian posterior contains more information about the
data-generating distribution, it continues to fit the original training data in a similar manner.
We start by denoting p̃ (✓|D, (y, x)) as the distribution obtained by updating the posterior p (✓|D)
with one new sample (y, x), i.e., p̃ (✓|D, (y, x)) / p(y|x, ✓)p (✓|D). And we also denote p̄ as
the distribution resulting from averaging p̃ (✓|D, (y, x)) over different unseen samples from the
data-generating distribution (y, x) ⇠ ⌫(y, x):
                                                 ⇥                ⇤
                                 p̄ (✓|D) = E⌫ p̃ (✓|D, (y, x)) .                                 (6)

In this sense, p̄ represents how the posterior p would be, on average, after being updated with a new
sample from the data-generating distribution. This updated posterior contains a bit more information
about the data-generating distribution, compared to p . Using the updated posterior p̄ , the following
result introduces a characterization of the optimality of the Bayesian posterior.
Theorem 4. The gradient of the Bayes loss at = 1 is null, i.e., r B(p )| =1 = 0, if and only if,
                                      Ĝ(p =1 , D) = Ĝ(p̄ =1 , D) .
Insight 2. The Bayesian posterior is optimal if after updating it using the procedure described in
Eq. (6), or in other words, after exposing the Bayesian posterior to more data from the data-generating
distribution, the empirical Gibbs loss over the initial training data remains unchanged.

4    P RIOR M ISSPECIFICATION , L IKELIHOOD M ISSPECIFICATION AND THE CPE
In light of the theoretical characterization of the CPE given above in terms of underfitting, we will
revisit the main arguments by previous works in relation to CPE, and we will show how we can


                                                    4
    (a) No misspecification   (b) Misspecified likelihood I       (c) Misspecified likelihood II   (d) Misspecified prior

Figure 1: 1. The CPE occurs in Bayesian linear regression with exact inference. 2. Model misspecification
can lead to overfitting and a “warm” posterior effect (WPE). Every column displays a specific setting, as
indicated in the caption. The first row shows exact Bayesian posterior predictive fits for three different values of
the tempering parameter . The second row shows the Gibbs loss Ĝ(p , D) (aka training loss) and the Bayes
loss B(p ) (aka testing loss) with respect to . The experimental details are given in Appendix C.


provide a new and more nuanced perspective on the underlying implications of the presence of the
CPE. For now, we set aside data augmentation, which will be specifically treated in the next section.
CPE, approximate inference, and NNs: As mentioned in the introduction, several works have
discussed that CPE is an artifact of inappropriate approximate inference methods, especially in the
context of the highly complex posterior that emerge from neural networks (Wenzel et al., 2020). The
main reasoning is that if the approximate inference method is accurate enough, the CPE disappears
(Izmailov et al., 2021). However, Theorem 2 shows that when is made larger than 1, the training loss
of the exact Bayesian posterior decreases; if the test loss decreases too, the exact Bayesian posterior
underfits. Figure 1 shows examples of a Bayesian linear regression model learned on synthetic data.
Here, the exact Bayesian posterior can be computed, and it is clear from Figures 1c and 1d that the
CPE can occur in Bayesian linear regression with exact inference. Although simple, the setting is
articulated specifically to mimic the classification tasks using BNNs where CPE was observed. In
particular, the linear model has more parameters than observations (i.e. it’s overparameterized).
Model misspecification, CPE, and underfitting: Prior and/or likelihood misspecification can lead
Bayesian methods to both underfitting or overfitting. Both cases have been widely discussed in
the literature (Domingos, 2000; Immer et al., 2021; Kapoor et al., 2022). We illustrate this using
a Bayesian linear regression model: Figures 1c and 1d show how the Bayesian posterior underfits
due to likelihood and prior misspecification, respectively. On the other hand, Figure 1b illustrates
a scenario where likelihood misspecification can perfectly lead to overfitting as well, giving rise to
what we term a “warm” posterior effect (WPE), i.e., there exists other posteriors (p with < 1)
with lower testing loss, which, at the same time, also have higher training loss due to Theorem 2.
The prior misspecification argument: As discussed in previous works, such as in Wenzel et al.
(2020); Fortuin et al. (2022), isotropic Gaussian priors are commonly chosen in modern Bayesian
neural networks for the sake of tractability in approximate Bayesian inference rather than chosen
based on their alignment with our actual beliefs. Given that the presence of the CPE implies that
either the likelihood and/or the prior are misspecified, and given that neural networks define highly
flexible likelihood functions, there are strong reasons for thinking these commonly used priors are
misspecified. Notably, the experiments conducted by Fortuin et al. (2022) demonstrate that the CPE
can be mitigated in fully connected neural networks when using heavy-tailed prior distributions that
better capture the weight characteristics typically observed in such networks. However, such priors
were found to be ineffective in addressing the CPE in convolutional neural networks (Fortuin et al.,
2022), indicating the challenges involved in designing effective Bayesian priors within this context.
Our theoretical analysis offers a more nuanced perspective on these findings: according to our
analysis, if there is no underfitting, there is no CPE. Therefore, under the assumption that the


                                                              5
  (a) Narrow prior and   (b) Narrow prior and   (c) Standard prior and   (d) Random crop and    (e) Pixels randomly
      standard softmax      tempered softmax        standard softmax          horizontal flip          shuffled

Figure 2: Experimental illustrations for the arguments in Sections 4 and 5 using small CNN via SGLD on
MNIST. We show similar results on Fashion-MNIST with small CNN and CIFAR-10(0) with ResNet-18
in Appendix C. Figures 2a to 2c illustrate the arguments in Section 4, while Figures 2c to 2e illustrate the
arguments in Section 5. Figure 2c uses the standard prior ( = 1) and the standard softmax ( = 1) for the
likelihood without applying DA. Figure 2a follows a similar setup except for using a narrow prior. Figure 2b
uses a narrow prior as in Figure 2a but with a tempered softmax that results in a lower aleatoric uncertainty.
Figure 2d follows the setup as in Figure 2c but with standard DA applied, while Figure 2e uses fabricated DA.
We report the training loss Ĝ(p , D) and the testing losses B(p ) and G(p ) from 10 samples of the small
Convolutional neural network (CNN) via Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD). We show the mean
and standard error across three different seeds. For additional experimental details, please refer to Appendix C.


  (a) Narrow prior and   (b) Narrow prior and   (c) Standard prior and   (d) Random crop and    (e) Pixels randomly
      standard softmax      tempered softmax        standard softmax          horizontal flip          shuffled

Figure 3: Experimental illustrations for the arguments in Sections 4 and 5 using large CNN via SGLD on
MNIST. We show similar results on Fashion-MNIST with large CNN and CIFAR-10(0) with ResNet-50 in
Appendix C. The experiment setup is similar to the setups in Figure 2 but with a large CNN. Please refer to
Appendix C for further details on the model.


likelihood function defined by a large NN is flexible enough and is not misspecified, underfitting
arises when the prior is not placing enough probability mass on models that effectively explain the
training data and generalize well. Consequently, the resulting Bayesian posterior will also not place
enough probability mass on those models. When this happens, our analysis shows that by increasing
the parameter , we discount the impact of the prior, which reduces the “regularization effect” of the
prior, alleviating the underfitting and resulting in improved training and predictive performance. In
short, our analysis suggests that commonly used Bayesian priors overegularize.
Figures 2a and 2c exemplify this situation: when the prior is too narrow ( = 0.0005) and induces a
very strong regularization, the resulting posterior severely underfits the training data and leads to a
high empirical Gibbs loss that deviates significantly from zero (Figure 2a). We also observe a strong
CPE in this case, i.e., the Bayes loss B(p ) significantly decreases when > 1. However, by using a
flatter prior (Figure 2c) there is less underfitting, and the CPE is considerably diminished.
The likelihood misspecification argument: Likelihood misspecification has also been identified as
a cause of CPE, especially in cases where the dataset has been curated (Aitchison, 2021; Kapoor
et al., 2022). Data curation often involves carefully selecting samples and labels to improve the
quality of the dataset. As a result, the curated data-generating distribution typically presents very low
aleatoric uncertainty, meaning that ⌫(y|x) usually takes values very close to either 1 or 0. However,
the standard likelihoods used in deep learning, like softmax or sigmoid, implicitly assume a higher
level of aleatoric uncertainty in the data (Aitchison, 2021; Kapoor et al., 2022). Therefore, their use
in curated datasets, that exhibit low uncertainty, made them misspecified (Kapoor et al., 2022; Fortuin
et al., 2022). To address this issue, alternative likelihood functions like the Noisy-Dirichlet model
(Kapoor et al., 2022, Section 4) have been proposed, which better align with the characteristics of the
curated data. On the other hand, introducing noise labels also alleviates the CPE, as demonstrated
in Aitchison (2021, Figure 7). By introducing noise labels, we intentionally increase aleatoric
uncertainty in the data-generating distribution, which aligns better with the high aleatoric uncertainty


                                                          6
assumed by the standard Bayesian deep networks (Kapoor et al., 2022). Consequently, according to
these works, the CPE can be strongly alleviated when the likelihood misspecification is addressed.
Our theoretical analysis aligns with these findings. However, we can say that the key underlying
cause of CPE under data curation is the underfitting induced by likelihood misspecification. The
presence of underfitting is not mentioned at all by any of these previous works (Aitchison, 2021;
Kapoor et al., 2022). However, it is obvious that fitting low aleatoric uncertainty data-generating
distributions, e.g., ⌫(y|x) 2 {0.01, 0.99}, with high aleatoric uncertainty likelihood functions e.g.,
p(y|x, ✓) 2 [0.2, 0.8], induces underfitting. In this case, raising the likelihood function to a power
larger than 1, i.e., p(y|x, ✓) for > 1, allows the likelihood to capture the low-level aleatoric
uncertainty distributions better, which helps alleviate underfitting and CPE.
Figures 2a and 2b illustrate this point. Specifically, Figure 2b depicts a binary classification situation,
using the same narrow prior as in Figure 2a. However, it uses a tempered softmax model defined by
p(y|x, ✓) = (1 + exp(        logits(x,✓))) 1 with = 2. In this case, the tempered softmax model can
better represent distributions with lower aleatoric uncertainty compared to when = 1, corresponding
to the likelihood function used in Figure 2a. Therefore, Figure 2b has a milder CPE compared with
Figure 2a. However, it is important to note that the interplay between the likelihood and the prior
cannot be ignored.

Model size, CPE, and underfitting: Larger models have the capacity to fit data more effectively,
while smaller models are more likely to underfit. As we have argued that if there is no underfitting,
there is no CPE, we expect that the size of the model has an impact on the strength of CPE as well,
as demonstrated in Figure 2 and Figure 3. Specifically, in our experiments presented in Figure 2,
we utilize a relatively small convolutional neural network (CNN), which has a more pronounced
underfitting behavior, and this indeed corresponds to a stronger CPE. On the other hand, we employ a
larger CNN in Figure 3, which has less underfitting, and we see the CPE is strongly alleviated.

5    DATA AUGMENTATION (DA) AND THE CPE
Machine learning is applied to many different fields and problems, and in many of them, the data-
generating distribution is known to have properties that can be exploited to artificially generate new
data samples (Shorten and Khoshgoftaar, 2019). This is commonly known as data augmentation (DA)
and relies on the property that for a given set of transformations T , the data-generating distribution
satisfies ⌫(y|x) = ⌫(y|t(x)) for all t 2 T . In practice, not all the transformations are applied to
every single data. Instead, a probability distribution (usually uniform) µT is defined over T , and
augmented samples are drawn accordingly. As argued in Nabarro et al. (2022), the use of data
augmentation when training Bayesian neural networks implicitly targets the following (pseudo)
log-likelihood, denoted L̂DA (D, ✓) and defined as
                                         1 X
                         L̂DA (D, ✓) =          Et⇠µT [ ln p(y i |t(xi ), ✓)] ,                     (7)
                                         n
                                           i2[n]

where data augmentation provides unbiased estimates of the expectation under the set of transforma-
tions using Monte Carlo samples (i.e., random data augmentations).
Although some argue that this data-augmented (pseudo) log-likelihood “does not have a clean
interpretation as a valid likelihood function” (Wenzel et al., 2020; Izmailov et al., 2021), we do not
need to enter into this discussion to understand why the CPE emerges when using the generalized
Bayes posterior (Bissiri et al., 2016) associated to this (pseudo) log-likelihood, which is the main goal
of this section. We call this posterior the DA-tempered posterior and is denoted by pDA (✓|D). The
DA-tempered posterior can be expressed as the global minimizer of the following learning objective,
                                                                1
                   pDA (✓|D) = arg min E⇢ [nL̂DA (D, ✓)] + KL(⇢(✓|D), p(✓)) .                         (8)
                                     ⇢

This is similar to Eq. (3) but now using L̂DA (D, ✓) instead of L̂(D, ✓), where we recall the notation
L̂(D, ✓) = n1 ln p(D|✓). Hence, the resulting DA-tempered posterior is given by pDA (✓|D) /
e n L̂DA (D,✓) p(✓). In comparison, the tempered posterior p (✓|D) in Eq. (2) can be similarly
expressed as e n L̂(D,✓) p(✓).


                                                    7
There is large empirical evidence that DA induces a stronger CPE (Wenzel et al., 2020; Izmailov
et al., 2021; Fortuin et al., 2022). Indeed, many of these studies show that if CPE is not present in
our Bayesian learning settings, using DA makes it appear. According to our previous analysis, this
means that the use of DA induces underfitting. To understand why this is case, we will take a step
back and begin analyzing the impact of DA in the so-called Gibbs loss of the DA-Bayesian posterior
pDA=1 rather than the Bayes loss, as this will help us in understanding this puzzling phenomenon.

5.1   DATA AUGMENTATION AND CPE ON THE G IBBS LOSS

The expected Gibbs loss of a given posterior ⇢, denoted G(⇢), is a commonly used metric in the
theoretical analysis of the generalization performance of Bayesian methods (Germain et al., 2016;
Masegosa, 2020). The Gibbs loss represents the average of the expected log-loss of individual models
under the posterior ⇢, that is,
                             G(⇢) = E⇢ [L(✓)] = E⇢ [E⌫ [ ln[p(y|x, ✓)]] .
In fact, Jensen’s inequality confirms that the expected Gibbs loss serves as an upper bound for the
Bayes loss, i.e., G(⇢) B(⇢). This property supports the expected Gibbs loss to act as a proxy of
the Bayes loss, which justifies its usage in gaining insights into how DA impacts the CPE.
We will now study whether data augmentation can cause a CPE on the Gibb loss. In other words, we
will examine whether increasing the parameter of the DA-tempered posterior leads to a reduction
in the Gibbs loss. This can be formalized by extending Definition 1 to the expected Gibbs loss by
considering its gradient r G(p ) at = 1, which can be represented as follows:
                            r G(p )| =1 =      COVp =1 nL̂(D, ✓), L(✓) .                              (9)
Where COV(X, Y ) denotes the covariance of X and Y . Again, due to the page limit, we postpone
the necessary proofs in this section to Appendix B.
With this extended definition, if Eq. (9) is negative, we can infer the presence of CPE for the
Gibbs loss as well. Based on this, we say that DA induces a stronger CPE if the gradient of the
expected Gibbs loss for the DA-tempered posterior exhibits a more negative trend at = 1, i.e., if
r G(pDA )| =1 < r G(p )| =1 .This condition can be equivalently stated as
                COVp =1 nL̂DA (D, ✓), L(✓) > COVp =1 nL̂(D, ✓), L(✓) > 0 .                           (10)
                       DA

The inequality presented above helps characterize and understand the occurrence of a stronger CPE
when using DA. A stronger CPE arises if the expected Gibbs loss of a model L(✓) is more correlated
with the empirical Gibbs loss of this model on the augmented training dataset L̂DA (D, ✓) than on the
non-augmented dataset L̂(D, ✓). This observation suggests that, if we empirically observe that the
CPE is stronger when using an augmented dataset, the set of transformations T used to generate the
augmented dataset are introducing valuable information about the data-generating process.
The plots of the last three columns in Figure 2 clearly illustrate such situations. Figure 2d shows
that, compared to Figure 2c, the standard DA, which makes use of the invariances inherent in the
data-generating distribution, induces a CPE on the Gibbs loss. Thus, the condition in Eq. (10) holds
by definition. On the other hand, Figure 2e uses a fabricated DA, where the same permutation is
applied to the pixels of the images in the training dataset, which destroys low-level features present
in the data-generating distribution. In this case, the gradient of the Gibb loss is positive, and Eq. (10)
holds in the opposite direction. These findings align perfectly with the explanations provided above.

5.2   DATA AUGMENTATION AND CPE ON THE BAYES LOSS

Now, we step aside of the Gibbs loss and focus back to the Bayes loss. The gradient of the Bayes loss
at = 1 can also be written as,
                                                     ⇣                     ⌘
                      r B(p )| =1 = COVp =1 nL̂(D, ✓), Sp =1 (✓) ,                              (11)

where for any posterior ⇢, S⇢ (✓) is a (negative) performance measure defined as
                                                  
                                                      p(y|x, ✓)
                                  S⇢ (✓) = E⌫                      .                                 (12)
                                                    E⇢ [p(y|x, ✓)]

                                                    8
This function measures the relative performance of a model parameterized by ✓ compared to the
average performance of the models weighted by ⇢. Such measure is conducted on samples from the
data-generating distribution ⌫(y, x). Specifically, if the model ✓ outperforms the average, we have
S⇢ (✓) < 1, and if the model performs worse than the average, we have Sp (✓) > 1 (i.e., the lower
the better). The derivations of the above equations are given in Appendix B.
According to Definition 1 and Eq. (11), DA will induce a stronger CPE if and only if the following
condition is satisfied:
                        ⇣                    ⌘               ⇣                    ⌘
             COVp =1 nL̂DA (D, ✓), Sp =1 (✓) > COVp =1 nL̂(D, ✓), Sp =1 (✓) .                 (13)
                   DA                    DA


The previous analysis on the Gibbs loss remains applicable in this context, with the use of S⇢ (✓) as a
metric for the expected performance on the true data-generating distribution instead of L(✓). While
these metrics are slightly different, it is reasonable to assume that the same arguments we presented to
explain the CPE under data augmentation for the Gibbs loss also apply here. The theoretical analysis
aligns with the behavior of the Bayes loss as depicted in Figure 2.
Finally, comparing Figure 2d with Figure 3d, we also notice that using a larger neural network enables
us to mitigate the CPE because we reduce the underfitting introduced by DA.

Related work of the data augmentation argument. The relation between data augmentation and
CPE is an active topic of discussion (Wenzel et al., 2020; Izmailov et al., 2021; Noci et al., 2021;
Nabarro et al., 2022). Some studies suggest that CPE is an artifact of DA because turning off data
augmentation is enough to eliminate the CPE (Izmailov et al., 2021; Fortuin et al., 2022). Our study
shows that this is much more than an artifact, as also argued in Nabarro et al. (2022). As discussed,
the (pseudo) log-likelihood induced by standard DA is a better proxy of the expected log-loss, in the
precise sense given by Eq. (10) and Eq. (13).
Other works argue that, when using DA, we are not using a proper likelihood function (Izmailov et al.,
2021), and that could be problem. Recent works (Nabarro et al., 2022) have developed principle
likelihood functions that integrate DA-based approaches, hoping that this will remove CPE. But they
find that CPE still persist. As the methodology described here applies to any likelihood function, we
can say that in the experiments of Nabarro et al. (2022) (Figure 4) are also underfitting, and Eq. (13)
is satisfied. In fact, probably Eq. (10) is satisfied too.
Another widely accepted viewpoint regarding the interplay between the CPE and DA is that DA
increases the effective sample size (Izmailov et al., 2021; Noci et al., 2021), “intuitively, data
augmentation increases the amount of data observed by the model, and should lead to higher
posterior contraction” (Izmailov et al., 2021). In that sense, our study aligns with this interpretation
because CPE needs higher values to alleviate underfitting, which, in turn, leads to higher posterior
concentration. But, our analysis is more nuanced because we show that DA only induces CPE
if it provides meaningful information about the data-generating process. Thus, higher posterior
concentration in the context of non-meaningful DA does not improve performance; as discussed
before, Figure 2e illustrates this situation.

6    C ONCLUSIONS
In this work, we show that the presence of CPE implies that the Bayesian posterior is underfitting.
As discussed in previous works, CPE also implies that that the likelihood and/or the prior are
misspecified. In consequence, it is reasonable to deduce that CPE is a problem of underfitting induced
by poorly specified likelihoods (e.g., softmax-based likelihoods on curated datasets) and/or priors
(e.g., overregularizing priors).
This insight provides a practical recommendation for addressing CPE: to use more powerful likelihood
functions (e.g., by using larger models) and better specified priors that do not overregularize. This
seems to be specially relevant when using DA because, as discussed above, it induces a stronger CPE
because the augmented data contains more information about the data-generating distribution and, in
consequence, it is safer to fit it further. At the same time, tuning the hyper-parameter is also a valid
strategy to improve performance but, also, to detect if the Bayesian posterior underfits.



                                                   9
R EFERENCES
Martín Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S. Corrado, Andy
  Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow, Andrew Harp, Geoffrey Irving,
  Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Dandelion
  Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Murray, Chris Olah, Mike Schuster, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit
  Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul Tucker, Vincent Vanhoucke, Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas,
  Oriol Vinyals, Pete Warden, Martin Wattenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. TensorFlow:
  Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems, 2015. URL https://www.tensorflow.
  org/. Software available from tensorflow.org.

Laurence Aitchison. A statistical theory of cold posteriors in deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.

Pierre Alquier, James Ridgway, and Nicolas Chopin. On the properties of variational approximations of Gibbs
   posteriors. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):8374–8414, 2016.

Gregor Bachmann, Lorenzo Noci, and Thomas Hofmann. How tempering fixes data augmentation in bayesian
  neural networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.

Andrew Barron and Thomas Cover. Minimum complexity density estimation. IEEE Transactions on Information
  Theory, 1991.

Pier Giovanni Bissiri, Chris C Holmes, and Stephen G Walker. A general framework for updating belief
   distributions. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 78(5):1103–1130,
   2016.

David M Blei, Alp Kucukelbir, and Jon D McAuliffe. Variational inference: A review for statisticians. Journal
  of the American Statistical Association, 112(518):859–877, 2017.

François Chollet et al. Keras. https://keras.io, 2015.

Joshua V Dillon, Ian Langmore, Dustin Tran, Eugene Brevdo, Srinivas Vasudevan, Dave Moore, Brian Patton,
  Alex Alemi, Matt Hoffman, and Rif A Saurous. Tensorflow distributions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.10604,
   2017.

Pedro Domingos. Bayesian averaging of classifiers and the overfitting problem. In ICML, 2000.

Vincent Fortuin, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Sebastian W Ober, Florian Wenzel, Gunnar Ratsch, Richard E Turner,
  Mark van der Wilk, and Laurence Aitchison. Bayesian neural network priors revisited. In Proceedings of the
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.

Andrew Gelman, John B Carlin, Hal S Stern, David B Dunson, Aki Vehtari, and Donald B Rubin. Bayesian
  data analysis. CRC press, 2013.

Pascal Germain, Francis Bach, Alexandre Lacoste, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. PAC-Bayesian theory meets
  Bayesian inference. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1884–1892, 2016.

Peter Grünwald and Thijs van Ommen. Inconsistency of bayesian inference for misspecified linear models, and
  a proposal for repairing it. Bayesian Analysis, 12(4):1069–1103, 2017.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 770–778, 2016.

Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick, Shakir Mohamed,
   and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained variational framework.
   In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.

Alexander Immer, Maciej Korzepa, and Matthias Bauer. Improving predictions of bayesian neural nets via local
  linearization. In International conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pages 703–711. PMLR,
  2021.

Pavel Izmailov, Sharad Vikram, Matthew D Hoffman, and Andrew Gordon Gordon Wilson. What are bayesian
  neural network posteriors really like? In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2021.

Sanyam Kapoor, Wesley J Maddox, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew G Wilson. On uncertainty, tempering, and
  data augmentation in bayesian classification. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2022.


                                                      10
A. Krizhevsky. Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images. Technical report, Univ. Toronto, 2009.

Yann LeCun and Corinna Cortes. MNIST handwritten digit database. 2010. URL http://yann.lecun.
  com/exdb/mnist/.

Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to document
  recognition. Proc. IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.

Andrés R Masegosa. Learning under model misspecification: Applications to variational and ensemble methods.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Warren R. Morningstar, Alex Alemi, and Joshua V. Dillon. Pacm-bayes: Narrowing the empirical risk gap in the
  misspecified bayesian regime. In AISTATS, volume 151 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
  8270–8298. PMLR, 2022.
Seth Nabarro, Stoil Ganev, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Vincent Fortuin, Mark van der Wilk, and Laurence Aitchison.
  Data augmentation in bayesian neural networks and the cold posterior effect. In Proceedings of the Conference
  on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2022.
Lorenzo Noci, Kevin Roth, Gregor Bachmann, Sebastian Nowozin, and Thomas Hofmann. Disentangling the
  roles of curation, data-augmentation and the prior in the cold posterior effect. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen,
  Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward Z. Yang, Zachary
  DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and
  Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In NeurIPS, pages
  8024–8035, 2019.

Connor Shorten and Taghi M Khoshgoftaar. A survey on image data augmentation for deep learning. Journal of
  big data, 6(1):1–48, 2019.

Max Welling and Yee Whye Teh. Bayesian learning via stochastic gradient langevin dynamics. In ICML, pages
  681–688. Omnipress, 2011.

Florian Wenzel, Kevin Roth, Bastiaan Veeling, Jakub Swiatkowski, Linh Tran, Stephan Mandt, Jasper Snoek,
  Tim Salimans, Rodolphe Jenatton, and Sebastian Nowozin. How good is the bayes posterior in deep neural
   networks really? In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.

Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-MNIST: a novel image dataset for benchmarking machine
  learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.

Ruqi Zhang, Chunyuan Li, Jianyi Zhang, Changyou Chen, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Cyclical stochastic
  gradient mcmc for bayesian deep learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Tong Zhang. From "-entropy to kl-entropy: Analysis of minimum information complexity density estimation.
  Annals of Statistics, 2006.

Yijie Zhang and Eric Nalisnick. On the inconsistency of bayesian inference for misspecified neural networks. In
  Third Symposium on Advances in Approximate Bayesian Inference, 2021. URL https://openreview.
   net/forum?id=vfZtrgabCr.


                                                      11
