Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F EDERATED Z EROTH -O RDER O PTIMIZATION USING
T RAJECTORY-I NFORMED S URROGATE G RADIENTS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                A BSTRACT

          Federated optimization, an emerging paradigm which finds wide real-world ap-
          plications such as federated learning, enables multiple clients (e.g., edge devices)
          to collaboratively optimize a global function. The clients do not share their local
          datasets and typically only share their local gradients. However, the gradient in-
          formation is not available in many applications of federated optimization, which
          hence gives rise to the paradigm of federated zeroth-order optimization (ZOO).
          Existing federated ZOO algorithms typically suffer from the limitations of query
          and communication round inefficiency, which can be attributed to (a) their reliance
          on a substantial number of function queries for gradient estimation and (b) the
          significant disparity between their realized local updates and the intended global
          updates. To this end, we (a) introduce trajectory-informed gradient surrogates
          which is able to use the history of function queries during optimization for accurate
          and query-efficient gradient estimation, and (b) develop the technique of adaptive
          gradient correction using these gradient surrogates to mitigate the aforementioned
          disparity. With these, we propose the federated zeroth-order optimization using
          trajectory-informed surrogate gradients (FZooS) algorithm for query- and commu-
          nication round-efficient federated ZOO. FZooS achieves theoretical improvements
          over the existing approaches, which is supported by our real-world experiments on
          federated black-box adversarial attack and non-differentiable metric optimization.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Due to the growing computational power of edge devices and increasing privacy concerns, recent
years have witnessed a surging interest in federated optimization, which finds real-world applications
such as federated learning (McMahan et al., 2017a). Federated optimization allows the agents to
retain their local datasets but share their locally computed gradients. However, in many important
applications of federated optimization such as federated black-box adversarial attack (Fang et al.,
2022), the gradient information is not available. This gives rise to the paradigm of federated zeroth-
order optimization (ZOO), in which the global function to be optimized is an aggregation of the
local functions that are distributed on edge devices (i.e., clients) and are only accessible via function
queries (Fang et al., 2022). To tackle federated ZOO, existing algorithms (Fang et al., 2022) follow
the framework of using finite difference (FD) for local gradient estimation and hence resorting to
federated first-order optimization (FOO) algorithms (e.g., FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017b)) for
optimization.1 Nevertheless, these algorithms usually suffer from both query and communication
round inefficiency for local and global functions that are not only expensive-to-evaluate but also
heterogeneous. This impedes their practical applicability, especially in the scenarios with restricted
query times and communication rounds. However, little attention has been dedicated to achieving
query- and communication round-efficient federated ZOO algorithms in the literature.
To address this problem, it is imperative to firstly identify the challenges faced by existing federated
ZOO algorithms which are responsible for their query and communication round inefficiency (Sec. 3).
Federated ZOO requires multiple communication rounds for central server aggregation; between
consecutive communication rounds, every client performs several iterations of local optimization
   1
     So, existing federated FOO algorithms (e.g., FedProx (Li et al., 2020a), SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al.,
2020a) and etc.) can be easily adapted to this framework (refer to Sec. 3). We refer to this simple integration of
FD methods and federated FOO algorithms as the existing federated ZOO algorithms throughout this paper.


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


using their estimated gradients which are usually approximated via additional function queries
(e.g., based on FD). Firstly, we show (Sec. 3) that the query inefficiency of existing federated ZOO
algorithms arises from their employment of FD for local gradient estimation, which often requires
an excessive number of additional function queries. Therefore, addressing the challenge of query
efficiency in federated ZOO calls for a gradient estimation method that requires minimal (ideally zero)
additional function queries. Secondly, we show (Sec. 3) that the communication round inefficiency
of these existing algorithms results from the disparity between their realized local updates and the
intended global updates, which is typically caused by client heterogeneity. Hence, resolving the
challenge of communication round efficiency requires developing a high-quality gradient correction
technique to mitigate such a disparity.
To this end, we propose the federated zeroth-order optimization using trajectory-informed surrogate
gradients (FZooS) algorithm to address the aforementioned challenges, and hence to achieve query-
and communication round-efficient federated ZOO. Firstly, we introduce the recent derived Gaus-
sian process (Shu et al., 2023), which only requires the optimization trajectory (i.e., the history of
function queries during optimization) for gradient estimation, as the local gradient surrogates for the
clients, thereby realizing query-efficient gradient estimation in federated ZOO (Sec. 4.1). Secondly,
based on these local gradient surrogates, we use random Fourier features (RFF) approximation
(Rahimi and Recht, 2007) to produce a transferable global gradient surrogate (without transferring
raw observations), which is an accurate estimate of the gradient of the global function (Sec. 4.2.1).
Using these surrogates, we develop the technique of adaptive gradient correction using adaptive gra-
dient correction vector and length to mitigate the disparity between our local updates and the intended
global updates, and consequently to improve the communication round efficiency of federated ZOO
(Sec. 4.2.2).
We verify that our FZooS has addressed the aforementioned challenges via both theoretical analysis
and empirical experiments. We firstly theoretically bound the disparity between our realized local
updates in FZooS and the intended global updates in the federated ZOO problems with heterogeneous
clients. It shows that our local update is superior to those employed by the previous works because it
achieves both a better query efficiency and smaller disparity error (Sec. 5.1). Based on this, we then
prove the convergence of our FZooS and show that FZooS also enjoys an improved communication
round efficiency over the existing algorithms (Sec. 5.2). Lastly, we use extensive experiments, such
as synthetic experiments, federated black-box adversarial attack and federated non-differentiable
metric optimization, to show that our FZooS consistently outperforms the existing federated ZOO
algorithms in terms of both query efficiency and communication round efficiency (Sec. 6).

2    P ROBLEM S ETUP AND N OTATIONS
In the federated zeroth-order optimization (ZOO) setting (Fang et al., 2022), we aim to minimize
a global function F defined on the domain X Ōē£ [0, 1]d , which is the arithmetic average of N local
functions {f1 , ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , fN } distributed on N different clients with |fi (x)| Ōēż 1 for any x Ōłł X and
i Ōłł [N ] without sharing these local functions:
                                                     1P
                                       min F (x) Ōē£             fi (x).                                 (1)
                                       xŌłłX          N iŌłł[N ]
A central server is typically introduced to periodically aggregate the updated inputs sent from the
distributed clients after their several iterations of local optimization. Of note, in this federated
ZOO setting, the gradients of the local functions are either not accessible or too computationally
expensive to obtain. Consequently, the gradients can not be directly employed for optimization,
which is our main difference from the standard federated first-order optimization (FOO) setting
(Konec╠īny╠Ć et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2021; Reddi et al., 2021). Instead, given an input x Ōłł X , agent
i is only allowed to observe a noisy output yi (x) Ōē£ fi (x) + ╬Č of the local function fi , in which
╬Č Ōł╝ N (0, Žā 2 ). Moreover, we focus on federated ZOO with heterogeneous clients, i.e., the local
functions {fi }N  i=1 differ from the global function F . Besides, we adopt a common assumption on
{fi }N
     i=1 : We    assume   that every local function fi is sampled from a Gaussian process (GP), i.e.,
fi Ōł╝ GP(┬Ą(┬Ę), k(┬Ę, ┬Ę)) (Shu et al., 2023), in which k is a shift-invariant kernel and is assumed to have
ŌłźŌłéz ŌłézŌĆ▓ k(z, z ŌĆ▓ )|z=zŌĆ▓ =x Ōłź Ōēż ╬║, ŌłźŌłéz k(z, xŌĆ▓ )|z=x Ōłź Ōēż L (ŌłĆx, xŌĆ▓ Ōłł X ) for some ╬║ > 0 and L > 0.
This encompasses commonly used kernels such as the squared exponential kernel (Rasmussen and
Williams, 2006). Unless specified otherwise, we use Ōłź ┬Ę Ōłź to denote the norm Ōłź ┬Ę Ōłź2 and [Z] to denote
the set {1, ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , Z}. We will use i Ōłł [N ] to denote the formulas related to client i in this paper.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     F RAMEWORK AND C HALLENGES FOR F EDERATED ZOO
Here we firstly summarize the framework to solve the federated ZOO problem (Sec. 3.1), and then
identify the challenges which existing algorithms following this framework fail to address (Sec. 3.2).

3.1   O PTIMIZATION F RAMEWORK

To solve (1), a general optimization framework is to estimate the gradients of {fi }N      i=1 using only
function queries and then employ the standard federated FOO algorithms for the optimization, as in
Algo. 1. Specifically, in round r, every client performs T iterations of local gradient decent updates
                                              (i)
in parallel (line 2-5 of Algo. 1), in which gbr,tŌłÆ1 Ōłł Rd denotes the estimated gradient by client i for
the local update in iteration t of round r. After that, each client sends its locally updated input x(i) r,T
to server (line 6 of Algo. 1). After receiving the updated inputs from all clients (i.e., {x(i)   N
                                                                                             r,T }i=1 ), the
server aggregates them (e.g., via arithmetic average) to produce a globally updated input xr , and then
sends it back to the clients for the optimization in the next round (line 7-8 of Algo. 1).
                     (i)
The aforementioned gbr,tŌłÆ1   used in the literature can
                                                        be summarized into the
                                                                               following general form:
                           (i)        (i)        (i)                (i)
                         gbr,tŌłÆ1 Ōē£ gr,tŌłÆ1 + ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ )                         (2)
         (i)
where gr,tŌłÆ1  Ōłł Rd is an estimate of Ōłćfi (x(i)  r,tŌłÆ1 ) and is usually obtained using the finite difference
(FD) methods (refer to Sec. 3.2). In addition, the gradient correction vector grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1   (i)
                                                                                                       (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ) Ōłł
  d                                                                                               (i)
R is usually obtained from the previous round r ŌłÆ 1. This aims to make the resulting gbr,tŌłÆ1 better
aligned with ŌłćF (x(i)r,tŌłÆ1 ), such that the local update on each client (i.e., line 5 of Algo. 1) can better
approximate the intended global update along the direction of ŌłćF (x(i)    r,tŌłÆ1 ). It is especially important
                                                         N
in the presence of client heterogeneity, i.e., {Ōłćfi }i=1 differ from ŌłćF . Intuitively, to accomplish
this alignment, grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) and grŌłÆ1
                                  (i)
                                      (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ) should be good estimates of ŌłćF (x(i)                        (i)
                                                                                    r,tŌłÆ1 ) and Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ),
respectively, which we theoretically justify in Sec. 3.2. Of note, the form of grŌłÆ1 (x ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ )
                                                                                              ŌĆ▓       (i)

for gradient correction usually aims to ensure that the estimation biases from grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) and grŌłÆ1    (i)
                                                                                                           (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ )
                                                             (i)
could cancel out (Johnson and Zhang, 2013). Finally, ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 Ōłł [0, 1] denotes the gradient correction
length, which can be adjusted to trade off the utilization of the gradient correction vector (Sec. 3.2).
Remarkably, (2) subsumes the forms of gradient updates employed in many existing federated
ZOO algorithms, and hence Algo. 1 can reduce to the corresponding optimization algorithms (more
                                     (i)                (i)
details in Appx. D). E.g., when ╬│r,tŌłÆ1     = 0 and gr,tŌłÆ1     is obtained using FD, Algo. 1 becomes
                                                                                  PN,T (i)
the FedZO algorithm (Fang et al., 2022); when ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 =1, grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ )= N1T i,t=1 grŌłÆ1,tŌłÆ1
                                                        (i)
                                                                                                    , and
  (i)   ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓    1
                PT      (i)
grŌłÆ1 (x ) = T t=1 grŌłÆ1,tŌłÆ1 , (2) reduces to the gradient update in (Karimireddy et al., 2020a) and
hence Algo. 1 becomes the SCAFFOLD (Type II) algorithm in the federated ZOO setting; let the
gradient correction vector grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1
                                         (i)
                                             (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ) in (2) be x(i)
                                                                r,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xr , Algo. 1 is then equivalent to
FedProx (Li et al., 2020a) in the federated ZOO setting.

3.2   E XISTING C HALLENGES

Existing federated ZOO algorithms aiming to solve the problem in Sec. 2 typically fail to address the
challenges of query efficiency and communication round efficiency, which we discuss in detail below.

Challenge of Query Efficiency. Similar to standard ZOO algorithms (Nesterov and Spokoiny,
2017; Cheng et al., 2021), existing federated ZOO algorithms (e.g., (Fang et al., 2022)) also commonly
apply the FD methods (Berahas et al., 2022) for gradient estimation. Specifically, given a parameter
╬╗ > 0 and directions {uq }Q q=1 , the gradient of the function fi on client i at x can be estimated as
                                               1 X yi (x + ╬╗uq ) ŌłÆ yi (x)
                      Ōłćfi (x) Ōēł Ōłå(i) (x) Ōē£                                      uq .                  (3)
                                               Q                  ╬╗
                                                    qŌłł[Q]
                                                     (i)
That is, for existing federated ZOO algorithms, gr,tŌłÆ1    = Ōłå(i) (x(i)
                                                                     r,tŌłÆ1 ) in (2). As implied in (3),
Q additional function queries are required for the gradient estimation at every local updated input
x(i)
  r,tŌłÆ1 . This therefore results in N T Q├Ś more function queries than the standard federated FOO
algorithms (Li et al., 2020a; Karimireddy et al., 2020a) in every communication round, which is
unsatisfying in practice especially when {fi }N
                                              i=1 are prohibitively costly to evaluate. So, tackling the
challenge of query efficiency in federated ZOO requires designing query-efficient gradient estimators.


                                                       3
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



  Algorithm 1: The General Optimization          Algorithm 2: FZooS
  Framework for Federated ZOO                    Input: Input of Algo. 1, length ╬│, M features
  Input: Initial x0 , rounds R, learning rate 1 for each round r Ōłł [R] do
          ╬Ę, iterations T for each round,            // Client-Side Update
          number of clients N                  2    for each client i Ōłł [N ] in parallel do
                                                          (i)
1 for each round r Ōłł [R] do                    3        xr,0  ŌåÉ xrŌłÆ1 , Ōłćb   ┬ĄrŌłÆ1 based on wrŌłÆ1
       // Client-Side Update                   4        for each iteration t Ōłł [T ] do
                                                                 (i)                      (i)
2     for each client i Ōłł [N ] in parallel do 5              Ōłć┬Ąr,tŌłÆ1    conditioned on Dr,tŌłÆ1
            (i)
3         xr,0 ŌåÉ xrŌłÆ1                          6
                                                              (i)       (i)         (i)
                                                             xr,t ŌåÉ xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ╬Ę gbr,tŌłÆ1 with (8)
4         for each iteration t Ōłł [T ] do       7        Send x(i)
                                                                r,T to receive xr , query around xr
5              x(i)      (i)
                 r,t ŌåÉ xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ╬Ę g
                                    (i)
                                                        Approx. Ōłć┬Ą(i)                         (i)
                                                                       r,T via RFF to get wr,T
                                   br,tŌłÆ1      8
                   (i)
6         Send xr,T to receive xr back         9        Send wr,T (i)
                                                                      to receive wr back
       // Server-Side Update                         // Server-Side Update
      xr ŌåÉ N1 iŌłł[N ] x(i)
                 P
                                                    xr ŌåÉ N1 iŌłł[N ] x(i)              1            (i)
7
                                                              P                         P
                                                                         r,T , wr ŌåÉ N    iŌłł[N ] wr,T
                            r,T               10
8     Send xr back to each client             11    Send x back first and then w to each client
                                                               r                        r

                                                                   (i)
 Challenge of Communication Round Efficiency. When gbr,tŌłÆ1             = ŌłćF (x(i) r,tŌłÆ1 ) in (2), Algo. 1 is
 then able to attain the convergence of centralized FOO algorithms, which is known to be better than
 the one in the federated setting (Karimireddy et al., 2020a). Therefore, intuitively, the convergence or
 the communication round efficiency (i.e., the number of communication rounds R required to achieve
 an ŽĄ convergence error) of Algo. 1 depends on the disparity between (2) and ŌłćF (x(i)        r,tŌłÆ1 ). Define
 the gradient disparity ╬×(i)
                          r,t Ōē£ Ōłźbg (i)
                                    r,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF (x(i)
                                                 r,tŌłÆ1  )Ōłź2
                                                            , we propose the following    Prop.  1 (proof in
 Appx. C.1) to show the condition for the best-performing (2) and thus to justify the challenge in
 communication round efficiency that existing federated ZOO algorithms typically fail to address well.
                      (i)
  Proposition 1. Let grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ) ╠Ė= grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ), the minimum of ╬×(i)          (i)
                                                                  r,t w.r.t ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 is achieved when
                                               ŌŖż                                                      ŌłÆ2
            (i)ŌłŚ            (i)         (i)                       (i)                         (i)
   (i)
  ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 = ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 Ōē£ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ gr,tŌłÆ1           grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ) grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ )    .
       (i)ŌłŚ                                   ŌĆ▓           ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓
 When ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 = 1, ╬×(i)                              (i)             (i)        (i)
                   r,t = 0 iff we have grŌłÆ1 (x ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (x ) = ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ gr,tŌłÆ1 .
                                                              (i)
 Prop. 1 shows that to achieve a small gradient disparity, ╬│r,tŌłÆ1   should be adaptive w.r.t. the alignment
 between the gradient correction vector grŌłÆ1 (x ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ) and the drift ŌłćF (x(i)
                                                      ŌĆ▓     (i)                                          (i)
                                                                                             r,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ gr,tŌłÆ1 .
 We have shown (Appx. C.1) that a better alignment between the gradient correction vector and the
 drift leads to a smaller gradient disparity, Prop. 1 further shows that a zero gradient disparity (i.e.,
 ╬×(i)
   r,t = 0 for any r Ōłł [R], t Ōłł [T ]) can be reached when these two are perfectly aligned. To achieve
 such an alignment, i.e., to make grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) = ŌłćF (x(i)                (i)    ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓     (i)
                                                         r,tŌłÆ1 ) and grŌłÆ1 (x ) = gr,tŌłÆ1 hold more likely,
                                                                      (i)
 it requires not only (a) accurate gradient surrogates grŌłÆ1 and grŌłÆ1       to accurately represent ŌłćF and
 Ōłćfi , respectively, but also (b) adaptive xŌĆ▓ , xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ to avoid the discrepancy between xr,tŌłÆ1
                                                                                          (i)
                                                                                                 and xŌĆ▓ , xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ .
  Consequently, resolving the challenge of communication round efficiency in federated ZOO mainly
                                                              (i)
  requires (A) accurate local and global surrogates (i.e., grŌłÆ1   and grŌłÆ1 ) for the gradient correction
  in (2), and (B) adaptive gradient correction in (2) with both adaptive xŌĆ▓ , xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ and adaptive ╬│r,tŌłÆ1
                                                                                                   (i)
                                                                                                        .
  However, existing federated ZOO algorithms usually fail to address them well: Firstly, these al-
  gorithms rely on the FD methods for gradient estimation, which usually lead to poor estimation
  quality and consequently inaccurate gradient correction vectors in (2) when the query budget is very
  limited. Secondly, although x(i)
                                 r,tŌłÆ1 changes during local updates, existing algorithms typically rely
             (i)
  on grŌłÆ1 , grŌłÆ1  evaluated at a fixed input xrŌłÆ1 = xŌĆ▓ = xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ to estimate ŌłćF or Ōłćfi (e.g., (Li et al.,
                                                                                          ŌĆ▓   ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓
  2020a; Karimireddy et al., 2020a)), leading to large discrepancies between x(i)
                                                                               r,tŌłÆ1 and x , x . Thirdly,
                                                                        (i)
  existing algorithms use a fixed gradient correction length (e.g., ╬│r,tŌłÆ1   = 0 in (Fang et al., 2022)
        (i)
  and ╬│r,tŌłÆ1  = 1 in (Karimireddy et al., 2020a)), which is likely to result in misspecified gradient
  correction length.

  4   FZooS A LGORITHM
  To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose our federated zeroth-order optimization using
  trajectory-informed surrogate gradients (FZooS) algorithm in Algo. 2, which improves the query
  and communication round efficiency of existing algorithms thanks to our two major contributions,
  correspondingly. Firstly, we introduce the trajectory-informed derived Gaussian Process in (Shu et al.,


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2023) as local gradient surrogates for query-efficient gradient estimations (Sec. 4.1). Secondly, we
use random Fourier features (RFF) approximation (Rahimi and Recht, 2007) to attain a transferable
global gradient surrogate that can accurately estimate the gradient of the global function (Sec. 4.2.1);
based on these surrogates, we then develop the technique of adaptive gradient correction with both
adaptive gradient correction vector and length for communication round-efficient federated ZOO by
mitigating the disparity between our local updates and the intended global updates (Sec. 4.2.2).
4.1      T RAJECTORY-I NFORMED G RADIENT E STIMATION FOR Q UERY E FFICIENCY

Of note, we assumed that fi Ōł╝ GP(┬Ą(┬Ę), k(┬Ę, ┬Ę)), ŌłĆi Ōłł [N ] (Sec. 2). Then, in iteration t of communica-
                                                                     (i)                (i) T (rŌłÆ1)+tŌłÆ1
tion round r (Algo. 2), conditioned on the optimization trajectory Dr,tŌłÆ1   Ōē£ {(x(i)
                                                                                   Žä , yŽä )}Žä =1
of client i,2 Ōłćfi follows a derived posterior  Gaussian Process   (Shu  et al., 2023):
                                                                   2
                                              (i)           (i)
                             Ōłćfi Ōł╝ GP Ōłć┬Ąr,tŌłÆ1 (┬Ę), Ōłé Žār,tŌłÆ1 (┬Ę, ┬Ę)                                   (4)
                                                                                ŌĆ▓
where the mean function Ōłć┬Ą(i)                                      (i)    2
                          r,tŌłÆ1 (x) and the covariance function Ōłé(Žār,tŌłÆ1 ) (x, x ) are defined as
                                                                    ŌłÆ1
                  (i)               (i)              (i)                 (i)
          Ōłć┬Ąr,tŌłÆ1 (x) Ōē£ Ōłéx kr,tŌłÆ1 (x)ŌŖż Kr,tŌłÆ1 + Žā 2 I     yr,tŌłÆ1 ,
            2                                                            ŌłÆ1                                     (5)
      (i)                                     (i)          (i)                   (i)
   Ōłé Žār,tŌłÆ1 (x, xŌĆ▓ ) Ōē£ Ōłéx ŌłéxŌĆ▓ k(x, xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ Ōłéx kr,tŌłÆ1 (x)ŌŖż Kr,tŌłÆ1 + Žā 2 I     ŌłéxŌĆ▓ kr,tŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) .
      (i)
Both kr,tŌłÆ1 (x)ŌŖż Ōē£ [k(x, x(i) T (rŌłÆ1)+tŌłÆ1
                          Žä )]Žä =1
                                                (i)
                                          and (yr,tŌłÆ1 )ŌŖż Ōē£ [yŽä(i) ]TŽä =1
                                                                      (rŌłÆ1)+tŌłÆ1
                                                                                are [T (r ŌłÆ1)+tŌłÆ1]-
                                                                 T (rŌłÆ1)+tŌłÆ1
dimensional row vectors, and K(i)           (i)  (i)
                                r,tŌłÆ1 Ōē£ [k(xŽä , xŽä ŌĆ▓ )]Žä,Žä ŌĆ▓ =1                is a [T (r ŌłÆ 1) + t ŌłÆ 1] ├Ś [T (r ŌłÆ
1) + t ŌłÆ 1]-dimensional matrix.
We propose to use the posterior mean Ōłć┬Ą(i)   r,tŌłÆ1 (x) (5) as the local gradient surrogate for client i
                                                           (i)
since it is a prediction of the gradient Ōłćfi (x), and Ōłé(Žār,tŌłÆ1  )2 (x) Ōē£ Ōłé(Žār,tŌłÆ1
                                                                              (i)
                                                                                  )2 (x, x) provides a
principled uncertainty measure for this gradient surrogate (Shu et al., 2023). Of note, our gradient
                                                                                              (i)
surrogate only requires the optimization trajectory (i.e., the history of function queries Dr,tŌłÆ1   till
iteration t ŌłÆ 1 of round r) and thus eliminates the need for additional queries required by the FD
methods adopted by existing federated ZOO (Sec. 3.2). This therefore leads to more query-efficient
gradient estimations in federated ZOO. Moreover, the aforementioned uncertainty measure can
theoretically guarantee the quality of our gradient estimation, and provide theoretical support for our
technique of using active queries to further improve the local gradient estimations (Sec. 5.1).

4.2      H IGH -Q UALITY G RADIENT C ORRECTION FOR C OMMUNICATION ROUND E FFICIENCY
4.2.1      T RANSFERABLE G LOBAL G RADIENT S URROGATE
Of note, our local gradient surrogates from Sec. 4.1 can produce not only query-efficient but also
accurate gradient estimations (Shu et al., 2023). So, these local surrogates can be used to construct an
accurate global gradient surrogate, which then satisfies requirement (A) for communication round-
efficient federated ZOO from Sec. 3.2: accurate local and global gradient surrogates. Unfortunately,
due to the non-parametric nature of Gaussian processes, (4) cannot be transferred to the server without
sending the raw observations. To this end, we introduce the idea of random Fourier features (RFF)
approximation from (Rahimi and Recht, 2007) to approximate the mean of (4) and then transfer this
approximated mean to server for the construction of high-quality global gradient surrogate.
We firstly approximate the mean of (4) on each client i Ōłł [N ] to ease its transfer between the clients
and the server. Since k(┬Ę, ┬Ę) is assumed to be shift-invariant, it can be approximated by a finite number
of random features (Rahimi and Recht, 2007). That is, we have that k(x, xŌĆ▓ ) Ōēł ŽĢ(x)ŌŖż ŽĢ(xŌĆ▓ ) where
pre-defined function ŽĢ : Rd 7ŌåÆ RM produces M random features and its parameters are shared across
all clients and the server (Appx. B). By incorporating this approximation into (5), the local gradient
surrogates on each client i at the end of every round r (i.e., Ōłć┬Ą(i) r,T (x)) can then be approximated as
                                                                          ŌłÆ1
                               (i)              ŌŖż (i)       (i)        2        (i)
                          Ōłćb ┬Ą (x) Ōē£ ŌłćŽĢ(x) ╬”
                                  r,T                     K +Žā I
                                                          b
                                                           r,T    r,T         y     r,T                (6)
where ŌłćŽĢ(x) is an M ├Ś d-dimensional matrix, ╬”(i)                 (i) rT
                                                    r,T Ōē£ [ŽĢ(xŽä )]Žä =1 is an M ├Ś rT -dimensional
               (i)        (i)  ŌŖż   (i)  rT
matrix, and K  r,T Ōē£ [ŽĢ(xŽä ) ŽĢ(xŽä ŌĆ▓ )]Žä,Žä ŌĆ▓ =1 is an rT ├Ś rT -dimensional matrix. Define an M -
             b
                             (i)                   2 ŌłÆ1 (i)
dimensional column vector wr,T   Ōē£ ╬”(i)   b (i)
                                     r,T (Kr,T + Žā I)                                    ┬Ą(i)
                                                         yr,T , (6) can be rewritten as Ōłćbr,tŌłÆ1 (x) =
   2
       We slightly abuse notation and use (x(i)  (i)
                                            Žä , yŽä ) to denote a historical query till iteration t ŌłÆ 1 of round r.



                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ŌłćŽĢ(x)ŌŖż wr,T(i)
               (line 8 of Algo. 2). So, each client only needs to calculate and send the M -dimensional
        (i)
vector wr,T  to the server for constructing the global gradient surrogate (line 9 of Algo. 2).
                     (i) N
After receiving {wr,T    }i=1 from all clients, the server can construct the global gradient surrogate at
the end of every round r by averaging the local gradient surrogates (6) from all clients, i.e.,
                                 1P            (i)
                                                                  1P
                                                                                 (i)

                    Ōłćb ┬Ąr (x) Ōē£               br,T (x) = ŌłćŽĢ(x)ŌŖż
                                       iŌłł[N ] ┬Ą                          iŌłł[N ] wr,T .                 (7)
                                 N                                 N
To transfer this global gradient surrogate to clients, we only need to send the M -dimensional vector
          PN
wr Ōē£ N1 i=1 wr,T   (i)
                        back (lines 10-11 of Algo. 2). Importantly, after receiving wr from the server,
each client can calculate the global gradient surrogate at any input in the domain. Although this global
gradient surrogate incurs an additional transmission of M -dimensional vectors compared with existing
federated ZOO algorithms (Algo. 1), it enjoys the advantage of achieving an improved gradient
correction with theoretical guarantees (Sec. 5.1), which is known to be essential for addressing
federated ZOO with heterogeneous clients (Sec. 3.2) and is thus able to outweigh its drawback of
increased transmission burden in practice. To further improve the quality of this surrogate, we can
actively query in the neighbourhood of the updated input xr on every client (line 7 of Algo. 2) as
supported in Sec. 5.1. This incurs an additional server-clients transmission because the transmission
                                   (i)
of the gradient surrogates via wr,T     needs to happen after the active queries (i.e., after the gradient
surrogates are improved), which is consistent with SCAFFOLD (Type I) (Karimireddy et al., 2020a).

4.2.2   A DAPTIVE G RADIENT C ORRECTION
By exploiting our aforementioned high-quality local and global gradient surrogates, we then develop
the technique of adaptive gradient correction to meet requirement (B) for communication round-
efficient federated ZOO from Sec. 3.2. Specifically, thanks to the ability of our gradient surrogates
to estimate the gradient at any input in the domain, we can let xŌĆ▓ = xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ = x(i)  r,tŌłÆ1 in (2) to realize a
more accurate gradient correction vector during optimization. Moreover, we propose to employ an
adaptive gradient correction length ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 (shared across all clients) to better trade off the utilization
of our gradient correction vector during optimization.
                                                                             (i)
That is, for every iteration t of round r, we propose to use the following gbr,tŌłÆ1 on each client i Ōłł [N ]:

              (i)          (i)      (i)                        (i)          (i)      (i)
            gbr,tŌłÆ1 = Ōłć┬Ąr,tŌłÆ1 (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 Ōłćb   ┬ĄrŌłÆ1 (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćb ┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ,           (8)
                                   (i)
(i.e., line 6 of Algo. 2) where Ōłćb
                                 ┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T is the local gradient surrogate of client i with RFF approxima-
tion at the end of round r ŌłÆ 1 from (6), Ōłćb ┬ĄrŌłÆ1 is our global gradient surrogate from (7), and ╬│r,tŌłÆ1
is a theoretically inspired adaptive gradient correction length which we will discuss in Sec. 5.1. Of
note, the advantage of this adaptive gradient correction can be theoretically justified (Sec. 5.1).

5     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
In this section, we present our theoretical analysis on the gradient disparity of our local gradient
update (8) in Sec. 5.1 and the convergence of our FZooS (Algo. 2) in Sec. 5.2.

5.1   G RADIENT D ISPARITY A NALYSIS
                   PN                         2
We assume that N1 i=1 ŌłźŌłćfi (x) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (x)Ōłź Ōēż G for any x Ōłł X , which is a common assumption
in the analysis of federated optimization (Reddi et al., 2021). Here a larger G indicates a larger
degree of client heterogeneity. By making use of the uncertainty measure from (5), we derive an
upper bound on the gradient disparity of our (8) in Thm. 1 below (proof in Appx. C.2).
                                                                       2                 PN
Theorem 1. Define Žüi Ōē£ maxxŌłłX ,rŌēź1,tŌēź1 Ōłé(Žār,t     (i) 2          (i)
                                                     ) (x) / Ōłé Žār,tŌłÆ1    (x) and Žü Ōē£ N1 i=1 Žüi ,
            1                                        1
Žü, Žüi Ōłł[ 1+1/Žā 2 , 1]. Given constant Žē>0 and ŽĄ = O( M ), the following holds with constant probability

         1  X       (i)
                  ╬×r,t Ōēż 4Žē╬║Žü(rŌłÆ1)T +tŌłÆ1 +╬│r,tŌłÆ1
                                              2
                                                  (8Žē╬║Žü(rŌłÆ1)T + 8N ŽĄ) +(1 ŌłÆ ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 )2 |{z}4G .
        N                 |      {z      }        |          {z         }
           iŌłł[N ]
                                  1                          2                              3
                                                                                         G
Corollary 1. Thm. 1 implies a better-performing choice of ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 , i.e., ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 = G+2Žē╬║Žü(rŌłÆ1)T +2N ŽĄ
                                                                                                     .
In the upper bound of Thm. 1, term 1 represents the error of estimating {Ōłćfi (┬Ę)}N  i=1 using our
local gradient surrogates in Sec. 4.1, and term 2 characterizes the disparity between our gradient


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


correction vector in (8) and its corresponding ground truth {ŌłćF (┬Ę) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (┬Ę)}N        i=1 . The ŽĄ within
term 2 denotes the RFF approximation error for our global gradient surrogate in Sec. 4.2.1 and ŽĄ
decreases with a larger number M of random features. Term 3 results from the client heterogeneity
in federated ZOO. Compared with the gradient disparity of existing algorithms (provided in Appx. D),
Thm. 1 shows that our (8) enjoys a number of major advantages: (a) Our (8) is more query-efficient
since it does not require any additional function query for gradient estimation, in contrast to existing
algorithms which incur O(N Q) additional function queries in every iteration. (b) The estimation
error in our (8) (i.e., terms 1 and 2 ) can be exponentially decreasing when Žü < 1 and ŽĄ is small,
whereas other existing algorithms only achieve a reduction rate of O(1/Q), which implies that our
gradient estimation is significantly more accurate. Of note, Žüi < 1 is likely to be satisfied as justified
in (Shu et al., 2023) and more importantly, Žü < 1 is even easier to be realized as it only needs one of
the clients to satisfy Žüi < 1. (c) Our (8) mitigates the disparity caused by the fixed gradient correction
vector adopted by existing works, i.e., inP contrast to FedProx and SCAFFOLD, our Thm. 1 does not
                                              N
contain an additional disparity term of i=1 Ōłźx(i)                    2
                                                     r,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xrŌłÆ1 Ōłź . (d) Our (8) can trade off between
the impacts of our gradient correction vector and client heterogeneity, and can consequently urther
improve the gradient estimation when ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 is chosen intelligently while accounting for this trade-off.
Specifically, the upper bound in Thm. 1 has characterized such a trade-off: When the estimation
error of our gradient correction vector (i.e., term 2 ) is relatively small compared with the client
heterogeneity (i.e., term 3 ), a large ╬│tŌłÆ1 is preferred to reduce the impact of client heterogeneity
and hence to achieve a small gradient disparity. Furthermore, this also implies a theoretically better
choice of ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 in our Cor. 1 (refer to Appx. C.3 for a more practical choice of ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 ).
In addition to the theoretical insights above, Thm. 1 also offers valuable insights to enhance the
practical efficacy of our (8). Firstly, during local updates, we can actively query more function
                                                                       (i) 2
values on each client to further decrease the uncertainty (i.e., Ōłé(Žār,t   ) (x) ) of our local gradient
surrogates, which improves our (8) by decreasing term 1 in Thm. 1 with a larger exponent. Secondly,
after receiving xr from the server (i.e., at the end of every round r of our Algo. 2), we can actively
query in the neighborhood of xr on every client, in order to decrease term 2 in Thm. 1 using a larger
exponent and thus to improve the quality of gradient correction in our (8). Thirdly, we can use a large
number M of random features to achieve a small RFF approximation error ŽĄ in term 2 of Thm. 1.
Fourthly, we can choose an adaptive gradient correction length ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 (e.g., the ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 in Cor. 1) to
better trade off the impacts of the gradient correction and client heterogeneity.

5.2   C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS

We prove the convergence of our FZooS (measured by the number of communication rounds to
achieve ŽĄ convergence error) under different assumptions, in addition to assuming that F is ╬▓-smooth.
                                         2
Theorem 2. Define D0 Ōē£ Ōłźx0 ŌłÆ xŌłŚ Ōłź and D1 Ōē£ F (x0 )ŌłÆF (xŌłŚ ), to achieve an ŽĄ convergence error
for our FZooS (Algo. 2) with a constant probability when Žü < 1, the number M of random features
and the number R of communication rounds need to satisfy the following,
                                                                                         ŌłÜ
                                         1
                                            , M = O NŽĄ2G and R = O ╬ĘT     1
                                                                            ln DŽĄ0 + ln ŽĄG .

   (i) If F is strongly convex and ╬Ę Ōēż 10╬▓T
                                                     2
                                                                                 ŌłÜ    ŌłÜ4

                                 1                                         D0       G+ d2 G
  (ii) If F is convex and ╬Ę Ōēż 10╬▓T  , M = O NŽĄ2G + d ŽĄN4 G and R = O ╬ĘT      ŽĄ +      ŽĄ      .
                                                                              ŌłÜ
                                      7                               D1
                                         , M = O NŽĄ2G and R = O ╬ĘT             G

 (iii) If F is non-convex and ╬Ę Ōēż 100╬▓T                                 ŽĄ + ŽĄ     .
The proof is in Appx. C.5.3 Thm. 2 suggests that the learning rate ╬Ę in FZooS should be proportionally
reduced w.r.t. the number T of local updates, which is in fact consistent with the results in federated
FOO (Karimireddy et al., 2020a). Thm. 2 also shows that when client heterogeneity (i.e., measured
by G) increases, both the number M of random features and the number R of communication rounds
in our FZooS should be increased in order to achieve the same convergence error, which is also
empirically verified in our Sec. 6 and Appx. F. Moreover, Thm. 2 has revealed that given a constant
learning rate ╬Ę that satisfies the conditions in Thm. 2 under various T , a larger T usually improves the
communication round efficiency (i.e., R) of our FZooS (see Appx. F). More importantly, compared
with the convergence of other existing algorithms (provided in Appx. D), FZooS enjoys an improved
   3
     The poor convergence of our FZooS under convex F (vs. the one under non-convex F ) results from the
drawback of the commonly applied proof technique for convex F rather than the algorithm itself. This has been
widely recognized in the literature (Harvey et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2023).


                                                     7
             Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  Client 1               Client 2                      Client 3                      Client 4                        Client 5
                               C = 0:5              C = 5:0             C = 50:0                           C = 0:5                  C = 5:0                  C = 50:0
             0.50
                     3                                                                                3

Similarity   0.25
                2                                                                                     2


                                                                                              F (x)
             F (x)
                1                                                                                     1
             0.00
                     0                                                                                0
                         0    5     20
                                     10      15 0       20
                                                        5    10   015       20     5       10 150             20 5     10 0 15          20       5     010      15 20
                                                    # Rounds                           Iterations                               # Queries (┬Ż10 3 )

                                                     FedZO        FedProx        SCAFFOLD (1)             SCAFFOLD (2)            FZooS

             Figure 1: Comparison of the communication round and query efficiency between our FZooS
             and other existing baselines on the federated synthetic functions with varying client heterogeneity
             (controlled by C Ōēź 0), where a larger C implies larger client heterogeneity. The x-axes of the
             first and last three plots are the number of rounds and total queries required by these algorithms.
             SCAFFOLD (1) and (2) stand for SCAFFOLD (Type I) and SCAFFOLD (Type II) algorithms,
             respectively.

             communication round efficiency, which can be attributed to the advantages of our (8) as discussed in
             Sec. 5.1 (see Appx. D for a detailed comparison).

             6               E XPERIMENTS
             In this section, we demonstrate that our FZooS outperforms existing federated ZOO algorithms using
             synthetic experiments (Sec. 6.1), as well as real-world experiments on federated black-box adversarial
             attack (Sec. 6.2) and federated non-differentiable metric optimization (6.3).

             6.1             S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENTS

             We firstly employ federated synthetic functions to illustrate the superiority of our proposed FZooS
             over a number of existing federated ZOO baselines such as FedZO, FedProx, and SCAFFOLD in
             the federated ZOO setting (see Appx. D for their specific forms). We refer to Appx. E.1 for the
             details of these synthetic functions and the experimental setting applied here. Fig. 1 provides the
             results with d = 300, N = 5, and varying C to control the client heterogeneity (more results in
             Appx. F.1). It shows that our FZooS considerably outperforms the other baselines in terms of both
             communication round and query efficiency, which can be attributed to the superiority of our (8). When
             C is increased, a larger number of communication rounds and total queries is required to achieve the
             same convergence error, which empirically verifies our Thm. 2. Interestingly, SCAFFOLD (Type II)
             consistently outperforms SCAFFOLD (Type I) while Type II in fact is an approximation of Type
             I in (Karimireddy et al., 2020a). This is likely because SCAFFOLD (Type II) achieves improved
             gradient correction by implicitly increasing the number of additional function queries for a smaller
             approximation error of ŌłćF (refer to Appx. D). This thus indicates the necessity of achieving an
             accurate approximation of ŌłćF for federated ZOO with heterogeneous clients, which is achieved
             by our FZooS. Meanwhile, when client heterogeneity is small (i.e., C Ōēż 5.0), both FedProx and
             SCAFFOLD (Type I) perform worse than FedZO which does not apply any gradient correction.
             This is likely because the impact of the inaccurate gradient correction applied in these two algorithms
             outweighs that of client heterogeneity as justified in our Appx. D. This corroborates the importance
             of developing improved gradient correction for federated ZOO of varying client heterogeneity.

             6.2             F EDERATED B LACK -B OX A DVERSARIAL ATTACK

             Following the practice of (Fang et al., 2022), we then examine the advantages of our FZooS in the task
             of federated black-box adversarial attack. Here we aim to find a small perturbation x to be added to
             an input image z such that the perturbed image z + x will be wrongly classified by the majority of the
             private ML models on various clients through only the function queries of these models. Specifically,
             we randomly select 15 images from CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) and then attempt to find
             one single perturbation ( d = 32 ├Ś 32 ) for every image to make the averaged output of N = 10
             deep neural networks trained using private datasets on different clients misclassify the image using
             federated ZOO algorithms (refer to Appx. E.2 for more details). Fig. 2 illustrates the success rates on
             these 15 images achieved by various federated ZOO algorithms during optimization (more results
             in Appx. F.2). Remarkably, our FZooS again achieves consistently improved communication round
             efficiency over the other baselines under varying client heterogeneity. Thanks to this improved


                                                                                          8
             Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              Client 1                   Client 2                          Client 3                                 Client 4                          Client 5
                                              P = 0:5              P = 0:7                P = 0:9                                        P = 0:5                     P = 0:7                  P = 0:9
             0.50
                1.0                                                                                                              1.0


                                                                                                                  Success Rate
             Success Rate
Similarity   0.25
                            0.5                                                                                                  0.5

             0.00
                            0.0                                                                                                  0.0
                                     0    5 10 10 20 15        0   10 5 20 10       015   10      205          10 15 0                       25 5     5010    0 15   25       505       010       25
                                                                                                                                                                                                 15         50
                                                                   # Rounds                                Iterations                                            # Queries (┬Ż10 3 )

                                                                    FedZO          FedProx        SCAFFOLD (1)                         SCAFFOLD (2)               FZooS

             Figure 2: Comparison of the success rate in federated black-box adversarial attack achieved by
             FZooS and other existing federated ZOO algorithms on CIFAR-10 under varying client heterogeneity
             (controlled by P Ōłł [0, 1], a larger P implies smaller client heterogeneity). The x and y-axis are the
             number ofClient 1
                        rounds/queries    Client
                                        and   the2 corresponding
                                                              Client 3
                                                                  success         Client is
                                                                          rate (higher   4 better). Client 5
             0.50                         P = 0:9                  P = 0:6                   P = 0:3                                   P = 0:9                       P = 0:6                      P = 0:3
Similarity


                                                          62                       74                                                                    62                            74
               54                                                                                                                54
             0.25


                                                                                                                  F (x) (%)
             F (x) (%)


                                                          60                       72                                                                    60                            72
                            52                                                                                                   52
             0.00                                                                                                                50                                                    70
                            50                            58                       70                                                                    58


                                 0        5     2010     15    0       520    10    15
                                                                                     0          20     5       10 15 0                  20      540    10     015 20        40 5        10
                                                                                                                                                                                         0       1520       40
                                                                   # Rounds                                Iterations                                           # Queries (┬Ż10 3 )

                                                                    FedZO          FedProx        SCAFFOLD (1)                         SCAFFOLD (2)               FZooS

             Figure 3: Comparison of the non-differentiable metric optimization between FZooS and other existing
             federated ZOO algorithms under varying client heterogeneity (controlled by P Ōłł [0, 1], a larger P
             implies smaller client heterogeneity). The y-axis is (1 ŌłÆ precision) ├Ś 100% and each curve is the
             mean ┬▒ standard error from five independent runs.

             communication round efficiency and the ability of (8) to avoid a large number of additional function
             queries in every communication round, FZooS also achieves a substantial improvement in query
             efficiency. Overall, these results support the superiority of FZooS over the other existing approaches
             in real-world federated ZOO problems in terms of both communication round and query efficiency.

             6.3                         F EDERATED N ON -D IFFERENTIABLE M ETRIC O PTIMIZATION

             Inspired by (Shu et al., 2023), we lastly demonstrate the superior performance of our FZooS in
             the task of federated non-differentiable metric optimization, which has received a surging interest
             recently (Hiranandani et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2021). Specifically, we employ federated ZOO
             algorithms to fine-tune a fully trained MLP model (d = 2189) to optimize a non-differentiable metric
             such as precision and recall, using the Covertype dataset (Dua and Graff, 2017) distributed on N = 7
             clients (refer to Appx. E.3 for more details). This is similar to the widely applied federated learning
             setting (McMahan et al., 2017a) whereas the gradient information here is unavailable due to the
             non-differentiability of these metrics. Fig. 3 reports the comparison among various federated ZOO
             algorithms under varying client heterogeneity (more results in Appx. F.3). The results show that in
             the task of federated non-differentiable metric optimization with varying client heterogeneity, our
             FZooS is still able to consistently outperform the other existing federated ZOO algorithms in terms of
             both communication round and query efficiency, which therefore further substantiates the superiority
             of our FZooS in optimizing high-dimensional non-differentiable functions in the federated setting.

             7                       C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
             In this paper, we first identify the challenges of query and communication round inefficiency faced
             by federated ZOO algorithms in the presence of client heterogeneity (Sec. 3) and then introduce our
             FZooS algorithm to address these challenges (Sec. 4). We employ both theoretical justifications
             (Sec. 5) and empirical demonstrations (Sec. 6) to show that FZooS is indeed able to address these
             challenges and consequently to achieve considerably improved query and communication round
             efficiency over the existing federated ZOO algorithms. Of note, the limitation of our FZooS lies in one
             major aspect: As discussed in Sec. 4.2.1, FZooS incurs an additional transmission of M -dimensional
             vectors for every communication round compared with existing algorithms, which therefore results in
             a trade-off between communication overhead and communication rounds. However, in the scenario
             when communication rounds are more important to be reduced (e.g., to reduce the total queries of
             expensive-to-evaluate local function on every client), our FZooS will be more advanced.


                                                                                                              9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
In regards to our theoretical results, we have explicated underlying assumptions in the main paper
and comprehensive proofs in Appx. C. As for our empirical findings, we have divulged our thorough
experimental configurations in Appx. E and furnished our software codes in the supplementary
resources, specifically the zip file.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Ag├╝era y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Proc. AISTATS,
  2017a.
Wenzhi Fang, Ziyi Yu, Yuning Jiang, Yuanming Shi, Colin N. Jones, and Yong Zhou. Communication-
 efficient stochastic zeroth-order optimization for federated learning. IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
 70:5058ŌĆō5073, 2022.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Ag├╝era y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Proc. AISTATS,
  2017b.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith.
  Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. In Proc. ICML, 2020a.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank J. Reddi, Sebastian U. Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. SCAFFOLD: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning. In
  Proc. ICML, 2020a.
Yao Shu, Zhongxiang Dai, Weicong Sng, Arun Verma, Patrick Jaillet, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low.
  Zeroth-order optimization with trajectory-informed derivative estimation. In Proc. ICLR, 2023.
Ali Rahimi and Benjamin Recht. Random features for large-scale kernel machines. In Proc. NeurIPS,
  2007.
Jakub Konec╠īny╠Ć, Brendan McMahan, and Daniel Ramage. Federated optimization: Distributed
  optimization beyond the datacenter. arXiv:1511.03575, 2015.
Jianyu Wang, Zachary Charles, Zheng Xu, Gauri Joshi, H Brendan McMahan, Maruan Al-Shedivat,
   Galen Andrew, Salman Avestimehr, Katharine Daly, Deepesh Data, et al. A field guide to federated
   optimization. arXiv:2107.06917, 2021.
Sashank J. Reddi, Zachary Charles, Manzil Zaheer, Zachary Garrett, Keith Rush, Jakub Konec╠īn├Į,
  Sanjiv Kumar, and Hugh Brendan McMahan. Adaptive federated optimization. In Proc. ICLR,
  2021.
Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian processes for machine learning.
  Adaptive computation and machine learning. MIT Press, 2006.
Rie Johnson and Tong Zhang. Accelerating stochastic gradient descent using predictive variance
  reduction. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2013.
Yurii E. Nesterov and Vladimir G. Spokoiny. Random gradient-free minimization of convex functions.
  Found. Comput. Math., 17(2):527ŌĆō566, 2017.
Shuyu Cheng, Guoqiang Wu, and Jun Zhu. On the convergence of prior-guided zeroth-order
  optimization algorithms. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2021.
Albert S. Berahas, Liyuan Cao, Krzysztof Choromanski, and Katya Scheinberg. A theoretical and
  empirical comparison of gradient approximations in derivative-free optimization. Found. Comput.
  Math., 22(2):507ŌĆō560, 2022.
Nicholas JA Harvey, Christopher Liaw, Yaniv Plan, and Sikander Randhawa. Tight analyses for
  non-smooth stochastic gradient descent. In Proc. COLT, 2019.
Zijian Liu, Ta Duy Nguyen, Thien Hang Nguyen, Alina Ene, and Huy L├¬ Nguyen. High probability
  convergence of stochastic gradient methods. arXiv:2302.14843, 2023.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  Technical report, Citeseer, 2009.
Gaurush Hiranandani, Jatin Mathur, Harikrishna Narasimhan, Mahdi Milani Fard, and Sanmi Koyejo.
  Optimizing black-box metrics with iterative example weighting. In Proc. ICML, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chen Huang, Shuangfei Zhai, Pengsheng Guo, and Josh M. Susskind. MetricOpt: Learning to
  optimize black-box evaluation metrics. In Proc. CVPR, 2021.
Dheeru Dua and Casey Graff. UCI machine learning repository, 2017. URL http://archive.
  ics.uci.edu/ml.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated learning: Challenges,
  methods, and future directions. IEEE Signal Process. Mag., 37(3):50ŌĆō60, 2020b.
Peter Kairouz, H. Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aur├®lien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Kallista A. Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, Rafael
  G. L. DŌĆÖOliveira, Hubert Eichner, Salim El Rouayheb, David Evans, Josh Gardner, Zachary Garrett,
  Adri├Ā Gasc├│n, Badih Ghazi, Phillip B. Gibbons, Marco Gruteser, Za├»d Harchaoui, Chaoyang
  He, Lie He, Zhouyuan Huo, Ben Hutchinson, Justin Hsu, Martin Jaggi, Tara Javidi, Gauri Joshi,
  Mikhail Khodak, Jakub Konec╠īn├Į, Aleksandra Korolova, Farinaz Koushanfar, Sanmi Koyejo,
  Tancr├©de Lepoint, Yang Liu, Prateek Mittal, Mehryar Mohri, Richard Nock, Ayfer ├¢zg├╝r, Rasmus
  Pagh, Hang Qi, Daniel Ramage, Ramesh Raskar, Mariana Raykova, Dawn Song, Weikang Song,
  Sebastian U. Stich, Ziteng Sun, Ananda Theertha Suresh, Florian Tram├©r, Praneeth Vepakomma,
  Jianyu Wang, Li Xiong, Zheng Xu, Qiang Yang, Felix X. Yu, Han Yu, and Sen Zhao. Advances
  and open problems in federated learning. Found. Trends Mach. Learn., 14(1-2):1ŌĆō210, 2021.
Jianyu Wang, Vinayak Tantia, Nicolas Ballas, and Michael G. Rabbat. SlowMo: Improving
   communication-efficient distributed SGD with slow momentum. In Proc. ICLR, 2020.
Honglin Yuan and Tengyu Ma. Federated accelerated stochastic gradient descent. In Proc. NeurIPS,
  2020.
Jiayin Jin, Jiaxiang Ren, Yang Zhou, Lingjuan Lyu, Ji Liu, and Dejing Dou. Accelerated federated
   learning with decoupled adaptive optimization. In Proc. ICML, 2022.
Maruan Al-Shedivat, Jennifer Gillenwater, Eric P. Xing, and Afshin Rostamizadeh. Federated learning
 via posterior averaging: A new perspective and practical algorithms. In Proc. ICLR, 2021.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith.
  Feddane: A federated newton-type method. In ACSSC, pages 1227ŌĆō1231. IEEE, 2019.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Martin Jaggi, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank J Reddi, Sebastian U
  Stich, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Mime: Mimicking centralized stochastic algorithms in
  federated learning. arXiv:2008.03606, 2020b.
Beatrice Laurent and Pascal Massart. Adaptive estimation of a quadratic functional by model selection.
  Annals of Statistics, pages 1302ŌĆō1338, 2000.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX A         R ELATED W ORK
Federated Learning and Federated First-Order Optimization. Federated learning (FL) has
become a paradigm of applying multiple edge devices (i.e., clients) to collaboratively train a global
model without sharing the private data on these edge devices (McMahan et al., 2017a). We refer
to the surveys (Li et al., 2020b; Kairouz et al., 2021) for more comprehensive reviews of FL. Such
a paradigm then gives rise to recent interest in federated optimization or more precisely federated
first-order optimization (FOO) (Wang et al., 2021) to broaden its real-world application. Since the
first federated FOO algorithm FedAvg proposed in (McMahan et al., 2017b), a number of techniques
have been developed to further improve its performance in different aspects, e.g., federated FOO with
momentum (Wang et al., 2020) and adaptive learning rates (Reddi et al., 2021; Yuan and Ma, 2020;
Jin et al., 2022) for convergence speedup, federated FOO with local posterior sampling for de-biased
client updates (Al-Shedivat et al., 2021), and federated FOO with regularized functions (Li et al.,
2020a; 2019) and control variates (Karimireddy et al., 2020a;b) for the challenge of heterogeneous
clients, in which the global function to be optimized differs from the local functions on clients.

Federated Zeroth-Order Optimization. Despite the success of federated FOO algorithms, some
important applications, e.g., federated black-box adversarial attack in (Fang et al., 2022), suggests
the development of federated zeroth-order (ZOO) algorithms for the federated optimization where
gradient information is not available. Nevertheless, very limited efforts have been devoted to the de-
velopment of federated zeroth-order (ZOO) algorithms especially when the clients are heterogeneous.
To the best of our knowledge, Fang et al. (2022) are the first to consider federated ZOO, in which
they simply combine FedAvg with existing FD methods as their FedZO algorithm. Similar to the
FedAvg algorithm in federated FOO, the FedZO algorithm also likely performs poorly in the hetero-
geneous setting. This thus encourages the design of federated ZOO algorithms for heterogeneous
federated ZOO problems. Following the practice of FedZO, existing federated FOO algorithms for
heterogeneous clients, e.g., (Li et al., 2020a; Karimireddy et al., 2020a), can be simply adapted to the
corresponding federated ZOO algorithms for this kind of problem. However, these algorithms shall
be query- and communication round-inefficient in practice, which therefore raises the question of
how to improve query efficiency and the communication round efficiency of these algorithms. To
answer this question, we first identify the challenges of such an improvement and then develop a
federated ZOO algorithm to overcome these challenges in this paper.

A PPENDIX B         R ANDOM F OURIER F EATURES
According to (Rahimi and Recht, 2007), the random Fourier features can usually be represented as
                                      h                  iM
a M -dimensional row vector ŽĢ(x)ŌŖż = ŌłÜ2M cos(vj x + bj )        where every vj is independently
                                                                j=1
randomly sampled from a distribution p(v) and every bj is independently randomly sampled from
                                                                                                  ŌĆ▓
the uniform
                             [0, 2ŽĆ]. Particularly, for the squared exponential kernel k(x, x ) =
              distribution over
                 ŌĆ▓ 2     2                                               1
exp ŌłÆ Ōłźx ŌłÆ x Ōłź /(2l ) in which l is the length scale, p(v) = N (0, l2 I). In FZooS, we typically
adopt the squared exponential kernel for the optimization. Importantly, before the start of our FZooS,
{vj }M              M
     j=1 and {bj }j=1 need to be sampled and shared across all clients as well as server (as mentioned
in Sec. 4.2.1), which however will only happen once for whole optimization process.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX C           T HEORETICAL A NALYSES
C.1    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Based on the definition of ╬×(i)
                            r,t in Sec. 3.2, we have that
                                                2
              (i)                 (i)
╬×(i)
 r,t = g br,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
                                                                            2
           (i)         (i)                       (i)                (i)
     = gr,tŌłÆ1 + ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
                                     2                                       ŌŖż
           (i)                (i)              (i)          (i)         (i)                      (i)
     = gr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ 2╬│r,tŌłÆ1 ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ gr,tŌłÆ1                     grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ) +
                            2                             2
                    (i)                          (i)
                   ╬│r,tŌłÆ1       grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ) ,
                                                                                                          (9)
                                           (i)
which is a quadratic function w.r.t. ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 . It is easy to show that when
                                                                 ŌŖż
                                                 (i)      (i)                      (i)
                                       ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ gr,tŌłÆ1         grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ )
                (i)         (i)ŌłŚ
               ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 = ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 Ōē£                                                               ,         (10)
                                                                      (i)
                                                       grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ )
 (i)                                                                 (i)
╬×r,t can achieve its global minimum w.r.t. ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 as
                                                                                                      ŌŖż                                2
                                                                           (i)           (i)                               (i)
                                                    2
                                                                  ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ gr,tŌłÆ1                      grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ )
   (i)          (i)                 (i)
  ╬×r,t = gr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 )                          ŌłÆ                                                                2                  .
                                                                                                             (i)
                                                                                     grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ )
                                                                                                        (11)
This therefore finishes the proof of the fist-part result in Prop. 1. Interestingly, (11) implies that given
     (i)                                                                                            (i)
the ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 in (10), a better alignment between the gradient correction vector grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ )
                      (i)                 (i)                                                                      (i)
and the shift ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ gr,tŌłÆ1 leads to a smaller gradient disparity ╬×r,t .
               (i)ŌłŚ                                                          (i)                             (i)         (i)
Given the ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 = 1 in (10), when grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ) = ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ gr,tŌłÆ1 , we can easily
                (i)                     (i)                                                    (i)
verify that ╬×r,t in (10) has ╬×r,t = 0. On the contrary, when ╬×r,t = 0, we have that
                                                                                          ŌŖż
                                                                    (i)            (i)                     (i)
                                                        ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ gr,tŌłÆ1                grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ )
        (i)                 (i)
       gr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) =                                                                                                    ,         (12)
                                                                                                     (i)
                                                                            grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ )
                                  (i)                   (i)                               (i)
which implies that ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ gr,tŌłÆ1 and grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ) are linear dependent according
                                                                  (i)ŌłŚ
to the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. Since ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 = 1, we further have
                                          (i)                 (i)                                      (i)
                             ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ gr,tŌłÆ1 = grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ) .                                                             (13)
                                                                                         (i)                 (i)                      (i)
These two results, i.e., (12) and (13) thus imply that ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ gr,tŌłÆ1 = grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ),
which therefore concludes our proof.


                                                                           14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

C.2.1    G RADIENT E STIMATION E RROR U SING U NCERTAINTY
We introduce the following lemma that is adapted from (Shu et al., 2023) to bound the estimation
error of our local gradient surrogates using the uncertainty measure in our (5).
                                               ŌłÜ
Lemma C.1. Let ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1) and Žē Ōē£ d + 2( d + 1) ln(1/╬┤). For any x Ōłł X , i Ōłł [N ], r Ōēź 1 and
t Ōēź 1, the following holds with probability of at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤,
                                                   2                2
                                (i)                            (i)
                             Ōłć┬Ąr,t (x) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (x) Ōēż Žē Ōłé Žār,t (x) .


C.2.2    RFF A PPROXIMATION E RROR FOR G LOBAL G RADIENT S URROGATE
Lemma C.2 (Laurent and Massart (2000)). If x1 , ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , xk are independent standard normal random
                  Pk
variables, for y = i=1 x2i and any ŽĄ,
                                         ŌłÜ
                              P(y ŌłÆ k Ōēź 2 kŽĄ + 2ŽĄ) Ōēż exp(ŌłÆŽĄ) .

Following the general idea in (Rahimi and Recht, 2007), we present the following Lemma C.3 to
bound the difference of our approximated kernel using random features and the ground truth kernel k,
as well as the difference between their partial derivatives first. To ease our presentation, we let the
kernel k be defined by an infinite dimensional vector Žł(x), which is defined by the corresponding
infinite number of features for k, throughout this section. That is, k(x, xŌĆ▓ ) = Žł(x)ŌŖż Žł(xŌĆ▓ ) for any
x, xŌĆ▓ Ōłł X .
                                              h       i
                                                    2
Lemma C.3. Let ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1). Assume that E ŌłźvŌłź Ōēż V , for any x, xŌĆ▓ Ōłł X , the following holds
with probability of at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤,
                                                                p
                             ŽĢ(x)ŌŖż ŽĢ(xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ Žł(x)ŌŖż Žł(xŌĆ▓ ) Ōēż 8 ln(2/╬┤)/M ,
                                                                p
                        ŌłćŽĢ(x)ŌŖż ŽĢ(xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż Žł(xŌĆ▓ ) Ōēż 4V /(M ╬┤)
where M is the number of random Fourier features.

                                       PM
Proof. Recall that ŽĢ(x)ŌŖż ŽĢ(xŌĆ▓ ) = 1/M j=1 2 cos(vjŌŖż x+bj ) cos(vjŌŖż xŌĆ▓ +bj ) as shown in Appx. B.
Then, according to (Rahimi and Recht, 2007), for any j Ōłł [M ],

                     E 2 cos(vjŌŖż x + bj ) cos(vjŌŖż xŌĆ▓ + bj ) = Žł(x)ŌŖż Žł(xŌĆ▓ ) ,

                                                                                           (14)
                                         E ŽĢ(x)ŌŖż ŽĢ(xŌĆ▓ ) = Žł(x)ŌŖż Žł(xŌĆ▓ ) .


Since 2 cos(vjŌŖż x + bj ) cos(vjŌŖż xŌĆ▓ + bj ) Ōłł [ŌłÆ2, 2] and both {v1 , ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , vM } and {b1 , ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , bM } are
randomly independently sampled, according to HoeffdingŌĆÖs inequality, the following inequality holds
for any ŽĄ > 0
                                                                            M ŽĄ2

                             ŌŖż     ŌĆ▓         ŌŖż      ŌĆ▓

                  P ŽĢ(x) ŽĢ(x ) ŌłÆ Žł(x) Žł(x ) Ōēź ŽĄ Ōēż 2 exp ŌłÆ                          .                   (15)
                                                                              8
Choose ╬┤ = 2 exp(M ŽĄ2 ), the following holds with a probability of at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤,
                                                          r
                               ŌŖż     ŌĆ▓        ŌŖż      ŌĆ▓        8 ln(2/╬┤)                               (16)
                         ŽĢ(x) ŽĢ(x ) ŌłÆ Žł(x) Žł(x ) Ōēż                        .
                                                                  M

Moreover, based on the interchangeability of derivative and expectation, we then have the following
results derived from (14)

                   E ŌłÆ2 sin(vjŌŖż x + bj ) cos(vjŌŖż xŌĆ▓ + bj )vjŌŖż = ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż Žł(xŌĆ▓ ) ,

                                                                                                (17)
                                          E ŌłćŽĢ(x)ŌŖż ŽĢ(xŌĆ▓ ) = ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż Žł(xŌĆ▓ ) .



                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since both {v1 , ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , hvM } and {b1 , ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , bM } are randomly iindependently sampled, we then can
                                                                      2
bound the variance E          ŌłćŽĢ(x)ŌŖż ŽĢ(xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż Žł(xŌĆ▓ )               as below

              h                                     2
                                                        i
          E       ŌłćŽĢ(x)ŌŖż ŽĢ(xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż Žł(xŌĆ▓ )
              ’Ż«                                                                                    ’Ż╣
                                                                                               2
               M
      (a) ’Ż» 1 X
                  ŌłÆ2 sin(vjŌŖż x + bj ) cos(vjŌŖż xŌĆ▓ + bj )vj ŌłÆ ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż Žł(xŌĆ▓ )

      =E’Ż░
                                                                                                   ’Ż║
            M j=1
                                                                                                   ’Ż╗

            ’Ż«                                                               ’Ż╣
               M
      (b) 1  X                                                            2
      = 2E’Ż░       ŌłÆ2 sin(vjŌŖż x + bj ) cos(vjŌŖż xŌĆ▓ + bj )vj ŌłÆ ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż Žł(xŌĆ▓ ) ’Ż╗
         M    j=1
                 M
      (c)    1 X  h            ŌŖż                ŌŖż ŌĆ▓           2
                                                                i     h
                                                                             ŌŖż     ŌĆ▓ 2
                                                                                       i
                                                                                                               (18)
      =             E ŌłÆ2 sin(v j x + bj ) cos(v j x + bj )v j     ŌłÆ E   ŌłćŽł(x)  Žł(x  )
            M 2 j=1

      (d)        M
             1 X h             ŌŖż                ŌŖż ŌĆ▓           2
                                                                i
      Ōēż             E ŌłÆ2 sin(v j x + bj ) cos(v j x + bj )v j
            M 2 j=1

      (e)        M
             4 X h           2
                               i
      Ōēż             E Ōłźv j Ōłź
            M 2 j=1
      (f ) 4V
      Ōēż
            M

where (b) is from the independence among {v1 , ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , vM } and {b1 , ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę , bM } for variance derivation
and (c) is based on the definition of variance. In addition, (e) is due to the fact that sin(vjŌŖż x +
                                                                                h       i
                                                                                      2
bj ), cos(vjŌŖż xŌĆ▓ + bj ) Ōłł [ŌłÆ1, 1] and (f ) is because of the assumption that E ŌłźvŌłź Ōēż V .

Therefore, according to ChebyshevŌĆÖs inequality, we have the following inequalities for any ŽĄ > 0

                                                             h                                             i
                                                                                                       2
                                             E                   ŌłćŽĢ(x)ŌŖż ŽĢ(xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż Žł(xŌĆ▓ )
  P       ŌłćŽĢ(x)ŌŖż ŽĢ(xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż Žł(xŌĆ▓ ) > ŽĄ Ōēż
                                                                                          ŽĄ2                   (19)
                                                          4V
                                                        Ōēż      .
                                                          M ŽĄ2

                  p
Choose ŽĄ =         4V /(M ╬┤), the following holds for a probability of at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤,

                                                                              r
                                        ŌŖż     ŌĆ▓              ŌŖż        ŌĆ▓           4V                           (20)
                                   ŌłćŽĢ(x) ŽĢ(x ) ŌłÆ ŌłćŽł(x) Žł(x ) Ōēż                       ,
                                                                                  M╬┤

which finally completes the proof.



                                                        h     i
                                                            2
Lemma C.4. For any x, xŌĆ▓ Ōłł X and i Ōłł [N ], assume that E ŌłźvŌłź Ōēż V , ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż Žł(xŌĆ▓ ) Ōēż L
and |fi (x)| Ōēż 1, then the following holds with a constant probability for all r Ōłł [R],


                                                                 2            1
                                       (i)         (i)
                                     Ōłćb
                                      ┬Ąr,T (x) ŌłÆ Ōłć┬Ąr,T (x)           ŌēżO               .
                                                                              M

                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Based on the definition in (5) and (6), we have that:
              (i)                     (i)
        Ōłćb
         ┬Ąr,T (x) ŌłÆ Ōłć┬Ąr,T (x)
    (a)
                                      ŌłÆ1                                     ŌłÆ1
                  (i)   b (i) + Žā 2 I      (i)        ŌŖż (i)     (i)              (i)
    = ŌłćŽĢ(x)ŌŖż ╬”r,tŌłÆ1 K     r,T            yr,T  ŌłÆ ŌłćŽł(x) ╬© r,T   Kr,T + Žā 2
                                                                          I     yr,T
    (b)                             ŌłÆ1                             ŌłÆ1
               (i)   b (i) + Žā 2 I               (i)   (i)                                    (i)
     Ōēż ŌłćŽĢ(x)ŌŖż ╬”r,T K   r,T             ŌłÆ ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż ╬©r,T Kr,T + Žā 2 I                            yr,T

    (c)
                                    ŌłÆ1                                   ŌłÆ1                         (21)
               (i)   b (i) + Žā 2 I               ŌŖż (i)    b (i) + Žā 2 I           (i)
     = ŌłćŽĢ(x)ŌŖż ╬”r,T K   r,T             ŌłÆ  ŌłćŽł(x)   ╬© r,T   K r,T                 yr,T +
      |                                {z                                    }
                                        1
                                          ŌłÆ1                                    ŌłÆ1
                     (i)   b (i) + Žā 2 I              ŌŖż (i)      (i)                   (i)
           ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż ╬©r,T K     r,T             ŌłÆ  ŌłćŽł(x)   ╬© r,T   Kr,T  +  Žā 2
                                                                             I        yr,T
         |                                   {z                                    }
                                             2
where (b) and (c) are from the CauchyŌĆōSchwarz inequality and the triangle inequality, respectively.
                                                    (i)
We bound term 1 , term 2 and yr,T above separately. Firstly, the following holds with probability
of at least 1 ŌłÆ rT ╬┤ ŌĆ▓
                (a)
                                               ŌłÆ1                               ŌłÆ1
                          (i)   b (i) + Žā 2 I               (i)   b (i) + Žā 2 I
              1 = ŌłćŽĢ(x)ŌŖż ╬”r,T K   r,T             ŌłÆ ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż ╬©r,T K   r,T

                  (b)                                             ŌłÆ1
                              (i)           (i)    b (i) + Žā 2 I
                  Ōēż ŌłćŽĢ(x)ŌŖż ╬”r,T ŌłÆ ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż ╬©r,T      K r,T

                                                                                                    (22)
                      v
                      u rT                                                       ŌłÆ1
                  (c) uX                                   2
                                     (i)               (i)        b (i) + Žā 2 I
                  Ōēżt       ŌłćŽĢ(x)ŌŖż ŽĢ(xŽä ) ŌłÆ ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż Žł(xŽä )          K r,T
                          Žä =1
                              r
                  (d)
                    1             4rT V
                  Ōēż 2
                   Žā               M ╬┤ŌĆ▓
Where (b) comes from the CauchyŌĆōSchwarz inequality and (c) follows from          the fact that for any
                                                                                    n
                                                                               pP
matrix A with n rows and each row identified as ai we have ŌłźAŌłź Ōēż ŌłźAŌłźF Ōē£                      2
                                                                                    i=1 Ōłźai Ōłź . Finally,
                              (i)                                          (i)    2      2
(d) is due to the fact that Kr,T is positive semi-definite and therefore Kr,T + Žā I ŌēĮ Žā I as well as
                            b                                            b
the results in Lemma C.3.
Secondly, the following holds with probability of at least 1 ŌłÆ r2 T 2 ╬┤ ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ,
     (a)
                                           ŌłÆ1                                 ŌłÆ1
                      (i)   b (i) + Žā 2 I                   (i)    (i)
   2 = ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż ╬©r,T K          r,T             ŌłÆ ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż ╬©r,T Kr,T + Žā 2 I
       (b)                                                         ŌłÆ1                  ŌłÆ1
                                (i)               b (i) + Žā 2 I            (i)
       Ōēż ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż ╬©r,tŌłÆ1                            K r,T                 ŌłÆ Kr,T + Žā 2 I

       (c)
                                                         ŌłÆ1                 ŌłÆ1
                   (i)      (i)   b (i)    b (i) + Žā 2 I        (i)
       = ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż ╬©r,T      Kr,T ŌłÆ K  r,T   K  r,T              Kr,T + Žā 2 I
           v
           u rT                                                     ŌłÆ1                    ŌłÆ1
       (d) uX                   2
                           (i)       (i)   b (i)      b (i) + Žā 2 I          (i)
       Ōēż t      ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż Žł(xŽä )     Kr,T ŌłÆ K    r,T     K  r,T                Kr,T + Žā 2 I
              Žä =1
                       v
                       u rT
       (e)   LŌłÜ        u X                        (i)        (i)             (i)   (i)
                                                                                         2
       Ōēż            rT t                    Žł(xŽä )ŌŖż Žł(xŽä ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ ŽĢ(xŽä )ŌŖż ŽĢ(xŽä ŌĆ▓ )
             Žā4
                              Žä,Žä ŌĆ▓ =1
                        3/2
                              r
       (f ) L (rT )               8 ln(2/╬┤ ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ )
       Ōēż
                  Žā4                  M
                                                                                                    (23)


                                                                        17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where (b) is from the CauchyŌĆōSchwarz inequality. Besides, (c) and (e) come from the aforementioned
inequality ŌłźAŌłź Ōēż ŌłźAŌłźF . In addition, (f ) is based on the assumption that ŌłćŽł(x)ŌŖż Žł(xŌĆ▓ ) Ōēż L,
ŌłźAŌłź Ōēż ŌłźAŌłźF , K  b (i) + Žā 2 I ŌēĮ Žā 2 I and K(i) + Žā 2 I ŌēĮ Žā 2 I.
                  r,T                      r,T

Thirdly, the following holds with probability of at least 1 ŌłÆ rT ╬┤ ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ,
                             v
                             u rT
                    (i)  (a) u X                    2
                   yr,T = t        (fi (xŽä ) + ╬ČŽä )
                                  Žä =1
                                v
                                u rT
                            (b) uX
                            Ōēżt       2fi2 (xŽä ) + 2╬ČŽä2
                                 Žä =1                                                                 (24)
                                v
                                u
                            (c) u          rT       2
                                          X     ╬ČŽä
                            Ōēż t2rT + 2Žā 2
                                          Žä =1
                                                Žā
                                r
                            (d)                    p
                            Ōēż 2rT + 2Žā 2 rT + 2 rT ln(1/╬┤ ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ) + 2 ln(1/╬┤ ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ )

where ╬ČŽä denote the observation noise associated with the input xŽä . Besides, (c) is from the assump-
tion that ╬ČŽä Ōł╝ N (0, Žā 2 ) for any Žä in Sec. 2 and |fi (x)| Ōēż 1 for any x Ōłł X . Finally, (d) comes from
our Lemma C.2.
By introducing (22), (23) and (24) with ╬┤ ŌĆ▓ = 3rT
                                               ╬┤
                                                  , ╬┤ ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ = 3r2╬┤T 2 and ╬┤ ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ = 3rT
                                                                                ╬┤
                                                                                   into (21), the following
then holds with probability of at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤,
        (i)           (i)
  Ōłćb┬Ąr,T (x) ŌłÆ Ōłć┬Ąr,T (x)
                                          !r
                         3/2
      r                      r
   rT 12V       4L (rT )       ln(6rT /╬┤)                     p
                                                      2 rT + 2 rT ln(3rT /╬┤) + 2 ln(3rT /╬┤)

Ōēż             +                              2rT + 2Žā
   Žā2 M ╬┤             Žā4            M
        ŌłÜ             p        !
     rT rT      r2 T 2 ln(rT )
=O    ŌłÜ       +       ŌłÜ           .
         M              M
                                                                                     (25)
Of note, it is easy to show that when (25) holds for r = R, it must hold for any r Ōēż R. Therefore,
the following finally holds with a constant probability for all r Ōłł [R],

                                                         2         1
                                   (i)          (i)
                               Ōłćb┬Ąr,T (x) ŌłÆ Ōłć┬Ąr,T (x) Ōēż O                ,                    (26)
                                                                   M
which concludes our proof.
                                         h       i
                                               2
Remark. Note that the assumption E ŌłźvŌłź Ōēż V implies that the distribution p(v) in Appx. B
                                              h      i                h              i
                                                   2           2                   2
has a bounded mean and covariance since E ŌłźvŌłź = ŌłźE [v]Ōłź + E Ōłźv ŌłÆ E [v]Ōłź . This is usually
valid for the widely applied kernels (e.g., the squared exponential kernel in Appx. B) in practice.
Remarkably, (25) with r = R has demonstrated that a larger number M of random features is
                                                          (i)           (i)
preferred to maintain the approximation quality of Ōłćb    ┬ĄR,T (x) Ōēł Ōłć┬ĄR,T when the number R of
communication rounds and the number T of local iterations increase. This in fact aligns with the
intuition that a larger hypothesis space (defined by the M random features) should be used when the
target function (defined by the existing RT function queries) becomes more complex. However, for
                                                                                (i)          (i)
any communication round r + 1 Ōłł [R] in our FZooS, the approximation of Ōłć┬Ąr,T using Ōłćb       ┬Ąr,T (x)
                                                           (i)
needs to be accurate only at the local updated inputs {xr+1,tŌłÆ1 }tŌłł[T ],iŌłł[N ] with a relatively small T
(i.e., T Ōēż 20), which consequently usually does not requires an extremely large M to realize a good
approximation quality in practice. This has actually been supported by the empirical results in our
Sec. 6 and Appx. F.


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2.3   F INAL G RADIENT D ISPARITY A NALYSIS U SING U NCERTAINTY

We introduce the following Lemma C.5 and Lemma C.6 from (Shu et al., 2023) to ease our proof of
Thm. 1:

Lemma C.5. Let {v1 , . . . , vŽä } be any Žä vectors in Rd . Then the following holds for any a > 0:

                                      a      2     1      2
                          Ōłźvi Ōłź Ōłźvj Ōłź Ōēż Ōłźvi Ōłź +      Ōłźvj Ōłź ,                                     (27)
                                      2           2a
                                   2               2         1        2
                         Ōłźvi + vj Ōłź Ōēż (1 + a) Ōłźvi Ōłź + 1 +        Ōłźvj Ōłź ,                         (28)
                                                             a
                           Žä           2          Žä
                           X                      X             2
                                  vi       ŌēżŽä           Ōłźvi Ōłź .                                  (29)
                            i=1                   i=1


Proof. For (27), we have that

                                        r
                  a      2   1      2     a      2   1      2                                    (30)
                    Ōłźvi Ōłź +    Ōłźvj Ōłź Ōēź 2    Ōłźvi Ōłź ┬Ę    Ōłźvj Ōłź = Ōłźvi Ōłź Ōłźvj Ōłź .
                  2         2a            2         2a


For (28), we have that


                        2      1        2        2       2        2    1    2
           (1 + a) Ōłźvi Ōłź + 1 +     Ōłźvj Ōłź = Ōłźvi Ōłź + Ōłźvj Ōłź + a Ōłźvi Ōłź + Ōłźvj Ōłź
                               a                                       a
                                                             r
                                                 2       2           2 1      2                  (31)
                                          Ōēź Ōłźvi Ōłź + Ōłźvj Ōłź + 2 a Ōłźvi Ōłź ┬Ę Ōłźvj Ōłź
                                                                       a
                                                      2
                                          = Ōłźvi + vj Ōłź .


                                                                                 2
For (29), we can directly employ the convexity of function h(x) = ŌłźxŌłź and JensenŌĆÖs inequality:

                                              Žä         2              Žä
                                           1X                    1X         2
                                                 vi         Ōēż          Ōłźvi Ōłź .                   (32)
                                           Žä i=1                 Žä i=1


By multiplying the inequality above with Žä 2 , we conclude the proof.


                                                                        2      2
                                                                 (i)     (i)
Lemma C.6. Define Žüi Ōē£ maxxŌłłX ,rŌēź1,tŌēź1 Ōłé                  (x)   Žār,tŌłé Žār,tŌłÆ1 (x) , we have that

Žüi Ōłł 1/(1 + 1/Žā 2 ), 1 , and that for any x Ōłł X , r Ōēź 1, t Ōēź 1 the following holds,

                                               2
                                          (i)         (rŌłÆ1)T +t
                                       Ōłé Žār,t (x) Ōēż ╬║Žüi         .


                                                            19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        1
                                           ŌłÜ
Let ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1), ŽĄ = O( M   ) and Žē = d + 2( d + 1) ln(2N RT /╬┤), the following inequalities then
hold with a probability of at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤:


                                                               2
            N
    1       X
                       (j)     (i)             (i)

                     Ōłćb
                      ┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfj (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
    N
         j=1,j╠Ė=i

(a) N ŌłÆ 1     N                                                  2
                          (j)      (i)               (i)
              X
Ōēż                      Ōłćb
                        ┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfj (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
    N2
            j=1,j╠Ė=i
              N
(b) N ŌłÆ 1     X           (j)      (i)         (j)         (i)       (j)   (i)             (i)
                                                                                                   2
=                      Ōłćb
                        ┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłć┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + Ōłć┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfj (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
    N2
            j=1,j╠Ė=i

(c) N ŌłÆ 1     N
                                                        2                                          2

              X    N     (j)     (i)             (i)           (j)     (i)         (j)     (i)
Ōēż                      Ōłć┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfj (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + N Ōłćb
                                                              ┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłć┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
    N2            N ŌłÆ1
            j=1,j╠Ė=i
          N
(d) Žē     X
                       (j)
                             2
                               (i)       (N ŌłÆ 1)2
Ōēż                   Ōłé ŽārŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) +          ŽĄ,
    N                                       N
        j=1,j╠Ė=i
                                                                                                 (33)
in which (a) is from (29) and (c) is from (28) with a = N 1ŌłÆ1 . In addition, (d) comes from Lemma C.1
and Lemma C.4.


    (N ŌłÆ 1)2            (i)            (i)      (i)
                                                        2
               Ōłćf  i (x r,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćb ┬Ą rŌłÆ1,T (x r,tŌłÆ1 )
       N2
(a) (N ŌłÆ 1)2            (i)            (i)      (i)            (i)   (i)      (i)     (i)
                                                                                               2
 =       2
               Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłć┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + Ōłć┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćb    ┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
       N
(b) (N ŌłÆ 1)2

                   N                                               2                                       2
                                   (i)           (i)      (i)            (i)      (i)      (i)      (i)
 Ōēż                          Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłć┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + N Ōłć┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 )Ōłćb     ┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
       N2       N ŌłÆ1
                                                   (N ŌłÆ 1)2

(c) Žē(N ŌłÆ 1)                     2
                         (i)           (i)
 Ōēż                Ōłé ŽārŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) +                        ŽĄ ,
          N                                            N
                                                                                                  (34)
in which (c) is from (28) with a = N 1ŌłÆ1 . In addition, (d) comes from Lemma C.1 and Lemma C.4.


                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By exploiting the inequalities above, we have

        N
    1 X (i)
         ╬×
    N i=1 r,t
        N                                                                                   2
(a) 1

                (i)     (i)                      (i)         (i)     (i)            (i)
        X
=             Ōłć┬Ąr,tŌłÆ1 (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 Ōłćb
                                          ┬ĄrŌłÆ1 (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćb
                                                            ┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
    N i=1
                                                             ’Ż½                                                          ’ŻČ
        N                                                                N
(b) 1                                                      1
                (i)     (i)             (i)                                       (j)     (i)             (i)
        X                                                                X
=             Ōłć┬Ąr,tŌłÆ1 (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 ’ŻŁ                      Ōłćb
                                                                                 ┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfj (xr,tŌłÆ1 )       ’ŻĖ+
    N i=1                                                        N
                                                                     j=1,j╠Ė=i

            ╬│r,tŌłÆ1   (N ŌłÆ 1)                                                                                     2
                                       (i)         (i)     (i)                           (i)            (i)
                                 Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćb
                                                  ┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + (1 ŌłÆ ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 ) Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
                     N
             ’Ż½
                                                                                                                             2
(c) 1   N                                     2                                 N
        X      (i)     (i)             (i)         2                     1      X
                                                                                          (j)     (i)             (i)

Ōēż         ’ŻŁ4 Ōłć┬Ąr,tŌłÆ1 (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + 4╬│r,tŌłÆ1                                Ōłćb
                                                                                         ┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfj (xr,tŌłÆ1 )        +
          ’Ż¼
    N i=1                                                                N
                                                                             j=1,j╠Ė=i
                                                                                                                                 !
            2
        4╬│r,tŌłÆ1  (N ŌłÆ 1)2          (i)            (i)     (i)
                                                                   2
                                                                                              (i)            (i)
                                                                                                                 2
                   2
                             Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćb ┬ĄrŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + 4(1 ŌłÆ ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 )2 Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
                 N
                                              ’Ż½                                                           ’ŻČ
       N                                                N     N                                        2
(d) 4Žē X
                  (i)

                          (i)            2         Žē   X    X
                                                                         (j)
                                                                                2
                                                                                   (i)         (N ŌłÆ 1)
Ōēż            Ōłé Žār,tŌłÆ1 (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + 4╬│r,tŌłÆ1     ’ŻŁ                      Ōłé ŽārŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) +                ŽĄ’ŻĖ +
    N i=1                                         N 2 i=1                                         N
                                                          j=1,j╠Ė=i
                               N
                                                                             !
                                                                          2
          2        Žē(N  ŌłÆ 1)  X
                                        (i)
                                                2
                                                      (i)        (N  ŌłÆ 1)
       4╬│r,tŌłÆ1                     Ōłé ŽārŌłÆ1,T (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) +                     ŽĄ + 4(1 ŌłÆ ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 )2 G
                      N2      i=1
                                                                     N
                                                                                                  (35)
where (c) is from the (29). In addition, (d) is from Lemma C.1, (33) and (34).
By introducing the results in Lemma C.6 into (35), we have

        N                 N                                                N
                                                                                                         !
 1 X (i) (a) 4Žē X (rŌłÆ1)T +tŌłÆ1     2                         2Žē(N ŌłÆ 1) X (rŌłÆ1)T 2(N ŌłÆ 1)2
      ╬× Ōēż         ╬║Žü          + 4╬│r,tŌłÆ1                                   ╬║Žüi +          ŽĄ
 N i=1 r,t   N i=1 i                                           N2     i=1
                                                                                  N
                              + 4(1 ŌłÆ ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 )2 G
                        N                               N
                                                                            !
                 (b) 4Žē X                          2Žē X (rŌłÆ1)T
                                 (rŌłÆ1)T +tŌłÆ1     2
              Ōēż                ╬║Žüi           + 4╬│r,tŌłÆ1    ╬║Žü         + 2N ŽĄ + 4(1 ŌłÆ ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 )2 G
                  N i=1                             N i=1 i
              (c)
              Ōēż 4Žē╬║Žü(rŌłÆ1)T +tŌłÆ1 + 4╬│r,tŌłÆ1
                                       2
                                               2Žē╬║Žü(rŌłÆ1)T + 2N ŽĄ + 4(1 ŌłÆ ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 )2 G
                                                                                             (36)
                                                  PN
where (c) is from JansenŌĆÖs inequality with Žü Ōē£ N1 i=1 Žüi . This finally concludes our proof.
Remark. Of note, the upper bound in our Thm. 1 is a quadratic function w.r.t. the gradient correction
length ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 . As a consequence, it is easy to verify that in order to minimize the upper bound in our
Thm. 1 (i.e., to achieve a better-performing (8)) w.r.t. ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 , ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 needs to be chosen as

                                                           G
                                       ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 =                        ,                                     (37)
                                                  G + 2ŽēŽü(rŌłÆ1)T + 2N ŽĄ

as shown in our Cor. 1. This better-performing ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 therefore implies that (a) an adaptive ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 is
indeed able to theoretically reduce the gradient disparity, which therefore aligns with the conclusion
from our Prop. 1 and (b) when the estimation error of our gradient correction vector (characterized by
2ŽēŽürT + 2N ŽĄ) in (8) is smaller than the client heterogeneity (characterized by G), a large ╬│tŌłÆ1 is
                                                                          PN      (i)
suggested to be applied in order to minimize the gradient disparity N1 i=1 ╬×r,t , as shown in our
Sec. 5.1.


                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By introducing this ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 into the upper bound in Thm. 1, we have
         N
     1 X (i) (a)
           ╬×r,t Ōēż 4Žē╬║Žü(rŌłÆ1)T +tŌłÆ1 + 4╬│r,tŌłÆ1
                                      2
                                              2Žē╬║Žü(rŌłÆ1)T + 2N ŽĄ + 4(1 ŌłÆ ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 )2 G
     N i=1
                (b)                 4G 2Žē╬║Žü(rŌłÆ1)T + 2N ŽĄ
                = 4Žē╬║Žü(rŌłÆ1)T +tŌłÆ1 +
                                    G + 2ŽēŽü(rŌłÆ1)T + 2N ŽĄ                                         (38)
                (c)                  q
                Ōēż 4Žē╬║Žü(rŌłÆ1)T +tŌłÆ1 + 2 2G(Žē╬║Žü(rŌłÆ1)T + N ŽĄ)
                 (d)                      p                       ŌłÜ
                 Ōēż 4Žē╬║Žü(rŌłÆ1)T +tŌłÆ1 + 2          2Žē╬║Žü(rŌłÆ1)T G + 2 2N GŽĄ
                                                                     p
where (c) is from the inequality of G + 2ŽēŽü(rŌłÆ1)T + 2N ŽĄ Ōēź 2 G(2ŽēŽü(rŌłÆ1)T + 2N ŽĄ) (i.e., the
relationship between the
                       p geometric mean ŌłÜ     and arithmetic mean of G and 2ŽēŽü(rŌłÆ1)T + 2N ŽĄ) and (d)
is from the fact that ( 2Žē╬║Žü    (rŌłÆ1)T  G + 2N GŽĄ)2 > 2Žē╬║Žü(rŌłÆ1)T G + 2N GŽĄ. Interestingly, (38)
enjoys two major aspects. (a) In contrast to the algorithm where ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 = 0 (e.g., FedZO), the impact
of client heterogeneity (i.e., G) is able to be reduced in our FZooS through decreasing the estimation
error of our gradient surrogates (i.e., Žē╬║Žü(rŌłÆ1)T ) and the RFF approximation error (i.e., ŽĄ) for our
global gradient surrogates. (b) In contrast to the federated ZOO algorithms where ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 = 1 (e.g.,
SCAFFOLD), the impact of the large estimation error of our gradient surrogates (i.e., Žē╬║Žü(rŌłÆ1)T )
is also able to be mitigated in our FZooS through a small client heterogeneity (i.e., G) in practice.
As a result, these advantages will intuitively make our FZooS produce more robust optimization
performance under different scenarios in practice, as supported by our Sec. 6 and Appx. F.


                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.3   G RADIENT E STIMATION A NALYSIS BASED ON E UCLIDEAN D ISTANCE

Of note, for every iteration t of round r, our global gradient surrogate in Sec. 4.2.1 is obtained based
                                    (i)           (i) (i) T (rŌłÆ1)
on the optimization trajectory DrŌłÆ1,T = {(xŽä , yŽä )}Žä =1 and is not capable of being updated
immediately although t ŌłÆ 1 new function queries are given at this time. This is because the update of
our global gradient surrogate only occurs when clients and server can communicate with each other,
i.e., at the end of each round. Intuitively, this will result in the phenomenon that the quality of our
global gradient surrogate and hence the quality of our (8) decays w.r.t. the iterations of local updates,
as empirically supported in Appx. F.1. This is likely because the Euclidean distance between the input
to be evaluated in our global gradient surrogate and the queried inputs from the optimization trajectory
becomes larger and consequently the optimization trajectory becomes less informative. Unfortunately,
such a quality decay within the local updates fails to be captured in Thm. 1 and hence may result in
an impractical choice of ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 in Cor. 1. To this end, we develop another uncertainty analysis of our
global gradient surrogate that is based on Euclidean distance to capture such a phenomenon in this
section, which finally gives us a more practical choice of gradient correction length.
We first introduce the following lemma to ease our proof in this section.
Lemma C.7. For any matrix A, AŌŖż A and AAŌŖż share the same non-zero eigenvalues.

Proof. Let ╬╗ be any non-zero eigenvalue of AŌŖż A, for some x ╠Ė= 0, we have
                                               AŌŖż Ax = ╬╗x .                                                   (39)
By multiplying A on both sides above, we have
                                        AAŌŖż (Ax) = ╬╗ (Ax) ,                                                   (40)

which implies that ╬╗ is also the eigenvalue of AAŌŖż with Ax being the eigenvector. Following the
same proof, it is easy to show that any non-zero eigenvalue of AAŌŖż remains the eigenvalue of AŌŖż A,
which therefore concludes the proof.

We then introduce another estimation error analysis (different from the one presented in Appx. C.2)
                                                                                          (i)   (i)
of our global gradient surrogate as follows where we slightly abuse the notation and use xŽä Ōłł Dr,T
                (i)                                           (i)
to denote that xŽä is from the optimization trajectory Dr,T .
                                                                                2
Proposition C.1. Let the shift-invariant kernel k(x, xŌĆ▓ ) = k(Ōłźx ŌłÆ xŌĆ▓ Ōłź ) where k(┬Ę) is assumed to
be non-increasing and function h(╬╣) = ╬╣Ōłćk(╬╣)2 is assumed to be convex, the following then holds
with a probability of at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤ for any x Ōłł X ,

                                                 2              4Žē╬╣2r Ōłćk(╬╣r )2
                            ŌłźŌłć┬Ąr (x) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (x)Ōłź Ōēż Žē╬║ ŌłÆ
                                                              k(0)d + Žā 2 d/(rT )
                ŌłÜ                          PN P                                     (i)
                                                                                          2
where Žē = d + 2( d + 1) ln(1/╬┤), ╬╣r Ōē£ rN1 T i=1 x(i) ŌłłD(i)                 x ŌłÆ xŽä             , and k(0) = k(x, x).
                                                               Žä     r,T



Proof. Recall that the uncertainty measure function (see (5)) of our local gradient surrogate on client
i for iteration T of round r will be
                2                                                   ŌłÆ1
           (i)                              (i)          (i)                  (i)
     Ōłé Žār,T (x) = Ōłéz ŌłézŌĆ▓ k(z, z ŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ Ōłéz kr,T (z)ŌŖż Kr,T + Žā 2 I         ŌłézŌĆ▓ kr,T (z ŌĆ▓ )   ŌĆ▓         z=z =x
                      (a)                             ŌłÆ1
                                         (i)                   (i)            (i)
                      Ōē╝ ╬║I ŌłÆ ╬╗max (Kr,T ) + Žā 2            Ōłéz kr,T (z)ŌŖż ŌłézŌĆ▓ kr,T (z ŌĆ▓ )                       (41)
                                                                                              z=z ŌĆ▓ =x
                                 (i)           (i)
                      (b)    Ōłéz kr,T (z)ŌŖż ŌłézŌĆ▓ kr,T (z ŌĆ▓ ) z=zŌĆ▓ =x
                      Ōē╝ ╬║I ŌłÆ
                             rT maxx,xŌĆ▓ ŌłłD(i) k(x, xŌĆ▓ ) + Žā 2
                                            r,T


where (a) is based on the assumption on Ōłéz ŌłézŌĆ▓ k(z, z ŌĆ▓ ) in our Sec. 2 and the definition of maxi-
                                                        (i)
mum eigenvalue. In addition, (b) comes from ╬╗max (Kr,T ) Ōēż rT maxx,xŌĆ▓ ŌłłD(i) k(x, xŌĆ▓ ) (i.e., the
                                                                                              r,T
Gershgorin theorem).


                                                     23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                       2
Based on the assumption that k(x, xŌĆ▓ ) = k(Ōłźx ŌłÆ xŌĆ▓ Ōłź ) and k(┬Ę) is non-increasing, we have
                               max k(x, xŌĆ▓ ) Ōēż k(x, x) = k(0) .
                                          x,xŌĆ▓ ŌłłDr,T
                                                     (i)                                                                          (42)
                                           2
Moreover, define ╬╣ Ōē£ Ōłźz ŌłÆ z ŌĆ▓ Ōłź , the partial derivative of kernel k(┬Ę, ┬Ę) will be
                                  Ōłéz k(z, z ŌĆ▓ ) = 2 (z ŌłÆ z ŌĆ▓ ) Ōłćk(╬╣)
                                                                                                                                  (43)
                                               ŌłézŌĆ▓ k(z, z ŌĆ▓ ) = 2 (z ŌĆ▓ ŌłÆ z) Ōłćk(╬╣) .
                                                                                           (i)           (i)
Therefore, the each element in the rT ├Ś rT matrix Ōłéz kr,T (z)ŌłézŌĆ▓ kr,T (z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż z=zŌĆ▓ =x that is induced
                     (i)         (i)              (i)      (i)          (i)
by the input pair (xŽä , xŽä ŌĆ▓ ) with xŽä , xŽä ŌĆ▓ Ōłł Dr,T and Žä, Žä ŌĆ▓ Ōłł [rT ] will be:
                                          ŌŖż
                                                    (i)                 (i)
                             4 x ŌłÆ x(i)
                                      Žä       x ŌłÆ xŽä ŌĆ▓ Ōłćk(╬╣(i) Žä )Ōłćk(╬╣Žä ŌĆ▓ )
                                                                                                                                  (44)
                                  2                                     2
        (i)                (i)           (i)                     (i)
where ╬╣Žä      Ōē£   x ŌłÆ xŽä               , ╬╣Žä ŌĆ▓ Ōē£      x ŌłÆ xŽä ŌĆ▓               . Based on these results, the trace norm Ōłź┬ĘŌłźtr of
    (i)         (i)
Ōłéz kr,T (z)ŌłézŌĆ▓ kr,T (z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż z=zŌĆ▓ =x will be
                                                                                            rT
                           (i)                 (i)
                                                                                            X                    2
                   Ōłéz kr,T (z)ŌłézŌĆ▓ kr,T (z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż z=zŌĆ▓ =x                                 =           4 Ōłźx ŌłÆ xŽä Ōłź Ōłćk(╬╣Žä )2
                                                                                  tr
                                                                                            Žä =1
                                                                                                                                  (45)
                                                                                            rT
                                                                                            X
                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                       =           4╬╣Žä Ōłćk(╬╣Žä ) .
                                                                                            Žä =1

By further assuming that the function h(╬╣) = ╬╣Ōłćk(╬╣)2 is convex, we then have
                                                 (a) 1
                (i)           (i)                          (i)           (i)
            Ōłéz kr,T (z)ŌŖż ŌłézŌĆ▓ kr,T (z ŌĆ▓ ) z=zŌĆ▓ =x Ōēź     Ōłéz kr,T (z)ŌŖż ŌłézŌĆ▓ kr,T (z ŌĆ▓ ) z=zŌĆ▓ =x
                                                     d                                      tr

                                                                       (b) 1                 (i)           (i)
                                                                       =               Ōłéz kr,T (z)ŌłézŌĆ▓ kr,T (z ŌĆ▓ )ŌŖż z=zŌĆ▓ =x
                                                                             d                                               tr
                                                                                    rT
                                                                                                                                  (46)
                                                                       (c) 1 X (i)
                                                                       =         4╬╣ Ōłćk(╬╣(i)
                                                                                        Žä )
                                                                                            2
                                                                           d Žä =1 Žä
                                                                       (d) 4rT
                                                      ╬╣(i) Ōłćk(╬╣r(i) )2 Ōēź
                                                    d r
where (a) comes from the fact the maximum eigenvalue of a matrix is always larger or equal to its
averaged eigenvalues and (b) is based on Lemma C.7. In addition, (c) is obtained from (45) while (d)
                                                                 2
                                (i)   1
                                        P                   (i)
results from the definition of ╬╣r Ōē£ rT      (i)
                                           x ŌłłD
                                                (i)  x ŌłÆ   xŽä       as well as the JansenŌĆÖs inequality
                                                                 Žä          r,T
for the convex function h(┬Ę).
Finally, by introducing the results above, i.e., (42) and (46), into (41), we have
                                                            (i)     (i)

                                  (i)
                                       2                 4╬╣r Ōłćk(╬╣r )2
                             Ōłé Žār,T (x) Ōēż ╬║ ŌłÆ                               .                                                     (47)
                                                       k(0)d + Žā 2 d/(rT )
                 PN (i)
Define ╬╣r Ōē£ N1 i=1 ╬╣r , we then have
                                                                                N                                    2
                                                           2 (a)       1 X   (i)
                    ŌłźŌłć┬Ąr (x) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (x)Ōłź =                                     Ōłć┬Ąr,T (x) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (x)
                                                                       N i=1
                                                             (b)            N                  2
                                                                     1 X     (i)
                                                             Ōēż             Ōłć┬Ąr,T (x) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (x)
                                                                     N i=1
                                                                                                                                  (48)
                                                                    N            (i)     (i)
                                                             (c) 1 X         4Žē╬╣r Ōłćk(╬╣r )2
                                                             Ōēż         Žē╬║ ŌłÆ
                                                                 N i=1      k(0)d + Žā 2 d/(rT )
                                                             (d)                    4Žē╬╣r Ōłćk(╬╣r )2
                                                             Ōēż Žē╬║ ŌłÆ
                                                                                  k(0)d + Žā 2 d/(rT )

                                                                        24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where (b) is from the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, (c) derives from Lemma C.1, and (d) results from
the JansenŌĆÖs inequality for convex function h(┬Ę). which finally concludes the proof.
                                                                   2
Remark. Of note, the assumption that k(x, xŌĆ▓ ) = k(Ōłźx ŌłÆ xŌĆ▓ Ōłź ) where k(┬Ę) is non-increasing and
                ╬╣Ōłćk(╬╣)2 is convex can be satisfied by the widely applied squared exponential kernel
function h(╬╣) =
                               2
k(x, xŌĆ▓ ) = exp ŌłÆ Ōłźx ŌłÆ xŌĆ▓ Ōłź /(2l2 ) , which has also been applied in our FZooS. To justify the
validity of these assumptions on the squared
                                            exponential kernel, we first show that this kernel can
                                       2
be represented   as k(╬╣) = exp  ŌłÆ╬╣/(2l   ) , which is non-increasing w.r.t. its input ╬╣, and h(╬╣) =
╬╣ exp ŌłÆ╬╣/l2 /(4l4 ) is convex when ╬╣ Ōēź 2l2 .
Remarkably, Prop. C.1 reveals that the quality of the gradient estimation at an input x Ōłł X when
using our global gradient surrogate without RFF approximation is highly related to the averaged
                                            SN      (i)
Euclidean distance between x and xŽä Ōłł i=1 Dr,T (i.e., ╬╣r in Prop. C.1). Specifically, when the
input x to be evaluated in our global gradient surrogate leads to a larger value of ╬╣r Ōłćk(╬╣r )2 , the
upper bound in our Prop. C.1 demonstrates that the gradient estimation error of our global gradient
surrogate tends to be more accurate. Note that   when the kernel is the squared exponential kernel,
we have that h(╬╣) = ╬╣Ōłćk(╬╣)2 = ╬╣ exp ŌłÆ╬╣/l2 /(4l4 ) decreases w.r.t. ╬╣ and that a smaller averaged
                                          SN      (i)
Euclidean distance between x and xŽä Ōłł i=1 Dr,T likely enjoys a smaller gradient estimation error.
                                                                 SN      (i)
This is intuitively aligned with the common practice that xŽä Ōłł i=1 Dr,T is more informative when
it achieves a smaller averaged Euclidean distance with x. Intuitively, when the iteration t of local
updates is increased, the input xr,tŌłÆ1 to be evaluated in our global gradient surrogate likely achieves
                                                         SN      (i)
a larger distance with the history of function queries i=1 Dr,T and consequently the quality of
our global gradient surrogate likely decays, which finally aligns with the phenomenon that we have
mentioned at the beginning of this section.

More Practical Choice of ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 . Finally, by introducing Prop. C.1 into the analysis in Appx. C.2,
we achieve the following better-performing choice of gradient correction length ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 :
Corollary C.1. Based on our Prop. C.1, a better-performing choice choice of ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 should be
                                                         G
                          ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 =                                             .
                                                      4Žē╬╣r Ōłćk(╬╣r )2
                                     G+2       Žē╬║ ŌłÆ k(0)d+Žā 2 d/(rT ) + N ŽĄ



                                                                                        2
Cor. C.1 implies that ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 should decay w.r.t                    updates if ╬╣r Ōłćk(╬╣r ) decreases
                                             the iteration t of local
                                                             2
w.r.t. t. Particularly, when k(x, xŌĆ▓ ) = exp ŌłÆ Ōłźx ŌłÆ xŌĆ▓ Ōłź /(2l2 ) and ╬╣r Ōłćk(╬╣r )2 decreases at a rate
of O( 1t ) for the iteration t of local updates, we then have that better-performing choice of ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 in
Prop. C.1 has the form of ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 = G+C0GŌłÆC1 /t for some constant C0 Ōēź C1 > 0. Since we usually
have no prior knowledge of client heterogeneity G as well as the constants C0 , C1 , we commonly
apply the approximated form of ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 = 1/t, which will be widely applied in our experiments as
shown in our Appx. E.


                                                    25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.4    C ONVERGENCE OF A LGO . 1

We first introduce the following lemmas that are inspired by the results in (Karimireddy et al., 2020a).
Lemma C.8. For any ╬▒-strongly convex and ╬▓-smooth function f , and any x, y, z in the domain of
f , we have
                  Ōłćf (x)ŌŖż (y ŌłÆ z) Ōēż f (y) ŌłÆ f (z) ŌłÆ ╬▒Ōłźy ŌłÆ zŌłź2 /4 + ╬▓Ōłźz ŌłÆ xŌłź2

Proof. Since f is both ╬▒-strongly convex and ╬▓-smooth, we have that
                                                              ╬▓          2
                         f (z) ŌłÆ f (x) Ōēż Ōłćf (x)ŌŖż (z ŌłÆ x) +      Ōłźz ŌłÆ xŌłź
                                                              2                                 (49)
                                                              ╬▒          2
                       f (y) ŌłÆ f (x) Ōēź Ōłćf (x)ŌŖż (y ŌłÆ x) + Ōłźy ŌłÆ xŌłź .
                                                              2
Note that when ╬▒ = 0, the inequalities above still hold. By aggregating the results above, we have
      f (z) ŌłÆ f (y) = f (z) ŌłÆ f (x) + f (x) ŌłÆ f (y)
                                                    ╬▓         2 ╬▒      2
                   Ōēż Ōłćf (x)ŌŖż (z ŌłÆ x) + Ōłćf (x)ŌŖż (x ŌłÆ y) +
                                                      Ōłźz ŌłÆ xŌłź ŌłÆ Ōłźy ŌłÆ xŌłź
                                                    2           2
                                       ╬▓      2   ╬▒      2  ╬▒      2                               (50)
                   Ōēż Ōłćf (x)ŌŖż (z ŌłÆ y) + Ōłźz ŌłÆ xŌłź ŌłÆ Ōłźy ŌłÆ zŌłź + Ōłźx ŌłÆ zŌłź
                                       2          4          2
                                       ╬▓+╬▒        2 ╬▒        2
                   = Ōłćf (x)ŌŖż (z ŌłÆ y) +     Ōłźz ŌłÆ xŌłź ŌłÆ Ōłźy ŌłÆ zŌłź
                                         2          4
                                                      2                2                  2
where the second inequality comes from ╬▒ Ōłźy ŌłÆ xŌłź /2 Ōēź ╬▒ Ōłźy ŌłÆ zŌłź /4 ŌłÆ ╬▒ Ōłźx ŌłÆ zŌłź /2 (triangle
inequality). When ╬▒ > 0, since ╬▓ > ╬▒, we have
                                                              2    ╬▒         2
                f (z) ŌłÆ f (y) Ōēż Ōłćf (x)ŌŖż (z ŌłÆ y) + ╬▓ Ōłźz ŌłÆ xŌłź ŌłÆ Ōłźy ŌłÆ zŌłź .                    (51)
                                                                   4
By rearranging the inequality above, we can directly derive the result in Lemma C.8 with ╬▒ > 0.
                                 2
Even when ╬▒ = 0, since Ōłźz ŌłÆ xŌłź Ōēź 0, we have
                                                           ╬▓         2
                         f (z) ŌłÆ f (y) Ōēż Ōłćf (x)ŌŖż (z ŌłÆ y) +   Ōłźz ŌłÆ xŌłź
                                                           2                                       (52)
                                                                    2
                                       Ōēż Ōłćf (x)ŌŖż (z ŌłÆ y) + ╬▓ Ōłźz ŌłÆ xŌłź .
By rearranging the inequality above, we show that the result in Lemma C.8 also holds for ╬▒ = 0.
Lemma C.9. For any ╬▓-smooth function f , inputs x, y in the domain of f , the following holds for
any ╬Ę > 0
                 Ōłźx ŌłÆ ╬ĘŌłćf (x) ŌłÆ y + ╬ĘŌłćf (y)Ōłź2 Ōēż (1 + ╬Ę╬▓)2 Ōłźx ŌłÆ yŌłź2 .

Proof. Since f is ╬▓-smooth, we have

                                   21          2                                2
  Ōłźx ŌłÆ ╬ĘŌłćf (x) ŌłÆ y + ╬ĘŌłćf (y)Ōłź Ōēż 1 +     Ōłźx ŌłÆ yŌłź + (1 + a) ╬Ę 2 ŌłźŌłćf (x) ŌłÆ Ōłćf (y)Ōłź
                                    a
                                                                                  (53)
                                    1            2 2           2
                              Ōēż 1 + + (1 + a) ╬Ę ╬▓ Ōłźx ŌłÆ yŌłź
                                    a
where the first inequality derives from Lemma C.5 and the second inequality comes from the
smoothness of f . By choosing a = 1/(╬Ę╬▓), we conclude our proof.
Remark. Lemma C.9 only requires the smoothness of function f . When f is both ╬▓-smooth and
╬▒-strongly convex (╬▒ > 0), we will have a tighter bound as below when ╬Ę < ╬▒/╬▓ 2 (see proof below),
                      Ōłźx ŌłÆ ╬ĘŌłćf (x) ŌłÆ y + ╬ĘŌłćf (y)Ōłź2 Ōēż (1 ŌłÆ ╬Ę╬▒)Ōłźx ŌłÆ yŌłź2 ,                            (54)
which can lead to a better convergence (by achieving a smaller constant term) compared with the
inequality (62) we will prove later. However, for simplicity and consistency under various assumptions
on the function to be optimized, we only use Lemma C.9 for the convergence analysis of our Thm. 2
in the main paper.


                                                  26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Based on the strong convexity of f , for any inputs x, y in the domain of f , we have
                                                             ╬▒        2
                            f (y) ŌłÆ f (x) Ōēź Ōłćf (x)ŌŖż (y ŌłÆ x) +  Ōłźy ŌłÆ xŌłź ,
                                                             2                                        (55)
                                                             ╬▒        2
                            f (x) ŌłÆ f (y) Ōēź Ōłćf (y)ŌŖż (x ŌłÆ y) + Ōłźy ŌłÆ xŌłź .
                                                             2
By summing up these inequalities, we have
                                                       ŌŖż                            2
                                (Ōłćf (y) ŌłÆ Ōłćf (x)) (y ŌłÆ x) Ōēź ╬▒ Ōłźy ŌłÆ xŌłź .                               (56)

Finally, we have
                                                          2
                  Ōłźx ŌłÆ ╬ĘŌłćf (x) ŌłÆ y + ╬ĘŌłćf (y)Ōłź
            (a)             2                                  2                              ŌŖż
            = Ōłźx ŌłÆ yŌłź + ╬Ę 2 ŌłźŌłćf (x) ŌłÆ Ōłćf (y)Ōłź ŌłÆ 2╬Ę (Ōłćf (x) ŌłÆ Ōłćf (y)) (x ŌłÆ y)
            (b)                                                                                       (57)
                            2                      2                     2
            Ōēż Ōłźx ŌłÆ yŌłź + ╬Ę 2 ╬▓ 2 Ōłźx ŌłÆ yŌłź ŌłÆ 2╬Ę╬▒ Ōłźx ŌłÆ yŌłź
            (c)                         2
            = 1 + ╬Ę 2 ╬▓ 2 ŌłÆ 2╬Ę╬▒ Ōłźx ŌłÆ yŌłź



where (b) comes from the smoothness of f and (56). Since ╬▒ > 0, by introducing ╬Ę Ōēż ╬▒/╬▓ 2 into
(57), we can complete our proof.

Lemma C.10. Let f be ╬▓-smooth and xŌłŚ = arg min f (x), then for any input x in the domain of f ,
the following holds
                                                   2
                                     ŌłźŌłćf (x)Ōłź Ōēż 2╬▓ (f (x) ŌłÆ f (xŌłŚ ))


Proof. Since f is ╬▓-smooth, we have the following inequality for any x, y in the domain of f

                                                                             ╬▓        2
                            f (y) Ōēż f (x) + Ōłćf (x)ŌŖż (y ŌłÆ x) +                  Ōłźy ŌłÆ xŌłź .              (58)
                                                                             2
By setting y = x ŌłÆ Ōłćf (x)/╬▓, we have

                              1
          f (xŌłŚ ) Ōēż f (x ŌłÆ      Ōłćf (x))
                             ╬▓
                                                                          2
                                     ŌŖż      1            ╬▓    1
                    Ōēż f (x) + Ōłćf (x)    x ŌłÆ Ōłćf (x) ŌłÆ x +   x ŌłÆ Ōłćf (x) ŌłÆ x                             (59)
                                            ╬▓            2    ╬▓
                                1         2
                    = f (x) ŌłÆ     ŌłźŌłćf (x)Ōłź .
                               2╬▓

We finally conclude our proof by rearranging the inequality above.


                                         (i)
We then bound the drift between xr,t and xr for every iteration t of any round r as below, which is
the key difference between the convergence of general federated ZOO and centralized optimization.
                                                                                        (i)
Lemma C.11. Assume that F is ╬▓-smooth. Then the updated input xr,t at any iteration t Ōēź 1 of
                                                                             1
round r Ōēź 1 on client i in Algo. 1 has the following bounded drift with ╬Ę Ōēż ╬▓T

                                    2              t
                      (i)                                          (i)
                                                   X                                              2
                    xr+1,t ŌłÆ xr         Ōēż 2╬Ę 2 T          S tŌłÆŽä ╬×r+1,Žä + 22╬Ę 2 T 2 ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź
                                                   Žä =1


where S Ōē£ (T + 1)2 /(T (T ŌłÆ 1)).


                                                              27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       (i)             (i)                (i)
Proof. Since xr+1,t = xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ╬Ęb
                                  gr+1,tŌłÆ1 , we have the following inequalities when T > 1
                             2
        (i)
       xr+1,t ŌłÆ xr
(a)                                                2
        (i)                      (i)
= xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ╬Ęb
              gr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xr
(b)
                                                                                          2
   (i)             (i)                                 (i)           (i)
= xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ╬ĘŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ) + ╬ĘŌłćF (xr ) ŌłÆ xr + ╬Ę ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ gbr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr )
(c)     T                                              2
            (i)             (i)
Ōēż          xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ╬ĘŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ) + ╬ĘŌłćF (xr ) ŌłÆ xr
      T ŌłÆ1
                                                                                                 2
                                             (i)                (i)
                     + ╬Ę 2 T ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ gbr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr )
(d)     T                                              2
            (i)              (i)
Ōēż          xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ╬ĘŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ) + ╬ĘŌłćF (xr ) ŌłÆ xr
      T ŌłÆ1

                                                 2
                 2          (i)          (i)              2
            + 2╬Ę T ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ gbr+1,tŌłÆ1 + ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź
                                                                                              (60)
where (c) and (d) come from the (28) in Lemma C.5 by setting a = 1/(T ŌłÆ1) and a = 1, respectively.
Since F is ╬▓-smooth, we can introduce Lemma C.9 into (60) to obtain the following result given the
constant S Ōē£ (T + 1)2 /(T (T ŌłÆ 1))
                             2
        (i)
       xr+1,t ŌłÆ xr
(a) T (1 + ╬Ę╬▓)2

                                                   2                                                        2
                          (i)                               2                (i)           (i)                                  2
Ōēż                        xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xr                 + 2╬Ę T           ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ gbr+1,tŌłÆ1              + ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź
        T ŌłÆ1
              tŌłÆ1                tŌłÆŽä ŌłÆ1                                                                                  tŌłÆ1                Žä
(b)           X     T (1 + ╬Ę╬▓)2                                   (i)             (i)
                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                         X     (1 + ╬Ę╬▓)2 T
=2╬Ę 2 T                                                  ŌłćF (xr+1,Žä ) ŌłÆ gbr+1,Žä                  + 2╬Ę 2 T ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź
              Žä =0
                             T ŌłÆ1                                                                              T ŌłÆ1      Žä =0
              tŌłÆ1             tŌłÆŽä ŌłÆ1                                                                tŌłÆ1              Žä
(c)           X     (T + 1)2                                (i)         (i)
                                                                              2
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                    X     (T + 1)2
Ōēż 2╬Ę 2 T                                               ŌłćF (xr+1,Žä ) ŌłÆ gbr+1,Žä + 2╬Ę 2 T ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź
              Žä =0
                       T (T ŌłÆ 1)                                                                    Žä =0
                                                                                                          T (T ŌłÆ 1)
(d)           tŌłÆ1                                                       2
                                             (i)           (i)
              X                                                                                         2
Ōēż 2╬Ę 2 T             S tŌłÆŽä ŌłÆ1 ŌłćF (xr+1,Žä ) ŌłÆ gbr+1,Žä                        + 22╬Ę 2 T 2 ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź
              Žä =0
                t
(e)           X                  (i)                                        2
= 2╬Ę 2 T             S tŌłÆŽä ╬×r+1,Žä + 22╬Ę 2 T 2 ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź
              Žä =1
                                                                                            (61)
where (b) comes from the summation of geometric series and (c) is from the fact that ╬Ę Ōēż 1/(╬▓T ).
In addition, (d) results from the definition of S as well as the following results
                             tŌłÆ1             Žä                  T ŌłÆ1                     Žä
                             X     (T + 1)2                     X           (T + 1)2
                                                          Ōēż
                             Žä =0
                                       T (T ŌłÆ 1)                Žä =0
                                                                            T (T ŌłÆ 1)
                                                                                    T
                                                             (T + 1)2 /[T (T ŌłÆ 1)] ŌłÆ 1
                                                          =
                                                              (T + 1)2 /[T (T ŌłÆ 1)] ŌłÆ 1
                                                                                          T   !
                                                            T (T ŌłÆ 1)           3T + 1
                                                          =               1+                ŌłÆ1
                                                             3T + 1            T (T ŌłÆ 1)                                                (62)

                                                            T (T ŌłÆ 1)          3T + 1
                                                          <             exp             ŌłÆ1
                                                             3T + 1               T

                                                            T         7
                                                          <      exp       ŌłÆ1
                                                            3         2

                                                          < 11T .

                                                                            28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                   2
                                               (i)                         (i)
Finally, (e) results from the definition of ╬×r+1,t Ōē£ gbr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 )        in our Sec. 3.2.



We finally present the convergence of Algo. 1 in the following theorem for the general federated ZOO
framework, which then can be easily applied to prove the convergence of our FZooS in Appx. C.5
and the convergence of existing federated ZOO algorithms in Appx. D.
                                                              2
                         (i)  PT       (i)             (i)
Theorem C.1. Define ╬×r,t Ōē£ t=1 gbr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) , S Ōē£ (T +1)2 /(T (T ŌłÆ1)), and xŌłŚ Ōē£
arg min F (x). Algo. 1 then has the following convergence when F is under different assumptions:
                                                                                 RŌłÆr
  (i) When F is ╬▓-smooth and ╬▒-strongly convex, by defining pr Ōē£ PR(1ŌłÆ╬▒╬ĘT /4)
                                                                      (1ŌłÆ╬▒╬ĘT /4)RŌłÆr
                                                                                    and choosing
                                                                         r=0
                                    1
     a constant learning rate ╬Ę Ōēż 10╬▓T ,

                                        ╬▒╬ĘT R             2
       min F (xr ) ŌłÆ F (xŌłŚ ) Ōēż 2╬▒ exp ŌłÆ         Ōłźx0 ŌłÆ xŌłŚ Ōłź
     rŌłł[R+1)                              4
                                           R X T
                                             N X                   t
                                                                                                           !
                                           X                   ╬Ę X tŌłÆŽä (i)        8(╬ĘT + 1/╬▒) (i)
                                       +                 pr            S ╬×r+1,Žä +            ╬×r+1,t            .
                                           r=0 i=1 t=1
                                                              N T Žä =1               ╬▒N T

                                                                                1
 (ii) When F is ╬▓-smooth and convex, by choosing a constant learning rate ╬Ę Ōēż 10╬▓T ,

                                                2      R N T            t
                                   2 Ōłźx0 ŌłÆ xŌłŚ Ōłź
                                   ŌłŚ                 1 XXX         ╬Ę X tŌłÆŽä (i)
            min F (xr ) ŌłÆ F (x ) Ōēż                +                        S ╬×r+1,Žä
          rŌłł[R+1)                      ╬ĘRT          R r=0 i=1 t=1 N T Žä =1
                                                     ŌłÜ q         !
                                       8╬Ę (i)       4 d     (i)
                                     + ╬×r+1,t +           ╬×r+1,t .
                                       N            NT

                                                                          7
(iii) When F is only ╬▓-smooth, by choosing a constant learning rate ╬Ę Ōēż 100╬▓T ,

                                                           R N T
                         2    13(F (x0 ) ŌłÆ F (xŌłŚ ))    13 X X X (0.14╬Ę + 1/(2╬▓T )) (i)
       min ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź Ōēż                             +                             ╬×r+1,t
     rŌłł[R+1)                         ╬ĘRT              ╬ĘRT r=0 i=1 t=1   N
                                              t
                                                          !
                                  1.02╬Ę 2 ╬▓ X tŌłÆŽä (i)
                                +                S ╬×r+1,Žä .
                                     N      Žä =1


Proof. Recall that the global update on server in Algo. 1 is given as
               N               N              T
                                                           !             N T
          1 X (i)           1 X       (i)
                                             X      (i)               ╬Ę X X (i)
  xr+1 =          xr+1 =            xr ŌłÆ ╬Ę        gbr+1,tŌłÆ1 = xr ŌłÆ             gb       .           (63)
          N i=1            N i=1             t=1
                                                                      N i=1 t=1 r+1,tŌłÆ1

Therefore, we have
                               N       T                      2
             ŌłŚ 2    ╬Ę X X (i)
 Ōłźxr+1 ŌłÆ x Ōłź = xr ŌłÆ          gb       ŌłÆ xŌłŚ
                    N i=1 t=1 r+1,tŌłÆ1
                                                 N T                      N T                      2
                             ŌłŚ 2              ╬Ę X X (i)
                                                 ŌłŚ ŌŖż                 ╬Ę X X (i)
               = Ōłźxr ŌłÆ x Ōłź ŌłÆ2 (xr ŌłÆ x )                 g       +               gb       .
                                              N i=1 t=1 r+1,tŌłÆ1     N i=1 t=1 r+1,tŌłÆ1
                                                        b
                            |                 {z               } |           {z       }
                                               1                              2
                                                                                       (64)
We then bound 1 and 2 based on the different assumptions on F separately.


                                                       29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Strongly Convex F .          Since F is ╬▓-smooth and ╬▒-strongly convex, we have
                              N T                                                  N X T
  (a)                  ŌŖż   ╬Ę X X   (i)                (i)

                                                                              ŌŖż ╬Ę
                                                                                  X            (i)
1 = 2 (xŌłŚ ŌłÆ xr )                     gbr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ) + 2 (xŌłŚ ŌłÆ xr )            ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 )
                           N i=1 t=1                                            N i=1 t=1
  (b)                        N    T
                    ╬Ę X X (i)                  (i)
   Ōēż 2 ŌłźxŌłŚ ŌłÆ xr Ōłź             gb       ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 )
                    N i=1 t=1 r+1,tŌłÆ1
                    N T                                                 2

                 2╬Ę X X         ŌłŚ            ╬▒         ŌłŚ 2   (i)
               +           F (x ) ŌłÆ F (xr ) ŌłÆ Ōłźxr ŌłÆ x Ōłź + ╬▓ xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xr
                 N i=1 t=1                   4
  (c) 2╬Ę                    N X T q
                           X         (i)                            ╬▒╬ĘT           2
             ŌłźxŌłŚ ŌłÆ xr Ōłź             ╬×r+1,t + 2╬ĘT F (xŌłŚ ) ŌłÆ F (xr ) ŌłÆ    Ōłźxr ŌłÆ xŌłŚ Ōłź

   Ōēż
         N                 i=1 t=1
                                                                     2
                            N T  t
                   4╬Ę 3 T ╬▓ X X X tŌłÆŽä (i)                            2
               +                    S ╬×r+1,Žä + 44╬Ę 3 T 3 ╬▓ ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź
                     N i=1 t=1 Žä =1
  (d)    ╬▒╬ĘT           2                                                2
             ŌłźxŌłŚ ŌłÆ xr Ōłź + 2╬ĘT F (xŌłŚ ) ŌłÆ F (xr ) + 44╬Ę 3 T 3 ╬▓ ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź +

   Ōēż ŌłÆ
          4
             N X T           t
                                                         !
            X       4╬Ę 3 T ╬▓ X tŌłÆŽä (i)         4╬Ę (i)
                                 S ╬×r+1,Žä +      ╬×           .
            i=1 t=1
                       N Žä =1                 ╬▒N r+1,t
                                                                                  (65)
                                                                (i)
where (b) is from Lemma C.8 by setting y = xŌłŚ , z = xr and x = xr,tŌłÆ1 in Lemma C.8. In
                                                                                    2
                                                  (i)                      (i)
addition, (c) comes from the definition of ╬×r+1,t Ōē£ gbr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 )          in our Sec. 3.2
and Lemma C.11. Finally, (d) comes from the following results
                           N X T q              N T
              2╬Ę ŌłŚ                          2╬Ę X X ŌłŚ
                                                                q
                                    (i)                            (i)
                          X
                Ōłźx ŌłÆ xr Ōłź          ╬×r+1,t =            Ōłźx ŌłÆ xr Ōłź ╬×r+1,t
              N           i=1 t=1
                                            N  i=1 t=1
                                                N X T
                                            ╬Ę  X        ╬▒ ŌłŚ        2   4 (i)
                                          Ōēż               Ōłźx ŌłÆ xr Ōłź + ╬×r+1,t                      (66)
                                            N i=1 t=1 4                ╬▒
                                                                           N T
                                                      ╬▒╬ĘT           2  4╬Ę X X (i)
                                                  =       ŌłźxŌłŚ ŌłÆ xr Ōłź +           ╬×      .
                                                       4               ╬▒N i=1 t=1 r+1,t

We then bound term 2 in (64) as below
               N   T                  2
   (a)   ╬Ę X X (i)
2 =               gb
         N i=1 t=1 r+1,tŌłÆ1
             N T                                                                          2
   (b)  ╬Ę X X   (i)                  (i)              (i)

   =               gb         ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ) + ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr ) + ╬ĘT ŌłćF (xr )
        N i=1 t=1 r+1,tŌłÆ1
              N X
   (c) 2╬Ę 2 T X  T                                 2                                2

                          (i)             (i)                    (i)
   Ōēż                  2 gbr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ) + 2 ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr )        +
        N i=1 t=1
                                          2
               2╬Ę 2 T 2 ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź
              N X
   (d) 4╬Ę 2 T X T                             N   T
                             4╬Ę 2 T ╬▓ 2 X X (i)
                            (i)
                                                              2
                                                                                       2
   Ōēż                       ╬×r+1,t +              xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xr + 2╬Ę 2 T 2 ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź
         N i=1 t=1              N       i=1 t=1
        N   T             t
                                                          !
                 4 2  2
   (e) X   X   8╬Ę T ╬▓   X
                              tŌłÆŽä (i)         4╬Ę 2 T (i)                                         2
                                                    ╬×r+1,t + 88╬Ę 4 T 4 ╬▓ 2 + 2╬Ę 2 T 2 ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź

   Ōēż                         S ╬×r+1,Žä +
       i=1 t=1
                  N     Žä =1
                                                N
                                                                                             (67)


                                                        30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where (c) is obtained by applying Lemma C.5 multiple times and (d) is from the smoothness of F .
Besides, (e) comes from our Lemma C.11 and the fact that ╬Ę Ōēż 1/(╬▓T ).
By combining (65) and (67), we have



                  2
    ŌłźxR+1 ŌłÆ xŌłŚ Ōłź
(a)

         ╬▒╬ĘT                  2
                 ŌłźxR ŌłÆ xŌłŚ Ōłź + 2╬ĘT F (xŌłŚ ) ŌłÆ F (xR )

Ōēż 1ŌłÆ
          4
                                                       2
       + 2╬Ę 2 T 2 44╬Ę 2 T 2 ╬▓ 2 + 22╬ĘT ╬▓ + 1 ŌłźŌłćF (xR )Ōłź


                 N X
                   T                             t
                                                                                           !
                 X         4╬Ę 3 T ╬▓(2╬ĘT ╬▓ + 1) X tŌłÆŽä (i)       4╬Ę(╬ĘT + 1/╬▒) (i)
             +                                      S ╬×R+1,Žä +             ╬×R+1,t
                 i=1 t=1
                                    N          Žä =1
                                                                   ╬▒N
(b)

          ╬▒╬ĘT                 2
                  ŌłźxR ŌłÆ xŌłŚ Ōłź + 2╬ĘT 1 ŌłÆ 2╬ĘT ╬▓ 44╬Ę 2 T 2 ╬▓ 2 + 22╬ĘT ╬▓ + 1           F (xŌłŚ ) ŌłÆ F (xR )

Ōēż 1ŌłÆ
             4
             N X T                           t
                                                                                     !
            X         4╬Ę 3 T ╬▓(2╬ĘT ╬▓ + 1) X tŌłÆŽä (i)             4╬Ę(╬ĘT + 1/╬▒) (i)
         +                                      S ╬×r+1,Žä +                   ╬×r+1,t
            i=1 t=1
                                N          Žä =1
                                                                      ╬▒N
                 R+1                    R                RŌłÆr
(c)       ╬▒╬ĘT                     2
                                      X            ╬▒╬ĘT
                      Ōłźx0 ŌłÆ xŌłŚ Ōłź +                           H F (xŌłŚ ) ŌłÆ F (xr )

= 1ŌłÆ                                         1ŌłÆ
             4                        r=0
                                                     4
             R               RŌłÆr X  N X T                           t
                                                                                                             !
            X         ╬▒╬ĘT                     4╬Ę 3 T ╬▓(2╬ĘT ╬▓ + 1) X tŌłÆŽä (i)          4╬Ę(╬ĘT + 1/╬▒) (i)
         +        1ŌłÆ                                                   S ╬×r+1,Žä +                     ╬×r+1,t
            r=0
                        4          i=1 t=1
                                                       N          Žä =1
                                                                                           ╬▒N
                                                                                                  (68)

where (b) is from Lemma C.10 and (c) is from H Ōē£ 2╬ĘT 1 ŌłÆ 2╬ĘT ╬▓ 44╬Ę 2 T 2 ╬▓ 2 + 22╬ĘT ╬▓ + 1
as well as the repeated application of (b).
                           RŌłÆr
Define pr Ōē£ PR(1ŌłÆ╬▒╬ĘT /4)
                 (1ŌłÆ╬▒╬ĘT /4)RŌłÆr
                                                                                                1
                               . Note that when choose the learning rate ╬Ę that satisfies ╬Ę Ōēż 10╬▓T ,
                 r=0
                                                           2
we have H Ōēź 0.544 ╬ĘT . Based on this and ŌłźxR+1 ŌłÆ xŌłŚ Ōłź Ōēź 0 for (68), we further have



                               R
                           (a) X
 min F (xr ) ŌłÆ F (xŌłŚ ) Ōēż           pr F (xr ) ŌłÆ F (xŌłŚ )

rŌłł[R+1)
                               r=0
                           (b) (1 ŌłÆ ╬▒╬ĘT /4)R+1 Ōłźx        ŌłŚ 2
                                                     0ŌłÆx Ōłź
                           Ōēż         PR                 r
                                 H    r=0 (1 ŌłÆ ╬▒╬ĘT /4)
                                      R  N X  T          t
                                                                                                      !
                                                       2
                                   1  XX            ╬Ę X tŌłÆŽä (i)        4╬Ę(╬ĘT + 1/╬▒) (i)
                                +               pr          S ╬×r+1,Žä +             ╬×r+1,t
                                  H r=0 i=1 t=1     2N Žä =1                ╬▒N
                           (c) ╬▒╬ĘT

                                          ╬▒╬ĘT R              2
                           Ōēż        exp ŌłÆ          Ōłźx0 ŌłÆ xŌłŚ Ōłź
                                H            4
                                     R N T                 t
                                                                                              !
                                  1 XXX              ╬Ę 2 X tŌłÆŽä (i)       4╬Ę(╬ĘT + 1/╬▒) (i)
                               +                pr            S ╬×r+1,Žä +               ╬×r+1,t
                                 H r=0 i=1 t=1       2N Žä =1                  ╬▒N
                           (d)

                                        ╬▒╬ĘT R                2
                           Ōēż 2╬▒ exp ŌłÆ             Ōłźx0 ŌłÆ xŌłŚ Ōłź
                                           4
                                  R X N X T             t
                                                                                         !
                                 X                 ╬Ę X tŌłÆŽä (i)         8(╬ĘT + 1/╬▒) (i)
                               +             pr            S ╬×r+1,Žä +             ╬×r+1,t
                                 r=0 i=1 t=1
                                                  N T Žä =1                ╬▒N T
                                                                                         (69)


                                                     31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                    1
where (b) is from the rearrangement of (68) and the fact that ╬Ę Ōēż 10╬▓T . Besides, (c) comes from the
inequality 1 ŌłÆ x Ōēż exp(ŌłÆx) as well as the following results when R + 1 Ōēź 4 ln(3/4)/(╬▒╬ĘT )
                                          R                     r                        R+1
                                          X              ╬▒╬ĘT            1 ŌłÆ (1 ŌłÆ ╬▒╬ĘT /4)
                                                    1ŌłÆ              =
                                          r=0
                                                          4               1 ŌłÆ (1 ŌłÆ ╬▒╬ĘT /4)
                                                                      4 [1 ŌłÆ exp(ŌłÆ╬▒╬ĘT (R + 1)/4)]                              (70)
                                                                    Ōēź
                                                                                  ╬▒╬ĘT
                                                                        1
                                                                    Ōēź       .
                                                                      ╬▒╬ĘT
Finally, (d) is due to the fact that H Ōēź 0.544 ╬ĘT .

Convex F .        When ╬▒ = 0, following the derivation in (65), we have

        (a) 2╬Ę              N X
                              T q
                                  (i)
                            X                                                           2
                          ŌłŚ
                                 ╬×r+1,t + 2╬ĘT F (xŌłŚ ) ŌłÆ F (xr ) + 44╬Ę 3 T 3 ╬▓ ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź

      1 Ōēż         Ōłźx ŌłÆ xr Ōłź
              N                             i=1 t=1
                                           N T  t
                                  4╬Ę 3 T ╬▓ X X X tŌłÆŽä (i)
                          +                        S ╬×r+1,Žä
                                    N i=1 t=1 Žä =1
                  ŌłÜ           N       T
        (b) 2╬Ę        d XX
                                           q
                                             (i)                                                    2
                                            ╬×r+1,t + 2╬ĘT F (xŌłŚ ) ŌłÆ F (xr ) + 44╬Ę 3 T 3 ╬▓ ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź

        Ōēż
              N           i=1 t=1                                                                                              (71)
                                      3  N T t
                                  4╬Ę T ╬▓ X X X                          (i)
                          +                                    S tŌłÆŽä ╬×r+1,Žä
                                      N       i=1 t=1 Žä =1
        (c)                       ŌłŚ                    2
        = 2╬ĘT F (x ) ŌłÆ F (xr ) + 44╬Ę 3 T 3 ╬▓ ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź


                                T
                              N X                            t              ŌłÜ q        !
                              X                     4╬Ę 3 T ╬▓ X tŌłÆŽä (i)    2╬Ę d   (i)
                          +                                    S ╬×r+1,Žä +       ╬×r+1,t
                                  i=1 t=1
                                                      N Žä =1               N
                                                                                         ŌłÜ
where the (b) comes from the diameter of X , i.e., Ōłźx ŌłÆ xŌĆ▓ Ōłź Ōēż                               d for any x, xŌĆ▓ Ōłł X = [0, 1]d .
For term 2 in (64), similar to (67), we also have
          T
        N X                                     t
                                                                                   !
        X                 8╬Ę 4 T 2 ╬▓ 2 X tŌłÆŽä (i)       4╬Ę 2 T (i)                                                           2
                                                                                       + 88╬Ę 4 T 4 ╬▓ 2 + 2╬Ę 2 T 2 ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź .

2 Ōēż                                         S ╬×r+1,Žä +       ╬×r+1,t
        i=1 t=1
                              N        Žä =1
                                                        N
                                                                                                                               (72)
By combining (71) and (72), we have
                              2
      ŌłźxR+1 ŌłÆ xŌłŚ Ōłź
(a)
                      2
Ōēż ŌłźxR ŌłÆ xŌłŚ Ōłź + 2╬ĘT 1 ŌłÆ 2╬ĘT ╬▓ 44╬Ę 2 T 2 ╬▓ 2 + 22╬ĘT ╬▓ + 1                                    F (xŌłŚ ) ŌłÆ F (xR )


                          N X
                            T                                      t                              ŌłÜ q       !
                          X                  4╬Ę 3 T ╬▓(2╬ĘT ╬▓ + 1) X tŌłÆŽä (i)       4╬Ę 2 T (i)     2╬Ę d  (i)
                  +                                                   S ╬×R+1,Žä +       ╬×R+1,t +      ╬×R+1,t
                          i=1 t=1
                                                      N          Žä =1
                                                                                  N              N
(b)                               R
                                  X
                      2
Ōēż Ōłźx0 ŌłÆ xŌłŚ Ōłź +                            H F (xŌłŚ ) ŌłÆ F (xr )

                                  r=0
                          N X
                            T                   t                              ŌłÜ q         !
                          4╬Ę 3 T ╬▓(2╬ĘT ╬▓ + 1) X tŌłÆŽä (i)
                          X                                   4╬Ę 2 T (i)     2╬Ę d    (i)
              +                                    S ╬×r+1,Žä +       ╬×r+1,t +       ╬×r+1,t
                 i=1 t=1
                                   N          Žä =1
                                                               N              N
                                                                                         (73)

where (a) is from Lemma C.10 and (b) is from H Ōē£ 2╬ĘT 1 ŌłÆ 2╬ĘT ╬▓ 44╬Ę 2 T 2 ╬▓ 2 + 22╬ĘT ╬▓ + 1
as well as the repeated application of (a).


                                                                              32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               1
Note that when choose the learning rate ╬Ę that satisfies ╬Ę Ōēż 10╬▓T , we have H Ōēź 0.544 ╬ĘT . Based on
                           2
this and ŌłźxR+1 ŌłÆ xŌłŚ Ōłź Ōēź 0 for (73), we further have
                                    R  (a)
                                 1 X
                                   ŌłŚ
                                       F (xr ) ŌłÆ F (xŌłŚ )

          min F (xr ) ŌłÆ F (x ) Ōēż
        rŌłł[R+1)                  R r=0
                                                    ŌłŚ 2          R N T          t
                                       (b) Ōłźx
                                                 0ŌłÆx Ōłź      1 X X X ╬Ę 2 X tŌłÆŽä (i)
                                        Ōēż                 +                       S ╬×r+1,Žä
                                                 RH        RH r=0 i=1 t=1 2N Žä =1
                                                                     ŌłÜ q        !
                                                    4╬Ę 2 T (i)     2╬Ę d   (i)
                                                  +       ╬×r+1,t +       ╬×r+1,t                       (74)
                                                     N              N
                                       (c) 2 Ōłźx      ŌłŚ 2       R N T            t
                                                  0ŌłÆx Ōłź     1 XXX             ╬Ę X tŌłÆŽä (i)
                                        Ōēż                   +                      S ╬×r+1,Žä
                                                  ╬ĘR        R r=0 i=1 t=1 N T Žä =1
                                                                ŌłÜ q           !
                                                     8╬Ę (i)    4 d      (i)
                                                   + ╬×r+1,t +          ╬×r+1,t
                                                     N         NT

where (c) is due to the fact that H Ōēź 0.544 ╬ĘT .

Non-Convex F .          When F is only ╬▓-smooth, we have
    F (xr+1 ) ŌłÆ F (xr )
(a)                      ╬▓              2
Ōēż ŌłćF (xr )ŌŖż (xr+1 ŌłÆ xr ) +  Ōłźxr+1 ŌłÆ xr Ōłź
                         2
               N X T                      N T         2
(b) ╬Ę       ŌŖż
              X         (i)       ╬▓ ╬Ę X X (i)
= ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr )          gbr+1,tŌłÆ1 +             gb
    N         i=1 t=1
                                  2 N i=1 t=1 r+1,tŌłÆ1
(c)                  N X T
        ╬Ę           X           (i)            (i)               (i)

ŌēżŌłÆ        ŌłćF (xr )ŌŖż           gbr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ) + ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr ) + ŌłćF (xr )
        N           i=1 t=1
              "N T                      t
                                                                   !                               #
            ╬▓  X   X     8╬Ę 4 T 2 ╬▓ 2 X tŌłÆŽä (i)       4╬Ę 2 T (i)            4 4 2      2 2
                                                                                                 2
          +                                S ╬×r+1,Žä +       ╬×r+1,t + 88╬Ę T ╬▓ + 2╬Ę T ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź
            2 i=1 t=1        N        Žä =1
                                                        N
(d) ╬Ę     T
        N X
                                       (i)                (i)             (i)
        X
Ōēż                 ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź       gbr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ) + ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr )
      N i=1 t=1
              N X
                T                            t
                                                                      !
              X          4╬Ę 4 T 2 ╬▓ 3 X tŌłÆŽä (i)       2╬Ę 2 ╬▓T (i)                                                     2
                                                                          + 44╬Ę 4 T 4 ╬▓ 3 + ╬Ę 2 T 2 ╬▓ ŌłÆ ╬ĘT ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź

          +                                S ╬×r+1,Žä +        ╬×r+1,t
              i=1 t=1
                             N        Žä =1
                                                        N
(e) ╬Ę   N X
          T                                                                    2                           2

        X                                2  1    (i)              (i)                 ╬▓      (i)
 Ōēż                ╬Ę╬▓T ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź +             gbr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ) +                 xr+1,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xr      +
     N i=1 t=1                            2╬Ę╬▓T                                       2╬ĘT
             N X  T                  t
                                                                    !
            X         4╬Ę 4 T 2 ╬▓ 3 X tŌłÆŽä (i)          2╬Ę 2 ╬▓T (i)                                                2
                                                              ╬×r+1,t + 44╬Ę 4 T 4 ╬▓ 3 + ╬Ę 2 T 2 ╬▓ ŌłÆ ╬ĘT ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź

         +                               S ╬×r+1,Žä +
            i=1 t=1
                          N        Žä =1
                                                        N
                                                       N X  T                          t
(f )
         4 4 3         2 2
                                                 2
                                                     X           4╬Ę 4 T 2 ╬▓ 3 + ╬Ę 2 ╬▓ X tŌłÆŽä (i)
 Ōēż 44╬Ę T ╬▓ + 13╬Ę T ╬▓ ŌłÆ ╬ĘT ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź +                                                      S ╬×r+1,Žä
                                                      i=1 t=1
                                                                          N            Žä =1
                                            !
             2╬Ę 2 ╬▓T + 1/(2╬▓T ) (i)
         +                           ╬×r+1,t
                     N
                                                                                                      (75)
where (a) comes from the smoothness of F and (b) is from the one-round update (63) for input x. In
addition, (c) derives from (67) and (e) results from (27) in Lemma C.5 by setting a = ╬Ę╬▓T in (27).
Finally, (f ) comes from Lemma C.11.


                                                           33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                             7
Define H Ōē£ ╬ĘT ŌłÆ 44╬Ę 4 T 4 ╬▓ 3 ŌłÆ 13╬Ę 2 T 2 ╬▓ and choose ╬Ę Ōēż 100╬▓T , we have that H > 0.08╬ĘT . Based
on this, we further have
                        (a)      R
                    2         1 X              2
 min ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź Ōēż                   ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź
rŌłł[R+1)                       R r=0
                                R                                   R N T
                        (b)1 X                                   1 XXX         2╬Ę 2 ╬▓T + 1/(2╬▓T ) (i)
                      Ōēż             F (xr ) ŌłÆ F (xr+1 ) +                                          ╬×r+1,t
                          RH r=0                                RH r=0 i=1 t=1         N
                                                          t              !
                                    4╬Ę 4 T 2 ╬▓ 3 + ╬Ę 2 ╬▓ X tŌłÆŽä (i)
                                 +                             S ╬×r+1,Žä
                                             N            Žä =1

                      (c) 13(F (x ) ŌłÆ F (xŌłŚ ))                R N T
                                  0                     13 X X X (0.14╬Ę + 1/(2╬▓T )) (i)
                      Ōēż                            +                                      ╬×r+1,t
                                  ╬ĘRT                 ╬ĘRT r=0 i=1 t=1          N
                                                t
                                                                 !
                                   1.02╬Ę 2 ╬▓ X tŌłÆŽä (i)
                                 +                 S ╬×r+1,Žä
                                      N       Žä =1
                                                                                               (76)
where (c) is due to the fact that H Ōēź 0.08 ╬ĘT .
Remark. Of note, Thm. C.1 has presented the convergence of the general optimization framework
for federated ZOO problems (i.e., Algo. 1). So, it can be easily adapted to provide the convergence for
those algorithms that follow this optimization framework (e.g., our Thm. 2 and the results in Appx. D).
This advancement demonstrates superiority over existing federated optimization approaches, such as
FedZO, FedProx, and SCAFFOLD, in terms of universality. Notably, these prior works primarily
focus on providing convergence guarantees exclusively for their specific algorithmic designs.


                                                   34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.5     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2


                                                                                               PN      (i)
To establish the proof for Thm. 2, we introduce the upper bound of gradient disparity N1 i=1 ╬×r,t
derived from our Thm. 1, into Thm. C.1. This is in fact facilitated by leveraging the gradient correction
length in our Cor. 1 to improve the bound in our Thm. 1 (refer to the remark of Appx. C.2). To begin
with, we first derive a set of inequalities below based on our (38) since they are frequently required in
the results of Thm. C.1. It is important to note that for the sake of simplicity in our proof, we present
the validity of these inequalities with a constant probability, without explicitly providing the exact
form of this probability.


           R   T   N    t
       1 X X X X tŌłÆŽä (i)
                           S ╬×r+1,Žä
      N R r=0 t=1 i=1 Žä =1
       R T t
 (a) 1 X X X
                                          p            ŌłÜ
 =                  S tŌłÆŽä 4Žē╬║ŽürT +Žä ŌłÆ1 + 2 2Žē╬║ŽürT G + 2 2N GŽĄ
      R r=0 t=1 Žä =1
       T       R
  (b) X 1 X 4Žē╬║Žü
                           rT
                               (S t ŌłÆ Žüt )   p                 ŌłÜ          St ŌłÆ 1
  =                                        + 2 2Žē╬║ŽürT G + 2 2N GŽĄ
      t=1
          R r=0              SŌłÆŽü                                            SŌłÆ1
       T
          "
                     t     t         (R+1)T
                                                    ŌłÜ                            ŌłÜ     !          #
  (c) X 4Žē╬║ (S ŌłÆ Žü ) (1 ŌłÆ Žü                   )    2 2Žē╬║G(1 ŌłÆ Žü(R+1)T /2 ) 2 2N GŽĄ         t
  =                                             +                            +           (S ŌłÆ 1)
      t=1
                  R(S ŌłÆ Žü)(1 ŌłÆ ŽüT )                  R(1 ŌłÆ ŽüT /2 )(S ŌłÆ 1)        SŌłÆ1
                 (R+1)T
                                                                 ŌłÜ
                          ) S(S T ŌłÆ 1) Žü(1 ŌłÆ ŽüT )              2 2Žē╬║G(1 ŌłÆ Žü(R+1)T /2 )

 (d) 4Žē╬║(1 ŌłÆ Žü
  =                                          ŌłÆ            +
      R(S ŌłÆ Žü)(1 ŌłÆ ŽüT )           SŌłÆ1             1ŌłÆŽü             R(1 ŌłÆ ŽüT /2 )(S ŌłÆ 1)
                      ŌłÜ         !
                                     S(S T ŌłÆ 1)

                    2 2N GŽĄ
                 +                                ŌłÆ1
                       SŌłÆ1              SŌłÆ1
               ŌłÜ                  r       !
  (e)     T 2 ( G + 1)          2   NG
  =O                       +T
                 R                   M
                                                                                                (77)
where (b), (c), (d) are from the summation of geometric series. In addition, (e) comes from the fact
                  2
                                       S T ŌłÆ1                       (T +1)2
that S Ōē£ T(T(T+1)                                           S                                 1

                ŌłÆ1) (i.e., S Ōēż 4.5), SŌłÆ1 Ōēż 11T in (62), SŌłÆ1 = 3T +1 = O (T ) and ŽĄ = O M .


        R T      N                 R T
   1 X X X (i) (a) 1 X X                                   p           ŌłÜ
                     ╬×r+1,t =              4Žē╬║ŽürT +tŌłÆ1 + 2 2Žē╬║ŽürT G + 2 2N GŽĄ
  N R r=0 t=1 i=1               R r=0 t=1
                                   R         rT      T                      ŌłÜ

                            (b) 1 X 4Žē╬║Žü (1 ŌłÆ Žü )            p
                            =                           + 2T 2Žē╬║ŽürT G + 2T 2N GŽĄ
                                R r=0        1ŌłÆŽü
                                                       ŌłÜ
                            (c) 4Žē╬║(1 ŌłÆ Žü
                                          (R+1)T
                                                 ) 2T 2Žē╬║G(1 ŌłÆ Žü(R+1)T /2 )      ŌłÜ
                            =                     +               T /2
                                                                            + 2T 2N GŽĄ
                                    R(1 ŌłÆ Žü)               R(1 ŌłÆ Žü )
                                      ŌłÜ                  !
                            (d)     T G+1         ŌłÜ
                            = O               + T N GŽĄ
                                        R
                                                                                     (78)
where (c), (d) are from the summation of geometric series.


                                                   35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    v
     R X T X N q       (a)    R X T u   N
 1  X            (i)       1 X      u1 X   (i)
                ╬×r+1,t Ōēż            t     ╬×
N R r=0 t=1 i=1            R r=0 t=1 N i=1 r+1,t
                                 R T
                                                                                    ŌłÜ
                              (b)
                                                             q p                q
                              1 XX p              rT +tŌłÆ1                rT
                          Ōēż                 4Žē╬║Žü           + 2 2Žē╬║Žü G + 2 2N GŽĄ
                              R r=1 t=1
                                 R
                                                                                                   !
                                                                                          ŌłÜ
                                      p
                                        4Žē╬║ŽürT (1 ŌłÆ ŽüT /2 )
                                                                  q p                   q
                          (c) 1 X
                          =                                  + T 2 2Žē╬║ŽürT G + T 2 2N GŽĄ
                              R r=0         1 ŌłÆ Žü1/2
                              ŌłÜ                                       ŌłÜ
                          (d)   4Žē╬║(1 ŌłÆ ŽüT /2 )(1 ŌłÆ Žü(R+1)T /2 ) T 4 8Žē╬║G(1 ŌłÆ Žü(R+1)T /4 )          ŌłÜ
                                                                                                    4
                          =                                       +                            +  T   8N GŽĄ
                                   R(1 ŌłÆ Žü1/2 )(1 ŌłÆ ŽüT /2 )                 R(1 ŌłÆ ŽüT /4 )
                                    ŌłÜ            r        !
                          (e)     T 4G+1          4 NG
                          =O                 +T
                                      R              M
                                                                                              (79)
                                                                                            ŌłÜ 2
                                                                             P         P
where (a) is from CauchyŌĆōSchwarz inequality and (b) is from the inequality of j cj Ōēż      j  cj
for any cj > 0. Besides, (c), (d) are from the summation of geometric series.
Subsequently, we proceed to establish the proof for the results in Thm. 2 that are conditioned on
different assumptions of F by systematically demonstrating each case individually as follows.


Strongly Convex F . Define c Ōē£ 1 ŌłÆ ╬▒╬ĘT /4. 4 When R + 1 Ōēź 4 ln(3/4)/(╬▒╬ĘT ), we then have
that pr Ōēż ╬▒╬ĘT cRŌłÆr according to (70), which finally yields the following result

        R      T    N   t
    1 X X X X tŌłÆŽä (i)
           pr              S ╬×r,Žä
    N r=1 t=1 i=1 Žä =1
     R           rT                                   R     ŌłÜ
                       S(S T ŌłÆ 1) Žü(1 ŌłÆ ŽüT )             2pr 2Žē╬║GŽürT /2 S(S T ŌłÆ 1)
                                                  X
(a) X 4pr Žē╬║Žü
=                                 ŌłÆ               +                                      ŌłÆ1
    r=1
           SŌłÆŽü            SŌłÆ1          1ŌłÆŽü           r=1
                                                              SŌłÆ1                SŌłÆ1
                   ŌłÜ
                  2 2N GŽĄ S(S T ŌłÆ 1)

              +                           ŌłÆ1
                    SŌłÆ1          SŌłÆ1
(b) 4╬▒╬ĘT Žē╬║(cR+1 ŌłÆ Žü(R+1)T )       S(S T ŌłÆ 1) Žü(1 ŌłÆ ŽüT )

 Ōēż                                             ŌłÆ
         (S ŌłÆ Žü)(c ŌłÆ ŽüT )            SŌłÆ1             1ŌłÆŽü
                        ŌłÜ         R+1     (R+1)T /2
                                                                              ŌłÜ
                                                    ) S(S T ŌłÆ 1)            2 2N GŽĄ S(S T ŌłÆ 1)

                  2╬▒╬ĘT 2Žē╬║G(c         ŌłÆŽü
              +                                                    ŌłÆ1 +                              ŌłÆ1
                          (S ŌłÆ 1)(c ŌłÆ ŽüT /2 )             SŌłÆ1                  SŌłÆ1         SŌłÆ1
                                        !
                   ŌłÜ
                                 r
(c)                                 NG
 Ōēż O ╬▒╬ĘT 3 cR ( G + 1) + T 2
                                    M
                                        !
        ╬▒T 2 cR ŌłÜ
                                 r
(d)                            2   NG
=O              ( G + 1) + T
           ╬▓                        M
                                                                                                (80)
where (a) follows from the derivation in (77) and (b) is due to the fact that pr Ōēż ╬▒╬ĘT cRŌłÆr as well
as the summation of geometric series. Besides, (c) comes from cR+1 > Žü(R+1)T /2 > Žü(R+1)T and
                                                                                    1
c > ŽüT /2 > ŽüT when we choose c properly in the proof of (69) as well as ŽĄ = O M       . Finally, (d)
                                 1
results from the fact that ╬Ę Ōēż 10╬▓T and ╬▒ < ╬▓.


   4                                                 ŌłÜ
    Note that according to (66), we can always find a Žü < c < 1 such that (69) still holds with only different
constant terms. As a result, cR+1 > Žü(R+1)T /2 > Žü(R+1)T and c > ŽüT /2 > ŽüT .


                                                     36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Following from the derivation above, we also have

            R      T  N
        1 X X X (i)
               pr        ╬×
        N r=0 t=1 i=1 r+1,t
         R
                 4Žē╬║ŽürT (1 ŌłÆ ŽüT )                  ŌłÜ
        X                              p
      =     pr                               rT
                                   + 2T 2Žē╬║Žü G + 2T 2N GŽĄ
        r=0
                      1ŌłÆŽü
                                                ŌłÜ
        4╬▒╬ĘT Žē╬║(1 ŌłÆ ŽüT )(cR+1 ŌłÆ Žü(R+1)T ) 2╬▒╬ĘT 2 2Žē╬║G(cR+1 ŌłÆ Žü(R+1)T /2 )      ŌłÜ
      Ōēż                                    +                              + 2T   2N GŽĄ
                  (1 ŌłÆ Žü)(c ŌłÆ ŽüT )                  (c ŌłÆ ŽüT /2 )
                                       !
            ╬▒cR ŌłÜ
                                 r
                                    NG
      =O         (T G + 1) + T           .
              ╬▓                      M
                                                                                     (81)
Finally, by introducing (80) and (81) into Thm. C.1, we have

       min F (xr ) ŌłÆ F (xŌłŚ )
      rŌłł[R+1)
                                           R X N X T             t
                                                                                                         !
(a)            ╬▒╬ĘT R                     X                  ╬Ę X tŌłÆŽä (i)            8(╬ĘT + 1/╬▒) (i)
                                   ŌłŚ 2
 Ōēż 2╬▒ exp ŌłÆ              Ōłźx0 ŌłÆ x Ōłź +                  pr             S ╬×r+1,Žä +                   ╬×r+1,t
                  4                       r=0 i=1 t=1
                                                           N T Žä =1                     ╬▒N T
                                                                          !
                                            ╬▒cR T 2 ŌłÜ
                                                                     r
(b)                ╬▒╬ĘT R             1                                 NG
                                                                   2
 ŌēżO ╬▒ exp ŌłÆ                 D0 +                   ( G + 1) + T
                     4              ╬▓T 2       ╬▓                       M
                                                              !!
                 1/╬▓ + 1/╬▒ ╬▒cR ŌłÜ
                                                      r
                                                          NG
               +                     (T G + 1) + T
                    ╬▒T            ╬▓                       M
                                              !
                               ŌłÜ
                                       r
(c)                                      NG
 = O exp(ŌłÆ╬ĘRT )D0 + cR G +
                                           M
                                                                                                   (82)
                                         1
where (b) is due to the fact that ╬Ę Ōēż 10╬▓T  . Let each item above achieve an ŽĄ/4 error, we then realize
the result in our Thm. 2 when F is ╬▒-strongly convex and ╬▓-smooth.


Convex F .        By introducing (77), (78) and (79) into Thm. C.1, we have



           min F (xr ) ŌłÆ F (xŌłŚ )
        rŌłł[R+1)

                ŌłŚ 2        R N T            t                       ŌłÜ q        !
  (a) 2 Ōłźx
             0ŌłÆx Ōłź      1 XXX           ╬Ę X tŌłÆŽä (i)      8╬Ę (i)    4 d   (i)
  Ōēż                  +                         S ╬×r+1,Žä + ╬×r+1,t +      ╬×r+1,t
             ╬ĘRT        R r=0 i=1 t=1 N T Žä =1           N         NT
                               ŌłÜ            r     !        ŌłÜ         r    !
  (b)         D0     1    T 2 ( G + 1)    2    NG      1 T G+1         NG
      ŌēżO         +                     +T           +             +T
             ╬ĘRT   ╬▓T 2         R              M      ╬▓T     R         M         (83)
                   ŌłÜ       ŌłÜ           r      !!
                     d T 4G+1          4 NG
                 +                  +T
                   T         R           M
                   ŌłÜ      ŌłÜ4
                                    r       r     !
  (c)         D0     G + d2 G         NG     4 NG
      =O         +               +       +
             ╬ĘRT         R            M         M

                                        1
where (b) is due to the fact that ╬Ę Ōēż 10╬▓T . Let each item above achieve an ŽĄ/4 error, we then realize
the result in our Thm. 2 when F is convex and ╬▓-smooth.


                                                   37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Non-Convex F .      By introducing (77) and (78) into Thm. C.1, we have
                           2
           min ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź
          rŌłł[R+1)

    (a) 13(F (x ) ŌłÆ F (xŌłŚ ))          R N T
               0                  13 X X X (0.14╬Ę + 1/(2╬▓T )) (i)
    Ōēż                          +                                  ╬×r+1,t
               ╬ĘRT               ╬ĘRT r=0 i=1 t=1        N
                               t
                                             !
                   1.02╬Ę 2 ╬▓ X tŌłÆŽä (i)
                 +                S ╬×r+1,Žä                                                        (84)
                      N      Žä =1
                           ŌłÜ            r      !             ŌłÜ             r    !!
    (b)       D1    1 T G+1                NG       1   T 2 ( G + 1)     2   NG
    ŌēżO           +                   +T          +                   +T
             ╬ĘRT   T         R             M       ╬▓T 2       R              M
                   ŌłÜ        r       !
    (c)       D1      G        NG
    =O           +      +
             ╬ĘRT     R           M
                                        7
where (b) is due to the fact that ╬Ę Ōēż 100╬▓T . Let each item above achieve an ŽĄ/3 error, we then realize
the result in our Thm. 2 when F is non-convex and ╬▓-smooth. This hence finally concludes our proof
of Thm. 2.


                                                  38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX D         T HEORETICAL R ESULTS FOR E XISTING F EDERATED ZOO
                    A LGORITHMS

D.1    G RADIENT E STIMATION IN E XISTING F EDERATED ZOO A LGORITHMS

We first introduce the following lemma from the Thm. 2.6 in (Berahas et al., 2022) to bound the
gradient estimation error of the standard FD method, which usually serves as the foundation of
existing federated ZOO baselines, e.g., (Fang et al., 2022).
Lemma D.1. Let ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1). Assume that function f is ╬▓-smooth in its domain and uq Ōł╝ N (0, I) in
(3), then the following holds with a probability of at least 1 ŌłÆ ╬┤,

                             ŌłÜ    s
                       ŌłÜ                             ╬▓ 2 ╬╗2                 4ŽĄ2

                            ŽĄ d     3n            2
   ŌłźŌłå(x) ŌłÆ Ōłćf (x)Ōłź Ōēż ╬▓╬╗ d +     +       3 ŌłźŌłćf (x)Ōłź +        (d + 2)(d + 4) + 2
                             ╬╗      ╬┤Q                 4                    ╬╗

where supxŌłłX |y(x) ŌłÆ f (x)| Ōēż ŽĄ.
Remark. In our setting (see Sec. 2), we in fact have the following result with a probability of at least
1 ŌłÆ ╬┤ by applying the Chernoff bound on the Gaussian observation noise ╬Č:
                                                 p
                                          ŽĄ=         2 ln(2/╬┤)Žā ,                                  (85)

which is regarded as a constant in our following proofs. By additionally assuming that the gradient of
f be bounded (i.e., ŌłźŌłćf (x)Ōłź Ōēż c for any x in the domain of f and some c > 0), we have

                                                                         1
                                ŌłźŌłå(x) ŌłÆ Ōłćf (x)Ōłź Ōēż ╬ø + O                 ŌłÜ                          (86)
                                                                          Q

                                            ŌłÜ        ŌłÜ
where the constant ╬ø is defined as ╬ø Ōē£ ╬▓╬╗ d + ŽĄ ╬╗ d . Note that this additional constant term in (86)
can not be avoided, which thus is another pitfall of the FD method in addition to its query inefficiency
as discussed in our Sec. 3.2.

Based on the results above, we can get the following upper bounds for the gradient estimation methods

                                                                                                  1
in the existing federated ZOO algorithms. Note that, we usually keep the constant before O Q
to deliver a more detailed comparison among different federated ZOO algorithms throughout this
section.


FedZO Algorithm. For FedZO (Fang et al., 2022), it applies the following gradient estimation for
every local update in Algo. 1:

                                        (i)                 (i)
                                       gbr,tŌłÆ1 = Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) .                                  (87)

          (i)             (i)              (i)
That is, ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 = 0 and gr,tŌłÆ1 = Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) in (2). We provide the following gradient disparity
bound for such a gradient estimation method when it is applied in Algo. 1.
                                    PN                        2
Proposition D.1. Assume that N1 i=1 ŌłźŌłćfi (x) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (x)Ōłź Ōēż G for any x Ōłł X and fi is ╬▓-
smooth with bounded gradient for any i Ōłł [N ]. When applying (87) in Algo. 1, the following then
holds with a constant probability for some ╬ø > 0,

                                   N
                                1 X (i)                                  1
                                     ╬× Ōēż 4╬ø2 + 2G + 4O                            .
                                N i=1 r,t                                Q


                                                      39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof.
     N            N                                2
  1 X (i) (a) 1 X           (i)            (i)
        ╬×r,t =       Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
  N i=1        N i=1
                         N                                                            2
              (b)1 X            (i)            (i)             (i)            (i)
              =         Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
                 N i=1
             (c) 1 XN
                                                          2                                2

                              (i)   (i)            (i)                  (i)           (i)
             Ōēż         2 Ōłå (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
                 N i=1
             (d)

                   2                1
             Ōēż 4╬ø + 2G + 4O
                                    Q
                                                                                            (88)
where (c) comes from Lemma C.5 and (d) is based on Lemma C.5 as well as the result in (86).

FedProx Algorithm. For FedProx in the federated ZOO setting (i.e., by simply combining Fed-
Prox from (Li et al., 2020a) with the standard FD method in (3)), it has the gradient estimation form
as follows:
                              (i)            (i)          (i)
                            gbr,tŌłÆ1 = Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + ╬│(xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xrŌłÆ1 )                          (89)
                                      (i)         (i)            (i)                     (i)
where ╬│ is a constant. That is, ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 = ╬│, gr,tŌłÆ1 = Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) and grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ) =
 (i)
xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆxrŌłÆ1 in (2). We provide the following gradient disparity bound for such a gradient estimation
method when it is applied in Algo. 1.
                                    PN                         2
Proposition D.2. Assume that N1 i=1 ŌłźŌłćfi (x) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (x)Ōłź Ōēż G for any x Ōłł X and fi is ╬▓-
smooth with bounded gradient for any i Ōłł [N ]. When applying (89) in Algo. 1, the following then
holds with a constant probability for some ╬ø > 0,
                  N                             N
                                           3╬│ 2 X (i)

               1 X (i)                                               2           1
                                2
                     ╬× Ōēż 6╬ø + 3G +                  x       ŌłÆ xrŌłÆ1 + 6O               .
               N i=1 r,t                    N i=1 r,tŌłÆ1                         Q

Proof.
   N            N                                                  2
1 X (i) (a) 1 X           (i)

                                       (i)

                                                           (i)
      ╬×r,t =       Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + ╬│ xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xrŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
N i=1        N i=1
                   N                                                                                     2
            (b) 1 X           (i)             (i)             (i)            (i)

                                                                                            (i)
            =          Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + ╬│ xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xrŌłÆ1
                N i=1
            (c) 1 XN
                                                         2                                   2

                                  (i)             (i)                  (i)            (i)
            Ōēż         3 Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
                N i=1
                                  N
                              3╬│ 2 X (i)           2
                          +          xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xrŌłÆ1
                               N i=1
                                       N
                        3╬│ 2 X (i)
            (d)

                                            2                          1
                    2
            Ōēż 6╬ø + 3G +        xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xrŌłÆ1 + 6O                              .
                         N i=1                                         Q
                                                                                                 (90)
Similarly, (c) is from Lemma C.5 and (d) is based on Lemma C.5 as well as the result in (86).

SCAFFOLD (Type I) Algorithm. For SCAFFOLD using its Type I gradient correction in the
federated ZOO setting (i.e., by simply combining SCAFFOLD (Type I) from (Karimireddy et al.,
2020a) with the standard FD method in (3)), it has the gradient estimation form as follows:
                                                    N
                        (i)             (i)      1 X (j)
                    gbr,tŌłÆ1 = Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) +         Ōłå (xrŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłå(i) (xrŌłÆ1 ) .                (91)
                                                 N j=1


                                                    40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          (i)          (i)             (i)                     (i)            PN
That is, ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 = 1, gr,tŌłÆ1 = Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) and grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ) = N1 j=1 Ōłå(j) (xrŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ
Ōłå(i) (xrŌłÆ1 ) in (2). Of note, similar to our FZooS where an additional transmission is required
when we actively query in the neighborhood of xr in line 7 of Algo. 2, SCAFFOLD (Type I) also
                                              PN
needs another server-client transmission of N1 j=1 Ōłå(j) (xrŌłÆ1 ) for gradient correction. We provide
the following gradient disparity bound for such a gradient estimation method when it is applied in
Algo. 1.
Proposition D.3. Assume that fi is ╬▓-smooth with bounded gradient for any i Ōłł [N ]. When applying
(91) in Algo. 1, the following then holds with a constant probability for some ╬ø > 0,
                       N                                N
                                       6╬▓ 2 X (i)

                   1 X (i)                                 2                                 1
                         ╬×r,t Ōēż 18╬ø2 +        xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xrŌłÆ1 + 18O                                      .
                   N i=1                N i=1                                                Q


Proof.
                                  ’Ż½                            ’ŻČ                2
   N             N                     N
 1 X  (i) (a) 1
                X
                     (i) (i)        1 X
                                           (j)         (i)              (i)
     ╬× =            Ōłå (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + ’ŻŁ       Ōłå (xrŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłå (xrŌłÆ1 )’ŻĖ ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
N i=1 r,t     N i=1                 N j=1

                      N                                                 N
            (b)    1 X          (i)             (i)       1             X
                                                                                                      (i)

            =            Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) +                        Ōłå(j) (xrŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfj (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
                   N i=1                                  N
                                                                      j=1,j╠Ė=i

                               N ŌłÆ1                                  2
                                             (i)
                           +           Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłå(i) (xrŌłÆ1 )
                                 N
                                                                                                                                   2
            (c)  N                                2    N                            N
              3 X          (i)             (i)       3 X                            X
                                                                                                                       (i)

            Ōēż       Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + 3                                       Ōłå   (j)
                                                                                                       (xrŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfj (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
              N i=1                                 N i=1
                                                                                 j=1,j╠Ė=i
                                           N
                             3(N ŌłÆ 1)2 X          (i)        (i)
                                                                          2
                           +               Ōłćf i (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłå    (x rŌłÆ1 )
                                N3     i=1
                      N                                             N  N
            (d)    3 X          (i)             (i)
                                                       2  3(N ŌłÆ 1) X X                                                       (i)
                                                                                                                                       2
            Ōēż            Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) +                                              Ōłå(j) (xrŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfj (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
                   N i=1                                    N3     i=1                  j=1,j╠Ė=i
                                            N
                                          2 X
                               3(N ŌłÆ 1)                     (i)
                                                                                    2
                           +                         Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłå(i) (xrŌłÆ1 )
                                  N3       i=1
                     N                                                              N
            (e)    3 X          (i)             (i)
                                                       2  6(N ŌłÆ 1) X          (i)             (i)
                                                                                                      2
            Ōēż            Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) +     2
                                                                       Ōłå(j) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfj (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
                   N i=1                                    N      j=1
                                                 N
                               6╬▓ 2 (N ŌłÆ 1)2 X (i)             2
                           +           2
                                                 xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xrŌłÆ1
                                     N       j=1

            (f )      N                             2                      N  2
                9 X          (i)             (i)
                                                            X (i)
            Ōēż         Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + 6╬▓ 2     xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xrŌłÆ1
                N i=1                                       i=1

            (g)            N                     2

                          X (i)                           1
            Ōēż 18╬ø2 + 6╬▓ 2       xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xrŌłÆ1 + 18O
                          i=1
                                                         Q
                                                                                                   (92)
Similarly, (c), (d) are from Lemma C.5 and (e) is because of the smoothness of F as well as (28)
with a = N 1ŌłÆ1 . Finally, (g) follows from the results in (86) as well as the result in Lemma C.5.


SCAFFOLD (Type II) Algorithm. For SCAFFOLD using its Type II gradient correction in the
federated ZOO setting (i.e., by simply combining SCAFFOLD (Type II) from (Karimireddy et al.,


                                                            41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2020a) with the standard FD method in (3)), it has the gradient estimation form as follows:


                                              N    T                       T
            (i)              (i)          1 X X (j) (j)                1 X (i) (i)
           gbr,tŌłÆ1 = Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) +                 Ōłå (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ        Ōłå (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 ) .                    (93)
                                         N T j=1 Žä =1                  T Žä =1


                           (i)                   PN PT              (j)           PT         (i)
That is, grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ ) ŌłÆ grŌłÆ1 (xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ ) = N1T           j=1
                                                                (j)             1
                                                          Žä =1 Ōłå (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ T
                                                                                         (i)
                                                                                   Žä =1 Ōłå (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 ),
 (i)                 (i)           (i)
gr,tŌłÆ1 = Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) and ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 = 1 in (2). Interestingly, SCAFFOLD (Type II) servers as
an approximation of SCAFFOLD (Type I), which in fact does not require another server-client
transmission for gradient correction as discussed in (Karimireddy et al., 2020a). This is because
  1
    PN PT           (j)  (j)                                                   (i)   N
NT     j=1   Žä =1 Ōłå (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 ) can be computed before the aggregation of {xrŌłÆ1,T }i=1 on server.
We provide the following gradient disparity bound for such a gradient estimation method when it is
applied in Algo. 1.



Proposition D.4. Assume that fi is c-continuous and ╬▓-smooth for any i Ōłł [N ] and the randomly
sampled {uq }Q q=1 in (3) are shared across all iterations and rounds. When applying (93) in Algo. 1,
the following then holds with a constant probability for some ╬ø, a > 0,


       N                                 N   T
                     24ac2 X X (i)

  1 X (i)                                            2                           1                    1
                                             (i)
        ╬×r,t Ōēż 18╬ø2 + 2            xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 + 6O                               + 12O                .
  N i=1               ╬╗ T i=1 Žä =1                                               Q                   TQ


                                                    (i)    (i)
Proof. We slightly abuse notation and use ŌłåT (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) to denote the FD method in (3) using T Q
                                                                 (i)
function queries for the gradient estimation at input xr,tŌłÆ1 on client i. Based on this notation, we


                                                          42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


then have


        N
    1 X (i)
         ╬×
    N i=1 r,t
                                ’Ż½                                             ’ŻČ                2
        N                      N    T                        T
(a) 1   X          (i)    1 X X (j) (j)                  1 X (i) (i)                   (i)
=           Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) + ’ŻŁ         Ōłå (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ         Ōłå (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 )’ŻĖ ŌłÆ ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
   N i=1                N T j=1 Žä =1                     T Žä =1
      N                                                            T
                                                                                    !
(b) 1 X   (i) (i)            (i)       N ŌłÆ1          (i)        1 X (i) (i)
=        Ōłå (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) +       Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ          Ōłå (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 )
   N i=1                                N                      T Žä =1
                                                                                          2
                  N T
           1      X X                         (j)                         (j)

        +                        Ōłå(j) (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfj (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
          NT
                j=1,j╠Ė=i Žä =1

(c) 3   N                                           2
                   (i)                  (i)
        X
Ōēż           Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
    N i=1
                     N                                                                                             T
                                                                                                                                                  ! 2
          3(N ŌłÆ 1)2 X           (i)      (i)    (i)

                                                                                           (i) (i)       1         X             (i)
        +               Ōłćf i (x r,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłåT   (x r,tŌłÆ1 )  +                                ŌłåT (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ                  Ōłå(i) (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 )
             N3     i=1
                                                                                                                 T Žä =1
            N            N
                                "                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                     !# 2
          3 X            X
                                           (j)        (j) (j)

                                                                                                (j) (j)       1          X
                                                                                                                                    (j)     (j)
        + 3                          Ōłćfj (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ ŌłåT (xr,tŌłÆ1 )                     +        ŌłåT (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ                   Ōłå         (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 )
         N i=1                                                                                                         T Žä =1
                     j=1,j╠Ė=1

(d) 3   N                                           2
                   (i)                  (i)
        X
Ōēż           Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
    N i=1
                         N
          3(N ŌłÆ 1)2 X

                                         1                                                                 2
                                                                   (i)                (i)      (i)
        +                           1+                  Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ŌłåT (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
             N3     i=1
                                       N ŌłÆ1
                                                        T                                     2!
                          (i) (i)       1               X
                                                                 (i)     (i)
                   +N    ŌłåT (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ                      Ōłå         (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 )
                                                    T Žä =1
                      N  N
            3(N ŌłÆ 1) X X                              1                         (j)                  (j)   (j)
                                                                                                                   2
        +                                     1+                   Ōłćfj (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ ŌłåT (xr,tŌłÆ1 )
              N3     i=1
                                                    N ŌłÆ1
                             j=1,j╠Ė=1

                                                        T                                     2!
                          (j) (j)       1               X
                                                                 (j)     (j)
                   +N    ŌłåT (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ                      Ōłå         (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 )
                                                    T Žä =1
                                                                                            (94)
Similarly, (c) are from (29) in Lemma C.5 and (d) is because of (28) in Lemma C.5 with a = NNŌłÆ1 .


                                                             43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                              2
                              (i)     (i)                PT                      (i)
We then bound ŌłåT (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ T1                               Žä =1 Ōłå
                                                                         (i)
                                                                               (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 )       as below

                                     T                                   2
         (i) (i)       1             X
                                                (i)     (i)
        ŌłåT (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ                      Ōłå         (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 )
                                   T Žä =1
      T
(a) 1 X                                                                  2
                             (i)                        (i)
Ōēż               Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłå(i) (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 )
       T Žä =1
                         Q                                                                                                                2
      T
(b) 1 X         1 X                                                                                u
                           (i)                     (i)                  (i)            (i)          q
=                     yi (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 + ╬╗uq ) ŌłÆ yi (xr,tŌłÆ1 + ╬╗uq ) + yi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ yi (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 )
       T Žä =1   Q q=1                                                                              ╬╗
               T   Q
(c)       1 XX                                                                                   2
                           (i)                     (i)                  (i)            (i)             2
Ōēż       2
                      yi (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 + ╬╗uq ) ŌłÆ yi (xr,tŌłÆ1 + ╬╗uq ) + yi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ yi (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 ) Ōłźuq |
       ╬╗ T Q Žä =1 q=1
               T   Q
(d)       1 XX                                                                                     2
                             (i)                     (i)                  (i)            (i)             2
=       2
                      2 fi (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 + ╬╗uq ) ŌłÆ fi (xr,tŌłÆ1 + ╬╗uq ) + fi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ fi (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 ) Ōłźuq Ōłź
       ╬╗ T Q Žä =1 q=1
                    Q
                1 X                                             2
                          (i)         (i)      (i)ŌĆ▓        (i)ŌĆ▓        2
            + 2        2 ╬ČrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ╬Čr,tŌłÆ1 + ╬ČrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ╬Čr,tŌłÆ1 Ōłźuq Ōłź
             ╬╗ T Q q=1
         T   Q
(e) 1 XX                                                    2                                 2
                       (i)                     (i)                  (i)            (i)                  2
Ōēż 2             4 fi (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 + ╬╗uq ) ŌłÆ fi (xr,tŌłÆ1 + ╬╗uq ) + fi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ fi (xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 )     Ōłźuq Ōłź
 ╬╗ T Q Žä =1 q=1
                        Q
                   1 X 2           2
            +              8ŽĄ Ōłźuq Ōłź
                ╬╗2 T Q q=1
                                                                                       Q
       T                                                                                          !
(f )
  8 X 2 (i)                    2                                                 1 X
                       (i)                                                                  2
Ōēż 2        c xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1 + ŽĄ2                                                   Ōłźuq Ōłź
 ╬╗ T Žä =1                                                                        Q q=1

(g) 8a      T                                                 2

                              (i)            (i)
            X
Ōēż                    c2 xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1                        + ŽĄ2
       ╬╗2 T Žä =1
                                                                                                  (95)
where (a), (d), (e) are due to (29) in Lemma C.5. Note that (d) is valid because {uq }Q   q=1 in (3) is
assumed to be shared across all iterations and rounds. In addition, (c) is from the CauchyŌĆōSchwarz
                                                                          ŌĆ▓
                                                p F , i.e., ŌłźF (x) ŌłÆ F (x
inequality and (f ) is based on the continuity of                           )Ōłź Ōēż c for any x, xŌĆ▓ Ōłł X .
                                                                       ŌłÆ1
Finally, (g) is from Lemma C.2 and a Ōē£ d + 2 dQŌłÆ1 ln(1/╬┤) + 2Q ln(1/╬┤).
Finally, by introducing (95) into (94), we have

   N            N                                                        N
1 X (i) (a) 3 X            (i)              (i)
                                                     2     6(N ŌłÆ 1) X                 (i)     (i) (i)
                                                                                                           2
      ╬×r,t Ōēż       Ōłå(i) (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) +                          Ōłćfi (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ ŌłåT (xr,Žä ŌłÆ1 )
N i=1        N i=1                                            N2        i=1
                               2 X N X  T
                   24a(N ŌłÆ 1)                 2     (i)         (i)
                                                                           2
                                                                                 2
                 +                           c    x r,tŌłÆ1  ŌłÆ  x rŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1     +  ŽĄ
                     ╬╗2 T N 2     i=1 Žä =1
                                    N      T
                   24a(N ŌłÆ 1) X X 2 (j)                             (j)
                                                                              2
                                                                                    2
                 +                              c    x  r,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ  x  rŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1    +  ŽĄ
                     ╬╗2 T N 2            Žä =1            j=1,j╠Ė=1

                   (b)                        N X
                                            2 X T                                             2

                                     24ac                          (i)               (i)                     1                    1
                   Ōēż18╬ø2 +                                        xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1              + 6O               + 12O
                                      ╬╗2 T      i=1 Žä =1
                                                                                                             Q                   TQ
                                                                                                     (96)
Finally, (b) follows from the results in (86) as well as the result in Lemma C.5, which finally concludes
our proof.


                                                                                44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Comparison and Discussion. By comparing the upper bounds in Prop. D.1, D.2, D.3, and D.4
above with the one in our Thm. 1, we can summarize certain interesting insights as follows, which, to
the best of our knowledge, has never been formally presented in the literature of federated ZOO.
  (i) The gradient disparity of existing federated ZOO algorithms consistently has an additional
      constant error term (i.e., ╬ø2 ) that can not be avoided. Remarkably, no additional constant error
      term occurs in the gradient disparity bound of our (8).
 (ii) The gradient disparity of existing federated ZOO algorithms typically can only be reduced at a
      polynomial rate of Q whereas our (8) is able to achieve an exponential rate of reduction for its
      gradient disparity.
(iii) FedProx achieves an even worse gradient disparity when compared with FedZO by introducing
                                  2 PN                          2
                                                (i)
      an additional error term 3╬│N      i=1 xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xrŌłÆ1         . This may explain its worst convergence
      in Sec. 6.
(iv) SCAFFOLD (Type I) and SCAFFOLD (Type II) are typically able to mitigate the impact of
      client heterogeneity (i.e., G) by enlarging the impact of the gradient estimation error that is
      resulting from the FD method applied in these two algorithms. This may lead to worse practical
      performance when the gradient estimation error outweighs the client heterogeneity, as shown in
      our Sec. 6.
 (v) Although SCAFFOLD (Type II) is proposed to approximate SCAFFOLD (Type I) in the
      original paper (Karimireddy et al., 2020a), SCAFFOLD (Type II) in fact has the advantage of
      achieving a smaller gradient estimation error for    gradient
                                                                      correction by increasing the number
                                                           1
      of additional function queries (i.e., the term O T Q in Prop. D.4), which is however at the cost
                                                                 2 PN                                  2
                                                                          PT       (i)        (i)
      of a likely increased input disparity (i.e., the term 24ac
                                                             ╬╗2 T     i=1   Žä =1 xr,tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ xrŌłÆ1,Žä ŌłÆ1      in
      Prop. D.4). Interestingly, federated ZOO usually prefers gradient correction of smaller gradient
      estimation errors, as suggested by the empirical results in our Sec. 6. This explains the reason
      why SCAFFOLD (Type II) usually outperforms SCAFFOLD (Type I) in federated ZOO,
      which differs from the scenario of federated FOO and therefore highlights the importance of an
      accurate gradient correction in federated ZOO.

D.2   C ONVERGENCE OF E XISTING F EDERATED ZOO A LGORITHMS

To establish the proof for the convergence of existing federated ZOO algorithms, we introduce the
                                       PN      (i)
upper bound of gradient disparity N1 i=1 ╬×r,t derived from our Prop. D.1, D.2, D.3, and D.4, into
Thm. C.1. Particularly, to ease our proof, we mainly prove the convergence of existing federated ZOO
                                                                                                   2
algorithms when F is non-convex and ╬▓-smooth. Similar to our Thm. 2, we define D0 Ōē£ Ōłźx0 ŌłÆ xŌłŚ Ōłź
                                                    N                       2
and D1 Ōē£ F (x0 ) ŌłÆ F (xŌłŚ ), and assume that N i=1 ŌłźŌłćfi (x) ŌłÆ ŌłćF (x)Ōłź Ōēż G for any x Ōłł X .
                                                1
                                                   P

Theorem D.1. FedZO enjoys the following convergence with a constant probability for some ╬ø > 0
              7
when ╬Ę Ōēż 100╬▓T   ,

                                            2         D1       2        1
                          min ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź Ōēż O              +╬ø +G+             .
                       rŌłł[R+1)                       ╬ĘRT                Q

Proof. Following the proof in our Appx. C.5, we have
                                                          R N T
                      2    13(F (x0 ) ŌłÆ F (xŌłŚ ))     13 X X X (0.14╬Ę + 1/(2╬▓T )) (i)
   min ŌłźŌłćF (xr )Ōłź Ōēż                              +                              ╬×r+1,t
 rŌłł[R+1)                          ╬ĘRT              ╬ĘRT r=0 i=1 t=1      N
                                           t
                                                         !
                               1.02╬Ę 2 ╬▓ X tŌłÆŽä (i)
                             +                 S ╬×r+1,Žä
                                  N      Žä =1

                                D1           2       1      1   2    1
                          ŌēżO         + ╬ø +G+              +    ╬ø +G+
                               ╬ĘRT                   Q      ╬▓        Q

                                D1                 1
                          =O         + ╬ø2 + G +         ,
                               ╬ĘRT                 Q
                                                                                     (97)


                                                   45
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which concludes our proof.
Remark. Of note, this convergence aligns with one provided in (Fang et al., 2022), which hence
supports the validity of our Thm. C.1 and Prop. D.1.

Discussion. Of note, the key to proving the convergence of other existing federated ZOO algorithms
(i.e., FedProx and SCAFFOLD) lies in the bounded client drift (i.e., Lemma C.11) when additional
input disparity is introduced in these algorithms. This in fact takes up a lot of space as shown in their
original paper and is also out of the scope of this paper. As a consequence, we leave out the proof of
the convergence of FedProx and SCAFFOLD in federated ZOO. Fortunately, the convergence (i.e.,
Thm. C.1) for the general optimization framework Algo. 1 implies that the key difference among the
convergence of various federated ZOO algorithms in fact lies in their difference of gradient disparity.
In light of this, based on our theoretical insights about the gradient disparity in different federated
ZOO algorithms (Sec. D.1), we are still able to present the following insights into the advantages of
our FZooS intuitively from the perspective of convergence:

  (i) In general, the convergence of our FZooS in Appx. C.5 avoids the constant error term that can
      not be omitted in existing federated ZOO algorithms. Note that even the error term caused by
      RFF approximation (see Thm. 2) is in fact able to be mitigated by using a large number M of
      random features.
 (ii) Compared with the convergence of FedZO in Thm. D.1, the convergence of FZooS in Appx. C.5
      demonstrates that the client heterogeneity can be effectively mitigated in FZooS and the gradient
      estimation term enjoys a better reduction rate (i.e., exponential rate vs. polynomial rate).
(iii) The bounded client drift in Lemma C.11 for the framework Algo. 1 implies that the additional
      input disparity from the FedProx in Prop. D.2, the SCAFFOLD (Type I) in Prop. D.3 and the
      SCAFFOLD (Type II) in Prop. D.4 likely leads to a larger client drift and consequently results
      in worse convergence compared with our FZooS, which has been empirically supported by the
      results in our Sec. 6 and Appx. F.


                                                  46
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX E           E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS
                                                                     (i)
General Settings. The gradient correction length is set to be ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 = 1/t such that it decays with
the iteration of local updates t. We set the learning rate ╬Ę = 0.01 and use Adam as the optimizer. As
we described in line 7-8 of Algo. 2 and in Sec. 4.2.1, at each local update iteration, we actively query
in the neighborhood of the input x(i)                                                            (i)
                                      r,t on each client. Each time we generate 100 values of xr,t + ╬┤
                            ŌĆ▓
where each dimension of ╬┤ is uniformly sampled from [ŌłÆ0.01, 0.01]. We select the top 5 values with
                                (i) 2
the highest uncertainty Ōłé(Žār,t     ) (x(i)
                                        r,t + ╬┤) . We set the number of random features M = 10000
for the squared exponential kernel with a length scale of 1. Each dimension of the function input
is normalized to be within [0, 1] using the min-max normalization. The number of clients N , the
number of local updates T , and the number of rounds R vary for different experiments.

E.1   S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENTS
                                                      (i)                     (i)
Let input x = [xj ]dj=1 Ōłł [ŌłÆ10, 10]d , a(i) = [aj ]dj=1 , and b(i) = [bj ]dj=1 , then the quadratic
functions on each client i that has been applied in our Sec. 6.1 is in the form of
                  ’Ż½                                                                       ’ŻČ

               1 ’ŻŁX                     (i)   1                         (i)   1
     fi (x) =                 1 + C aj ŌłÆ             x2j + 1 + C bj ŌłÆ              xj + 1 ’ŻĖ    (98)
              10d                             N                               N
                      jŌłł[d]

                (i)            (i)
where every [aj ]N             N
                  i=1 and [bj ]i=1 are independently randomly sampled from the same Dirichlet
distribution Dir(╬▒) where ╬▒ = N1 ┬Ę 1. So, given any C > 0, the final objective function remains
                                           ’Ż½                    ’ŻČ
                                        1 ’ŻŁX   2
                             F (x) =               xj + xj + 1 ’ŻĖ .                            (99)
                                      10d
                                                 jŌłł[d]


Of note, C is the constant that controls the client shift in our federated setting. Specifically, a larger C
typically leads to larger client shifts whereas a smaller C usually enjoys smaller client shifts. We set
the number of clients to be N = 5. We set C Ōłł {0.5, 5, 50} to vary the degree of heterogeneity (i.e.,
client shifts) among the local functions. The dimension of the function input is set to be d = 300. We
set the number of local updates to be T = 10 and the number of rounds to be R = 50.

E.2   F EDERATED B LACK -B OX A DVERSARIAL ATTACK

We set the number of clients N = 10 in this experiment. Before we conduct the adversarial attack,
we need to train N = 10 models on different datasets to get the heterogeneous local model functions.
To control the degree of heterogeneity among these functions, each time we sample P ├Ś 10 classes
among the 10 classes of the dataset (i.e., MNIST or CIFAR-10) and construct a dataset that only
contains data points from these P ├Ś 10 classes where P Ōłł [0, 1]. Repeat the above procedures for 10
times to get 10 different datasets. Consequently, a higher P means that the degree of heterogeneity
among the local model functions is lower. As an example, when P = 1, all the local models of these
clients will be exactly the same since they are all trained on the dataset with all 10 classes data points.
For MNIST, we train a convolutional neural network (CNN) with two convolution layers followed by
two fully connected layers on each dataset. For CIFAR-10, we train a ResNet18 on each dataset.
After obtaining these 10 local model functions for the clients, we proceed to select 15 data points from
the test dataset. Specifically, we choose these data points among the ones that have been correctly
classified by all of the 10 local models. These selected data points will be used as the targets for our
attack. The goal is to find a perturbation x, such that the modified image z + x will be classified
incorrectly by the model of each client. The local function takes the perturbed image z + x as input
and outputs the difference between the logit of the true class and the highest logit among all other
classes except the true class. The condition for the attack to be successful is that the averaged output
of N = 10 models misclassify the image z + x. The success rate is the portion of images that are
successfully attacked among the selected 15 images. We set the number of local updates T = 10 and
the number of rounds to be R = 100.


                                                    47
             Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    Client 1                      Client 2                       Client 3                    Client 4                        Client 5
                                  0.50

                     Similarity   0.25

                                  0.00

                                                5     10       15             5     10       15              5       10 15               5     10       15               5     10       15
                                                                                                                 Iterations
                                                                          FedZO            FedProx          SCAFFOLD (1)         SCAFFOLD (2)            FZooS
                                                                     (i)
             Figure 4: Comparison of the cosine similarity between gbr,tŌłÆ1 and ŌłćF (xr,tŌłÆ1 ) within one round
             (with local iterations T = 20) among different federated ZOO algorithms, where the y-axis denotes
             the cumulatively averaged similarity w.r.t. the x-axis (i.e., the iterations of local updates). Of note,
             for every iteration, our (8) will actively query only 5 additional function values, which is much fewer
             than the 20 additional queries in other existing algorithms based on FD methods.
                                             Client 1                     Client 2                          Client 3                     Client 4                        Client 5
                                             T=5                     T = 10                   T = 20                            T=5                      T = 10                     T = 20
             0.50
                     3                                                                                                     3
Similarity


             0.25
                2                                                                                                          2


                                                                                                                   F (x)
             F (x)


                1                                                                                                          1
             0.00
                     0                                                                                                     0
                            0            5     20
                                                10      15 0            20
                                                                        5    10      015          20    5       10 150            10 5       10 0 15        20       5       010    15       50
                                                                    # Rounds                                Iterations                              # Queries (┬Ż10 3 )

                                                                     FedZO          FedProx            SCAFFOLD (1)            SCAFFOLD (2)             FZooS

             Figure 5: Comparison of the communication round and query efficiency between our FZooS and
             other existing baselines on the federated synthetic functions with a varying number T of local updates.


             E.3                    F EDERATED N ON -D IFFERENTIABLE M ETRIC O PTIMIZATION

             Following the practice in (Shu et al., 2023), we first train a 3-layer MLP model on the training
             dataset of Covertype (Dua and Graff, 2017) using the Cross-Entropy loss to obtain its fully converged
             parameters ╬Ė ŌłŚ . This is to simulate the federated learning (i.e., fine-tuning) of a pre-trained model with
             other non-differentiable metrics. Similar to the setting in Appx. E.2, we construct N = 7 datasets by
             sampling P ├Ś7 (P Ōłł [0, 1]) classes from the test dataset each time. Again, the degree of heterogeneity
             among the local functions of the clients is controlled by P . The higher the value of P , the more
             heterogeneous local functions will be. In this experiment, we aim to find a perturbation x to the model
             parameters ╬Ė ŌłŚ , such that ╬Ė ŌłŚ + x will yield better performance for other non-differentiable metrics,
             e.g., precision and recall, by using the distributed datasets on clients. Specifically, the local function
             takes the perturbed model parameter as input and outputs the result of a non-differentiable metric
             (e.g., 1 ŌłÆ precision) that evaluates the performance of the model on the corresponding constructed
             dataset. We set T = 10 and R = 50. As in (Shu et al., 2023), we conduct experiments on four
             non-differentiable metrics, namely precision, recall, Jaccard score, and F1 score.


             A PPENDIX F                                   M ORE R ESULTS

             F.1                    S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENTS

             In this section, we first compare the gradient disparity of existing federated ZOO algorithms and
             our FZooS algorithm using the quadratic functions (see Appx. E.1) with d = 300, N = 5, and
             C = 5. The results are in Fig. 4, showing that our proposed adaptive gradient estimation is indeed
             able to realize significantly improved estimation quality than other existing methods while requiring
             fewer function queries. This consequently verified the theoretical insights of Thm. 1. Interestingly,
             we notice that the quality of our (8) decreases when the number of iterations for local updates is
             increased, which is likely because the performance of our gradient surrogates suffers when the input x
             for gradient estimation is far away from the historical function queries (i.e., few function information
             at x can be used for predictions), as theoretically supported in our Appx. C.3. This also indicates
             the importance of active queries in our FZooS for consistently high-quality (8) by collecting more
             function information in the neighborhood of the potential updated inputs within the local updates.


                                                                                                                 48
             Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                          C = 0:5                       C = 5:0                   C = 50:0                                             C = 0:5                         C = 5:0                       C = 50:0
                        1.0                               1.5                                                                            1.0                              1.5


                                                          1.0                                                                                                             1.0                          3.0
                                                                                      3.0


                                                                                                                              F (x)
             F (x)      0.5                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                             FZooS(M = 0:5┬Ż10 3 )
                                                          0.5                                                                                                             0.5                                 FZooS
                                                                                             FZooS(M = 1:0┬Ż10 3 )
                                                                                      2.5    FZooS(M = 2:5┬Ż10 3 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5    FZooS(┬░r; t ┬Ī 1 = 1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                              FZooS(┬░r; t ┬Ī 1 = 1, x 0 = x 00 = xr ┬Ī 1 )
                        0.0                               0.0                                FZooS(M = 10 ┬Ż10 3 )                        0.0                              0.0
                                      5     10      15              5      10    15           5          10         15                             5     10      15                5      10    15              5            10             15
                                                                        # Rounds                                                                                                       # Rounds


                                                                        (a)                                                                                                            (b)

             Figure 6: Comparison of the communication round efficiency of our FZooS (a) with a varying
             number M of random features and (b) without adaptive gradient correction. Of note, ╬│r,tŌłÆ1 = 1
             means a fixed gradient correction length and xŌĆ▓ = xŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ = xrŌłÆ1 stands for a fixed gradient correction
             vector as in SCAFFOLD.
                                            Client 1                           Client 2                                  Client 3                                     Client 4                        Client 5
                                             T=5                         T = 10                T = 20                                                     T=5                           T = 10                    T = 20
             0.50
                1.0                                                                                                                          1.0


                                                                                                                              Success Rate
             Success Rate
Similarity


             0.25
                            0.5                                                                                                              0.5

             0.00
                            0.0                                                                                                              0.0
                                  0       5 10 10 20 15         0       10 5 20 10     015   10               205            10 15 0                             520    10 0 15      25       505       010       50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15                        100
                                                                        # Rounds                                         Iterations                                              # Queries (┬Ż10 3 )

                                                                         FedZO        FedProx                 SCAFFOLD (1)                             SCAFFOLD (2)               FZooS

             Figure 7: Comparison of the success rate achieved by FZooS and other existing federated ZOO
             algorithms on CIFAR-10 under a varying number T of local updates.


             In addition to the comparison using a quadratic function that is under varying heterogeneity through
             different C in our Fig. 1, we present the comparison using a quadratic function that is under a varying
             number T of local updates in Fig. 5. Remarkably, our FZooS still considerably outperforms other
             baselines in terms of both communication round efficiency and query efficiency. Interestingly, Fig. 5
             shows that a larger T usually improves the communication round efficiency of both our FZooS, as
             theoretically supported in our Thm. 2. However, such an improvement is usually smaller than the
             increasing scale of T . This also aligns with our Thm. 2 since our Thm. 2 demonstrates that the
             increasing T fails to mitigate the impact of client heterogeneity. That is, term G in Thm. 2 can not be
             reduced when T is increased.
             We finally present the comparison of the communication round efficiency of our FZooS (a) with a
             varying number M of random features and (b) without adaptive gradient correction under varying
             client heterogeneity in Fig. 6. Of note, in Fig. 6, we only apply M = 1000 random features to
             facilitate a clear and direct comparison. Interestingly, Fig. 6(a) demonstrates that our FZooS of a
             larger number M of random features generally is preferred for an improved communication round
             efficiency when the client heterogeneity (i.e., C) is increased, which thus aligns with the theoretical
             insights from our Thm. 2 in Sec. 5.2. Nevertheless, when client heterogeneity is small (e.g., C Ōēż 5.0),
             a moderate number of random features can already produce compelling and competitive convergence.
             Meanwhile, Fig. 6(b) illustrates that, in general, both our adaptive gradient correction vector and
             adaptive gradient correction length are essential for our FZooS to achieve remarkable convergence in
             practice. Surprisingly, our FZooS with fixed gradient correction outperforms its counterpart with
             adaptive gradient correction when client heterogeneity is large (i.e., C = 50). This is likely because
             a small number of random features (i.e., M = 1000) are applied when C = 50, making adaptive
             gradient correction generally inaccurate for a long horizon of local updates since the quality of our
             gradient surrogates decays w.r.t. the horizon (i.e., iterations) as shown in Fig. 4. This can also be
             verified from Fig. 6(a). On the contrary, the fixed gradient correction is already of reasonably good
             quality due to the smoothness of the global function F (i.e., its gradients are continuous), which
             consequently can provide consistently good gradient correction along a long horizon of local updates
             when client heterogeneity is large (i.e., C = 50).

             F.2                      F EDERATED B LACK -B OX A DVERSARIAL ATTACK

             In addition to depicting the success rate of attacks on CIFAR-10 in Fig.2, which accounts for varying
             client heterogeneity, we also present the success rate of attacks on CIFAR-10 considering a variable


                                                                                                                            49
             Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              P = 0:5               P = 0:7                 P = 0:9                                           P = 0:5                     P = 0:7                    P = 0:9
                            1.0                                                                                                   1.0


                                                                                                                   Success Rate
             Success Rate
                            0.5                                                                                                   0.5


                            0.0                                                                                                   0.0
                                     0          20        40 0         20           40 0       20            40                         0           50            0           50             0            50
                                                                    # Rounds                                                                                          # Queries (┬Ż10 3 )
                                              Client 1                    Client 2                           Client 3                                    Client 4                          Client 5
                                              T=5                    T = 10                 T = 20                                                T=5                      T = 10                     T = 20
             0.50
                0.8                                                                                                               0.8


                                                                                                                   Success Rate
Similarity
             Success Rate


             0.25
                0.5                                                                                                               0.5

                            0.2                                                                                                   0.2
             0.00
                            0.0                                                                                                   0.0
                                     0    5     20
                                                 10      1540 0        20
                                                                        5    10 40 015         20        5 40 10 15 0                             20 5     40 0 15
                                                                                                                                                           10                 50     5       010      15 100
                                                                    # Rounds                              Iterations                                                  # Queries (┬Ż10 3 )

                                                                     FedZO           FedProx         SCAFFOLD (1)                           SCAFFOLD (2)               FZooS

             Figure 8: Comparison of the success rate in federated black-box adversarial attack achieved by
             FZooS and other existing federated ZOO algorithms on MNIST under varying client heterogeneity
             (controlled by P Ōłł [0, 1], a larger P implies smaller client heterogeneity) and a varying number T of
             local updates. The x and y-axis are the number of rounds/queries and the corresponding success rate
             (higher is better).
                                              Client 1                    Client 2                           Client 3                                    Client 4                          Client 5
             0.50                             T=5                    T = 10                    T = 20                                        T=5                          T = 10                      T = 20
Similarity


                                                           62                                                                                                62                            62
                                                                                     62                                           62
                            62
             0.25
                                                                                                                   F (x) (%)
             F (x) (%)


                                                           60                        60                                                                      60                            60
                            60                                                                                                    60
             0.00                                                                    58                                                                                                    58
                            58                             58                                                                     58                         58

                                                                                     56                                                                                                    56
                                 0        5     2010     15     0       520    10      15
                                                                                        0           20   5       10 15 0                     10     520    10     0 15 20        40 5           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0    15 50    100
                                                                    # Rounds                                 Iterations                                              # Queries (┬Ż10 3 )

                                                                     FedZO           FedProx         SCAFFOLD (1)                           SCAFFOLD (2)               FZooS

             Figure 9: Comparison of the non-differentiable metric optimization between FZooS and other
             existing federated ZOO algorithms under a varying number T of local updates. Note that the y-axis
             is (1 ŌłÆ precision) ├Ś 100% and each curve is the mean ┬▒ standard error from five independent runs.


             number of local updates, as showcased in Fig.7. Furthermore, we provide an illustration of the attack
             success rate on MNIST, considering both varying client heterogeneity and a variable number of local
             updates, as presented in Fig. 8. Notably, our proposed algorithm consistently demonstrates enhanced
             efficiency in terms of communication rounds when compared to other baselines, across different
             levels of client heterogeneity and varying numbers of local updates.

             F.3                         F EDERATED N ON -D IFFERENTIABLE M ETRIC O PTIMIZATION

             Besides the non-differentiable metric optimization result for the precision score that is under a varying
             heterogeneity through different P in Fig. 3, we also report the corresponding result under a varying
             number T of local updates in Fig. 9. Moreover, we provide results for recall, F1 score, and Jaccard as
             the non-differentiable metric in Fig. 10, Fig. 11, and Fig. 12 respectively. Notably, our FZooS still
             consistently outperforms other baselines in terms of both communication round efficiency and query
             efficiency when under the comparison of varying client heterogeneity and a varying number of local
             updates with different non-differentiable metrics.


                                                                                                                  50
             Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   P = 0:9                          P = 0:6                  P = 0:3                                     P = 0:9                     P = 0:6                    P = 0:3
                          64                                                                                                   64
                                                       72                                                                                               72


                                                                                                                   F (x) (%)
              F (x) (%)   62                                                       82                                          62                                                   82
                                                       70                                                                                               70
                          60                                                                                                   60
                                                                                   80                                                                   68                          80
                          58                           68                                                                      58
                               0        20                  0          20         0               20                                0    20        40        0       20      40         0       20        40
                                       Client 1                          Client 2
                                                                   # Rounds                                Client 3                                Client 4      # Queries (┬Ż10 3 ) Client 5


             0.50                      T=5                          T = 10                   T = 20                                      T=5                         T = 10                     T = 20
                                                                                   72                                                                                               72
Similarity


                                                   72                                                                                                   72
             0.25                                                                                                              72


                                                                                                                 F (x) (%)
               72
             F (x) (%)


                                                                                   70                                                                                               70
                                                   70                                                                                                   70
               70                                                                                                              70
             0.00
                          68                       68                              68                                          68                       68                          68
                               0   5    2010      15        0          520    10       150        20   5       10 15 0                   10    520 10        015   20      40 5      100       15 50           100
                                                                   # Rounds                                Iterations                                          # Queries (┬Ż10 3 )

                                                                    FedZO          FedProx         SCAFFOLD (1)                         SCAFFOLD (2)             FZooS

             Figure 10: Comparison of the non-differentiable metric optimization between FZooS and other
             existing federated ZOO algorithms under varying client heterogeneity (controlled by P Ōłł [0, 1], a
             larger P implies smaller client heterogeneity) and a varying number T of local updates. Note that the
             y-axis is (1 ŌłÆ recall) ├Ś 100% and each curve is the mean ┬▒ standard error from five independent
             runs.

                                   P = 0:9                          P = 0:6                  P = 0:3                                     P = 0:9                     P = 0:6                    P = 0:3

                          62                                                       80                                          62                                                   80
                                                       69                                                                                               69
                                                                                                                   F (x) (%)
              F (x) (%)


                          61                                                       79                                          61                                                   79
                                                       68                                                                                               68

                          60                                                       78                                          60                       67                          78
                                                       67

                               0        20                  0          20         0               20                                0    20        40        0       20        40        0      20        40
                                       Client 1                          Client 2
                                                                   # Rounds                                Client 3                                Client 4 # Queries (┬Ż103 ) Client 5
             0.50                      T=5                          T = 10                   T = 20                                      T=5                         T = 10                     T = 20
                                                                                                                               70
Similarity


                          70
                                                   69                              69                                                                   69                          69
             0.25
                                                                                                                 F (x) (%)
             F (x) (%)


                          68                       68                              68                                          68                       68                          68
             0.00
                                                   67                              67                                                                   67                          67

                               0   5    2010      15        0          520    10       150        20   5       10 15 0                   10    520 10        015   20      40 5      100       15 50           100
                                                                   # Rounds                                Iterations                                          # Queries (┬Ż10 3 )

                                                                    FedZO          FedProx         SCAFFOLD (1)                         SCAFFOLD (2)             FZooS

             Figure 11: Comparison of the non-differentiable metric optimization between FZooS and other
             existing federated ZOO algorithms under varying client heterogeneity (controlled by P Ōłł [0, 1], a
             larger P implies smaller client heterogeneity) and a varying number T of local updates. Note that the
             y-axis is (1 ŌłÆ F1 score) ├Ś 100% and each curve is the mean ┬▒ standard error from five independent
             runs.
                                   P = 0:9                          P = 0:6                  P = 0:3                                     P = 0:9                     P = 0:6                    P = 0:3
                                                                                   84                                                                                               84
                                                       75                                                                                               75
                          69                                                                                                   69
              F (x) (%)


                                                                                                                   F (x) (%)


                                                                                   83                                                                                               83
                                                       74                                                                                               74
                          68                                                       82                                          68                                                   82
                                                       73                                                                                               73
                          67                                                       81                                          67                                                   81
                               0   20        40             0       20      40           0   20        40                           0    20        40        0       20      40         0       20        40
                                       Client 1                           Client
                                                                # Queries (┬Ż10 3
                                                                                 ) 2                       Client 3                                Client 4      # Queries (┬Ż10 3 ) Client 5


             0.50                      T=5                          T = 10                   T = 20                                      T=5                         T = 10                     T = 20
Similarity


                                                   75                              75                                                                   75                          75
             0.25
                                                                                                                 F (x) (%)
             F (x) (%)


                                                   74                              74                                          74                       74                          74
                          74
             0.00                                                                                                                                       73
                                                   73                              73                                                                                               73
                          72                                                                                                   72
                               0   5    2010      15        0          520 10          150        20   5       10 15 0                   10    520 10        015   20      40 5      100       15 50           100
                                                                   # Rounds                                Iterations                                          # Queries (┬Ż10 3 )

                                                                    FedZO          FedProx         SCAFFOLD (1)                         SCAFFOLD (2)             FZooS

             Figure 12: Comparison of the non-differentiable metric optimization between FZooS and other
             existing federated ZOO algorithms under varying client heterogeneity (controlled by P Ōłł [0, 1], a
             larger P implies smaller client heterogeneity) and a varying number T of local updates. The y-axis is
             (1 ŌłÆ Jaccard score) ├Ś 100% and each curve is the mean ┬▒ standard error from five independent runs.

                                                                                                              51
