Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O NE IS M ORE : D IVERSE P ERSPECTIVES WITHIN A
S INGLE N ETWORK FOR E FFICIENT DRL
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT
         Deep reinforcement learning has achieved remarkable performance in various do-
         mains by leveraging deep neural networks for approximating value functions and
         policies. However, using neural networks to approximate value functions or policy
         functions still faces challenges, including low sample efficiency and overfitting.
         In this paper, we introduce OMNet, a novel learning paradigm utilizing multiple
         subnetworks within a single network, offering diverse outputs efficiently. We pro-
         vide a systematic pipeline, including initialization, training, and sampling with
         OMNet. OMNet can be easily applied to various deep reinforcement learning
         algorithms with minimal additional overhead. Through comprehensive evalua-
         tions conducted on MuJoCo benchmark, our findings highlight OMNet’s ability
         to strike an effective balance between performance and computational cost.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Deep reinforcement learning, as evidenced by various studies (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017;
Jumper et al., 2021), has demonstrated its versatility across numerous domains, surpassing the scope
of traditional reinforcement learning. This achievement can be attributed to the remarkable function
approximation prowess exhibited by deep neural networks. Within the realm of deep reinforcement
learning, neural networks play a pivotal role in approximating value functions, policy functions, and
other critical components.
However, recent research has pointed out that training neural networks in deep reinforcement learn-
ing still faces several challenges (Igl et al., 2020; Nikishin et al., 2022; Lyle et al., 2022; 2023; Sokar
et al., 2023), which, in turn, affect the performance of deep reinforcement learning agent. One
prominent issue among these challenges is the overfitting of neural networks in deep reinforcement
learning algorithms. Neural networks may be prone to overfitting on early experiences (Igl et al.,
2020; Nikishin et al., 2022; D’Oro et al., 2022) or bootstrapped learning target (Lyle et al., 2022;
2023) in deep reinforcement learning, resulting in poor sample efficiency (Nikishin et al., 2022) or
generalization performance (Igl et al., 2020).
In the face of the difficulties mentioned above, one class of methods involves the use of ensemble
learning techniques in deep reinforcement learning. Ensemble learning has found widespread ap-
plication in deep reinforcement learning. For example, researchers employ multiple value networks
to enhance value estimation in deep reinforcement learning, addressing issues such as alleviating
overestimation (Fujimoto et al., 2018), reducing variance in value estimates (Anschel et al., 2017;
Lee et al., 2021), and avoiding overfitting of value networks (Chen et al., 2021), among others.
Similarly, maintaining multiple policy networks helps achieve more diverse behaviors, which can
improve sampling efficiency (Zhang & Yao, 2019; Lee et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022; Fan et al.,
2023) or enhance an agent’s generalization capabilities (Yang et al., 2022) in complex and diverse
environments. However, ensemble learning comes at the cost of increased parameter complexity
and additional training overhead. In ensemble reinforcement learning, it often takes several times
the training effort to achieve performance gains, imposing severe constraints on the practical appli-
cation of such algorithms.
Different from employing extensive network ensembles, our inspiration stems from biological facts,
which offer an alternative perspective on addressing the issue. Research in the field of biology indi-
cates that sparsity plays a crucial role in biological neural networks (Friston, 2008; Foldiak, 2003;
Herculano-Houzel et al., 2010). This implies that when the brain responds to a specific problem,


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


only a fraction of the neural connections are truly active. Similar to biological neural networks,
researchers have found that the concept of sparsity can also be explored and utilized in deep neural
networks. Recent research on sparse neural networks has demonstrated their impressive perfor-
mance (Han et al., 2015; Frankle & Carbin, 2018; Liu et al., 2017; Malach et al., 2020). The “lottery
ticket hypothesis” (Frankle & Carbin, 2018) suggests that even in cases of very limited parameters,
a sparse network can be trained to achieve performance comparable to dense neural networks. In
the field of deep reinforcement learning, there is also substantial work highlighting the potential
of sparse neural networks (Sokar et al., 2021; Graesser et al., 2022; Tan et al., 2022; Arnob et al.,
2021). These studies imply that it is possible to harness untapped potential in neural networks even
without increasing the number of parameters.
Inspired by the aforementioned ideas, we pose the following question: Is it possible to achieve
diverse perspectives using just a single neural network to enable efficient deep reinforcement learn-
ing? More specifically, we aim to find a method that allows the network to generate more diverse
outputs (such as value estimates produced by the value network or actions generated by the policy
network) without increasing the network parameters. This is to achieve a more effective and effi-
cient deep reinforcement learning algorithm. To address this question, we focus on a single neural
network and discover that a single neural network can be transformed into multiple overlapping
subnetworks, allowing for more diverse network outputs without increasing parameter complexity
or computational overhead. We refer to our approach as OMNet, named after “One is More.”
Our contributions are as follows:
      • We show that one can leverage the presence of multiple distinct subnetworks within a single
        neural network, which provides diverse outputs that can be harnessed. We refer to this
        algorithm as OMNet and have introduced the algorithm pipeline for initializing, training,
        and utilizing OMNet for sampling.
      • We applied OMNet to deep reinforcement learning algorithms and obtained an efficient
        reinforcement learning approach that balances both sampling efficiency and computational
        efficiency. We show that using OMNet as the value network efficiently yields more ac-
        curate value estimates, alleviating the issue of value overestimation without the need for
        maintaining multiple value networks. We also demonstrate that OMNet can be used as the
        policy network to enable the collecting of richer and more diverse trajectories, accelerating
        the exploration of different states in the early stages of training.
      • We validate our method in continuous control environments, and the experiments demon-
        strate that OMNet can achieve both high sampling efficiency (converging performance
        within 300K environment steps on MuJoCo) and computational efficiency (over 5 times re-
        duction in computation compared to the state-of-the-art algorithm). Furthermore, through
        ablation experiments, we establish the stability of OMNet with respect to hyperparameter
        choices, making this algorithm easy to implement and use.

2 R ELATED W ORKS
Sample Efficiency Efforts to improve sampling efficiency in deep reinforcement learning have
been pivotal for practical, real-world applications. Model-based reinforcement learning methods,
such as Yu et al. (2020); Janner et al. (2019); Schrittwieser et al. (2020); Ye et al. (2021), strive
to bolster agent planning by training a transition model. However, the costs associated with this
model’s training and its impact on agent planning accuracy are notable challenges. Recently, model-
free reinforcement learning algorithms have shown comparable or superior sampling efficiency, par-
ticularly by increasing the replay ratio, as discussed by D’Oro et al. (2022). In continuous control,
several approaches employ techniques such as model ensembles (Chen et al., 2021) or modified
model architectures (Hiraoka et al., 2021) to mitigate overfitting and achieve sampling efficiency
akin to state-of-the-art model-based methods. Additionally, researchers have observed that peri-
odically resetting deep reinforcement learning model parameters can lead to substantial gains in
sampling efficiency (Nikishin et al., 2022; D’Oro et al., 2022).
Sparsity in NN People have studied the sparsity of deep neural networks from various perspec-
tives. Researchers use Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) or DropConnect (Wan et al., 2013) during
the training process to sparsely mask the parameters of the neural network. This approach has been
shown to be beneficial in improving the generalization capability of neural networks. Previous works
on pruning (Han et al., 2015; Lee et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2020) and “Lottery Ticket Hypothesis”


                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(Frankle & Carbin, 2018; Frankle et al., 2020; Evci et al., 2020) have demonstrated the role of sparse
neural networks in efficient training and deployment. In deep reinforcement learning, a recent line
of work (Sokar et al., 2021; Graesser et al., 2022; Tan et al., 2022; Arnob et al., 2021) suggested
that a sparse subnetwork of a dense network can preserve performance with only a small fraction
of parameters. The above work reveals the potential of neural networks with a limited number of
parameters.

Ensemble Methods in DRL In deep reinforcement learning, ensemble learning methods are piv-
otal. For example, TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018) in continuous control employs Clipped Double
Q-learning as a form of ensemble learning with an ensemble size of 2 to address value network
overestimation. To enhance value estimation stability in online and offline settings, researchers have
utilized larger ensembles for value networks (Anschel et al., 2017; Agarwal et al., 2020; Lee et al.,
2021). REDQ (Chen et al., 2021) employs a stochastic ensemble approach to reduce learning bias
in value networks, particularly in high replay ratio scenarios, thereby improving sample efficiency.
Some studies also apply ensemble methods to policy networks to enhance agent exploration (Zhang
& Yao, 2019; Lee et al., 2021). In model-based algorithms, ensemble techniques are employed to
enhance the learning of environment transition dynamics and dynamic model accuracy (Kurutach
et al., 2018; Buckman et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2020). These ensemble approaches contribute to the
robustness and effectiveness of reinforcement learning agents in DRL.

3     OMN ET: O NE IS M ORE
In this section, we present the idea and design details of our OMNet method. Our approach is in-
spired by existing research on sparse networks, which demonstrates that performance comparable
to a dense neural network can be achieved by training or inferring with a sparse subnetwork within
a neural network (Han et al., 2015; Frankle & Carbin, 2018; Liu et al., 2017; Malach et al., 2020).
However, differing from existing pruning or sparse training algorithms, our approach, instead of
reducing the neural network’s parameter count through sparsity, focuses on maintaining multiple
subnetworks within the network during training without altering the overall parameter count. The
goal is to enable the neural network to produce more diverse outputs with minimal additional com-
putational cost. In the remaining part of this section, we will sequentially introduce how we initialize
and train an OMNet and utilize OMNet for sampling.

           Subnetwork 1



                                                          OMNet                                      …



                   Subnetwork 2          Single Network                Subnetwork 1 Subnetwork 2
    Whole Brain
                                                   Active Connection           Inactive Connection

Figure 1: Overview of OMNet. Analogous to the sparsity in the biological brain, we highlight that
multiple diverse subnetworks can coexist within a single neural network, i.e., “One is More.” OMNet
can yield improvements in the sampling efficiency, computational efficiency, and generalization of
deep reinforcement learning algorithms.


3.1    I NITIALIZATION OF OMN ET
We first describe how we obtain a subnetwork from a given neural network through the use of a
binary mask.
Specifically, given a neural network parameterized by θ ∈ Rn , where n refers to the number of
parameters, the parameter of a subnetwork is θ ⊙ m, where ⊙ is the element-wise product and m
is the corresponding binary mask m ∈ {0, 1}n . This concept has been referenced in many prior
works, e.g., Frankle & Carbin (2018); Frankle et al. (2020); Cosentino et al. (2019); Jaiswal et al.
(2022).


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Unlike previous pruning (Han et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2017; Zhu & Gupta, 2017; Dong et al., 2017)
or sparse training (Mocanu et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018; Evci et al., 2020) methods, that only
maintain a single binary mask, our method maintains a set of fixed masks during training, i.e.,
M = {m1 , m2 , · · · , mN }, where N is the number of masks. In this way, we get access to multiple
subnetworks θi = θ ⊙ mi with almost no extra overhead since the binary masks are freezed, i.e.,
they do not need to be tracked or have gradients computed during training, and can be easily stored
compared to floating-point format parameters. For each binary mask, we independently sample
from the same Bernoulli distribution, which takes value 1 with probability 1 − S and value 0 with
probability S, and these masks remain unchanged throughout the subsequent training process. This
generation approach has very low complexty, and we will see later that it is also highly effective.
3.2 T RAINING A N OMN ET
Given the set of subnetworks generated, we now describe the training procedure. Consider a general
neural network denoted by fθ (x), where θ is the parameter and x is the input. We can express its
loss function by
                                        L(θ) = ℓ(θ, fθ (x)).                                       (1)
To implement an OMNet, we modify the above loss function to
                                 L(θi ) = ℓ̂(θ, fθi (x)), i ∼ U[1, N ]                             (2)
Here i ∼ U[1, N ] means we choose an i uniformly at random in {1, 2, ..., N }. From Eq. (2), we see
that there are two key points in training an OMNet:
(i) We use a modified loss function ℓ̂(θ, y). Since we get access to multiple subnetworks, we can
make use of the methods in ensemble training, for instance, using the average loss of all networks
                 PN
as ℓ̂(θ, y) = N1 k=1 ℓ(θk , y). Similarly, other ensemble-based methods designed to enhance deep
reinforcement learning algorithms can be applied to OMNet in a similar manner. The key adaptation
involves replacing the operators originally designed to operate on multiple distinct networks with
operations performed on multiple subnetworks within OMNet.
(ii) In each iteration, we only update one of the subnetworks in OMNet with the random index i. This
approach is different from previous works on ensemble training, which requires training all networks
in parallel and results in a rapidly increasing training overhead as the number of ensemble members
grows (Mohammed & Kora, 2023). In contrast, as the parameters overlap among the subnetworks
trained in OMNet, the number of parameters updated in each iteration is only influenced by the
sparsity of the subnetwork and is independent of the number of subnetworks. This allows us to
obtain multiple well-performing subnetworks efficiently by updating only one subnetwork at a time
in each iteration.
Based on the criteria mentioned above, OMNet can be straightforwardly applied to various deep
reinforcement learning algorithms. In this paper, we experimented with combining OMNet with the
state-of-the-art SAC algorithm in the domain of continuous control. For more details about the SAC
algorithm and how we integrated OMNet with SAC, please refer to Appendix A.
3.3 S AMPLING WITH A N OMN ET
Many studies have pointed out that maintaining multiple policies can help the agent exhibit more
diverse behaviors (Zhang & Yao, 2019; Lee et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2023). In this
paper, we employ a simple strategy to leverage different subnetworks within the actor for sampling.
Specifically, for each episode, we randomly select one subnetwork from the actor to make decisions,
and we maintain the use of the same subnetwork throughout each episode. This approach helps di-
versify the sampling trajectories of different subnetworks, enabling the agent to collect more diverse
data. We will demonstrate the advantages of using OMNet for sampling in Section 4.3 and present
visualization results.

4 E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct a comprehensive set of experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of
OMNet. In Section 4.1, we compare OMNet with the current state-of-the-art baseline algorithms,
showing that OMNet can achieve a balance between computational efficiency and sampling effi-
ciency. It achieves equal or higher sampling efficiency with much fewer parameters and lower
computational overhead. In Section 4.2, we delve deeper into how OMNet improves both value
networks and policy networks. We show that OMNet enables more accurate value estimates from
the value network and increases exploration in the policy network. In Section 4.4, we introduce en-
vironmental noise to investigate OMNet’s generalization performance, confirming that OMNet can


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


enhance the algorithm’s generalization capabilities. In Section 4.5, we conduct an ablation study to
analyze the sensitivity of OMNet to sparsity and the number of subnetworks.
4.1           OMN ET E NABLES H IGH S AMPLE E FFICIENCY AND C OMPUTATIONAL E FFICIENCY
We conduct experiments of OMNet on four tasks from MuJoCo: Hopper-v4, Walker2d-v4, Ant-
v4, and Humanoid-v4, as the same as previous works on sample efficiency on MuJoCo benchmark
(Chen et al., 2021; Hiraoka et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023). Each experiment is repeated 10 times with
different random seeds, and we report the average result.
We consider the following methods: (i) SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018): the original SAC algorithm,
updating the network parameters once after each environment interaction. (ii) SAC-20: SAC with
replay ratio (D’Oro et al., 2022) of 20, i.e., updating the network parameters for 20 times after each
environment interaction. (iii) REDQ (Chen et al., 2021): REDQ uses a replay ratio of 20 and policy
delay and trains 10 value networks in parallel while calculating the target Q value with a random
subset of value networks. (iv) DroQ (Hiraoka et al., 2021): Similar to SAC, with a replay ratio of
20 and a different value network architecture by using dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) and layer
normalization (Ba et al., 2016). (v) SR-SAC (D’Oro et al., 2022): SR-SAC uses SAC with a high
replay ratio and resets the network parameters periodically. In our implementation, we reset the
parameters every 105 environment step. (vi) OMNet: Our method, using OMNets for both value
network and policy network. We also adopt layer normalization in network architectures. We em-
phasize that OMNet can generate diverse outputs using just a single neural network. Therefore,
unlike all previous algorithms, we employ only one value network, calculating the TD target by tak-
ing the minimum value estimate from two different subnetworks. In the implementation of OMNet,
we employed 5 subnetworks with a sparsity of 0.5 for all environments. In the rest of Section 4, un-
less otherwise specified, we used the same set of hyperparameter settings for OMNet. All methods
except for SAC use a3.0replay ratio of 20 and policy delay to keep consistency.
                                       OMNet       SAC          SAC-20                REDQ         DroQ
                          2.5          SR-SAC     Sin-SAC       Sin-DroQ              Sin-SR-SAC


                          2.0
                                                                                             tab:purple
                          1.5
                                                                                          tab:cyan
                          1.0                                                                   tab:brown
Eval Return


                                                                 Eval Return


                                                                                   tab:gray       tab:green

                          0.5                                                                             tab:red ta
                                                                                                                  b:
                                                                                                                  pi
                          0.0                                                                                     nk
                                0.50    0.75    1.00     1.25   1.50           1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50



                        Environment Steps (×10³)                                               Environment Steps (×10³)
(a) Comparison with algorithms with multiple value (b) Comparison with algorithms with single value net-
networks.                                          work.
Figure 2: Training curves of 300K environment steps on MuJoCo. In Figure 2(a), we compare OM-
Net with existing state-of-the-art high-sample-efficiency algorithms. In Figure 2(b), we compare
OMNet with variants of the baseline algorithms that use only a single value network. OMNet can
strike a balance between sample efficiency and computational efficiency, achieving optimal perfor-
mance on both dimensions.
The training curves are presented in Figure 2. We run each method on each environment with 3 · 105
environment steps. Figure 2(a) shows the training curves in comparison with baseline algorithms.
REDQ utilizes 10 value networks, and the other baseline algorithms use 2 value networks each,
while OMNet adopts only one value network. For DroQ, we optimize its dropout ratio by searching
over a large range. Note the performance of DroQ can be sensitive to the dropout rate. Training
curves and the selection of dropout rate for each environment are provided in Appendix C. OMNet
shows comparable performance with REDQ by effectively utilizing different subnetworks within
a single neural network, without the need for a large ensemble of value networks as in REDQ.
Specifically, in the complex control environment of Humanoid-v4 with 376-dimensional inputs,


                                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


OMNet exhibits superior sampling efficiency compared to various baseline algorithms. Moreover,
our ablation study in Section 4.5 shows that OMNet exhibits stable performance across different
hyperparameter settings, thus delivering performance improvements without the need for meticulous
hyperparameter tuning.
To compare fairly with baseline algorithms in the case of using only one value network, we fur-
ther conducted a comparison with variants of baseline algorithms that utilize a single value net-
work. We consider the following baselines with a single value network: (i) Sin-SAC: uses only
one value network in SAC; (ii) Sin-DroQ: the single-network version of DroQ, as originally pro-
posed in Hiraoka et al. (2021); (iii) SR-Sin-SAC: Sin-SAC with network reset. For Sin-DroQ,
we meticulously selected dropout rates for each environment individually and included the train-
ing curves and the chosen dropout rates for each environment in Appendix C. Figure 2(b) illus-
trates the training curves of OMNet and baseline algorithms. It can be observed that the base-
line algorithms fail to achieve satisfactory performance when using only one value network.
In Figure 3, we also present an efficiency comparison of
different approaches. The horizontal axis corresponds
to the training FLOPs of the algorithms, which rep-
resents the number of FLOPs required for one itera-
tion of all networks during the training process, nor-
malized relative to the FLOPs of REDQ. The vertical
axis provides the scores of the algorithms. We adopt
the average evaluation returns from the last 50k envi-
ronment steps of experiments conducted with a single
run as the score for that run. Then, we normalize the
returns by the best average return achieved on each en-
vironment, as used in Li et al. (2023), and compute
the average results across all seeds and environments as
the algorithm’s score. The green dots within the green Figure 3: Comparison of training ef-
dashed box represent the performance of DroQ at dif- ficiency and sampling efficiency among
ferent dropout rates. For Sin-DroQ, we only plotted the different algorithms. The green dots rep-
performance corresponding to the best dropout rate. It resent the performance for DroQ at differ-
can be observed that OMNet achieves an optimal bal- ent dropout rates.
ance between high sampling efficiency and computational efficiency, surpassing existing algorithms.
It is worth noting that the performance of DroQ is sensitive to the choice of dropout rate, as shown
in Appendix C. In contrast, in Section 4.5, our ablation experiments on OMNet demonstrated that
OMNet’s performance is stable across hyperparameter values.

4.2           OMN ET I MPROVES VALUE E STIMATION
                   109                                                      1000
                             SinSAC
                                                                                                                 REDQ
                   108       SinDroQ
                                                                             800                                 DroQ
                             SAC-20                                                                              OMNet
                   107                                                       600
      Value Bias


                                                               Value Bias


                   106                                                       400

                   105                                                       200
                                                                               0
                   104
                                                                             200
                   103
                         0   50   100 150 200 250 300                              0   50   100 150 200 250 300
                                  Environment Steps                                         Environment Steps
                    (a) Algorithms that overestimate values.                 (b) Algorithms that learn stable values.

Figure 4: Value estimation bias during the training process for different algorithms. To display the
results on an appropriate scale, we present the curves for algorithms where value overestimation
occurs significantly in Figure 4(a), and in Figure 4(b), we show the curves for algorithms with more
stable value estimates. OMNet is capable of learning smaller value estimation biases even when
using only one value network.

                                                               6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As demonstrated in Section 4.1, OMNet achieves strong performance even when using just one
value network, a feat not matched by other baseline algorithms. To further elucidate how OMNet
enhances better learning of the value network, we calculate the bias of the value network estimates
during the training process, i.e., Eπ [(Qθ (s, a) − Qπ (s, a))]. We calculate the value bias of Sin-
SAC, Sin-DroQ, SAC-20, REDQ, DroQ, and OMNet, and the results are displayed in Figure 4.
These experiments were conducted on the Humanoid-v4 environment.
In Figure 4(a), we illustrate three cases of value overestimation, where we observe that these algo-
rithms significantly overestimate values (up to 107 ), which corresponds to very poor performance
by these algorithms as shown in Section 4.1. This indicates that applying a high replay ratio to the
SAC algorithm or using a baseline algorithm with only one value network leads to significant value
estimation overestimation. On the other hand, in Figure 4(b), we present the curves depicting the
change in value bias over sampling steps for REDQ, DroQ, and OMNet. For DroQ, we utilized
a fine-tuned dropout rate. It can be observed that all three algorithms eventually learn relatively
stable values, with OMNet maintaining a small value bias throughout the entire training process. It
is noteworthy that among these three algorithms, REDQ employs 10 value networks, DroQ uses 2
value networks with carefully chosen dropout rates, while OMNet leverages multiple subnetworks
within a single value network (hence much fewer parameters and lower complexity). These results
demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of OMNet in improving value estimation.
4.3 OMN ET C OLLECTS D IVERSE T RAJECTORIES
In deep reinforcement learning, agents need to interact with the environment continuously to collect
data, and the quality of the data collected can significantly impact the training of neural networks,
thereby having a crucial effect on algorithm performance. In this section, we investigate the impact
of using OMNet as the policy network and empirically demonstrate that using OMNet as the policy
network helps the agent collect more diverse trajectories. To visually demonstrate the effects of
OMNet, we consider a simple sparse-reward 2D maze environment, as depicted in Figure 5(a). The
maze is a 1 × 1 square, and the agent always starts from the center of the maze. The agent receives
rewards when it approaches the destination near the upper-right corner of the maze. Please refer to
Appendix B.1 for more details about this environment.
                                                                              120
We compare two different agents: one that uses                                100
                                                                             reward
                                                                              +100
OMNet for both the value network and pol-                                      80
icy network, the same as the agent evaluated                                   60
in Section 4.1, and the other that uses OM-                       Starting     40
                                                                  Point

Net solely for the value network. We start by                                  20
                                                                                0             w/o OMNet Actor
comparing their sample efficiency based on the                                 20             w/ OMNet Actor
average evaluation return. As shown in Fig-                                       20 40 60 80 100 120 140
ure 5(b), using OMNet as the policy network            (a) Map of 2D maze. (b) Training curves in 2D
leads to higher sampling efficiency. This indi-                               maze.
cates that employing OMNet can improve the Figure 5: An environment where an agent navi-
performance of the policy network.                   gates through a 2D maze. The agent starts from
To compare the impact of using OMNet as the the center of the maze and needs to reach the tar-
policy network on the sampling trajectories, we get point located in the upper-right corner while
visualize the exploration of different parts of navigating around obstacles. When using OMNet
the map by the agent in the early stages of train- as the actor, the agent exhibits higher sampling ef-
ing. The experimental results are averaged over ficiency.
multiple repeated experiments. The red area indicates regions explored by the agent, with darker red
representing higher visitation frequencies. Further details of the visualization of these results can be
found in Appendix B.2.
It can be seen that within just 100 steps of interaction with the environment, most of the exploration
by agents not using OMNet as the policy network remains concentrated in a small area within the
three-sided wall in the center of the maze. This implies that a significant portion of the exploration
steps are spent bumping into walls and taking detours within this small area. On the other hand,
agents using OMNet as the policy network cover a larger portion of the maze on the left and top
within the first 100 steps, and there are several visits to the right side of the maze, near the ultimate
goal location. This indicates that using OMNet as the policy network covers more areas within
the same 100 exploration steps. The visualization results for 500 and 1000 steps also support the
conclusion that using OMNet as the policy network allows for faster coverage of more areas of the
map within the same number of sampling steps. This result highlights the improvement that using
OMNet as the policy network can bring to the early exploration of the agent.


                                                     7
             Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         w/o OMNet Actor


                         w/ OMNet Actor


                                                 100 steps                500 steps                    1000 steps


s                  Figure 6: The visitation frequencies with and without using OMNet as the policy network.
             In Figure 7, we visualize the trajectories rolled out by different subnetworks within OMNet as the
             policy network. All trajectories are obtained by rolling out in the evaluation environment using net-
             work parameters at selected time steps. We visualize the trajectories rolled out by all subnetworks
             after updating the policy network with different numbers of gradient steps. It can be seen that in
             the early stages of training (after 500 gradient updates), the trajectories generated by the five sub-
             networks exhibit high divergence. This suggests that we can obtain more diverse sample trajectories
             in the early stages of training by randomly selecting different subnetworks. Then, at step 4800, one
             of the subnetworks’ evaluation trajectories successfully reaches the vicinity of the target position.
             Within just 200 gradient steps, the evaluation trajectories of all subnetworks have achieved success.
             This indicates that by maintaining multiple subnetworks to generate diverse trajectories when some
             subnetworks perform relatively better and obtain high-quality trajectory data earlier, other subnet-
             works can learn from these successful trajectories. In the subsequent training, the trajectories of
             subnetworks are optimized to reach the target point more quickly (6000 steps), and ultimately con-
             verge to nearly identical trajectories as training ends (30000 steps). In summary, these visual results
             illustrate how OMNet, acting as a policy network, samples more diverse trajectories to successfully
             enhance sampling efficiency.


                       500 steps          4800 steps         5000 steps          6000 steps                30000 steps
             Figure 7: Trajectories sampled by different subnetworks within OMNet as the actor. We represent
             trajectories generated by different subnetworks using different colors.

             4.4    OMN ET E NABLES B ETTER G ENERALIZATION
                                                                                                      Generalization Results under Noise
             The generalization performance of deep reinforcement learning
             algorithms is a critical consideration due to its implications for   5000
             the practical applicability of these models in real-world scenar-    4000
                                                                                      Eval Return


             ios (Rajeswaran et al., 2017; Packer et al., 2018; Kirk et al.,
                                                                                  3000
             2023). In this section, we conduct experiments of OMNet in
             noisy environments. Note that this problem is directly rele-         2000
             vant to real-world applications, such as the control of robots
                                                                                  1000   REDQ
             (Busoniu et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2021; Höfer et al., 2021).            OMNet
             These robots may need to learn from actual trajectories col-            0
                                                                                       0   0.01    0.03     0.1 0.3
             lected at different times and under varying conditions, each with                  Noise Scale
             its unique inherent biases.                                        Figure 8: Generalization perfor-
             To compare whether OMNet can generalize better in a noisy en- mance under different noise scale.
          0.4 vironment
                     0.3 compared
                               0.2to other algorithms,
                                           0.1       0.0
                                                       we utilize0.1       0.2
                                                                  the Humanoid-v4    0.3
                                                                                  environment in0.4
                                                                                                 MuJoCo and

    0.2                            0.1                       0.0   8                                0.1                                    0.2   0.
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


introduce noise (as specified below) to the model’s observations during both training and testing. For
each episode, we sample an observation noise observation noise from a uniform distribution, i.e.,
σ ∼ U[−σm , σm ], where σm represents the noise scale, determining the level of generalization diffi-
culty. The noise remains constant throughout an episode. In Figure 8, we present curves illustrating
the average return variation of REDQ and OMNet under varying levels of noise amplitude. It is
evident that OMNet consistently maintains relatively high performance even when exposed to high
levels of noise amplitude, demonstrating superior generalization capabilities compared to REDQ.
4.5 A BLATION S TUDY
The implementation of OMNet is very straightforward and only requires two simple hyper-
parameters: the sparsity of subnetworks and the number of subnetworks. We conduct ex-
periments with 10 different random seeds on all environments and present the results of the
ablation study in Figure 9. From Figure 9(a), it can be observed that OMNet consistently
achieves favorable performance within a within wide range of sparsity levels (Here the com-
parison is with the OMNet algorithm in Section 4.1, which uses a single value network).
This demonstrates the robustness of OMNet with respect to the choice of sparsity values.
In Figure 9(b), we present the performance           1.0                                 1.0
curves of OMNet under different numbers of           0.8                                 0.8
subnetworks. OMNet exhibits strong stability         0.6                                 0.6


                                                                                      Score
                                                         Score
across various subnetwork counts, even when
                                                     0.4                                 0.4
using only 2 subnetworks, it achieves favorable
performance. Furthermore, we observe that in-        0.2                                 0.2
creasing the number of subnetworks (to 4 or 5)           0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9                 1 2 3 4 5 8
                                                            Sparsity of Subnetworks            Number of Subnetworks
leads to improved algorithmic performance. In-
terestingly, we find that when we increase the (a) Ablation of sparsity of (b) Ablation of number of
number of subnetworks to 8, there is a slight subnetworks.                             subnetworks.
drop in algorithmic scores. This suggests that     Figure    9:  Results      of   the ablation  experiments for
the number of subnetworks may not be arbi-         OMNet.      The     scores    are  obtained  by  averaging the
trarily increased, and we delve further into this normalized evaluation returns across all environ-
phenomenon in Section 4.6.                         ments (See Section 4.1).

4.6    “O NE IS I NFINITY ”?
From Figure 9(b), we observe that while increasing the number of subnetworks appropriately results
in better performance than using only 2 subnetworks, this trend does not always hold. When we
increased the number of subnetworks to 8, we noticed a decrease in performance compared to using
5 subnetworks. This sparked our curiosity about the case of even larger numbers of subnetworks.
Note that OMNet uses independently and identically distributed masks for each subnetwork, and we
update network parameters or perform inference in a random manner. Thus, we can approximate
the situation where the number of subnetworks tends to infinity by using randomly generated masks
in each iteration or inference. This is similar to approaches such as Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014)
or DropConnect (Wan et al., 2013), generating a random mask dynamically during each forward
process, as the former one using mask constrained on the neural level.
Through experiments, we found that using an infinite number of subnetworks, as shown in Fig-
ure 9(b), further reduced performance compared to using just 8 subnetworks, consistent with pre-
vious results. The performance curve reflects a trade-off: multiple subnetworks within one neural
network can provide diverse outputs and greater effectiveness without extra parameters, but main-
taining some distinction among subnetworks may be important. Using random, sparse masks dy-
namically may blur these distinctions. In summary, one is more, but may not be infinity. We believe
this observation contributes to a better understanding of sparsity in neural networks and look forward
to further research in this field.

5     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigate the possibility of discovering and leveraging multiple subnetworks
within a single neural network. Our approach achieves more diversified outputs without increasing
the parameter count and is empirically demonstrated to be effective and efficient in the field of deep
reinforcement learning. We believe that the conclusions drawn in this paper contribute to a better
understanding of the potential of neural networks and offer a perspective for more efficient training
and inference.


                                                         9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
In our paper, we provide a detailed description of the environments we tested and various baseline
algorithms. We elaborate on the implementation of our algorithm in Section 3 and Appendix A,
making it easily reproducible with simple modifications based on the baseline algorithms. Further-
more, Section 4.1 explicitly outlines the values of new hyperparameters used in our algorithm, while
all other hyperparameters remain consistent with the default values used in the baseline algorithm.
Our algorithm can be straightforwardly implemented and exhibits high reproducibility.

R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Dale Schuurmans, and Mohammad Norouzi. An optimistic perspective on offline
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 104–114. PMLR,
  2020.
Oron Anschel, Nir Baram, and Nahum Shimkin. Averaged-dqn: Variance reduction and stabilization
  for deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 176–185.
  PMLR, 2017.
Samin Yeasar Arnob, Riyasat Ohib, Sergey Plis, and Doina Precup. Single-shot pruning for offline
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.15579, 2021.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Jacob Buckman, Danijar Hafner, George Tucker, Eugene Brevdo, and Honglak Lee. Sample-
  efficient reinforcement learning with stochastic ensemble value expansion. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Lucian Busoniu, Bart De Schutter, and Robert Babuska. Decentralized reinforcement learning con-
  trol of a robotic manipulator. In 2006 9th International Conference on Control, Automation,
  Robotics and Vision, pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2006.
Xinyue Chen, Che Wang, Zijian Zhou, and Keith Ross. Randomized ensembled double q-learning:
  Learning fast without a model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.05982, 2021.
Justin Cosentino, Federico Zaiter, Dan Pei, and Jun Zhu. The search for sparse, robust neural
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02386, 2019.
Xin Dong, Shangyu Chen, and Sinno Pan. Learning to prune deep neural networks via layer-wise
  optimal brain surgeon. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Pierluca D’Oro, Max Schwarzer, Evgenii Nikishin, Pierre-Luc Bacon, Marc G Bellemare, and
  Aaron Courville. Sample-efficient reinforcement learning by breaking the replay ratio barrier.
  In Deep Reinforcement Learning Workshop NeurIPS 2022, 2022.
Utku Evci, Trevor Gale, Jacob Menick, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Erich Elsen. Rigging the lottery:
  Making all tickets winners. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2943–2952.
  PMLR, 2020.
Jiajun Fan, Yuzheng Zhuang, Yuecheng Liu, Jianye Hao, Bin Wang, Jiangcheng Zhu, Hao Wang,
   and Shu-Tao Xia. Learnable behavior control: Breaking atari human world records via sample-
   efficient behavior selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05239, 2023.
Peter Foldiak. Sparse coding in the primate cortex. The handbook of brain theory and neural
  networks, 2003.
Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.03635, 2018.
Jonathan Frankle, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Daniel Roy, and Michael Carbin. Linear mode con-
  nectivity and the lottery ticket hypothesis. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  3259–3269. PMLR, 2020.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Karl Friston. Hierarchical models in the brain. PLoS computational biology, 4(11):e1000211, 2008.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
  critic methods. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018.
Laura Graesser, Utku Evci, Erich Elsen, and Pablo Samuel Castro. The state of sparse training in
  deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7766–7792.
  PMLR, 2022.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and appli-
  cations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018.
Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J Dally. Deep compression: Compressing deep neural networks
  with pruning, trained quantization and huffman coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.00149, 2015.
Suzana Herculano-Houzel, Bruno Mota, Peiyan Wong, and Jon H Kaas. Connectivity-driven white
  matter scaling and folding in primate cerebral cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 107(44):19008–19013, 2010.
Takuya Hiraoka, Takahisa Imagawa, Taisei Hashimoto, Takashi Onishi, and Yoshimasa Tsu-
  ruoka. Dropout q-functions for doubly efficient reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.02034, 2021.
Sebastian Höfer, Kostas Bekris, Ankur Handa, Juan Camilo Gamboa, Melissa Mozifian, Florian
  Golemo, Chris Atkeson, Dieter Fox, Ken Goldberg, John Leonard, et al. Sim2real in robotics
  and automation: Applications and challenges. IEEE transactions on automation science and
  engineering, 18(2):398–400, 2021.
Maximilian Igl, Gregory Farquhar, Jelena Luketina, Wendelin Boehmer, and Shimon Whiteson.
 Transient non-stationarity and generalisation in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2006.05826, 2020.
Ajay Kumar Jaiswal, Haoyu Ma, Tianlong Chen, Ying Ding, and Zhangyang Wang. Training your
  sparse neural network better with any mask. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 9833–9844. PMLR, 2022.
Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to trust your model: Model-
 based policy optimization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žı́dek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate
  protein structure prediction with alphafold. Nature, 596(7873):583–589, 2021.
Robert Kirk, Amy Zhang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. A survey of zero-shot gener-
  alisation in deep reinforcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 76:201–264,
  2023.
Thanard Kurutach, Ignasi Clavera, Yan Duan, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. Model-ensemble
  trust-region policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.10592, 2018.
Kimin Lee, Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. Sunrise: A simple unified frame-
  work for ensemble learning in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, pp. 6131–6141. PMLR, 2021.
Namhoon Lee, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, and Philip HS Torr. Snip: Single-shot network pruning
  based on connection sensitivity. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.02340, 2018.
Qiyang Li, Aviral Kumar, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Efficient deep reinforcement learning
  requires regulating overfitting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10466, 2023.
Zhuang Liu, Jianguo Li, Zhiqiang Shen, Gao Huang, Shoumeng Yan, and Changshui Zhang. Learn-
  ing efficient convolutional networks through network slimming. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  international conference on computer vision, pp. 2736–2744, 2017.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Clare Lyle, Mark Rowland, and Will Dabney. Understanding and preventing capacity loss in rein-
  forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.09560, 2022.
Clare Lyle, Zeyu Zheng, Evgenii Nikishin, Bernardo Avila Pires, Razvan Pascanu, and Will Dabney.
  Understanding plasticity in neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.01486, 2023.
Eran Malach, Gilad Yehudai, Shai Shalev-Schwartz, and Ohad Shamir. Proving the lottery ticket
  hypothesis: Pruning is all you need. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6682–
  6691. PMLR, 2020.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Decebal Constantin Mocanu, Elena Mocanu, Peter Stone, Phuong H Nguyen, Madeleine Gibescu,
  and Antonio Liotta. Scalable training of artificial neural networks with adaptive sparse connec-
  tivity inspired by network science. Nature communications, 9(1):2383, 2018.
Ammar Mohammed and Rania Kora. A comprehensive review on ensemble deep learning: Oppor-
 tunities and challenges. Journal of King Saud University-Computer and Information Sciences,
 2023.
Evgenii Nikishin, Max Schwarzer, Pierluca D’Oro, Pierre-Luc Bacon, and Aaron Courville. The
  primacy bias in deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 16828–16847. PMLR, 2022.
Charles Packer, Katelyn Gao, Jernej Kos, Philipp Krähenbühl, Vladlen Koltun, and Dawn Song.
  Assessing generalization in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12282, 2018.
Aravind Rajeswaran, Kendall Lowrey, Emanuel V Todorov, and Sham M Kakade. Towards general-
  ization and simplicity in continuous control. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  30, 2017.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering atari,
  go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature, 588(7839):604–609, 2020.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of go
  without human knowledge. nature, 550(7676):354–359, 2017.
Ghada Sokar, Elena Mocanu, Decebal Constantin Mocanu, Mykola Pechenizkiy, and Peter Stone.
  Dynamic sparse training for deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04217, 2021.
Ghada Sokar, Rishabh Agarwal, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Utku Evci. The dormant neuron phe-
  nomenon in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12902, 2023.
Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The journal of machine
  learning research, 15(1):1929–1958, 2014.
Yiqin Tan, Pihe Hu, Ling Pan, Jiatai Huang, and Longbo Huang. Rlx2: Training a sparse deep re-
  inforcement learning model from scratch. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Li Wan, Matthew Zeiler, Sixin Zhang, Yann Le Cun, and Rob Fergus. Regularization of neural
  networks using dropconnect. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1058–1066.
  PMLR, 2013.
Chaoqi Wang, Guodong Zhang, and Roger Grosse. Picking winning tickets before training by
  preserving gradient flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07376, 2020.
Zhengyu Yang, Kan Ren, Xufang Luo, Minghuan Liu, Weiqing Liu, Jiang Bian, Weinan Zhang,
  and Dongsheng Li. Towards applicable reinforcement learning: Improving the generalization and
  sample efficiency with policy ensemble. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09284, 2022.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Weirui Ye, Shaohuai Liu, Thanard Kurutach, Pieter Abbeel, and Yang Gao. Mastering atari games
 with limited data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:25476–25488, 2021.
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Y Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
  and Tengyu Ma. Mopo: Model-based offline policy optimization. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:14129–14142, 2020.
Huan Zhang, Hongge Chen, Duane Boning, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Robust reinforcement learning on
  state observations with learned optimal adversary. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.08452, 2021.
Shangtong Zhang and Hengshuai Yao. Ace: An actor ensemble algorithm for continuous control
  with tree search. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33,
  pp. 5789–5796, 2019.
Michael Zhu and Suyog Gupta. To prune, or not to prune: exploring the efficacy of pruning for
 model compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.01878, 2017.


A     T RAINING D ETAILS OF SAC AND OMN ET
In this section, we present the loss functions for SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) and OMNet, to illustrate
how we conduct training based on the diversity of outputs from multiple subnetworks using a single
neural network.
We first present the loss functions for SAC. SAC is an actor-critic RL algorithm, which requires
training a policy network, i.e., πϕ (s), and two value networks which have the same architecture, i.e.,
Qθ(k) , k = 1, 2. The loss functions used for SAC are:
               LCritic (θ(k) ) = (Qθ(k) (st , at ) − (r + γ Q̂(st+1 , πϕ (st+1 ))))2 , k = 1, 2,
                    Q̂(s, a) = min{Qθ(1) (s, a), Qθ(2) (s, a)},
                                          2
                                                                                                         (3)
                                 1X
                  LActor (ϕ) = −    Qθ(k) (st , πϕ (st , at )).
                                 2
                                      k=1

Note that SAC employs Clipped Double Q-Learning, as used in TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018). This
approach has been proven effective in mitigating value overestimation issues in value-based learning.
With OMNet, we only need to maintain one policy network ϕ and one value network θ. Denote θk
as the parameter of the k-th subnetwork, the loss functions of critic is given by:
            LCritic (θi ) = (r + γ Q̂(st+1 , πϕi′′ (st+1 )) − Qθi (st , at ))2 ,    i, i′′ ∼ U[1, N ],
                                                                                                         (4)
              Q̂(s, a) = min{Qθi′ (s, a), Qθi′ (s, a)},          i′1 , i′2 ∼ U[1, N ],
                                      1              2

where i is the randomly selected index of the subnetwork being updated in the critic, i′1 and i′2 are the
randomly chosen subnetwork indices to calculate the Temporal-Difference (TD) target, and i′′ is the
subnetwork index used to determine the next-step action for the actor. In other words, we randomly
select two from multiple subnetworks to calculate the TD target. This approach was inspired by
Chen et al. (2021), but we efficiently perform this operation by utilizing multiple subnetworks within
a single neural network, using much less parameters. The loss function of actor is given by
                                              N
                                          1 X
                    LActor (ϕi ) = −          Qθk (st , πϕi (st , at )),   i ∼ U[1, N ],                 (5)
                                          N
                                              k=1
where i is the randomly selected index of the subnetwork being updated in the actor. We update the
actor using the average value estimation of all subnetworks in the critic.

B     D ETAILS OF 2D M AZE E NVIRONMENT
B.1   E NVIRONMENT S ETTINGS

In this 1x1 maze shown in Figure 5(a), the agent always starts from the center of the maze, at
the position (1/2, 1/2). The agent’s actions are two-dimensional vectors, and the range for each


                                                         13
       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       dimension is [−0.2, 0.2]. The destination is located at the upper-right corner of the maze, at the
       position (5/6, 5/6). When the agent reaches the vicinity of the destination (within a distance of less
       than 0.1) located in the top-right corner of the maze (the orange circle in Figure 5(a)), the game ends,
       and the agent receives a reward of +100. In all other cases, the agent does not receive any rewards.
       If the agent fails to reach the vicinity of the destination within 50 steps, the game is considered a
       failure. Three walls within the maze and walls surrounding the maze perimeter obstruct the agent
       from passing through.

       B.2   D ETAILS REGARDING THE V ISUALIZATION OF V ISITATION F REQUENCY

       We divide the entire map into a 30 × 30 grid and count the cumulative number of times the agent’s
       position fell into each grid cell within a certain number of early exploration steps, converting it into
       a visit frequency. To ensure fair and reasonable comparisons, we conduct 10 repeated experiments
       and calculated the average results for comparison. Furthermore, since we aimed to compare the
       sampling policies generated by the policy network, we do not include the initial random exploration
       steps (1000 steps of warm-up) in the calculations. In Figure 6, we visualize the visit frequencies
       in different areas of the map, where areas marked in red indicate that the agent has reached that
       location, with darker colors representing higher visit frequencies.


       C     D RO Q AND S IN -D RO Q WITH D IFFERENT D ROPOUT R ATES ON E ACH
             E NVIRONMENT

       Figure 10 and Figure 11 depict the training curves of DroQ and Sin-DroQ for different
       dropout rates in each environment. For DroQ, we adjusted the dropout rate in the range
       {0.001, 0.003, 0.01, 0.03, 0.1}. For Sin-DroQ, we adjusted the dropout rate in the range
       {0.001, 0.01, 0.1}. The selected optimal dropout rate for each environment can be found in Ta-
       ble 1. As observed, DroQ and Sin-DroQ exhibit sensitivity to the choice of dropout rate, with the
       optimal values varying significantly across different environments.


0.04

           Figure 10: Training curves of DroQ with different dropout rates on different environments.
       0.4      0.3       0.2      0.1      0.0      0.1       0.2       0.3       0.4

                                                         14
       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


0.04

        Figure 11: Training curves of Sin-DroQ with different dropout rates on different environments.
       0.4      0.3       0.2      0.1           0.0    0.1    0.2          0.3     0.4

                       Table 1: Selected optimal dropout rate for DroQ and Sin-DroQ.
                      Algorithm Hopper-v4 Walker2d-v4 Ant-v4 Humanoid-v4
                      DroQ               0.001         0.003         0.01         0.03
                      Sin-DroQ           0.001          0.01          0.1         0.01


                                                        15
