Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EVISITING GNN S FOR B OOLEAN S ATISFIABILITY
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         We introduce a number of enhancements for the training and inference procedure
         of Graph Neural Networks that are trained to predict solutions of combinatorial
         problems. We motivate these enhancements by pointing to possible connections to
         two approximation algorithms studied in the domain of Boolean Satisfiability: Be-
         lief Propagation and Semidefinite Programming Relaxations. The first significant
         enhancement is a curriculum training procedure, which incrementally increases
         the problem complexity in the training set together with increasing the number
         of message passing iterations of the Graph Neural Network. We show that the
         curriculum, together with several other optimizations, reduces training time by
         more than an order of magnitude compared to the baseline without the curricu-
         lum. Furthermore, we apply decimation and initial embedding sampling, which
         significantly increase the percentage of solved problems.



1   I NTRODUCTION

This work advances the training and inference procedure of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) used in
the context of combinatorial problems (Cappart et al., 2023; Gasse et al., 2019; Lamb et al., 2020).
We target Boolean Satisfiability (SAT), which can be seen as a prototypical combinatorial problem,
with many practical applications. There we demonstrate a substantial increase in the training ef-
ficiency and the number of solved problems. The presented improvements are motivated by two
well-studied approximation algorithms, which could potentially shed light on the inner workings of
the trained model.
Previously, GNNs have already been shown to learn to predict the satisfiability status of CNF for-
mulas (Selsam et al., 2019). Although these learned solutions lag far behind the solvers used in
practice in terms of the size of problems they are able to solve, it is desirable to understand the pro-
cess by which they arrive at their outputs. Moreover, neural networks can potentially find solutions
(in our case, approximation algorithms), which could lead to unexpected insight (Pickering et al.,
2023; Davies et al., 2021), such as discovering new heuristic algorithms by interpreting the learned
weights in the neural network.
It is natural to try to interpret the message passing (MP) process of a GNN as an optimization of
a continuous relaxation of the original problem. Recently, Kyrillidis et al. (2020) demonstrates
scenarios where solving a continuous relaxation formulation may provide benefits over solving the
formula using standard solvers (i.e. having a better performance for non-CNF formulas). This
suggests promising future applications of GNN-based solutions. GNN-based solutions could poten-
tially bring improvements over manually designed continuous solvers because they can adapt to the
specifics of a given distribution of problems. Also, having a better understanding of learned solu-
tions can eventually lead to a confluence of continuous solvers and graph neural networks, which
would be an analog of Physics-Informed Neural Networks (Raissi et al., 2019) in the context of
combinatorial problems.
When treating the message-passing process of a GNN as an optimization of a continuous relaxation
of the original problem, the relaxed variables are in this context represented by high-dimensional
vectors. This hints at a possible connection to Semidefinite Programming (SDP) based approxi-
mation algorithms. The solving process of an SDP solver can be understood as an incremental
optimization of a set of vectors representing the variables being optimized. After convergence, these
vectors are rounded to give a solution to the original discrete problem.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Another way of interpreting the MP process of a GNN is through the lens of Belief Propagation
algorithms (Park & Shin, 2014). In the context of Boolean Satisfiability, Belief Propagation algo-
rithms operate on similar literal-clause factor graphs as a GNN. A particular version called Survey
Propagation also sends messages from literals to clauses in the form of 3-dimensional vectors. In
the domain of random satisfiability, these algorithms have been proven very effective (Braunstein
et al., 2005) and their theoretical properties are well-studied.
In this work, we empirically test whether these connections could give us novel insights into how
trained GNNs operate and bring about improvements in terms of their training speed and accuracy.
To our knowledge, these connections have not been explored before. We also emphasize that we do
not derive any formal statements regarding these connections. We demonstrate that the behavior of
the trained GNN is qualitatively similar to these approximation algorithms and that using insights
from these approximation algorithms can lead to significant improvements.
We present the following novel contributions:

       • We demonstrate several similarities between the empirical behavior of trained GNN and
         two well-studied approximation algorithms for Boolean Satisfiability.
       • Motivated by these connections, we design a training curriculum that speeds up the training
         process by an order of magnitude.
       • For a trained model with fixed weights, we propose to sample different initializations of
         literals and to apply a decimation procedure (inspired by Belief Propagation). This sub-
         stantially increases the number of solved problems (problem is considered solved if the
         network correctly predicts satisfiablity and produces a satisfying assignment for satisfiable
         instances).

In Section 2, we provide relevant background information; Sections 3 4 describe our contribution;
Section 5 contains experimental results and is followed by a conclusion.

2     BACKGROUND
2.1   B OOLEAN S ATISFIABILITY

Basic background knowledge of propositional logic is assumed, cf. Biere et al. (2021). Boolean
variables are denoted by x1 , x2 , . . . ; disjunction by ∨, conjunction by ∧, and negation by ¬. A
literal is a variable or its negation; a clause is a disjunction of literals. For a literal l we write ¯l
for the complementary literal of l, i.e. x̄ is ¬x and ¬x is x. A formula in conjunctive normal form
(CNF) is a conjunction of clauses. Whenever convenient, a clause is treated as a set of literals and a
CNF formula as a set of sets of literals. A clause is called unit iff it consists of a single literal.
An assignment is a total mapping from variables to {0, 1}, representing true/false. An assignment σ
is satisfying a formula ϕ iff ϕ evaluates to true under the standard semantics of Boolean connectives.
In particular, an assignment satisfies a CNF ϕ iff it satisfies at least one literal in each clause.
There exist multiple representations of CNF formulas in the form of graph. In this work, we use the
literal-clause factor graph, which is an undirected bipartite graph of clauses and literals. Each node
of a literal in this graph is connected to nodes of clauses that contain this literal.
MaxSAT is an optimization version of SAT where one is given a CNF ϕ and the objective is to
find a variable assignment that maximizes the number of satisfied clauses. So, for instance, in
{x1 ∨ x2 , ¬x1 , ¬x2 } the assignment x1 = 1, x2 = 0 satisfies the first 2 clauses but not the last
one, and it is the optimum because the 3 clauses cannot be satisfied simultaneously. The problem is
NP-hard even for formulas that have only 2 literals in each clause (Papadimitriou, 1994).

2.2   R ANDOM S ATISFIABILITY AND M ESSAGE - PASSING ALGORITHMS

Random satisfiability provides a natural and simplified setting to study the computational hardness of
finding a satisfying assignment and the structure of the space of satisfying assignments. Typically,
it is assumed that each clause in the formula is sampled randomly and has the same number of
variables (k). A random formula is parametrized by a parameter α denoting the clause-to-variable


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ratio. As the problem size increases asymptotically, the solution space undergoes several phase
transitions as the parameter α changes. When random clauses are added to the formula, it becomes
increasingly challenging to find a satisfying assignments until it reaches a point where the formula
becomes unsatisfiable. This occurs at the satisfiability threshold whose value for k > 2 is known
only through upper and lower bounds and numerical estimates (Zdeborová & Krzakala, 2016).
Before reaching the phase transition to unsatisfiability, the geometry of the solution space undergoes
several other phase transitions, during which the set of solutions breaks into well-separated clusters
(in terms of the Hamming distance) (Kroc et al., 2012). Each cluster corresponds to a set of solutions
in which specific variables are fixed (to a value 0 or 1) and the values of the remaining variables could
vary (this is denoted by the value ∗).
Unlike real-world formulas, random formulas could be efficiently solved by message-passing algo-
rithms (Braunstein et al., 2005). These algorithms could be viewed as algorithms that compute the
marginal probability of individual variables using a belief propagation algorithm (BP) (Kroc et al.,
2012). The marginal probability that a variable xi will have a value 1 in a satisfying assignment is
given by a proportion of assignments where xi = 1 among all possible satisfiable assignments. Be-
lief propagation can compute these marginal probabilities exactly for formulas whose factor graphs
are devoid of loops. Clearly, computing these marginal probabilities exactly for a generic formula
is much harder than finding a single satisfying assignment. For factor graphs with loops, BP can be
regarded as an algorithm that tries to approximate these marginal probabilities (Maneva et al., 2007).
To obtain an algorithm for finding a satisfying assignment with BP, one can employ a decimation
procedure in which variables with the most extreme estimated marginal values are fixed1 and the
whole process is repeated by running the BP process again on the reduced formula until no variable
has a sufficiently high estimated marginal. At this point, the resulting formula would be solved by a
local search. Empirically, it has been observed that BP starts to fail as the parameter α approaches
the satisfiability threshold. This phenomenon is frequently attributed to the evolving structure of the
solution space (Maneva et al., 2007). As the parameter α increases, long-range correlations between
variables start to appear2 and this breaks the assumption needed for BP to work properly.
Braunstein et al. (2005) overcome this problem by drawing on concepts from statistical physics
to design an algorithm called Survey Propagation (SP). It can be viewed as a BP running on an
augmented factor graph of the original formula in which each variable can take one of three values:
0, 1, ∗. SP was empirically shown to find satisfying assignments of problems with parameter α very
close to the satisfiability threshold. Similarly to BP, SP works by iteratively sending messages on a
literal-clause factor graph until the convergence threshold is reached. Unlike BP, the messages from
literals to clauses have the form of 3-dimensional vectors expressing the marginals for the three
possible values.

2.3    S EMIDEFINITE P ROGRAMMING FOR B OOLEAN S ATISFIABILITY

Semidefinite programming (SDP) is a mathematical optimization technique that is primarily used for
problems involving positive semidefinite matrices. In SDP, a linear objective function is optimized
over a feasible region given by a spectrahedron (an intersection of a convex cone formed by positive
semidefinite matrices and an affine subspace) (Ramana & Goldman, 1995). Along with the broad
scope of applications, SDP has also been used to design approximation algorithms for discrete NP-
hard problems (Gärtner & Matousek, 2012). This is achieved by lifting variables of a problem to a
vector space and optimizing a loss function expressed in terms of these vectors. Here we illustrate
this process on a Semidefinite Relaxation of a MAX-2-SAT problem.
MAX-2-SAT is a version of MAX-SAT in which each clause contains at most two literals. The
semidefinite relaxation of a MAX-2-SAT problem can be formulated as follows (Gomes et al., 2006):
To each Boolean variable xi (where i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}), a new variable yi ∈ {−1, 1} is associated,
and an additional variable y0 is introduced (this variable can be understood as representing the
value true). By definition, xi is true if and only if yi = y0 , otherwise, it is false. Using these
new variables, we can represent each clause by an expression that is maximized when the clause is
   1
     A variable is fixed if its estimated marginal reaches a given threshold.
   2
     Variables that are far apart in the factor graph start to be correlated, i.e. knowing the value of variable xi
in a satisfying assignment provides information about the value of the variable xj


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


satisfied (considering only values in {−1, 1}). Each expression contains binary products between
variables used in the given clause (see Appendix A.2). By summing the expressions of all the
clauses in the formula, we obtain a quadratic objective function that gives a maximal value when the
maximum number of clauses is satisfied. Therefore, the whole problem may be stated as an integer
quadratic program where the constraints restrict the values of the variables to {−1, 1}.
The SDP relaxation is obtained by lifting each variable yi to a (n + 1)-dimensional unit vector yi .
Therefore, the binary products yi ·yj in the objective function are replaced by inner products ⟨yi , yj ⟩.
This can be compactly represented in matrix form if we substitute each inner product ⟨yi , yj ⟩ by a
scalar Yij of a matrix Y. The fact that these scalars correspond to inner products could be encoded by
the restriction to positive-semidefinite matrices Y. We can thus represent the original MAX-2-SAT
problem as the following SDP:


           Maximize: Tr(W Y ) Subject to: Yii = 1 for all i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n}          Y ⪰ 0,

where Tr denotes the trace of a matrix. Both Y and W are (n + 1) × (n + 1) matrices. Matrix W is
a coefficient matrix of the objective function, derived from the clauses. More detailed derivation is
available in appendix A.1.
Positive semidefinitness of matrix Y assures that the matrix can be uniquely factorized as Y =
  1    1                         1
Y 2 Y 2 . Rows of the matrix Y 2 are real vectors yi for all i ∈ {0, . . . , n} and values in the original
matrix Yij are their inner products ⟨yi , yj ⟩ for all i, j ∈ {0, . . . , n}. The constraints Yii = 1 assures
that all vectors yi lie on (n + 1) dimensional unit sphere.
The solver for this SDP optimizes the numbers in the matrix Y but using the factorization, we can
possibly visualize what happens with the vectors yi . The process starts with random unit vectors
which are continuously updated in order to maximize the objective function. If we would further
fix the position of the vector y0 (corresponding to the value true) we would see that the vectors of
variables that will be set to true in the final assignment are getting closer to the vector y0 and the
vectors yj of variables that will be set to false will be moving away from it so that the inner product
⟨y0 , yj ⟩ is close to −1. If the formula is satisfiable, the objective function drives the vectors to form
two well-separated clusters. However, if only a few clauses could be satisfied at the same time, the
vectors would end up being scattered.
A simple way to round the resulting vectors (y1 , . . . yn ) and get the assignment for the original
Boolean variables is to compute an inner product ⟨y0 , yi ⟩ and assign the value according to its sign.
It is also possible to assign the values by picking a random separating hyperplane and it can be
shown that this rounding gives 0.8785-approximation of the integer program optimum (Goemans &
Williamson, 1995). Similar SDPs can be obtained for different versions of MAX-SAT (with larger
clauses). From an empirical observation, the convergence threshold of the SDP solver needs to be
decreased significantly compared to MAX-2-SAT in order to obtain a good approximation for these
more complicated versions, which is related to our curriculum training procedure.
We mention that the expressions of the clauses reach their maximum at 1 (when a clause is satis-
fied by the assignment). This means that the whole formula is satisfiable if the objective function
achieves a value that is equal to the number of clauses in the formula. Therefore, we can theoretically
obtain an incomplete SAT solver from this SDP.
In Section 4, we empirically demonstrate that the behavior of a trained GNN resembles the opti-
mization process described above. With this intuition, we propose several improvements that lead
to faster training time and higher accuracy.

2.4   G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS FOR B OOLEAN S ATISFIABILITY

GNNs constitute a flexible tool for learning representations of graph-structured data. Representing
the input data in the form of a graph allows one to encode complex relations and sparsity structures.
GNNs then allow to encode inductive biases such as invariance to various transformations (Bronstein
et al., 2021). For these reasons, GNNs are frequently used in applications of machine learning
to combinatorial optimization (Gasse et al., 2019; Lamb et al., 2020; Cappart et al., 2023) where
optimization problems are often amenable to graph-based representations.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Typically, a GNN would enhance a manually designed solver by replacing various decision heuris-
tics with their predictions after being trained either in a supervised or reinforcement learning mode
(Bengio et al., 2021; Gasse et al., 2019). Another area of research focuses on end-to-end approaches
where the GNN is trained to produce the final answer (Selsam et al., 2019). From a practical point
of view, these end-to-end approaches are interesting because they can potentially find more efficient
solutions than those proposed by algorithm designers (Veličković & Blundell, 2021).
As other data-driven algorithms, GNNs used for combinatorial optimization make a trade-off be-
tween performance on some restricted subset of inputs and generalization to the whole domain of
possible inputs. In the extreme case, the input distribution may be skewed to the extent that the GNN
only needs to recognize superficial features of the input graph.
In this work, we focus on the end-to-end approaches. We demonstrate these improvements with the
popular NeuroSAT architecture (Selsam et al., 2019) which has demonstrated the ability to exhibit
nontrivial behavior resembling a search in a continuous space, rather than mere classification based
on superficial statistics.

The NeuroSAT architecture We demonstrate our enhancement using the NeuroSAT architecture
with several simplifications. NeuroSAT is a GNN that operates on an undirected bipartite graph
of literals and clauses. In this graph, each literal is connected to clauses that contain this literal.
The MP process alternates between two steps that update the representations of clauses and literals,
respectively. The embeddings of literals and clauses are updated by two independent LSTMs. The
messages from clause to literals are produced with a 3-layer MLP that takes the embeddings of a
clause as an input, and similarly in the opposite direction. After several rounds of MP iterations,
the vector representation of each literal is passed into another MLP used to produce a vote for
the satisfiability of the formula. These votes are averaged across all literals to produce the final
prediction. A more detailed description is provided in Apendix A.2.


3   C URRICULUM FOR TRAINING GNN S

An important feature of the NeuroSAT architecture is that the number of MP iterations does not
need to be fixed because each round of MP is realized with the same function. In the original
paper, the authors demonstrated that the model trained with 26 MP iterations on problems with up
to 40 variables was able to generalize to much larger problems with up to 200 variables. This is
achieved just by iterating MP for more steps (hundreds or even thousands). Therefore, we can view
the architecture as an iterative algorithm with an adaptive number of steps that could depend on
the difficulty of the problem. During training, the number of iterations needs to be fixed so that
the problems can be solved in batches, but during inference, each problem can run for a different
number of steps.
As was already shown in the original paper, when the problem is satisfiable and the model correctly
predicts it, the vectors of literals form two well-separated clusters. Empirically, once the vectors
form two well-separate clusters, subsequent updates do not change the vectors significantly. Infor-
mally speaking, MP iterations can be viewed as optimization steps of an implicit energy function of
the trained model (Gould et al., 2021). Unsatisfied clauses should increase the energy and the mini-
mum energy should be achieved when the maximum number of clauses are satisfied. For satisfiable
formulas, this happens when the vectors form two well-separated clusters, which makes the whole
process qualitatively similar to the optimization of the SDP relaxation described in Section 2.3 (for
supportive arguments of this claim, see Appendix A.5). Therefore, we can set up a stopping criterion
that stops the MP process once the vectors stop to change significantly. This could be viewed as an
analog of a convergence threshold of iterative solvers for continuous problems or BP.
As mentioned in Section 2.3, the number of iterations required is well correlated with the difficulty of
the problem. This motivates our curriculum training procedure, which trains the model by incremen-
tally enlarging the training set with bigger problems and increasing the number of MP operations.
For each new problem size, the model is trained until a certain accuracy is reached, and after that,
larger problems are added to the training set and the number of MP rounds is incremented accord-
ingly. With this procedure and several simplifications of the original model, we achieve almost an
order of magnitude faster convergence to the same accuracy as reported in the original paper (85%).


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A similar observation was recently made by Garg et al. (2022) in a study of the in-context learning
capabilities of a trained transformer. The authors observe that the trained model is able to perform
optimization of a loss function (a high-dimensional regression) as the input passes through individual
layers. They also experimentally demonstrated that it is possible to significantly accelerate the
emergence of this capability if the model is trained incrementally by increasing the dimensionality
of the regression. In our case, we incrementally increase also the number of MP iterations together
with the number of variables within the formula, which speeds up the training even further.


Figure 1: This figure shows how the embeddigs of literals change during the MP process. We
selected 3 different time steps from the 30 time steps used for this example. The 16-dimensional
vectors are projected to 2D by UMAP algorithm. The colors correspond to the truth values of the
final solution recovered for this formula. As can be seen, the literals progressively form two well-
separated clusters of literals with the same truth value.

4   S AMPLING AND D ECIMATION

Selsam et al. (2019) observes that for formulas that the model correctly classified as satisfiable,
the embeddings of literals form two well-separated clusters. In Figures 1 and 5, we recapitulate
their visualization of embeddings with UMAP instead of PCA (the final clusters are more distinct
when visualized with UMAP). The authors showed that for a large portion of correctly classified
satisfiable formulas, they were able to recover a satisfying assignment by clustering the embeddings
and by assigning the same Boolean value to all literals within one cluster. They needed to test both
possible ways of assigning Boolean values because they did not know in advance which cluster
corresponds to the value true and which to the value false.
We first confirmed their finding by running an experiment in which we removed the final voting
layer and classified the formula using a Silhouette score (Rousseeuw, 1987) of the embeddings.
Concretely, we first run K-means on the embeddings of literals to assign them to two clusters and
then we compute the Silhouette score with the assigned labels. On the training set, we estimate
a threshold for this score and classify the test set according to this threshold (i.e., we classify a
formula as satisfiable if its score is above this threshold). With this procedure, we achieve the same
accuracy as the original model with the voting layer (85%), which means that the observation of
cluster formation is robust.
Next, we tested whether the model can produce different clusterings if we sample initial embeddings
of literals multiple times (this corresponds to different initializations of the SDP solver). This turned
out to be the case; for a large portion of satisfiable problems, using multiple random initializations
of the embeddings would produce a diverse set of solutions. This enables us to substantially improve
the classification accuracy by taking a majority vote over multiple initializations. Sampling different
solutions is also trivially parallelizable.
Motivated by similarities with the SDP relaxation, we tested whether it is possible to recover the
vector representing the value true and use this vector to assign value to each literal. We selected all
the formulas that the model correctly classified as satisfiable and checked whether the formula could
be satisfied by one of the two possible assignments of Boolean values to the resulting clusters. Thus,
we obtain a set of literal embeddings that correspond to the value true and another set corresponding
to the value false, aggregated over all problems. Finally, we computed an average vector for both
sets and also a distribution of Euclidean distances to these two vectors. Concretely, for each literal
that was assigned the value true, we compute the distance of its embedding to the average true vector
and also to the average false vector. Similarly, for each literal that was assigned the value false.
Figure 2 shows that all vectors assigned to the value true are close to the average true vector and
far from the average false vector, and vice versa. Therefore, we can assign each literal of a formula


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: A histogram of Euclidean distances to the average true vector and average false vector. 0
to 0 center are distances between embeddings of literals assigned to false to the average false vector,
etc. The figure clearly demonstrates that literals that take the value false in the final assignment move
to the same area of the vector space and the same is true for the opposite polarity.

                                         Model Training Time Comparison

                           0.8
          Model Accuracy


                           0.7
                                                                  Our model - Curriculum
                           0.6                                    Our model - without Curriculum
                                                                  Original Neurosat
                           0.5                                    Threshold (85%)
                                 0   1        2            3              4            5
                                             Wallclock Time (hours)

Figure 3: Validation accuracy during training. Our model with a curriculum achieves reaches 85%
in approximately 30 minutes, whereas the original NeuroSAT implementation needs over 5 hours.
For comparison, we also add our implementation trained on the same data but without a curriculum.
The training of each model stops once it achieves an accuracy of 85% on a validation set.


according to its distance to these two average vectors. Relying on the intuition from BP, we may try
to treat these two distances as marginal probabilities over the two possible truth values, and therefore
obtain a decimation algorithm. This algorithm fixes variables whose embeddings are close to one of
these average vectors, simplifies the formula, and runs the MP of the GNN again. The results with
these improvements are presented in the following section.

5   E XPERIMENTS

Data Generation Selsam et al. (2019) demonstrates that a well-structured distribution of training
data is essential to prevent the model from overfitting to superficial features. A recent theoreti-
cal study (Raventós et al., 2023) also explains why input diversity is important in order for the
model to transition to a regime where it is performing optimization over inputs. We therefore reuse
Selsam’s generative model of random SAT formulas which makes sure that no superficial features
exist. However, Selsam’s generation procedure is largely random and therefore does not capture
any human-like reasoning skills. Therefore we also generate structured problems (Latin squares,
Sudoku, and logical circuits). The details of data generation are described in Appendix A.3.1 and
A.3.2
In the reference implementation of NeuroSAT, the model is trained on 100,000 formulas where for
each formula the number of variables is sampled uniformly from the interval [10, 40]. The model is
then evaluated on problems with 40 variables (similarly as in the orinal paper, this test set is here
referred to as SR(40)). In our case, the size of the test set is the same, but we train on 10,000
formulas in total and sample the number of variables in the formula from the interval [5, 40].

Model architecture When experimenting with the original NeuroSAT architecture, we found that
it is unnecessarily complex. We managed to significantly simplify the model without sacrificing the
final accuracy. Here is the list of simplifications in our model:


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         • We completely removed the two 3-layer MLPs that produce the messages from the hidden
           states of the two LSTMs. The messages sent are, therefore, the hidden states themselves.
         • We replace the final voting MLP with a linear layer.
         • We do not use LayerNorm within LSTMs.
         • We reduce the dimension of the hidden state of the LSTMs from 128 to 16.

Training loop We train the model using the curriculum described in Section 3. In the following
text, we consider the size of the formula to be given by the number of variables it contains. The
training starts with formulas of size 5 and this size is incremented by 2 every time the validation
accuracy (for a given size) reaches a given threshold or the maximum number of 200 epochs is
reached. For each increment, we add the problems from the four previous increments 3 which makes
the training more stable. The thresholds used to increment the size are obtained by interpolating the
values between 0.65 (for the first size) and 0.85 (for the last size). We note that the values could be set
to a fixed number but this may waste time during learning on the intermediate sizes. Empirically, the
model spends most of the time on the first 3 and 5 last sizes. For the other training hyperparameters,
we follow the original implementation except that we change the learning rate to 2 · 10−3 .

5.1     R ESULTS

Training Convergence To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed curriculum, we compare
the training process with two baselines. The first is the publicly available implementation of Neu-
roSAT 4 and the second is our model without the curriculum. We stop training each model once
it reaches the validation accuracy reported in the original paper (85%). As visible in Figure 3, our
model with the curriculum reaches this accuracy in approximately 30 minutes, while the other two
baselines need to be trained for several hours5 . All models were trained on 1 GPU (NVIDIA A100).

Sampling and Decimation In Table 1, we show the increase in accuracy due to the enhancements
described in Section 4. Together with the results on randomly generated problems, we also show
results on three different structured problems whose details are described in the Appendix A.3.2.
The results show a noticeable increase in the number of solved problems for both enhancements
(sampling and decimation). For decimation, we use only two passes, which means that if the first
application of the GNN did not solve the formula, we fix the variables whose distances to the average
vectors were below a threshold6 , simplify the formula, and then process it with the GNN again. For
each subsequent pass, we used only one initialization sample for each decimated formula. Therefore,
if the first pass uses 16 samples, the second pass can also produce a maximum of 16 samples. To
see the effects of decimation, we show results of runs with the same number of samples in total (32)
but without decimation.
For results with 3 passes, see Appendix A.6. We note, as should be obvious, that our method cannot
certify unsatisfiability.

6       R ELATED W ORK
Most of the related work was already mentioned in Section 2. In this section, we describe related
work in the context of GNNs and Boolean Satisfiability.
In the domain of Boolean Satisfiability, applications of GNNs can be divided into hybrid or end-to-
end approaches. In the hybrid approaches, the GNN is used to guide a discrete search. We can further
distinguish between applications where the GNN guides a simple heuristic and applications where
the predictions of the GNN are used inside an industrial SAT solver. For the case heuristics, Yolcu
& Póczos (2019) use GNNs trained by Reinforcement Learning to select variables and values in a
local search. Zhang et al. (2020) also use GNN for local search, but train it with supervised learning.
    3
     That is, for the formulas of size 21, we add formulas of size 19, 17, 15, 13.
    4
     Available at this url: https://github.com/ryanzhangfan/NeuroSAT/tree/master.
   5
     The precise numbers are: 34 min for our model with a curriculum, 5h 23min for the original NeuroSAT
implementation, and 3h 44min for our model without a curriculum.
   6
     We set this threshold to 1.9 after a visual inspection of Figure 2


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          #SAT     Avg.    First   Second      #MP
      Problem type                                                       #samples   Decimation   Solved
                        problems   #var    pass     pass    iterations
                                           4442     274                    16          Yes         94 %
         SR(40)          5000       40     3990       -       100           1          No          80 %
                                           4457       -                    32          No         89.1 %
                                           186       14                    16          Yes        100 %
    Latin Squares 9x9     200      196.9    95        -       1000          1          No         47.5 %
                                           192        -                    32          No          96 %
                                           196        1                    16          Yes       98.5 %
    Latin Squares 8x8     200      133.5   113        -       1000          1          No         56.5 %
                                           197        -                    32          No         98.5 %
                                           319        0                    16          Yes       92.7 %
     Logical Circuits     344      131.1   293        -       1000          1          No         85.2 %
                                           319        -                    32          No        92.73 %
                                            92       11                    16          Yes       51.5 %
       Sudoku 9x9         200      245.6    35        -       1000          1          No         17.5 %
                                            94        -                    32          No          47 %

Table 1: Improvements obtained due to the sampling and decimation procedure. We test how many
satisfiable problems could be solved with the model. SR(40) is the test set with random problems;
the other prolems are describe in Appendix A.3.2. For each problem type, we include the aver-
age number of variables. For larger problems, we run the model for more MP iterations. When
decimation is used, we count the number of problems solved during the first and the second pass
separately. #samples refers to the number of different initializations of literal embeddings.


For the case of SAT solvers, Kurin et al. (2020) introduce a branching heuristic for SAT solvers
trained using value-based reinforcement learning (RL) with GNNs for function approximation. They
incorporate the heuristic with the MiniSat solver and manage to reduce the number of iterations
required to solve SAT problems by 2-3X. Similarly, Wang et al. (2021) use GNN as a variable
selection heuristic and manage to improve MiniSat in terms of the number of solved problems on
the SATCOMP-2021 competition problem set.
On the end-to-end front, the most relevant work is the one by Selsam et al. (2019) who introduced
the NeuroSAT architecture, which was our starting point. Similar to NeuroSAT were the models
introduced by Cameron et al. (2020) who used different GNN architecture and Shi et al. (2022)
who used a Transformer. Freivalds & Kozlovics (2022) use a Denoising Diffusion model to learn to
sample multiple solutions and Ozolins et al. (2022) propose an approach in which the GNN can take
feedback from solution trials.
Apart from work focused on Boolean Satisfiability, we also mention the work by Kuck et al. (2020)
who use GNN to improve Belief Propagation.


7     C ONCLUSION

We revisit and enhance the training and inference procedure of GNNs used in the context of com-
binatorial problems. In particular, we focus on the well-known NP-complete problem of Boolean
Satisfiability (SAT). We introduce a curriculum training procedure, which enables a significantly
faster iteration over experiments. Further, we apply a decimation procedure and initial-value sam-
pling, which significantly increase the number of solved problems. For a problem to be considered
solved, we not only require the correct prediction whether it is satisfible or not, but we also require
the GNN to produce a satisfying assignment for satisfiable problem instances.
The introduced enhancements are motivated by noticing similarities between the behavior of a
trained GNN and two well-studied approximation algorithms. Even though the enhancements were
presented in the domain of Boolean Satisfiability, we believe that they can easily be generalized to
other domains where these approximation algorithms are used. In future work, we plan to explore
these similarities more closely and reverse engineer the algorithm learned by the GNN. We also
hope that our work could eventually shed light on the connection between SDP and BP.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


8   R EPRODUCIBILITY
In the supplementary material, we provide a source code with a readme that allows to reproduce the
results of our model presented in Figure 3 and Table 1. Results for NeuroSAT presented in Figure3
were obtained by running training scripts in the publically available implementaion of NeuroSAT
available at this url:https://github.com/ryanzhangfan/NeuroSAT/tree/master.

R EFERENCES
Yoshua Bengio, Andrea Lodi, and Antoine Prouvost. Machine learning for combinatorial opti-
  mization: a methodological tour d’horizon. European Journal of Operational Research, 290(2):
  405–421, 2021.
Armin Biere, Marijn Heule, Hans van Maaren, and Toby Walsh (eds.). Handbook of Satisfiability -
  Second Edition, volume 336 of Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications. IOS Press,
  2021. doi: 10.3233/FAIA200993. URL https://doi.org/10.3233/FAIA200993.
Alfredo Braunstein, Marc Mézard, and Riccardo Zecchina. Survey propagation: An algorithm for
  satisfiability. Random Structures & Algorithms, 27(2):201–226, 2005.
Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Taco Cohen, and Petar Veličković. Geometric deep learning:
 Grids, groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13478, 2021.
Chris Cameron, Rex Chen, Jason Hartford, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Predicting propositional satis-
  fiability via end-to-end learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 34, pp. 3324–3331, 2020.
Quentin Cappart, Didier Chételat, Elias B Khalil, Andrea Lodi, Christopher Morris, and Petar
  Velickovic. Combinatorial optimization and reasoning with graph neural networks. J. Mach.
  Learn. Res., 24:130–1, 2023.
Edmund Clarke, Daniel Kroening, and Flavio Lerda. A tool for checking ANSI-C programs. In Tools
  and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems: 10th International Conference,
  TACAS 2004, Held as Part of the Joint European Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software,
  ETAPS 2004, Barcelona, Spain, March 29-April 2, 2004. Proceedings 10, pp. 168–176. Springer,
  2004.
Alex Davies, András Juhász, Marc Lackenby, and Nenad Tomasev. The signature and cusp geometry
  of hyperbolic knots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.15323, 2021.
Karlis Freivalds and Sergejs Kozlovics. Denoising diffusion for sampling sat solutions. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2212.00121, 2022.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? A case study of simple function classes. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:30583–30598, 2022.
Bernd Gärtner and Jiri Matousek. Approximation algorithms and semidefinite programming.
  Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
Maxime Gasse, Didier Chételat, Nicola Ferroni, Laurent Charlin, and Andrea Lodi. Exact combi-
 natorial optimization with graph convolutional neural networks. Advances in neural information
 processing systems, 32, 2019.
Michel X Goemans and David P Williamson. Improved approximation algorithms for maximum cut
 and satisfiability problems using semidefinite programming. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 42(6):
 1115–1145, 1995.
Carla P Gomes, Willem-Jan Van Hoeve, and Lucian Leahu. The power of semidefinite programming
  relaxations for max-sat. In International Conference on Integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI)
  and Operations Research (OR) Techniques in Constraint Programming, pp. 104–118. Springer,
  2006.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Stephen Gould, Richard Hartley, and Dylan Campbell. Deep declarative networks. IEEE Transac-
  tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 44(8):3988–4004, 2021.
Lukas Kroc, Ashish Sabharwal, and Bart Selman. Survey propagation revisited. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1206.5273, 2012.
Jonathan Kuck, Shuvam Chakraborty, Hao Tang, Rachel Luo, Jiaming Song, Ashish Sabharwal, and
  Stefano Ermon. Belief propagation neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:667–678, 2020.
Vitaly Kurin, Saad Godil, Shimon Whiteson, and Bryan Catanzaro. Can q-learning with graph net-
  works learn a generalizable branching heuristic for a sat solver? Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:9608–9621, 2020.
Anastasios Kyrillidis, Anshumali Shrivastava, Moshe Vardi, and Zhiwei Zhang. FourierSAT: a
  Fourier expansion-based algebraic framework for solving hybrid boolean constraints. In Pro-
  ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 1552–1560, 2020.
Luı́s C Lamb, Artur Garcez, Marco Gori, Marcelo Prates, Pedro Avelar, and Moshe Vardi. Graph
  neural networks meet neural-symbolic computing: A survey and perspective. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2003.00330, 2020.
Elitza Maneva, Elchanan Mossel, and Martin J Wainwright. A new look at survey propagation and
  its generalizations. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 54(4):17–es, 2007.
Emils Ozolins, Karlis Freivalds, Andis Draguns, Eliza Gaile, Ronalds Zakovskis, and Sergejs Ko-
  zlovics. Goal-aware neural sat solver. In 2022 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
  (IJCNN), pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2022.
Christos H Papadimitriou. Computational complexity. Addison-Wesley, 1994.
Sejun Park and Jinwoo Shin. Max-product belief propagation for linear programming: Applications
  to combinatorial optimization. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2014. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:15136373.
Lynn Pickering, Tereso Del Rio Almajano, Matthew England, and Kelly Cohen. Explainable AI
  insights for symbolic computation: A case study on selecting the variable ordering for cylindrical
  algebraic decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12154, 2023.
Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George Em Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks:
 A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear par-
 tial differential equations. J. Comput. Phys., 378:686–707, 2019. URL https://api.
 semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:57379996.
Motakuri Ramana and Alan J Goldman. Some geometric results in semidefinite programming.
 Journal of Global Optimization, 7(1):33–50, 1995.
Allan Raventós, Mansheej Paul, Feng Chen, and Surya Ganguli. Pretraining task diversity and the
  emergence of non-Bayesian in-context learning for regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15063,
  2023.
Peter J Rousseeuw. Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster analy-
  sis. Journal of computational and applied mathematics, 20:53–65, 1987.
Daniel Selsam, Matthew Lamm, Benedikt Bünz, Percy Liang, Leonardo de Moura, and David L.
  Dill. Learning a SAT solver from single-bit supervision. In 7th International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net,
  2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HJMC_iA5tm.
Zhengyuan Shi, Min Li, Sadaf Khan, Hui-Ling Zhen, Mingxuan Yuan, and Qiang Xu. Satformer:
  Transformers for sat solving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.00953, 2022.
Petar Veličković and Charles Blundell. Neural algorithmic reasoning. Patterns, 2(7), 2021.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wenxi Wang, Yang Hu, Mohit Tiwari, Sarfraz Khurshid, Kenneth McMillan, and Risto Mi-
 ikkulainen. Neurocomb: Improving sat solving with graph neural networks. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2110.14053, 2021.
Emre Yolcu and Barnabás Póczos. Learning local search heuristics for boolean satisfiability. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Lenka Zdeborová and Florent Krzakala. Statistical physics of inference: Thresholds and algorithms.
  Advances in Physics, 65(5):453–552, 2016.
Wenjie Zhang, Zeyu Sun, Qihao Zhu, Ge Li, Shaowei Cai, Yingfei Xiong, and Lu Zhang. Nlocalsat:
 Boosting local search with solution prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09398, 2020.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1    D ERIVATION OF THE SDP RELAXATION FOR MAX-2-SAT

Here we provide further details about the definition of SDP relaxation for MAX-2-SAT. The goal is
to write an objective function for 2-CNF formulae, which consist of clauses c1 , . . . , ck over variables
x1 , . . . , xn with at most two literals per clause.
For each Boolean variable xi (where i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}) a new variable yi ∈ {−1, 1} is first instanti-
ated and one additional variable y0 ∈ {−1, 1} is introduced. The additional variable is introduced to
unambiguously assign the truth value in the original problem from values of relaxed problem. It is
not possible to just assign True (False) to xi if yi = 1(0) because quadratic terms cannot distinguish
between yi · yj and (−yi ) · (−yj ). Instead, the truth value of xi is assigned by comparing yi with
y0 : xi is True if and only if yi = y0 otherwise it is False. The assignment is therefore invariant to
negating all variables.
To determine the value of a formula, we sum the value of its clauses c which are given by the value
function v(c). Here are examples of the value function for 3 different clauses:

                                    1 + y0 · yi
                         v(xi ) =
                                        2
                                              1 − y0 · yi
                       v(¬xi ) = 1 − v(xi ) =
                                                   2
                  v(xi ∨ ¬xj ) = 1 − v(¬xi ∧ xj )
                                     1 − y0 · yi 1 + y0 · yj
                               =1−
                                         2           2
                                 1                 1              1
                               = (1 + y0 · yi ) + (1 − y0 · yj ) + (1 + yi · yj )
                                 4                 4              4
By summing over all clauses c in in the Boolean formula, the following integer quadratic program
for MAX-2-SAT is obtained:
                                     X
                      Maximize:          v(c)
                                        c∈C
                         Subject to: yi ∈ {−1, 1} for all i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n},
this can be rewritten by collecting coefficients of yi · yj for i, j ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n} and putting them
symmetrically into a (n + 1) × (n + 1) coefficient matrix W . The terms yi · yj can be collected in a
matrix Y with same dimensions as W . The elements Yij correspond to yi ·yj for i, j ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n}.
Both matrices are symmetric, hence the sum of all elements in their element-wise product (which
is the objective function) can be compactly expressed by using trace operation. This leads to the
following version of the same integer program:


                    Maximize: Tr(W Y )
                    Subject to: Yij ∈ {−1, 1} for all i, j ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n}, i ̸= j.


                                                    12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


So far no relaxation has been made. To make the discrete program continuous, the value of the
variables yi is allowed to be any real number between −1 and 1. After solving a quadratic program
with this relaxation, rounding can be used to obtain a value from {−1, 1}.
Semi-definite programming goes further and allows variables to be (n + 1)-dimensional unit vectors
(y0 , . . . yn ) −→ (y0 , . . . yn ). schematicaly depicted in figure 4. This directly leads to the relaxation
used in the main part of this study.
Our aim was to show that solving SDP relaxation by optimization and rounding by separating the
high-dimensional vectors closely resembles the behavior of GNN.


                                                                                   y1

                                                                              y3


                                                                         -1                            1


                                                                                               y2
  y1 , y3                  y2                 y3 y1             y2
  -1                         1   -1                                  1

Figure 4: Lifting the variables to a higher dimension, demonstrated on variables y1 , y2 , y3 . Initially,
only integer values of −1 and 1 could be assigned to them (integer program). Next, constraints are
relaxed, allowing variables to take any real value between −1 and 1. Finally, it is permitted for them
to be unit vectors in a high-dimensional space (here, 3 dimensions). The hyperplane in the last pic-
ture would be used for rounding the variables at the end. This hyperplane can be randomly selected,
and truth values for variables y1 , y2 , y3 are determined based on which side of the hyperplane they
land after continuous optimization.


A.2         T HE N EURO SAT A RCHITECTURE

For completeness, we provide the update rules and voting rule from the original paper Selsam et al.
(2019):

                                      (t+1)               (t)
                      (C (t+1) , Ch           ) ← Cu ([Ch , M ⊤ Lmsg (L(t) )])                              (1)

                                      (t+1)              (t)
                      (L(t+1) , Lh            ) ← Lu ([Lh , Flip(L(t) ), M Cmsg (C (t+1) )])                (2)

                                        LT∗ ← Lvote (L(T ) ) ∈ R2n .                                        (3)

The first rule is used to update the clause embedding matrix C (t) ∈ Rm×d where d is the size of
the hidden feature vector and m is the number of clauses, t is a discrete time step. The second
rule is used to update literals whose embedding are stored in matrix L(t) ∈ R2n×d , where n is
number of variables (there are 2n rows to cover both polarities of each literal). These two updates
are consecutively repeated for T iterations.
                                                                                                      (t)
Cu , Lu denote two LayerNorm LSTMs (initialized randomly) with hidden states Ch                        ∈
          (t)
Rm×d , Lh ∈ R2n×d respectively, and Lmsg , Cmsg are multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) process-
ing messages from literals and clauses. The last trained component is Lvote , a voting MLP whose
output is a single scalar for each literal. Edges of bipartite graph representation of the SAT formula
are encoded in the bipartite adjacency matrix M (M (i, j) is 1 iff literal li is in clause cj ). The flip
operator swaps each pair of rows in matrix L, containing two polarities of the same literal.
To update a representation of each clause, the representations of literals contained in this clause are
processed by the MLP Lmsg and the resulting vectors are summed together and taken as input by
the LSTM Cu .


                                                            13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We emphasize that for updating a representation of each literal, the process is analogous to the clause
update, except that the LSTM takes as an input a concatenation of the summed messages from literals
and the hidden-state representation of the literal of the same variable but opposite polarity (i.e., to
update the hidden state of literal xi , the LSTM takes as an input a concatenation of the aggregated
message vector and a hidden state of literal x̄i from the previous iteration).
At the end, the output of the model is a 2n dimensional vector, which is then averaged to a single
logit on which a sigmoid activation cross-entropy is applied to compute the loss with respect to the
ground truth label (SAT/UNSAT).
Our model is a simplified version of the described architecture, achieved by omitting two MLPs,
namely Lmsg , Cmsg and replacing Lvote with just a single linear layer. LayerNorm is removed
from LSTM and the dimensionality of the hidden states is reduced to 16 from 128.

A.3     DATASETS

A.3.1    R ANDOM P ROBLEMS
The generative model proposed by Selsam et al. (2019) samples formulas in sat/unsat pairs which
differ only by a negation of a single literal in one clause. This is accomplished through the sequential
sampling of clauses which are continuously added to the CNF formula until it becomes unsatisfiable.
To create a new clause, the generative model first samples a small integer, k, and then randomly
selects k variables without replacement. Each selected variable is independently negated with a
probability 0.5 and the resulting literal is added to the clause. Satisfiability is determined by querying
a solver right after the addition of a new clause. When the problem becomes unsatisfiable, it is paired
with a satisfiable problem which is exactly the same except that in the last added clause, one literal
is negated. The sampling of k is designed to vary the size of clauses while avoiding an excessive
number of two-literal clauses, which would simplify the problem on average.

A.3.2    S TRUCTURED P ROBLEMS
While many works evaluate NN-based SAT solvers on randomly generated problems, it is far more
compelling to understand their performance on problems representing facets of human reasoning.
The objective is to generate data that is reflecting various degrees of difficulty of Boolean reasoning.
Since real-world problems often produce a large number of variables and clauses, which can be
easily reduced by preprocessing, we uniformly reduce all the instances by unit propagation, which
can be realized in polynomial time (see following paragraph).

Unit propagation is one of the simplest operation for propositional logic, which propagates unit
clauses in a CNF ϕ. The process consists of identifying a unit clause {l} ∈ ϕ, then removing all
clauses from ϕ that contain ϕ and removing the complementary literal ¯l from all the other clauses.
This process may create new unit clauses, which are then propagated in the same manner. If the
process produces the empty clause (semantically equivalent to false), then the formula ϕ is unsatisfi-
able. We can say that a formula is solved by unit propagation if the unit operation derives the empty
clause, or if all remaining clauses are unit clauses.

Latin square is an n × n grid of numbers 1..n, where each number appears exactly once in
each row and in each column. We generate SAT instances by partially filling the Latin square—the
individual values in the partially filled Latin square are referred to as hints. Then, the task is to
decide whether the given hints can be completed in to a full Latin square (similarly to the Sudoku
puzzle). In order to generate interesting instances, we generate instances that have a unique solution
and are minimal in the sense that removing any of the hints leads to multiple solutions. This is
generated as follows. First generate a valid random Latin square and then start removing values of
individual squares, at random, while a unique solution exists—this is checked by a SAT solver. The
resulting formula consists of the rules of the Latin square and a set of unit clauses representing the
hints. This process generates a satisfiable SAT instance with a unique solution. An unsatisfiable
instance is generated by adding a single random hint incongruent with the unique solution.

Sudoku is a popular puzzle , which is in fact an extension of latin squares Where we add additional
constraints on smaller squares (aka boxes). We consider the standard format where the puzzle is


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


composed of 3 × 3 boxes, which comprise 3 × 3 cells to be filled. We use the same method as in
Latin squares to generate interesting puzzles.

Logical circuits Are one of the main means of modeling in SAT. Indeed, they enable modeling
digital systems but also represent a powerful intermediate language for modeling propositional prob-
lems. An important application of SAT are bit-vector problems of a fixed bit-width. To represent
this type of reasoning, we generate problems of the form
                                 c1 ∗ r1 + c2 ∗ r2 ̸= c3   mod 2n

We use the Model checker CBMC to convert these inequalities to CNF (Clarke et al., 2004).

A.4   V ISUALIZATIONS OF LITERAL EMBEDDINGS


Figure 5: This figure shows evolution of the embeddigs of literals during the MP process. We
selected 6 different time steps from the 30 time steps used for this example. The 16-dimensional
vectors are projected to 2D by UMAP algorithm.


A.5   A NALYSIS OF THE E VOLUTION OF L ITERAL E MBEDDINGS

To reinforce the assertion regarding the relationship between NeuroSAT and the SDP relaxation for
MaxSAT, we tested whether the evolution of literal embeddings in NeuroSAT actually corresponds
to an optimization process that tries to maximize the SDP objective 2.3.
We first sampled several hundred 2-CNF formulas and obtained the SDP objective function for each
of them using the expressions mentioned in Appendix A.1. The objective function is a linear function
of the Gram matrix Y corresponding to the inner products between the unit vectors (representing
the lifted variables and one vector y0 representing the value TRUE).
An SDP solver optimizes the matrix Y while adhering to specified constraints (which ensure that
the matrix can be obtained as a Gram matrix for some set of unit vectors). To observe the behavior
of the same objective function with literal embeddings from NeuroSAT, we need to compute this
Gram matrix Y after each MP iteration of the GNN. If the evolution of these embeddings would
correspond to an optimization process maximizing the objective, then we should observe an increase
in this objective after each MP step.
When computing the matrix Y from the NeuroSAT embeddings, two details must be taken into
account. First, only the positive literals are taken into account as the objective function automati-
cally assumes that the embeddings of negative literals are obtained by negation of the positive ones.
Second, NeuroSAT does not explicitly represent the embedding y0 representing the value TRUE.


                                                 15
       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Therefore, we estimate it by averaging all literals that are assigned to TRUE in the extracted solu-
       tion. Before computing the matrix Y , we also center all vectors to 0 and normalize them to unit
       vectors.
       For each iteration t of the GNN, we obtain the matrix Y (t) = L(t) L(t)T where L(t) represents the
       matrix of centered and normalized positive literal embeddings with the estimated vector y0 (also
       normalized and centered) concatenated as its first row. In Figure 6 we show how the objective
       function changes after each iteration t for 10 randomly selected instances. We also include the
       objective value obtained with a SDP solver as a reference.

                                                                                                  20                                         17.5
                                                         17.5                                                                                15.0                                        15
                      20
                                                         15.0                                     15                                         12.5
                      15                                 12.5                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                             10.0
                                                         10.0                                     10
                                                                                                                                              7.5                                          5
                      10                                  7.5                                     5                                           5.0
                      5                                   5.0                                                                                 2.5                                          0
                                                          2.5                                     0                                           0.0
SDP objective value


                      0                                   0.0                                                                                                                              5
                           0   10   20     30       40          0       10      20      30   40        0      10     20       30        40            0   10     20       30      40           0         10       20   30       40
                      20                                                                                                                                                                 14
                                                           15                                     15                                             15
                      15                                                                                                                                                                 12
                      10                                   10                                     10                                             10                                      10
                       5                                                                          5                                              5                                        8
                                                            5
                       0                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                            0                                     0                                              0
                       5                                                                                                                                                                  4
                      10                                    5                                      5                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                      15                                   10                                     10                                             10                                       0
                           0   10   20     30       40          0       10      20      30   40        0      10      20      30        40            0   10     20       30      40           0         10       20   30       40
                                                                                                           NeuroSAT iterations

       Figure 6: A plot showing how the SDP objective value computed from the NeuroSAT embeddings
       (in blue) changes after each iteration of MP. The horizontal red line represents the value of the same
       objective obtained with an SDP solver.


       Figure 6 shows that the evolution of literal embeddings corresponds to an increase of the SDP
       objective value. It is also visible that there is a gap between the highest value achieved and the
       objective value obtained with an SDP solver. In Figure 7 (a), we plot a histogram of these gaps
       computed for all generated problems.


                      60
                                                                                                                                   50

                      50
                                                                                                                                   40

                      40
                                                                                                                                   30
          Count


                                                                                                                           Count


                      30

                                                                                                                                   20
                      20

                                                                                                                                   10
                      10


                       0                                                                                                           0
                                    10               15                20               25        30                                         2            0               2                4                  6             8
                                                Relative gap from optimal SDP value (%)                                                                        Relative gap from optimal SDP value (%)


                                         (a) Before optimization                                                                                          (b) After optimization

       Figure 7: Histograms of relative gaps between the final SDP objective value obtained from Neu-
       roSAT embeddings and the same objective value obtained with an SDP solver. Plot (a) depicts
       results for the matrix Y (t) with t = 40. Plot (b) depicts results for the case where this matrix is
       further optimized by an SDP solver. A negative gap means that the subsequent optimization found
       a solution with better objective value the the SDP solver which was initialized randomly.

       We hypothesized that the gap may be partially caused by the inappropriate choice of the vector y0 .
       Therefore, we took the matrix Y (t) from the last step of MP, t = 40, and further optimized it using


                                                                                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a gradient-based SDP solver (implemented in PyTorch). This closed the gaps mentioned above in
most instances, as visible in Figure 7 (b).
In Figure 8, we show how the entries in the matrix Y (t) change after further optimization for a
random formula. As can be seen, the largest change in values occurs in the first row and in the
first column, which correspond to inner products of each literal embedding with the vector y0 . This
supports our hypothesis that if we would be able to pick the vector y0 in a more optimal way, the
gaps in Figure 6 would be smaller.



                       0                                                   0.6
                       5
                                                                           0.4
                      10

                      15                                                   0.2
                      20
                                                                           0.0
                      25

                      30                                                    0.2
                      35
                           0   5    10    15    20    25   30    35


Figure 8: A heat map (for a single MAX-2-SAT instance) showing the change of values in the
symmetric matrix Y (t) after further optimization. The largest change happens in the first row and in
the first column, which correspond to inner products of each literal embedding with the vector y0
(corresponding to the value TRUE).


A.6   S UPPLEMENTARY R ESULTS FOR M ORE D ECIMATON S TEPS

In Table 2, we show the effect of running the decimation process multiple times. On our test sets,
the decimation process did not result in any further improvement when repeated more than twice.
The hyperparameters are the same as for the experiments in Table 1 (with 16 random init. samples
per formula in the first pass and 1 random init. sample for each subsequent pass). We note that we
did not try to optimize the decimation threshold, which could lead to further improvements.

                                 #SAT               First                Second         Third
      Problem Type
                               problems              pass                  pass          pass
       SR(40)                    5000          4442 (88.8 %)          274 (5.4 %)    35 (0.7 %)
  Latin Squares 9x9               200            186 (93 %)             14 (7 %)       4 (2 %)
  Latin Squares 8x8               200            196 (98 %)             1 (0.5%)       0 (0 %)
   Logical Circuits               344           319 (92.7 %)             0 (0 %)       0 (0 %)
     Sudoku 9x9                   200             83 (46 %)            11 (5.5 %)     3 (1.5 %)

Table 2: This table shows a number of problems solved after subsequent application of the decima-
tion procedure.



                                                 17
