Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


TAILORED V ISIONS : E NHANCING T EXT- TO -I MAGE
G ENERATION WITH P ERSONALIZED P ROMPT R EWRIT-
ING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         We propose a novel perspective of viewing large pretrained models as search en-
         gines, thereby enabling the repurposing of techniques previously used to enhance
         search engine performance. As an illustration, we employ a personalized query
         rewriting technique in the realm of text-to-image generation. Despite significant
         progress in the field, it is still challenge to create personalized visual representa-
         tions that align closely with the desires and preferences of individual users. This
         process requires users to articulate their ideas in words that are both comprehensi-
         ble to the models and accurately capture their vision, posing difficulties for many
         users. In this paper, we tackle this challenge by leveraging historical user inter-
         actions with the system to enhance user prompts. We propose a novel approach
         that involves rewriting user prompts based a new large-scale text-to-image dataset
         with over 300k prompts from 3115 users. Our rewriting model enhances the ex-
         pressiveness and alignment of user prompts with their intended visual outputs.
         Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our methods over baseline
         approaches, as evidenced in our new offline evaluation method and online tests.
         Our approach opens up exciting possibilities of applying more search engine tech-
         niques to build truly personalized large pretrained models.


1   I NTRODUCTION
We are training increasingly large and powerful foundation models (Brown et al., 2020; Rombach
et al., 2022; Gal et al., 2022) through self-supervised learning. These large pretrained models
(LPMs) serve as efficient compressors (Delétang et al., 2023), condensing vast amounts of internet
data. This compression enables the convenient extraction of the knowledge encoded within these
models via natural language descriptions. Despite being in its infancy, this approach exhibits the
potential to surpass traditional search engines as a superior source for knowledge and information
acquisition.
In this study, we take a fresh perspective, seeing LPMs as if they are search engines. This lens
uncovers a goldmine of techniques previously utilized in enhancing search engine performance,
which can be repurposed to refine foundational models. For instance, strategies for improving query
formulation (Antonellis et al., 2008), data source purification(Davis, 2006; Yang et al., 2023a), and
ranking optimization (Brin & Page, 1998; Song et al., 2023) can be leveraged.
To bring this concept to life, we experiment with an enhanced query generation technique in this
paper. This technique restructures the query using personalized information to augment the perfor-
mance of text-to-image generation models(Rombach et al., 2022), a major category of foundational
models used for encapsulating image knowledge.
Akin to refining queries for search engines, prompts given to LPMs must also be carefully crafted.
However, the complexity of prompts, the unpredictability of model responses compared to tradi-
tional search engines present unique challenges. Significant research efforts (Jagerman et al., 2023;
Zhong et al., 2023) have been made to comprehend how LPMs react to various prompts, with some
studies examining the feasibility of rewriting prompts for specificity. However, without access to
users’ personal data and behavior, tailoring the prompt to meet the user’s needs accurately remains
challenging.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Comparison between “Original Prompt” and “Personalized Prompt” text-to-image generation meth-
ods. Left: A user’s histories from our PIP dataset. It intuitively implies this user favors the style of Italianate,
oil painting, Claude Monet etc. Right: The personalized prompt rewriting results. Through the use of our
personalized method, we can generate images closely align with the user’s preferences, significantly different
from the original prompt method and its conventional style.


Our research addresses this issue by integrating user preference information into prompt rewriting.
The primary obstacle in personalized query rewriting is the absence of a dataset containing text-to-
image prompts with personalized information. To overcome this, we have assembled a large dataset
encompassing over 300k prompts from 3,115 users. We rewrite user prompts using their query
history, although we had limited access to personal information, leaving room for further research.
Another significant challenge is the evaluation of rewritten queries. To evaluate their efficacy, we’ve
developed a new offline method that uses multiple metrics to measure how well our rewriting models
can recover the original user query from the ChatGPT-shortened version.
Our paper’s contributions are manifold:
1. We propose viewing large foundational models through the lens of search engines.
2. We demonstrate how this perspective can enhance human-model interaction by borrowing query
rewriting ideas from the search engine community.
3. We’ve compiled a large Personalized Image Prompt (PIP) dataset, which will be made public
upon paper acceptance to aid future research in this field.
4. We experimented with two query rewriting techniques and proposed a new query evaluation
method to assess their performance.
While there is still a considerable distance to cover before we can create a perfect prompt encapsu-
lating both the user’s requirements and the model’s capabilities, we believe our research provides a
critical stepping stone in this ongoing exploration.


2    R ELATED W ORK

This section provides an overview of prior work on text-to-image generation, personalization for
such generation, and prompt rewriting. It’s important to note that our review is aimed more at
offering sufficient background knowledge rather than exhaustive coverage of all related works.


                                                         2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.1   T EXT- TO -I MAGE G ENERATION

Large text-to-image generation models can generate high-fidelity image synthesis and achieve a deep
level of language understanding. DALL-E (Ramesh et al., 2021) uses a VQ-VAE transformer-based
method to learn a visual codebook in the first stage and then trains autoregressive transformers on
sequences of text tokens followed by image tokens in the second stage. DALL-E2 (Ramesh et al.,
2022) introduces latent diffusion models to generate various images by conditioning on CLIP text la-
tents and CLIP image embeddings generated by a prior model. Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) discov-
ers that a larger language model with more parameters trained on text-only data improves the quality
of text-to-image generation. Late developments like stable-diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al., 2022)
proposes to generate images effectively in latent space significantly lowering computational costs.
Furthermore, SD designs a conditional mechanism to complete class-conditional, text-to-image and
layout-to-image models. Furthermore, ControlNet (Zhang & Agrawala, 2023) accomplishes certain
function by conditioning on multi-modal data, e.g., edge, sketching, pose, segmentation, depth etc.,
which unavoidably involving additional condition-generation modalities.
Despite these models’ ability to generate high-fidelity images, they often fail to meet the precise
needs of the users. Text-to-image generation is more like a game of chance.

2.2   P ERSONALIZATION FOR T EXT- TO -I MAGE G ENERATION

Recently, personalization approaches based on text-to-image models have taken a set of images
of a concept and generated variations of the concept. Specifically, some methods optimize a set
of text embeddings. For example, Cohen et al. (2022) involves pseudo-word embeddings by a set
encoder to provide personalization and Textual inversion (Gal et al., 2022) composes the concept into
language sentences and performed as a personalized creation. Some methods finetune the diffusion
model. For example, DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023) finetunes the text-to-image diffusion model
with shared parallel branches. To speed up, CustomDiffusion (Kumari et al., 2023) reduces the
amount of fientuned parameters, and Tewel et al. (2023) locks the subject’s cross-attention key to
its superordinate category to align with visual concepts. Moreover, an additional encoder is trained
to map concept images to its textual representation by Gal et al. (2023) and Shi et al. (2023).
Existing studies have three key limitations: they demand extra images and fine-tuning of text-to-
image models with limited scope for new concepts; they can’t learn from user interaction history
and need detailed user prompts; and there’s a lack of public, personalized text-to-image datasets that
truly reflect user preferences.

2.3   P ROMPT R EWRITING

Recently, researchers have found that optimizing prompts can boost the performance of LLMs on
several NLP tasks and even search systems. For examples, Guo et al. (2023) connect the LLM with
evolutionary algorithms to generate an optimized prompt from parent prompts, without any gradient
calculation. Yang et al. (2023b) propose to use LLM as an optimizer by generating new prompts
based on a trajectory of previously generated prompts in each optimization step with the objective
of maximizing the accuracy of the task. In the work (Zhou et al., 2022), LLMs serve as models
for engineering work like inference, scoring, and resampling. In search systems, LLMs are used to
generate query expansion terms by Jagerman et al. (2023), while they are used to reformulate query
by Wang et al. (2023) instead.
For T2I generation, one relatively close work, SUR-adapter (Zhong et al., 2023) learns to align
the representations between simple prompt and complex prompt by an adapter. Hao et al. (2022)
optimize prompt through general rewriting. However, Neither of above works utilized personalized
information for improving prompts.


3     P ERSONALIZED P ROMPT R EWRITING

The basic idea of our personalization method is to rewrite the input prompt, considering user pref-
erences gleaned from past user interactions. The full pipeline of our method is depicted in the left
part of Figure 2. If a user u input a prompt xt , a retriever Ret (xt , Qt ) retrieves prompts from the


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Left: Pipeline of personalized prompt rewriting, including Retriever, Rewriter and T2I model to
generate personalized images from user histories. Right: Illustration of context-dependent prompt rewriting.
We present a specific example for better understanding the procedure of context-dependent prompt rewriting.

user’s historical prompt set Qt , using xt as a query. Based on the retrival result Rt = Ret (xt , Qt ),
the rewriter Rew rewrite the input prompt to generate a personalized prompt x′t = Rew (xt , Rt ).
Finally, the text-to-image generation model G produces the image It′ = G (x′t , ϵ) from the rewritten
prompt, where ϵ is a random noise vector or matrix1 .

3.1      R ETRIEVAL AND R ANKING

In the retrieval stage, given the input prompt xt , the retriever Ret (xt , Qt ) retrieve relevant prompts
from historical prompt set Qt , using xt as a query.
By analyzing user prompts, we have noticed that users tend to construct prompts that involve objects,
their attributes, and the relationships between objects. In the works (Schuster et al., 2015), (Krishna
et al., 2017), a query for image retrieval is defined to include objects, attributes of objects, and
relations between objects. Inspired by this, we suspect users have the habit of using attributes and
some objects, such as background, to express their preferences. To confirm this, we visualize the
word cloud of the top 250 frequent words in the text prompts of all users, as shown in the right part
of Figure 5. In Figure 5, we find some attributes, such as “cute”, “golden”, and “beautiful” appear
in prompts with high frequency, as well as some objects, such as “mountain”, “sea,” and “sky”.
Intuitively, we can use the current prompt xt to locate the relevant history prompts that include the
same or similar attributes or objects.
To locate relevant prompts, two retrieval methods are used: dense and sparse. In dense retrieval, we
choose the prompt xt and calculate its textual embedding Em (xt ) using CLIP’s text encoder, also
the text encoder in Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022). We suspect the prompts with similar
visual attributes and objects will be close to each other in the text embedding space. To confirm
this, we visualize some retrieval results in Figure 6. The three nearest neighbors of Em (xt ) are
prompts that are semantically related. For example, if the input prompt is “Hobbit homes”, the three
most relevant prompts would include the words “village”, “city”, and “house”. This dense retrieval
method is also referred to as embedding-based retrieval (EBR). In sparse retrieval, we use BM25 to
locate relevant prompts that include the same visual attributes and objects.
In the above retrival, we rank relevant prompts in EBR-based or BM25-based ranking, depending
on the retrieval ways. In EBR-based ranking, we rank the relevant prompts based on their em-
bedding similarity with the query xt . For similarity measuring, we choose cosine similarity as it
is a commonly used similarity measure in embedding learning. In BM25-based ranking, BM25
scores are used for similarity measures. Consequently, we obtain the top k relevant user queries
Rt = {r1 , ..., rk }.
   1
       The image generated from the prompt xt is denoted as It , where It = G (xt , ϵ).


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   R EWRITTING

The procedure of context-independent rewriting leverages pertinent queries Rt = {r1 , ..., rk }, and
employs ChatGPT to encapsulate user preferences and rewrite the prompt directly. These queries
Rt are organized based on their relevance to xt . An elaborate example of this process is available
in Appendix A2.
In the context-dependent scenario, we initially create a collection of demonstration examples E =
{e1 , ..., eL } using manual design. We then select a small subset of these examples to serve as
demonstrations for each rewriting task. Given the issue of order sensitivity in in-context learning, as
highlighted in the study (Liu et al., 2021), we arrange the demonstration examples in a descending
sequence based on their proximity to the input prompt xt . The in-context rewriting process we
employ is illustrated in the right section of Figure 2.


4     P ERSONALIZED I MAGE -P ROMPT (PIP) DATASET

4.1   DATASET C OLLECTION

The Personalized Image-Prompt (PIP) dataset is the first large-scale personalized generation dataset.
The original data are collected from a public website that we host to provide open-domain text-to-
image generation to users. To construct PIP, we select 300,237 image-prompt pairs created by 3115
users using SD v1-5 (Rombach et al., 2022) and an internal fine-tuned version of SD v1-5. We only
include users who have created 18 or more images or provided at least 12 different prompts.


                                                                Figure 4: Dataset statistics and dis-
                                                                tribution. Upper: Proportion of users
                                                                based on the varying number of his-
                                                                tories they have. Note that each user
                                                                has a minimum of 18 histories, as we
              Figure 3: Data collection pipeline.               have excluded those with fewer histo-
                                                                ries from the dataset. Lower: Propor-
                                                                tion of prompts based on their varying
                                                                lengths .


Figure 3 illustrates the process of creating the dataset. For each individual user, we randomly choose
two prompts to serve as test prompts, with the remaining prompts allocated as training prompts
(historical user query). This approach of random selection, as opposed to using the most recent
generated prompts for testing, is adopted to enhance the diversity of our test data. Subsequently,
we employ ChatGPT to condense the test prompts, ensuring they only include the primary object or


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


scene, as depicted in Figure 3. We shorten the prompts into three scales, i.e., contain only nouns,
noun phases or short sentences respectively.
In the ensuing experiment, each test prompt in the test set will be considered as the input prompt
xt for every user u, with the original prompts serving as the ground truth that mirrors the user’s
authentic preferences. The remaining prompts are utilized as training samples.
The PIP dataset consists of 300,237 image-prompt pairs, personally categorized by 3,115 users.
These pairs are divided into 294,007 training samples and 6,230 test samples.

4.2   DATASET S TATISTICS AND D ISTRIBUTION

In this section, we showcase the data statistics that depict the quality and diversity of PIP. We specif-
ically illustrate data distributions of the number of prompts and prompt length for each user, and
delve deeper into the content of the prompt through a word cloud representation.
Each data sample contain a prompt, the generated images, UserID, Image size, and the URL, as
illustrated in the left part of the Figure 5.


Figure 5: Left: Two examples from User histories, containing Image, Prompt, User ID, Image size
and URL. Right: Word cloud visualization of top 250 keywords sampled from the PIP dataset.

In the PIP dataset, each user contributes at least 18 images, as depicted in the upper section of Figure
4. This results in a long-tail distribution. The prompts have an average word count of 27.53. The
length of the prompts, ranging from 1 to 284 words, also follows a long-tail distribution, as seen in
the lower section of Figure 4. Despite the presence of approximately 2500 prompts that surpass the
75-word limit of SD, we retain them to maintain the integrity of user preferences.
Figure 5 presents the 250 most frequently used words or phrases. The frequency of these words is
determined by the highest TF-IDF value across all users. The word cloud reveals that these words
describe various image attributes, such as objects, styles, quality, and colors. This variety underlines
the high diversity present within the prompt content of the PIP dataset.


5     E XPERIMENT

We validate our personalized prompt rewriting method through both offline and online evaluation.

5.1   E VALUATION M ETHOD

In the offline assessment, we introduce a novel evaluation technique to gauge the rewriter’s capability
to restore the original user query from its shortened version produced by ChatGPT. An example of
input is shown in Table 1. For this evaluation, we utilize all the abbreviated prompts from the PIP
test set, in conjunction with the users’ actual prompts and saved images.
The metrics used for this offline evaluation include:
ROUGE-L. Given a shortened prompt, ROUGE-L compares the rewritten prompt against the orig-
inal prompt. It measures the ability of our prompt rewritter to recover the original prompt. We set
β = 5 to emphasize the recall of the generated prompts.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 ChatGPT Prompt for Creating Test Examples
 Your task is to abbreviate a given text-to-image prompt. The abbreviated prompt should just include the primary
 object from the original prompt and basic attributes, ignoring trivial details and other descriptions. Generally
 speaking, an abbreviated prompt should be less than 10 words.
 Please abbreviate the following prompt:
 The original prompt: Autumn leaves, detailed, concept art, low angle, high detail, warm lighting, huge scene,
 grass, art Greg Rutkowski, trending in artstation.
 The abbreviated prompt:

                       Table 1: An input example for test prompt abbreviation.

Distance to Historical Prompts (DHP). DHP measures how close the shortened prompt or the
rewritten prompt is to the previous prompts in Euclidean embedding space. GTR-T5-large (Ni et al.,
2021) is used for extracting textual embeddings.
Preference Matching Score (PMS). PMS calculates the CLIPScore (Hessel et al., 2021) for Gener-
ated image with the keywords that represent the user’s preference. The keywords can be summarized
using LLMs based on the user’s past interactions. It measures how the generated image aligns with
the user’s preference.
Text-Alignment. It calculates the CLIPscore (Hessel et al., 2021) between the generated image
and the user’s original prompt, and gauges how the generated image matches the user’s intended
description.
Image-Alignment. It measures the similarity between either the generated image and the ground-
truth image. Image-alignment quantifies how closely the current created image aligns with the user’s
truly saved image.
In the online evaluation, we create an online system to gather real user feedback. Positive feedback
ratio is used to evaluate our personalized text-to-image generation model.

5.2   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We use ChatGPT (OpenAI) as our rewriter and Stable Diffusion (SD) v1-5 (Rombach et al.) as our
text-to-image generation model. SD is sampled by using PNDM scheduler in 50 steps and setting
the classifier-free guidance scale to 7.0.
In retrieval, we choose the relevant text prompt number as k = 3. For in-context rewriting, we set
L = 5 and randomly select one demonstration example for each rewriting task, unless otherwise
specified.
When calculating DHP, we randomly select 20 history prompts from Qt at most for users with
prompts larger than 20 image-prompt histories.
Unless other specified, all the experiments using EBR to retrieval hisotrical prompts, and one-short
in-context learning to rewrite the shortened prompt.

5.3   Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS

To illustrate the effectiveness of our retrieval methods, we provide visualizations of the retrieved
relevant image-prompt pairs in the left section of Figure 6. These examples are drawn from the
experimental results of three different test prompts from three users. The retrieved histories exhibit
a high degree of similarity with their corresponding queries in terms of objects, attributes, as well as
the overall style or mood of the image.
This effectively demonstrates the proficiency of our retriever in sourcing relevant user histories,
thereby providing a robust reference for our rewriter to carry out personalized prompt rewriting.
In the right section of Figure 6, we display the generation outcomes of both “Shortened Prompt”
and “Personalized Prompt”. The “Shortened Prompt” column exhibits the results produced from the
shortened prompts, while the “Personalized Prompt” column features the rewritten prompts along
with their corresponding generated images. It’s evident from these displays that our generated im-


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Figure 6: Qualitative analysis of personalized retrieval and rewriting.


ages are more inclined towards user preferences based on their histories, a testament to the expressive
power of our rewritten prompt. For instance, when the query “Hobbit homes” is used (as seen in
the first row), we observe the user’s preferred style across three images, all capturing the mood of
mountainous scenery and depicting the Hobbit homes within a consistent landscape.

5.4   Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON

To further examine the effectiveness of our personalized prompting methods, we further conduct of-
fline and online quantitative evaluation, comparing different settings to the baseline methods without
enhanced prompt rewritten on the test samples we created.

        Method            Retriever   ROUGE-L↑         DHP ↓    PMS ↑    Text-Align ↑     Image-Align↑
   Shortened Prompt           -         0.3268         0.6618   0.5567     0.5856            0.6272
                           BM25         0.3942         0.5942   0.6125     0.6188            0.6581
  Personalized Prompt      EBR          0.4137         0.5943   0.6083     0.6232            0.6485
                           BM25         0.4417         0.5418   0.6253     0.6219            0.6456
  Personalized + ICL       EBR          0.4686         0.5332   0.6179     0.6411            0.6796

Table 2: Comparison results of different variants of our method with the baseline. Evidently, our
method using EBR retriever (top-3 retrieval) and 1-shot ICL can achieve most best results.

Offline Test Table 2 showcases the numerical results comparing various retrieval and rewriting
configurations with shortened prompts. A comparison between BM25 and EBR reveals that dense
retrieval generally outperforms sparse retrieval, although the difference is relatively small, indicating
that both methods can yield satisfactory results.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Further, when contrasting context-independent learning with context-dependent learning, it’s evident
that ICL produces superior outcomes. By integrating ICL with EBR, we achieve absolute improve-
ments of 14.2%, 12.9%, 6.9%, and 5.6% in terms of ROUGE-L, DHP, PMS, and Text-Align metrics
respectively. This underscores the exceptional performance of personalized prompting.
To check how sensitive our prompt rewriting methods with respect to the length of the prompts
before rewriting. we assess our rewriting method using two additional types of prompts with shorter
lengths, namely “Noun Phrase” and “Noun”, as detailed in Table 3.

    Prompt Type        Method       ROUGE-L↑       DHP ↓    PMS ↑     Text-Align ↑    Image-Align↑
                       Original       0.1770       0.7183   0.5537      0.5330           0.6087
        Noun
                     Personalized     0.2804       0.5639   0.6142      0.5937           0.6478
                       Original       0.2459       0.6722   0.5554      0.5623           0.6146
     Noun Phrase
                     Personalized     0.3387       0.5557   0.6168      0.6087           0.6534
                       Original       0.3268       0.6618   0.5567      0.5856           0.6272
    Short Sentence
                     Personalized     0.4686       0.5332   0.6179      0.6411           0.6796

Table 3: Performance with respect to different prompt lengths, i.e. Noun, Noun Phrase and Short
Sentence. Our “Personalized Prompt” method equipped with top-3 dense retriever, and 1-shot ICL
consistently enhance the results, even with only nouns or noun phrases.

These two prompts are derived using spaCy (Honnibal et al., 2020) from our dataset, adhering to the
principle of minimizing word count while maintaining the main entities. The results displayed in
Table 3 show that across all three shortened scale, “Personalized Prompt” outperforms the baseline
across all metrics, demonstrating the effectiveness of our methods in recovering user preferences.
Online Test To further validate our approach, we established an open-domain online evaluation
system using SD1.5. Users from the PIP dataset collection platform were invited to participate. Each
user input a prompt and compared two images - one from a ”Personalized Prompt” and another from
an ”Original Prompt”, choosing their preferred one. We used data samples from the 9th comparison
onwards to ensure sufficient history for the ”Personalized Prompt”. Together, we gathered 311 data
samples from 95 users. Our approach was favored in 61.7% of the results, indicating a stronger
alignment with user preferences and affirming the effectiveness of our method. We anticipate even
better results in real-world scenarios with more historical interactions and a better text to image
generation method. Further details on the evaluation method and the platform we used can be found
in Appendix A3.


6     C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

In conclusion, this paper has presented a novel perspective on large pretrained models, viewing them
as search engines, which has enabled us address a significant challenge of creating personalized text-
to-image generation.
Our approach has been to enhance user prompts by leveraging historical user interactions with the
system. We have proposed a novel method that involves rewriting user prompts based on a new
large-scale text-to-image dataset with over 300,000 prompts from 3,115 users. This approach has
been shown to enhance the expressiveness and alignment of user prompts with their intended visual
outputs. Our experimental results have demonstrated the superiority of our methods over baseline
approaches. This was evidenced in our new offline evaluation method and online tests, validating
the effectiveness of our approach.
Although the outcomes are encouraging, considerable research still lies ahead in this domain. In
the realm of personalized text-to-image generation, the incorporation of more personal details like
a user’s age and gender could bolster performance. The methodologies used could be extended to
other large pretrained models, including language models. Additionally, techniques for enhancing
search engines, such as data source purification and ranking optimization, could be assimilated into
these models.
We are confident that our contributions represent an advancement towards a more personalized and
user-focused artificial intelligence.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   E THICS S TATEMENT
In this section, we discuss three primary ethical considerations regarding both our PIP dataset and
the proposed method.

      • Copyright. When using our text-to-image generation website, all users consent to our
        privacy policy and data usage agreement. This includes academic utilization and the dis-
        semination of any content hosted on the server, such as anonymized prompts, images, and
        user iterations.
      • Privacy. We’ve ensured that all user data in the PIP dataset, including usernames and other
        private details, has been anonymized. It is worth noting that while rare, there is a possibility
        that certain prompts could contain sensitive information. But, this is uncommon because
        our website has strict rules against writing personal information in the prompts, and has
        professional detectors to eliminate any violative content as well.
      • Potential Harm. Although we have built strong detectors to filter out inappropriate mate-
        rial on our website, there remains a potential for occasional instances of NSFW (Not Safe
        for Work) content to emerge in PIP dataset. Furthermore, our method uses Stable Diffusion
        v1-5 and ChatGPT as a prior, therefore it inherits any problematic biases and limitations
        that they may have.

R EFERENCES
Ioannis Antonellis, Hector Garcia-Molina, and Chi-Chao Chang. Simrank++ query rewriting
  through link analysis of the clickgraph (poster). In Proceedings of the 17th international con-
  ference on World Wide Web, pp. 1177–1178, 2008.
Sergey Brin and Lawrence Page. The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual web search engine.
  Computer networks and ISDN systems, 30(1-7):107–117, 1998.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Niv Cohen, Rinon Gal, Eli A Meirom, Gal Chechik, and Yuval Atzmon. “this is my unicorn, fluffy”:
  Personalizing frozen vision-language representations. In European Conference on Computer Vi-
  sion, pp. 558–577. Springer, 2022.
Harold Davis. Search engine optimization. ” O’Reilly Media, Inc.”, 2006.
Grégoire Delétang, Anian Ruoss, Paul-Ambroise Duquenne, Elliot Catt, Tim Genewein, Christo-
  pher Mattern, Jordi Grau-Moya, Li Kevin Wenliang, Matthew Aitchison, Laurent Orseau, et al.
  Language modeling is compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.10668, 2023.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
Rinon Gal, Moab Arar, Yuval Atzmon, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
  Encoder-based domain tuning for fast personalization of text-to-image models. ACM Transac-
  tions on Graphics (TOG), 42(4):1–13, 2023.
Qingyan Guo, Rui Wang, Junliang Guo, Bei Li, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Guoqing Liu, Jiang Bian,
  and Yujiu Yang. Connecting large language models with evolutionary algorithms yields powerful
  prompt optimizers, 2023.
Yaru Hao, Zewen Chi, Li Dong, and Furu Wei. Optimizing prompts for text-to-image generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09611, 2022.
Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Clipscore: A
  reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08718, 2021.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Matthew Honnibal, Ines Montani, Sofie Van Landeghem, and Adriane Boyd. spaCy: Industrial-
 strength Natural Language Processing in Python. 2020. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.1212303.
Rolf Jagerman, Honglei Zhuang, Zhen Qin, Xuanhui Wang, and Michael Bendersky. Query expan-
  sion by prompting large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03653, 2023.
Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin Johnson, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie
  Chen, Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma, et al. Visual genome: Connecting lan-
  guage and vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations. International journal of computer
  vision, 123:32–73, 2017.
Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Multi-concept
  customization of text-to-image diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1931–1941, 2023.
Jiachang Liu, Dinghan Shen, Yizhe Zhang, Bill Dolan, Lawrence Carin, and Weizhu Chen. What
   makes good in-context examples for gpt-3? arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.06804, 2021.

Jianmo Ni, Chen Qu, Jing Lu, Zhuyun Dai, Gustavo Hernández Ábrego, Ji Ma, Vincent Y Zhao,
   Yi Luan, Keith B Hall, Ming-Wei Chang, et al. Large dual encoders are generalizable retrievers.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.07899, 2021.
OpenAI. Chatgpt. https://chat.openai.com.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. Stable
  diffusion v1-5. https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10684–10695, June 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22500–
  22510, 2023.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Sebastian Schuster, Ranjay Krishna, Angel Chang, Li Fei-Fei, and Christopher D Manning. Gen-
  erating semantically precise scene graphs from textual descriptions for improved image retrieval.
  In Proceedings of the fourth workshop on vision and language, pp. 70–80, 2015.
Jing Shi, Wei Xiong, Zhe Lin, and Hyun Joon Jung. Instantbooth: Personalized text-to-image
   generation without test-time finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03411, 2023.
Chiyu Song, Hongliang He, Haofei Yu, Pengfei Fang, Leyang Cui, and Zhenzhong Lan. Uni-
  encoder: A fast and accurate response selection paradigm for generation-based dialogue systems.
  In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pp. 6231–6244, 2023.
Yoad Tewel, Rinon Gal, Gal Chechik, and Yuval Atzmon. Key-locked rank one editing for text-to-
  image personalization. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings, pp. 1–11, 2023.
Xiao Wang, Sean MacAvaney, Craig Macdonald, and Iadh Ounis. Generative query reformulation
  for effective adhoc search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00415, 2023.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aiyuan Yang, Bin Xiao, Bingning Wang, Borong Zhang, Chao Yin, Chenxu Lv, Da Pan, Dian
  Wang, Dong Yan, Fan Yang, et al. Baichuan 2: Open large-scale language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.10305, 2023a.
Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun
  Chen. Large language models as optimizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.03409, 2023b.
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05543, 2023.
Shanshan Zhong, Zhongzhan Huang, Wushao Wen, Jinghui Qin, and Liang Lin. Sur-adapter: En-
  hancing text-to-image pre-trained diffusion models with large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.05189, 2023.
Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan,
  and Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt engineers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.01910, 2022.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                  Appendix

A1     A BLATION S TUDY
In this section, we ablate the k relevant historical prompts used to rewrite personalized prompts and
the number of demonstration examples used for in-context learning. We evaluate each experiment
on the same setup as in Section 5.1 and 5.2.

        Method           Retrieval Top-k     ROUGE-L ↑        DHP ↓     PMS ↑     Text-Align ↑     Image-Align ↑
                                1              0.4539         0.5500    0.6057      0.6360            0.6751
                                3              0.4686         0.5332    0.6179      0.6411            0.6796
 Personalized + ICL
                                5              0.4474         0.5434    0.6204      0.6405            0.6748
                                7              0.4592         0.5368    0.6265      0.6297            0.6651

Table A1: Ablation for Retrieval Top-k. We empirically conduct experiments with respect to k ∈
{1, 3, 5, 7}, keeping the configuration of DENSE retriever and 1-shot ICL.
Retrieval Top-k Ablation. As shown in Table A1, when using 3 most relevant historical prompts
for rewriting, we can obtain most best results among all evaluation metrics. We analyze that too
more historical prompts could provide redundant information and also too long prompt input to
ChatGPT worsens the rewriting performance. Therefore, we choose 3 as the number of retrieval
results, a balanced manner between performance and efficiency.

   Method (Retrieval)       ICL Shot       ROUGE-L ↑         DHP ↓     PMS ↑     Text-Align ↑     Image-Align ↑
                               1             0.4417          0.5418    0.6253      0.6219            0.6456
  Personalized (BM25)          3             0.4381          0.5379    0.6289      0.6183            0.6580
                               5             0.4226          0.5324    0.6236      0.6188            0.6571
                               1             0.4686          0.5332    0.6179      0.6411            0.6796
  Personalized (EBR)           3             0.4354          0.5392    0.6274      0.6349            0.6708
                               5             0.4439          0.5371    0.6242      0.6387            0.6724

Table A2: Ablation for Number of ICL Demonstrations. We experiment with consistent top-3 re-
trieval both on BM25 and EBR. When we set ICL shot as 1 and use EBR retriever, we observe more
superior results appearing.
Number of ICL Demonstrations Ablation. Table A2 shows that 1-shot setting, i.e., given 1
demonstration example for in-context learning, can achieve the best results in general among all the
four evaluation metrics regarding both BM25 and EBR. This demonstrates that our prompt rewriting
template is efficient and effective enough for extracting the personalized preference from numerous
historical data of each user.

  ChatGPT Input Example
  Prompt in text-to-image generation describes the detailed attributes of the object user plans to draw. User’s
  preference in text-to-image generation is shown in history prompts.
  Given 3 history prompts, your task is to rewrite the current prompt so that it matches the user’s preference. The
  rewritten prompt should retain primary objects in the original prompt and conform to the user’s preference.
  Please avoid being too diffused and restrict your output within 70 words.
  The history prompts are:
     1. Fusion of nature and technology, high, rise buildings, science and technology cities, sky gardens, ultra,
  fine, cosmic light, Unreal Engine 5, intricate design, wide angle, imposing, futuristic concept, Thomas Cole,
  trending in artstation.
     2. Tech City, Grand Scenes, Soldiers Under the City, Wide Angle, Complex Backgrounds, Wireless Connec-
  tivity, Ambient Light, Cosmic Light, Unreal Engine 5, Cinematic Rendering, trending in artstation
     3. Castle, streets, demons, soldiers under the city, wide angle, complex background, wireless connectivity,
  ambient light, cosmic light, Unreal Engine 5, cinematic rendering, reference to Lord of the Rings style,John
  Harris,trending in artstation.
  The current prompt is: Skyscrapers
  The rewritten prompt (one sentence less than 70 words) is:

                    Table A3: An input example for context independent rewriting.


                                                        13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A2     D ETAILS FOR P ERSONALIZED P ROMPT R EWRITING
Here, we show details of the two strategies of personalized prompt rewriting we designed in Section
3.2. Table A3 shows an example input for context independent prompt rewriting. The input consists
of an instruction we created, the user prompt, and the retrieved relevant prompts Rt . We use Italic
style font to show concrete contents of xt and Rt on the Table A3 and Table A4.
For in-context rewriting, we insert a few demonstration examples between the instruction and the
current query. Each demonstration example consists of a user prompt, three relevant history prompts,
and a target prompt. Table A4 shows an example input for context dependent prompt rewriting when
using one demonstration example.

 ChatGPT Input Example
 Prompt in text-to-image generation describes the detailed attributes of the object user plans to draw. User’s
 preference in text-to-image generation is shown in history prompts.
 Given 3 history prompts, your task is to rewrite the current prompt so that it matches the user’s preference. The
 rewritten prompt should retain primary objects in the original prompt and conform to the user’s preference.
 Please avoid being too diffused and restrict your output within 70 words.
 Example:
 The history prompts are:
    1. Best Quality, Masterpiece photo of a girl, Single Person, Perfect Eyes, Acquire Face, Acquire Skin,
 Black Hair, Long Hair, Necklace, Looking at Camera, City, Street, Night, Hotel, Skyscraper, Skyline, Top
 Shoulder, Bottom Split Short Skirt, Black Socks, A Pair of Red High Heels, 4k Ultra Clear, Highly detailed,
 pro Professional digital painting, Unreal Engine 5, Photorealism, HD quality, 8k resolution, cinema 4d,
 3D, cinematic, professional photography, art by art and greg rutkowski and alphonse mucha and finish and
 WLOP,Photography
   2. Photography exquisitely portrays realistic characters in the style of Pino daeni, a female college student
 fashion masterpiece, a classic masterpiece, a close,up of a beautiful girl, black hair, side bun, red dress, happy,
 long hair fluttering, full moon, dark night, glowing red fireflies, amidst plum blossoms, forest in the distance,
 colorful and colorful oil painting techniques, the best composition,Photography, realistic.
   3. A beautiful photo of a European girl, exquisite and complex skirt, colorful clothing, mature and beautiful,
 with clear and moving eyes, sitting outdoors, (masterpiece), best quality, midjournal portrait, masterpiece,
 close,up, by Paul Hedley.
 The current prompt is: A beautiful girl
 The rewritten prompt is: A delicate and beautiful girl with a pure temperament, red lips, black hair, straight
 hair, wearing a black off shoulder top, red split mini skirt, high heels, modern urban clothing. Standing on
 the evening street, with trees on both sides of the street and leaves falling all over the street, the whole body is
 photographed, realistic, 8k, The best quality, masterpiece, highlights, beautiful.

 The history prompts are:
   1. Soft colors beautiful lines, smart lines, flowers surround the edge of the picture, Goddess of Light, Daphne,
 artist Musa, trending in artstation.
   2. Painting by artist Muxia, Flowers and Women, vivid colors, trending in artstation.
    3. One person wears a luxurious long dress, a large round window and the scene is magnificent. The
 European court is extremely luxurious and the cinematic backlight is an epic scene. Sylvain Sarrailh, trending
 in artstation.
 The current prompt is: Girl by the window
 The rewritten prompt (one sentence less than 70 words) is:

                     Table A4: An input example for context dependent rewriting.


A3     D ETAILS FOR O NLINE E VALUATION
In this section, we elaborate on the process of online evaluation. Figure A1 displays screenshots of
the online evaluation platform we have developed.
For every prompt a user inputs, two generated images are presented. One image is produced using
the ”Original Prompt” approach, while the other is created using the ”Personalized Prompt” method.
The user’s task is to choose the image they prefer. Our platform then automatically records which
method the user favored in each instance.


                                                       14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To ensure that there is enough user interaction history, each user is asked to generate at least 9
images, whwere the first 8 form the user’s history. Subsequently, the user’s preferred images are
added to their history in the following rounds.


                      Figure A1: Screenshot of Online Evaluation Platform


                                               15
