Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


IBCL: Z ERO - SHOT M ODEL G ENERATION FOR TASK
T RADE - OFFS IN C ONTINUAL L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Like generic multi-task learning, continual learning has the nature of multi-
         objective optimization, and therefore faces a trade-off between the performance
         of different tasks. Researchers have discussed how to train models to address user
         trade-off preferences between the tasks. However, existing algorithms (1) do not
         guarantee Pareto-optimality and (2) require a training overhead proportional to the
         number of user preferences, which may be infinite, thus generating a substantial
         cost. As a response, we propose Imprecise Bayesian Continual Learning (IBCL).
         Upon a new task, IBCL (1) updates a knowledge base in the form of a convex
         hull of model parameter distributions and (2) generates one model per given user
         preference without any additional training. That is, obtaining the user-preferred
         models via IBCL is zero-shot. Moreover, IBCL ensures a buffer growth that is
         sublinear in the number of tasks. Experiments show IBCL improves on baseline
         methods by at most 45% in average per task accuracy and by 43% in peak per task
         accuracy, while maintaining a near-zero to positive backward transfer. Moreover,
         its training overhead, measured by number of batch updates per task, does not
         scale up with the number of preferences. Therefore, it is a well-performing and
         efficient algorithm when a large number of preferences are requested.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Multi-task learning aims to obtain a shared model to maximize performance on multiple tasks.
Therefore, it has the nature of multi-objective optimization (Kendall et al., 2018; Sener and Koltun,
2018), where trade-offs exist between individual tasks. Lifelong machine learning, also known as
continual learning (CL), is a special case of multi-task learning where tasks arrive in sequential or-
der (Chen and Liu, 2016; Parisi et al., 2019; Ruvolo and Eaton, 2013b; Thrun, 1998). Formally,
the trade-off in CL between not forgetting previous knowledge vs. acquiring new knowledge is
known as stability-plasticity trade-off (De Lange et al., 2021). So far, researchers have leveraged
user preferences to select what points on a trade-off curve should be aimed for during multi-task and
continual learning (Mahapatra and Rajan, 2020; Kim et al., 2023).
Consider the following motivating example of a movie recommendation system. The model is first
trained to rate movies in the sci-fi genre. Then, a new genre, e.g., documentaries, is added by the
movie company. The model needs to learn how to rate documentaries while not forgetting how to
rate sci-fis. Training this model boils down to a continual learning problem.
The company now wants to build a recommendation system that adapts to users’ tastes in movies.
For example, a user Alice tells the company that she has equal preferences over sci-fis and docu-
mentaries. Another user Bob says he absolutely wants to watch documentaries and has no interest in
sci-fis at all. Consequently, the company’s goal is to train two customized models for Alice and Bob
respectively, to predict how likely a sci-fi or a documentary should be recommended to an individual
user. Based on preferences, Alice’s personal model should balance between the accuracy in rating
sci-fis and rating documentaries, while Bob’s model can compromise the accuracy in rating sci-fis
in order to achieve a high accuracy in rating documentaries. As new genres are added, users should
be able to input their preferences over all available genres to obtain customized models.
The example above urges us to train Pareto-optimal models under user trade-off preferences between
the tasks. State-of-the-art techniques formalize a user’s preference as a probability vector over tasks.
For instance, if we have two tasks, vector (0.5, 0.5)⊤ means that they are equally preferred, while


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(1, 0)⊤ means that the user is only interested in the first one (Mahapatra and Rajan, 2020; 2021).
Then, the user-preferred model is trained with a weighted sum of losses on each task’s training
data, with the weights being the preferences (Lin et al., 2019; 2020; De Lange et al., 2021; Servia-
Rodriguez et al., 2021).
However, we identify two major disadvantages in the state-of-the-art approach. First, there is no
guarantee of Pareto-optimality. We do not know whether the obtained model is the Pareto-optimal
one associated with the given user preference. Aside from the hard Pareto-optimality guarantee,
existing techniques do not provide even soft guarantees. For example, they do not inspect how far –
with respect to some metric – the obtained model is from the Pareto-optimal one, or how likely it is
to be Pareto-optimal under some probability distribution. Second, the training cost is proportional
to the number of user preferences. Specifically, we need to train one model per preference, impos-
ing large time and sample overheads, since the number of user preferences can be infinitely large.
The need for lowering the training cost urges us to seek few-shot or zero-shot model generation tech-
niques. Although model-based (Finn et al., 2017; Yoon et al., 2018b; Navon et al., 2020; Von Oswald
et al., 2019) and prompt-based (Radford et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022a;b) methods enable few-shot
or zero-shot knowledge transfer in continual learning, they have yet to discuss generating models
under a specific preference over tasks performance.


       Figure 1: The IBCL workflow, illustrated without loss of generalization on two tasks.

We propose Imprecise Bayesian Continual Learning (IBCL), a Bayesian continual learning algo-
rithm to tackle the two identified shortcomings, with the workflow illustrated in Figure 1. Upon the
arrival of a new task’s training data, IBCL is trained to update its knowledge base (that is, all infor-
mation shared across tasks), which is a convex set of distributions Q, formally known as a fintely
generated credal set (FGCS) (Caprio et al., 2023). Each distribution in the FGCS corresponds to
one Pareto-optimal model on the trade-off curve, i.e., a model’s parameters are viewed as a random
variable θ sampled from a distribution in Q. Since FGCS Q is convex, we only need to learn and
cache its extreme points. Then, given a preference w̄, IBCL selects the distribution q̂w̄ ∈ Q cor-
responding to the preferred Pareto-optimal model. Once we have q̂w̄ , we identify a set of model
parameters, known as a highest density region (HDR), which is the smallest parameter set that con-
tains the Pareto-optimal model with high probability. Detailed definitions of FGCS and HDR can be
found in Section 2.
Compared to existing efficient knowledge transfer like Wang et al. (2022b) and Navon et al. (2020),
IBCL enables to specify trade-off preferences over tasks. Compared to existing multi-task and con-
tinual learning methods that allow to specify preferences (Lin et al., 2020), IBCL does not require
training one model per preference. In other words, IBCL significantly improves efficiency by main-
taining a constant training overhead per task, regardless of number of preferences requested. More-
over, IBCL probabilistically guarantees to find the Pareto-optimal models under given preferences,
a property not achievable by state-of-the-art.
IBCL is a method that belongs to the Bayesian continual learning (BCL) framework (Nguyen et al.,
2018) which, by design, mitigates catastrophic forgetting, that is, the forgetting part of the stability-
plasticity trade-off. This is shown in Appendix A, where we also carry out a more in-depth discus-
sion on BCL, and the relationship between IBCL and other BCL techniques.
Contributions. 1. We propose IBCL, a Bayesian continual learning algorithm that (i) probabilis-
tically guarantees to find the Pareto-optimal models associated with user trade-off preferences be-
tween the performance over the tasks, (ii) zero-shot generates these models, so that the training
overhead per task is constant, regardless of number of preferences, and (iii) has a sublinear buffer
growth in the number of tasks. 2. We prove the probabilistic guarantee of Pareto-optimality. 3. We


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


evaluate IBCL on image classification and NLP benchmarks to support our claims. We find that
IBCL improves on baselines by at most 45% in average per task accuracy and by 43% in peak per
task accuracy while maintaining a near-zero to positive backward transfer, with a constant training
overhead regardless of number of preferences. Ablation studies are also performed.

2       BACKGROUND
Our algorithm hinges upon the concepts of finitely generated credal set (FGCS) from Imprecise
Probability (IP) theory (Walley, 1991; Troffaes and de Cooman, 2014; Caprio and Gong, 2023;
Caprio and Mukherjee, 2023; Caprio and Seidenfeld, 2023; Caprio et al., 2023).
                                                                               Pm      j j
Definition 1 (Finitely Generated Credal Set). A convex set Q = {q : q =           j=1 β q , βj ≥
0 ∀j, j βj = 1} of probability distributions with finitely many extreme elements ex[Q] = {q j }m
       P
                                                                                               j=1
is called a finitely generated credal set (FGCS).

In other words, an FGCS is a convex hull of (finitely many) distributions. We also borrow from the
Bayesian literature the idea of highest density region (HDR) (Coolen, 1992).
Definition 2 (Highest Density Region). Let Θ be a set of interest, and α ∈ [0, 1] be a significance
                                                                                                    1
                                                 R θ ∈ Θ has probabilityR density function (pdf) q.
level. Suppose that a (continuous) random variable
Then, the (1 − α)-HDR is the set Θα  q such that  Θα
                                                     q(θ)dθ ≥ 1 −  α and   Θα
                                                                              dθ is minimum.
                                                      q                           q


Definition 2 tells us that if θ ∼ q, Prθ∼q [θ ∈ Θα                  α
                                                 q ] ≥ 1 − α, and Θq is the narrowest subset of Θ that
guarantees this inequality. In other words, the HDR Θα  q is the smallest subset of Θ where we can find
the realization of random variable θ with high probability. The concept of HDR is further explained
in Appendix B with an illustration. Other related works, including multi-task and continual learning,
are reviewed in Appendix C.

3       P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Our goal is to obtain classification models for domain-incremental learning (Van de Ven and Tolias,
2019) under user preferences over task trade-offs. The models should probabilistically guarantee
Pareto-optimality, with training overhead not scaling up with the number of user preferences.

3.1     A SSUMPTIONS

Formally, we denote a measurable space by (·, A(·)), i.e. the tuple of a set and a σ-algebra endowed
to it. Let (X , A(X )) be the measurable space of data, (Y, A(Y)) be the measurable space of labels,
and (X × Y, A(X × Y)) be the measurable product space of data and labels. Next, we denote
the space of all probability measures on a measurable space by ∆(·, A(·)). That is, all possible
distributions on X × Y belong to set ∆(X × Y, A(X × Y)), simplified as ∆X Y .
A task i is associated with a distribution pi ∈ ∆X Y , from which labeled data can be i.i.d. drawn.2
We assume that all tasks are similar to each other.
Assumption 1 (Task Similarity). For all task i, pi ∈ F, where F is a convex subset of ∆X Y . Also,
we assume that the diameter of F is some r > 0, that is, supF,F ′ ∈F ∥F − F ′ ∥W2 ≤ r, where ∥ · ∥W2
denotes the 2-Wasserstein distance.

In an effort to make the paper self-contained, in Appendix D we give the definition of 2-Wasserstein
distance, as well as the reason we choose it. Assumption 1 is needed to mitigate the possible model
misspecification, which in turn could lead to catastrophic forgetting even when Bayesian inference
is carried out exactly. For more, see Kessler et al. (2023) and Appendix E. Under Assumption 1, for
any two tasks i and j, their underlying distributions pi and pj satisfy ∥pi − pj ∥W2 ≤ r. Moreover,
since F is convex, any convex combination of task distributions belongs to F. Next, we assume the
parameterization of class F.
    1
     Here, for ease of notation, we do not distinguish between a random variable and its realization.
    2
     Notice that pi denotes the pdf/pmf of probability measure Pi . In the remainder of the paper, we do not
distinguish between them for notational convenience.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assumption 2 (Parameterization of Task Distributions). Every distribution F in F is parameterized
by θ, a parameter belonging to a parameter space Θ.

An example of a parameterized family that satisfies Assumption 1 is given in Appendix F. Notice
that all tasks share the same data space X and label space Y, so the learning is domain-incremental.
We then formalize user preferences over tasks.
Definition 3 (User Preferences over Tasks). Consider k tasks with underlying distributions
p1 , p2 , . . . , pk . We express a preference over them via a probability vector w̄ = (w1 , w2 , . . . , wk )⊤ ,
                                                 Pk
that is, wi ≥ 0 for all i ∈ {1, . . . , k}, and i=1 wi = 1.

Based on this definition, given a user preference w̄ over all k tasks encountered, the personalized
                                                            Pk
model for the user aims to learn the distribution pw̄ := i=1 wi pi . It is the distribution associated
with tasks 1, . . . , k that also takes into account a preference over them. Since pw̄ is the convex
combination of p1 , . . . , pk , thanks to Assumptions 1 and 2, we have that pw̄ ∈ F, and therefore it is
also parameterized by some θ ∈ Θ.
The learning procedure is the same as standard supervised domain-incremental learning. Upon task
k, we draw nk labeled examples i.i.d. from an unknown pk . Then, we are given at least one user
preference w̄ over the k tasks so far. The data drawn for task k + 1 will not be available until we
have finished learning models for all user preferences at task k.

3.2   M AIN P ROBLEM

We aim to design a domain-incremental learning algorithm that generates one model per user pref-
erence at each task. Given a significance level α ∈ [0, 1], at a task k, the algorithm should satisfy

1. Probabilistic Pareto-optimality. Let w̄ be a preference over the k tasks. We want to identify the
   smallest subset of model parameters, Θα                                 α
                                                  q̂w̄ ⊂ Θ (written as Θw̄ for notational convenience from
                                                         ⋆
   now on), that the Pareto-optimal parameter θw̄ (i.e. the ground-truth parameter of pw̄ ) belongs
                                                   ⋆
   to with high probability, i.e., Prθw̄⋆ ∼q̂w̄ [θw̄   ∈ Θαw̄ ] ≥ 1 − α, under a known q̂w̄ over Θ.
2. Zero-shot preferred model generation. When there are more than one user preference ws ,
   s ∈ {1, . . . , S}, no training is needed for generating model subsets Θα      w̄s , for all s, i.e. the model
   generation is zero-shot.
3. Sublinear buffer growth. The memory overhead for the entire procedure should be growing
   sublinearly in the number of tasks.


4     I MPRECISE BAYESIAN C ONTINUAL L EARNING

4.1   FGCS K NOWLEDGE BASE U PDATE

We take a Bayesian continual learning approach, i.e., the parameter θ of distribution pk pertaining to
task k is viewed as a random variable distributed according to some distribution q. At the beginning
of the analysis, we specify m many such distributions, ex[Q0 ] = {q01 , . . . , q0m }. They are the ones
that the designer deems plausible – a priori – for parameter θ of task 1. Upon observing data
pertaining to task 1, we learn a set Qtmp
                                       1     of parameter distributions and buffer them as extreme
points ex[Q1 ] of the FGCS Q1 corresponding to task 1. We proceed similarly for the successive
tasks i ≥ 2.
In Algorithm 1, at task i, we learn m posteriors qi1 , . . . qim by variational inference from buffered
        1            m
priors qi−1 , . . . qi−1 one-by-one (line 3). However, we do not want to buffer all learned posteriors,
so we use a distance threshold to exclude posteriors with similar distributions to the ones that are
already buffered (line 4 - 9). When a distribution similar to qij is found in the knowledge base, we
remember to use it in place of qij in the future (line 8). The posteriors without a similar distribution
buffered are appended to the knowledge base (line 11).
We note in passing that another reason for requiring Assumption 1 is that, without it, the variational
approximation in line 3 may incur catastrophic forgetting.


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 FGCS Knowledge Base Update
     Input: Current knowledge base in the form of FGCS extreme points
                      1              m
    ex[Qi−1 ] = {qi−1    , . . . , qi−1 }, observed labeled data (x̄i , ȳi ) at task i, and a distribution distance
threshold d ≥ 0
     Output: Updated extreme elements ex[Qi ]
       tmp
 1: Qi       ←∅
 2: for j ∈ {1, . . . , m} do
 3:      qij ← variational inference(qi−1    j
                                                , x̄i , ȳi )
 4:      dji ← minq∈ex[Qi−1 ] ∥qij − q∥W2
 5:      if dji ≥ d then
 6:           Qtmp
                i   ← Qtmp i      ∪ {qij }
 7:      else
 8:           Remember to use q = arg minq∈ex[Qi−1 ] ∥qij − q∥W2 in place of qij later on
 9:      end if
10: end for
                                    tmp
11: ex[Qi ] ← ex[Qi−1 ] ∪ Qi



Notice that Algorithm 1 ensures sublinear buffer growth in our problem formulation because at
each task i we only buffer mi new posterior models, with 0 ≤ mi ≤ m. With sufficiently large
threshold d, the buffer growth can become constant after several tasks. The use of different threshold
d’s is discussed in our ablation studies, see section 5.2.

4.2    Z ERO - SHOT G ENERATION OF U SER P REFERRED M ODELS

Next, after we update the FGCS extreme points for task i, we are given a set of user preferences.
                                                                            ⋆
For each preference w̄, we need to identify the Pareto-optimal parameter θw̄  for the preferred data
distribution pw̄ . This procedure can be divided into two steps as follows.
First, we find the parameter distribution q̂w̄ via a convex combination of the extreme points in the
knowledge base, whose weights correspond to the entries of preference vector w̄. That is,
                         mk
                       i X
                       X                             mk
                                                     X
              q̂w̄ =             βkj qkj ,   where         βkj = wk , and βkj ≥ 0, for all j and all k.         (1)
                       k=1 j=1                       j=1


Here, qkj is a buffered extreme point of FGCS Qk , i.e. the j-th parameter posterior of task k. The
weight βkj of this extreme point is decided by preference vector entry w̄j . In implementation, if we
have mk extreme points stored for task k, we can choose equal weights βk1 = · · · = βkm = wk /mk .
For example, if we have preference w̄ = (0.8, 0.2)⊤ on two tasks so far, and we have two extreme
points per task stored in the knowledge base, we can use β11 = β12 = 0.8/2 = 0.4 and β21 = β22 =
0.2/2 = 0.1.
As we can see from the following theorem, distribution q̂w̄ is a parameter posterior corresponding
to a preference elicitation via preference vector w̄ over the tasks encountered so far.
Theorem 4 (Selection Equivalence). Selecting a precise distribution q̂w̄ from Qi is equivalent to
specifying a preference weight vector w̄ on p1 , . . . , pi .

Please refer to Appendix G for the proof. Theorem 4 entails that the selection of q̂w̄ in Algorithm 2
is related to the correct parameterization of pw̄ ∈ ∆X Y .
Second, we compute the HDR Θα       w̄ ⊂ Θ from q̂w̄ . This is implemented via a standard procedure
that locates a region in the parameter space whose enclosed probability mass is (at least) 1 − α,
according to q̂w̄ . This procedure can be routinely implemented, e.g., in R, using package HDInterval
(Juat et al., 2022). As a result, we locate the smallest set of parameters Θα  w̄ ⊂ Θ associated with
the preference w̄. This subroutine is formalized in Algorithm 2, and one remark is that it does not
require any training, i.e., we meet our goal of zero-shot preferred model generation of section 3.2.


                                                              5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Preference HDR Computation
    Input: Knowledge base ex[Qi ] with mk extreme points saved for task k ∈ {1, . . . , i},
    preference vector w̄ on the i tasks, significance level α ∈ [0, 1]
    Output: HDR Θα         w̄ ⊂ Θ
 1: for k = 1, . . . , i do
 2:       βk1 = · · · = βkm ← wk /mk
 3: end for  Pi Pmk j j
 4: q̂w̄ = k=1 j=1            βk qk
 5: Θα w̄ ←   hdr(q̂ w̄ , α)


4.3   OVERALL IBCL A LGORITHM AND A NALYSIS

From the two subroutines in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we construct the overall IBCL algorithm as in
Algorithm 3.

Algorithm 3 Imprecise Bayesian Continual Learning
    Input: Prior distributions ex[Q0 ] = {q01 , . . . , q0m }, hyperparameters α and d
    Output: HDR Θα      w̄ for each given preference w̄ at each task i
 1: for task i = 1, 2, ... do
 2:     x̄i , ȳi ← sample ni labeled data points i.i.d. from pi
 3:     ex[Qi ] ← fgcs knowledge base update(ex[Qi−1 ], x̄i , ȳi , d)               ▷ % Algorithm 1 %
 4:     while user has a new preference do
 5:            w̄ ← user input
 6:            Θαw̄ ← preference hdr computation(ex[Qi ], w̄, α)                     ▷ % Algorithm 2 %
 7:     end while
 8: end for

For each task, in line 3, we use Algorithm 1 to update the knowledge base by learning m posteriors
from the current priors. Some of these posteriors will be cached and some will be substituted by a
previous distribution in the knowledge base. In lines 4-6, upon a user-given preference over all tasks
so far, we obtain the HDR of the model associated with preference w̄ with zero-shot via Algorithm
2. Notice that this HDR computation does not require the initial priors ex[Q0 ], so we can discard
them once the posteriors are learned in the first task. The following theorem ensures that IBCL
locates the user-preferred Pareto-optimal model with high probability.
Theorem 5 (Probabilistic Pareto-optimality). Pick any α ∈ [0, 1]. The Pareto-optimal parameter
 ⋆
θw̄ , i.e., the ground-truth parameter for pw̄ , belongs to Θα    w̄ with probability at least 1 − α under
                                                ⋆
distribution q̂w̄ . In formulas, Prθw̄⋆ ∼q̂w̄ [θw̄ ∈ Θα
                                                      w̄ ] ≥ 1 − α.

Theorem 5 gives us a (1 − α)-guarantee in obtaining Pareto-optimal models for given task trade-off
preferences. Consequently, the IBCL algorithm enjoys the probabilistic Pareto-optimality targeted
by our main problem. Please refer to Appendix G for the proof.

5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   S ETUP

We compare IBCL to the following continual learning baselines.

1. Rehearsal-based. Rehearsal-based methods memorize a subset of training data at each task. The
   loss function is a sum of losses on each task’s data retained. A preference can be specified as
   weights when computing the sum (Lin et al., 2019). We choose GEM (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato,
   2017) and A-GEM (Chaudhry et al., 2018).
2. Rehearsal-based, Bayesian. Rehearsal-based methods are in general deterministic. Since IBCL
   is Bayesian, we also compare to Bayesian methods and we choose VCL (Nguyen et al., 2018).
   We equip VCL with episodic memory to make it rehearsal-based to specify a preference. This
   approach has been used in Servia-Rodriguez et al. (2021).


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3. Prompt-based. Prompt-based continual learning are considered efficient because they fine-tune
   a data prefix (prompt) instead of a model at each task. So far, there has been no discussion on
   how to specify task preferences in these methods. We choose L2P (Wang et al., 2022b), with an
   attempt to specify preferences by training one prompt per task, and use a preference-weighted
   sum of the prompts at inference time.

We experiment on four standard continual learning benchmarks, including three image classification
and one NLP: (i) 15 tasks in CelebA (Liu et al., 2015) (with vs. without attributes), (ii) 10 tasks in
Split CIFAR-100 (Zenke et al., 2017) (animals vs. non-animals), (iii) 10 tasks in TinyImageNet (Le
and Yang, 2015) (animals vs. non-animals) and (iv) 5 tasks in 20NewsGroup (Lang, 1995) (news
related to computers vs. not related to computers). For the first three image benchmarks, features
are first extracted by ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016), and for 20NewsGroup, features are extracted by
TF-IDF (Aizawa, 2003).
As in standard continual learning evaluation, after training on task i, we evaluate the accuracy on all
testing data of previous tasks j ∈ {1, . . . , i}. To evaluate how well does a model address preferences,
we randomly generate nprefs = 10 preferences per task, except for task 1, whose preference is always
given by scalar 1. Therefore, for each method, we obtain 10 models at each task, and we evaluate a
preference-weighted sum of their accuracies on previous tasks. Finally, these preference-weighted
accuracies are used to compute standard continual learning metrics: average per task accuracy, peak
per task accuracy, and backward transfer (Dı́az-Rodrı́guez et al., 2018). Experiments are run on
Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8550U CPU @ 1.80GHz. Detailed setup can be found in Appendix H.1.

5.2   R ESULTS

Our results support the claim that IBCL not only achieves high performance by probabilistic Pareto-
optimality, but is also efficient with zero-shot generation of models.
Since VCL and IBCL output probabilistic models (BNNs and HDRs), we sample 10 deterministic
models from each and compute the range of their performance metrics, illustrated as shaded areas in
Figures 2 and 3. They represent performances on the 20NewsGroup and TinyImageNet, respectively.
In these figures, we draw the curves of top performance and mean performance of the sampled
deterministic models by VCL and IBCL as solid and dashed lines, respectively. Due to page limit,
we show the results on Split CIFAR-100 and CelebA in Figure 8 and 9 in Appendix H.2.
From Figures 2, 3, 8 and 9, we can see that IBCL overall generates the model with top performance
(high accuracy) in all cases, while maintaining little catastrophic forgetting (near-zero to positive
backward transfer). This is due to the probabilistic Pareto-optimality guarantee. Statistically, IBCL
improves on the baselines by at most 45% in average per task accuracy and by 43% in peak per task
accuracy (compared to L2P in 20News). So far, to our knowledge, there is no discussion on how
to specify a task trade-off preference in prompt-based continual learning, and we make an attempt
by using a preference-weighted sum of all learned prompts in L2P. We can see how this approach
generally works poorly, except for CelebA, where L2P performs nearly well as IBCL. We believe the
performance by prompts trained in L2P depends on its frozen model, and how to use prompt-based
methods to generate preference-specified models is still an open problem.
As illustrated in the figures, IBCL has a slightly negative backward transfer in the very beginning
but then this value stays near-zero or positive. This shows that although IBCL may slightly forget
the knowledge learned from the first task at the second task, it steadily retains knowledge afterwards.
This may be due to the choice of the priors, of the likelihood, of the variational method to approx-
imate the posterior, or to an intrinsic characteristic of our method. Given its relevance, we defer
studying this phenomenon to future work. We can also see how, although VCL’s backward transfer
is higher than IBCL’s in the first few tasks, it eventually decreases and takes values that are nearly
identical to IBCL ones. For 20NewsGroup, this happens after 5 tasks, for the other datasets after 10.

Table 1 shows the training overhead comparison measured in number of batch updates per task.
We can see how IBCL’s overhead is independent of the number of preferences nprefs because it
only requires training for the FGCS but not for the preferred models. Therefore, IBCL maintains
a constant training overhead regardless of number of preferences. Although prompt-based methods
like L2P can also achieve this efficiency, IBCL has a larger overhead only by a constant number of


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Results of 20NewsGroup. Since VCL and IBCL produce probabilistic models, we sample
10 deterministic models for each. The solid blue curve illustrates the top performance of determin-
istic models by IBCL, and the dashed blue curve is the mean performance. The shaded blue region
is the performance range by IBCL. The same illustration method is used for VCL in green color.


      Figure 3: Results of TinyImageNet. The illustration method is the same as in Figure 2.


priors, not to mention that L2P has not yet developed a way to learn preference-specified models
and therefore performs poorly.
The main experiments are conducted with hyperparameters α = 0.01 and d = 0.002. We also
conduct two ablation studies. The first one is on different significance level α in Algorithm 2.
In Figure 4, we evaluate testing accuracy on three different α’s over five different preferences (from
[0.1, 0.9] to [0.9, 0.1]) on the first two tasks of 20NewsGroup. For each preference, we uniformly
sample 200 deterministic models from the HDR. We use the sampled model with the maximum L2
sum of the two accuracies to estimate the Pareto optimality under a preference. We can see that,
as α approaches 0, we tend to sample closer to the Pareto front. This is because, with a smaller α,
HDRs becomes wider and we have a higher probability to sample Pareto-optimal models according
to Theorem 5. For instance, when α = 0.01, we have a probability of at least 0.99 that the Pareto-
optimal solution is contained in the HDR.
We then evaluate the three α’s in the same way as in the main experiments, with 10 randomly
generated preferences per task. Figure 5 shows that the performance drops as α increases, because
we are more likely to sample poorly performing models from the HDR.
The second ablation study is on different thresholds d in Algorithm 1. As d increases, we are
allowing more posteriors in the knowledge base to be reused. This will lead to memory efficiency

                                                                  # batch updates at last task
                             # batch updates at task i
                                                         CelebA     CIFAR100 TImgNet 20News
                   GEM                 nprefs
      Rehearsal   A-GEM      ×(ni + (i − 1) × nmem )     99747       19532      13594      35313
                    VCL                ×e/b
        Prompt      L2P             ni × e/b             9538        1250         938       2907
           IBCL (ours)         npriors × ni × e/b        28614       3750        2814       8721

Table 1: Training overhead comparison, measured as # of batch updates required at a task. Here, ni :
# of training data points at task i, nprefs : # of preferences per task, nmem : # of data points memorized
per task in rehearsal, npriors : # of priors in IBCL, e: # of epochs and b: batch size.


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Figure 4: Different α’s on different preferences over the first two tasks in 20NewsGroup.


    Figure 5: Different α’s on randomly generated preferences over all tasks in 20NewsGroup.


Figure 6: Different d’s on 20NewsGroup and Split-CIFAR100. The buffer growth curves of d =
5e − 3 and d = 2e − 3 of 20NewsGroup are overlapping.


at the cost of a performance drop. Figure 6 supports this trend. We can see how performance barely
drops by reusing posteriors, while the buffer growth speed becomes sublinear. For Split-CIFAR100,
when d = 8e − 3, the buffer size stops growing after task 6.

6   D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

Advantages of IBCL. IBCL (i) guarantees that the Pareto-optimal model under a given prefer-
ence can be sampled from the output HDR with high probability and (ii) zero-shot generates these
preferred model, with training overhead not scaling up with number of preferences. From the ex-
periments, we can see how baseline methods with performance close to IBCL (rehearsal-based) are
inefficient, and efficient methods (prompt-based) do not perform well in finding Pareto optimality.
Limitations of IBCL. Poorly performing models can also be sampled from IBCL’s HDRs. However,
in practice, we can fine-tune α to shrink down the HDR to avoid poorly performing ones, as shown
in the ablation studies.
Overall, we propose a probabilistic continual learning algorithm, namely IBCL, to locate models for
particular task trade-off preferences with probabilistic Pareto-optimality via zero-shot. This means
that the training overhead does not scale up with the number of preferences, significantly reducing
the computational cost when there is a large number of preferences.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Davide Abati, Jakub Tomczak, Tijmen Blankevoort, Simone Calderara, Rita Cucchiara, and
  Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi. Conditional channel gated networks for task-aware continual learn-
  ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020.
Akiko Aizawa. An information-theoretic perspective of tf–idf measures. Information Processing &
  Management, 39(1):45–65, 2003.
Patrick Billingsley. Probability and Measure. John Wiley and Sons, second edition, 1986.
Adrian Bulat, Jean Kossaifi, Georgios Tzimiropoulos, and Maja Pantic. Incremental multi-domain
  learning with network latent tensor factorization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence. AAAI Press, 2020.
Michele Caprio and Ruobin Gong. Dynamic imprecise probability kinematics. Proceedings of
 Machine Learning Research, 215:72–83, 2023.
Michele Caprio and Sayan Mukherjee. Ergodic theorems for dynamic imprecise probability kine-
 matics. International Journal of Approximate Reasoning, 152:325–343, 2023.
Michele Caprio and Teddy Seidenfeld. Constriction for sets of probabilities. Proceedings of Machine
 Learning Research, 215:84–95, 2023.
Michele Caprio, Souradeep Dutta, Kuk Jin Jang, Vivian Lin, Radoslav Ivanov, Oleg Sokolsky, and
 Insup Lee. Imprecise Bayesian neural networks. Available at arXiv:2302.09656, 2023.
Rich Caruana. Multitask learning. Machine learning, 28:41–75, 1997.
Arslan Chaudhry, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Marcus Rohrbach, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Efficient
  lifelong learning with a-gem. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00420, 2018.
Z. Chen and B. Liu. Lifelong Machine Learning. Synthesis Lectures on Artificial Intelligence and
  Machine Learning. Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2016.
Frank P. A. Coolen. Imprecise highest density regions related to intervals of measures. Memorandum
  COSOR, 9254, 1992.
Matthias De Lange, Rahaf Aljundi, Marc Masana, Sarah Parisot, Xu Jia, Aleš Leonardis, Gregory
 Slabaugh, and Tinne Tuytelaars. A continual learning survey: Defying forgetting in classification
 tasks. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 44(7):3366–3385, 2021.
Michel Marie Deza and Elena Deza. Encyclopedia of Distances. Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 2nd
 edition, 2013.
Natalia Dı́az-Rodrı́guez, Vincenzo Lomonaco, David Filliat, and Davide Maltoni. Don’t forget, there
  is more than forgetting: new metrics for continual learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.13166,
  2018.
Sayna Ebrahimi, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Trevor Darrell, and Marcus Rohrbach. Uncertainty-guided
  continual learning with bayesian neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02425, 2019.
Mehrdad Farajtabar, Navid Azizan, Alex Mott, and Ang Li. Orthogonal gradient descent for con-
 tinual learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics, 2020.
Sebastian Farquhar and Yarin Gal. A unifying Bayesian view of continual learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1902.06494, 2019.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning for fast adapta-
  tion of deep networks. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh, editors, Proceedings of the 34th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pages 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Soumyajit Gupta, Gurpreet Singh, Raghu Bollapragada, and Matthew Lease. Scalable unidirectional
  pareto optimality for multi-task learning with constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.15442, 2021.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
  770–778, 2016.
Xiaoxi He, Zimu Zhou, and Lothar Thiele. Multi-task zipping via layer-wise neuron sharing. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 6016–6026, 2018.
Rob J. Hyndman. Computing and graphing highest density regions. The American Statistician, 50
  (2):120–126, 1996.
Ngumbang Juat, Mike Meredith, and John Kruschke. Package ‘hdinterval’, 2022. URL https://
  cran.r-project.org/web/packages/HDInterval/HDInterval.pdf. Accessed
  on May 9, 2023.
Ta-Chu Kao, Kristopher Jensen, Gido van de Ven, Alberto Bernacchia, and Guillaume Hennequin.
  Natural continual learning: success is a journey, not (just) a destination. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:28067–28079, 2021.
Alex Kendall, Yarin Gal, and Roberto Cipolla. Multi-task learning using uncertainty to weigh losses
  for scene geometry and semantics. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pages 7482–7491, 2018.
Samuel Kessler, Adam Cobb, Tim G. J. Rudner, Stefan Zohren, and Stephen J. Roberts. On sequen-
  tial bayesian inference for continual learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.01828, 2023.
Sanghwan Kim, Lorenzo Noci, Antonio Orvieto, and Thomas Hofmann. Achieving a bet-
  ter stability-plasticity trade-off via auxiliary networks in continual learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.09483, 2023.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A.
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Demis Hass-
  abis, Claudia Clopath, Dharshan Kumaran, and Raia Hadsell. Overcoming catastrophic forget-
  ting in neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(13):3521–3526,
  2017a.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcom-
  ing catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences,
  114(13):3521–3526, 2017b.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  Technical Report, University of Toronto, 2009.
Ken Lang. Newsweeder: Learning to filter netnews. In Machine learning proceedings 1995, pages
  331–339. Elsevier, 1995.
Ya Le and Xuan Yang. Tiny imagenet visual recognition challenge. CS 231N, 7(7):3, 2015.
Sang-Woo Lee, Jin-Hwa Kim, Jaehyun Jun, Jung-Woo Ha, and Byoung-Tak Zhang. Overcoming
  catastrophic forgetting by incremental moment matching. Advances in neural information pro-
  cessing systems, 30, 2017.
Seungwon Lee, James Stokes, and Eric Eaton. Learning shared knowledge for deep lifelong learning
  using deconvolutional networks. In IJCAI, pages 2837–2844, 2019.
Honglin Li, Payam Barnaghi, Shirin Enshaeifar, and Frieder Ganz. Continual learning using
  bayesian neural networks. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 32(9):
  4243–4252, 2020.
Xi Lin, Hui-Ling Zhen, Zhenhua Li, Qing-Fu Zhang, and Sam Kwong. Pareto multi-task learning.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xi Lin, Zhiyuan Yang, Qingfu Zhang, and Sam Kwong. Controllable pareto multi-task learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.06313, 2020.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  In Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.
David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Yongxi Lu, Abhishek Kumar, Shuangfei Zhai, Yu Cheng, Tara Javidi, and Rogério Feris. Fully-
  adaptive feature sharing in multi-task networks with applications in person attribute classification.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017.
Pingchuan Ma, Tao Du, and Wojciech Matusik. Efficient continuous pareto exploration in multi-task
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 6522–6531. PMLR, 2020.
Debabrata Mahapatra and Vaibhav Rajan. Multi-task learning with user preferences: Gradient de-
  scent with controlled ascent in pareto optimization. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pages 6597–6607. PMLR, 2020.
Debabrata Mahapatra and Vaibhav Rajan. Exact pareto optimal search for multi-task learning: tour-
  ing the pareto front. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.00597, 2021.
Jorge A. Mendez and Eric Eaton. Lifelong learning of compositional structures. In Proceedings of
  the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Aviv Navon, Aviv Shamsian, Gal Chechik, and Ethan Fetaya. Learning the pareto front with hyper-
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04104, 2020.
Cuong V. Nguyen, Yingzhen Li, Thang D. Bui, and Richard E. Turner. Variational continual
  learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=BkQqq0gRb.
German I Parisi, Ronald Kemker, Jose L Part, Christopher Kanan, and Stefan Wermter. Continual
  lifelong learning with neural networks: A review. Neural networks, 113:54–71, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning,
  pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Krishnan Raghavan and Prasanna Balaprakash. Formalizing the generalization-forgetting trade-off
  in continual learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:17284–17297,
  2021.
Rahul Ramesh and Pratik Chaudhari. Model zoo: A growing brain that learns continually. In
  Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=WfvgGBcgbE7.
Matthew Riemer, Ignacio Cases, Robert Ajemian, Miao Liu, Irina Rish, Yuhai Tu, and Gerald
 Tesauro. Learning to learn without forgetting by maximizing transfer and minimizing interfer-
 ence. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Anthony Robins. Catastrophic forgetting, rehearsal and pseudorehearsal. Connection Science, 7(2):
  123–146, 1995.
David Rolnick, Arun Ahuja, Jonathan Schwarz, Timothy Lillicrap, and Gregory Wayne. Experience
  replay for continual learning. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc,
  E. Fox, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2019/file/fa7cdfad1a5aaf8370ebeda47a1ff1c3-Paper.pdf.
Andrei A. Rusu, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Guillaume Desjardins, Hubert Soyer, James Kirkpatrick, Koray
  Kavukcuoglu, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progressive neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1606.04671, 2016.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P. Ruvolo and E. Eaton. Active task selection for lifelong machine learning. Proceedings of the
   AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 27(1), 2013a.
Paul Ruvolo and Eric Eaton. ELLA: An efficient lifelong learning algorithm. In Sanjoy Dasgupta
  and David McAllester, editors, Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 28 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 507–515. PMLR,
  17–19 Jun 2013b. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v28/ruvolo13.html.
Jonathan Schwarz, Wojciech Czarnecki, Jelena Luketina, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Yee Whye
  Teh, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progress & compress: A scalable framework for con-
  tinual learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4528–4537. PMLR,
  2018.
Ozan Sener and Vladlen Koltun. Multi-task learning as multi-objective optimization. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Joan Serra, Didac Suris, Marius Miron, and Alexandros Karatzoglou. Overcoming catastrophic
  forgetting with hard attention to the task. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pages 4548–4557, 2018.
Sandra Servia-Rodriguez, Cecilia Mascolo, and Young D Kwon. Knowing when we do not know:
  Bayesian continual learning for sensing-based analysis tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.05872,
  2021.
D. L. Silver, Q. Yang, and L. Li. Lifelong machine learning systems: Beyond learning algorithms.
  In 2013 AAAI spring symposium series, 2013.
Mihai Suteu and Yike Guo. Regularizing deep multi-task networks using orthogonal gradients.
 CoRR, abs/1912.06844, 2019.
Shixiang Tang, Peng Su, Dapeng Chen, and Wanli Ouyang. Gradient regularized contrastive learning
  for continual domain adaptation. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  35(3):2665–2673, May 2021. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v35i3.16370. URL https://ojs.aaai.
  org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/16370.
Sebastian Thrun. Lifelong learning algorithms. Learning to learn, 8:181–209, 1998.
Matthias C. M. Troffaes and Gert de Cooman. Lower Previsions. Wiley Series in Probability and
 Statistics. New York : Wiley, 2014.
Gido M. Van de Ven and Andreas S. Tolias. Three scenarios for continual learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1904.07734, 2019.
Simon Vandenhende, Bert De Brabandere, and Luc Van Gool. Branched multi-task networks: de-
  ciding what layers to share. CoRR, abs/1904.02920, 2019.
Johannes Von Oswald, Christian Henning, Benjamin F Grewe, and João Sacramento. Continual
  learning with hypernetworks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.00695, 2019.
Peter Walley. Statistical Reasoning with Imprecise Probabilities, volume 42 of Monographs on
  Statistics and Applied Probability. London : Chapman and Hall, 1991.
Zifeng Wang, Zizhao Zhang, Sayna Ebrahimi, Ruoxi Sun, Han Zhang, Chen-Yu Lee, Xiaoqi Ren,
  Guolong Su, Vincent Perot, Jennifer Dy, et al. Dualprompt: Complementary prompting for
  rehearsal-free continual learning. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 631–648.
  Springer, 2022a.
Zifeng Wang, Zizhao Zhang, Chen-Yu Lee, Han Zhang, Ruoxi Sun, Xiaoqi Ren, Guolong Su, Vin-
  cent Perot, Jennifer Dy, and Tomas Pfister. Learning to prompt for continual learning. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 139–149,
  2022b.
Ju Xu, Jin Ma, Xuesong Gao, and Zhanxing Zhu. Adaptive progressive continual learning. IEEE
  transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, PP, 07 2021. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.
  2021.3095064.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yongxin Yang and Timothy Hospedales. Deep multi-task representation learning: a tensor factori-
  sation approach. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2017.

Jaehong Yoon, Eunho Yang, and Sungju Hwang. Lifelong learning with dynamically expandable
  networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018a.

Jaehong Yoon, Saehoon Kim, Eunho Yang, and Sungju Hwang. Scalable and order-robust continual
  learning with additive parameter decomposition. In Proceedings of the International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2020.

Jaesik Yoon, Taesup Kim, Ousmane Dia, Sungwoong Kim, Yoshua Bengio, and Sungjin Ahn.
  Bayesian Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman,
  N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018b.

Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Continual learning through synaptic intelligence.
  In International conference on machine learning, pages 3987–3995. PMLR, 2017.


A        R EASON TO ADOPT A BAYESIAN CONTINUAL LEARNING APPROACH

Let q0 (θ) be our prior pdf/pmf on parameter θ ∈ Θ at time t = 0. At time t = 1, we collect
data (x̄1 , ȳ1 ) pertaining to task 1, we elicit likelihood pdf/pmf ℓ1 (x̄1 , ȳ1 | θ), and we compute
q1 (θ | x̄1 , ȳ1 ) ∝ q0 (θ) × ℓ1 (x̄1 , ȳ1 | θ). At time t = 2, we collect data (x̄2 , ȳ2 ) pertaining to task 2
and we elicit likelihood pdf/pmf ℓ2 (x̄2 , ȳ2 | θ). Now we have two options.

         (i) Bayesian Continual Learning (BCL): we let the prior pdf/pmf at time t = 2 be the posterior
             pdf/pmf at time t = 1. That is, our prior pdf/pmf is q1 (θ | x̄1 , ȳ1 ), and we compute q2 (θ |
             x̄1 , ȳ1 , x̄2 , ȳ2 ) ∝ q1 (θ | x̄1 , ȳ1 ) × ℓ2 (x̄2 , ȳ2 | θ) ∝ q0 (θ) × ℓ1 (x̄1 , ȳ1 | θ) × ℓ2 (x̄2 , ȳ2 | θ);3
        (ii) Bayesian Isolated Learning (BIL): we let the prior pdf/pmf at time t = 2 be a generic prior
             pdf/pmf q0′ (θ). We compute q2′ (θ | x̄2 , ȳ2 ) ∝ q0′ (θ) × ℓ2 (x̄2 , ȳ2 | θ). We can even re-use
             the original prior, so that q0′ = q0 .

As we can see, in option (i) we assume that the data generating process at time t = 2 takes into
account both tasks, while in option (ii) we posit that it only takes into account task 2. Denote by
σ(X) the sigma-algebra generated by a generic random variable X. Let also Q2 be the probability
measure whose pdf/pmf is q2 , and Q′2 be the probability measure whose pdf/pmf is q2′ . Then, we
have the following.
Proposition 1. Posterior probability measure Q2 can be written as a σ(X̄1 , Ȳ1 , X̄2 , Ȳ2 )-measurable
random variable taking values in [0, 1], while posterior probability measure Q′2 can be written as a
σ(X̄2 , Ȳ2 )-measurable random variable taking values in [0, 1].

Proof. Pick any A ⊂ Θ. Then, Q2 [A | σ(X̄1 , Ȳ1 , X̄2 , Ȳ2 )] = EQ2 [1A | σ(X̄1 , Ȳ1 , X̄2 , Ȳ2 )], a
σ(X̄1 , Ȳ1 , X̄2 , Ȳ2 )-measurable random variable taking values in [0, 1]. Notice that 1A denotes the
indicator function for set A. Similarly, Q′2 [A | σ(X̄2 , Ȳ2 )] = EQ′2 [1A | σ(X̄2 , Ȳ2 )], a σ(X̄2 , Ȳ2 )-
measurable random variable taking values in [0, 1]. This is a well-known result in measure theory
(Billingsley, 1986).

Of course Proposition 1 holds for all t ≥ 2. Recall that the sigma-algebra σ(X) generated by a
generic random variable X captures the idea of information encoded in observing X. An immediate
corollary is the following.
Corollary 2. Let t ≥ 2. Then, if we opt for BIL, we lose all the information encoded in
{(X̄i , Ȳi )}t−1
              i=1 .

    3
        Here we tacitly assume that the likelihoods are independent.


                                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In turn, if we opt for BIL, we obtain a posterior that is not measurable with respect to
σ({(X̄i , Ȳi )}ti=1 ) \ σ(X̄t , Ȳt ). If the true data generating process pt is a function of the previ-
ous data generating processes pt′ , t′ ≤ t, this leaves us with a worse approximation of the “true”
posterior Qtrue ∝ Q0 × pt .
The phenomenon in Corollary 2 is commonly referred to as catastrophic forgetting. Continual
learning literature is unanimous in labeling catastrophic forgetting as undesirable – see e.g. Farquhar
and Gal (2019); Li et al. (2020). For this reason, in this work we adopt a BCL approach. In practice,
we cannot compute the posterior pdf/pmf exactly, and we will resort to variational inference to
approximate them – an approach often referred to as Variational Continual Learning (VCL) Nguyen
et al. (2018). As we shall see in Appendix E, Assumption 1 is needed in VCL to avoid catastrophic
forgetting.

A.1     R ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN IBCL AND OTHER BCL TECHNIQUES

Like Farquhar and Gal (2019); Li et al. (2020), the weights in our Bayesian neural networks (BNNs)
have Gaussian distribution with diagonal covariance matrix. Because IBCL is rooted in Bayesian
continual learning, we can initialize IBCL with a much smaller number of parameters to solve
a complex task as long as it can solve a set of simpler tasks. In addition, IBCL does not need to
evaluate the importance of parameters by measures such as computing the Fisher information, which
are computationally expensive and intractable in large models.

A.1.1    R ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN IBCL AND MAML

In this section, we discuss the relationship between IBCL and the Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning
(MAML) and Bayesian MAML (BMAML) procedures introduced in Finn et al. (2017); Yoon et al.
(2018b), respectively. These are inherently different than IBCL, since the latter is a continual learn-
ing procedure, while MAML and BMAML are meta-learning algorithms. Nevertheless, given the
popularity of these procedures, we feel that relating IBCL to them would be useful to draw some
insights on IBCL itself.
In MAML and BMAML, a task i is specified by a ni -shot dataset Di that consists of a small number
of training examples, e.g. observations (x1i , y1i ), . . . , (xni , yni ). Tasks are sampled from a task
distribution T such that the sampled tasks share the statistical regularity of the task distribution. In
IBCL, Assumption 1 guarantees that the tasks pi share the statistical regularity of class F. MAML
and BMAML leverage this regularity to improve the learning efficiency of subsequent tasks.
At each meta-iteration i,

1. Task-Sampling: For both MAML and BMAML, a mini-batch Ti of tasks is sampled from the
   task distribution T. Each task τi ∈ Ti provides task-train and task-validation data, Dτtrni and Dτvali ,
   respectively.
2. Inner-Update: For MAML, the parameter of each task τi ∈ Ti is updated starting from the
   current generic initial parameter θ0 , and then performing ni gradient descent steps on the task-
   train loss. For BMAML, the posterior q(θτi | Dτtrni , θ0 ) is computed, for all τi ∈ Ti .
3. Outer-Update: For MAML, the generic initial parameter θ0 is updated by gradient descent. For
   BMAML, it is updated using the Chaser loss (Yoon et al., 2018b, Equation (7)).

Notice how in our work w̄ is a probability vector. This implies that if we fix a number of task k and
we let w̄ be equal to (w1 , . . . , wk )⊤ , then w̄ · p̄ can be seen as a sample from T such that T(pi ) = wi ,
for all i ∈ {1, . . . , k}.
Here lies the main difference between IBCL and BMAML. In the latter the information provided
by the tasks is used to obtain a refinement of the (parameter of the) distribution T on the tasks
themselves. In IBCL, instead, we are interested in the optimal parameterization of the posterior
distribution associated with w̄ · p̄. Notice also that at time k + 1, in IBCL the support of T changes:
it is {p1 , . . . , pk+1 }, while for MAML and BMAML it stays the same.
Also, MAML and BMAML can be seen as ensemble methods, since they use different values
(MAML) or different distributions (BMAML) to perform the Outer-Update and come up with a


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


single value (MAML) or a single distributions (BMAML). Instead, IBCL keeps distributions sepa-
rate via FGCS, thus capturing the ambiguity faced by the designer during the analysis.
Furthermore, we want to point out how while for BMAML the tasks τi are all “candidates” for the
true data generating process (dgp) pi , in IBCL we approximate the pdf/pmf of pi with the product
Qi
   h=1 ℓh of the likelihoods up to task i. The idea of different candidates for the true dgp is beneficial
for IBCL as well: in the future, we plan to let go of Assumption 1 and let each pi belong to a credal
set Pi . This would capture the epistemic uncertainty faced by the agent on the true dgp.
To summarize, IBCL is a continual learning technique whose aim is to find the correct parameteriza-
tion of the posterior associated with w̄· p̄. Here, w̄ expresses the developer’s preferences on the tasks.
MAML and BMAML, instead, are meta-learning algorithms whose main concern is to refine the dis-
tribution T from which the tasks are sampled. While IBCL is able to capture the preferences of, and
the ambiguity faced by, the designer, MAML and BMAML are unable to do so. On the contrary,
these latter seem better suited to solve meta-learning problems. An interesting future research direc-
tion is to come up with imprecise BMAML, or IBMAML, where a credal set Conv({T1 , . . . , Tk })
is used to capture the ambiguity faced by the developer in specifying the correct distribution on the
possible tasks. The process of selecting one element from such credal set may lead to computational
gains.

B        H IGHEST D ENSITY R EGION
Equivalently to Definition 2, an HDR is defined as follows (Hyndman, 1996).
Definition 6. Let Θ be a set of interest, and consider a significance level α ∈ [0, 1]. Suppose that a
(continuous) random variable θ ∈ Θ has probability density function (pdf) q.4 The α-level Highest
Density Region (HDR) Θα  q is the subset of Θ such that

                                             Θα                    α
                                              q = {θ ∈ Θ : q(θ) ≥ q },                                         (2)
where q α is a constant value. In particular, q α is the largest constant such that Prθ∼q [θ ∈ Θα
                                                                                                q] ≥
1 − α.

Some scholars indicate HDRs as the Bayesian counterpart to the frequentist concept of confidence
intervals. In dimension 1, Θαq can be interpreted as the narrowest interval – or union of intervals
– in which the value of the (true) parameter falls with probability of at least 1 − α according to
distribution q. We give a simple visual example in Figure 7.


                                       ̂
                                      0.25
                                    qp0.25
                                                                          ̂ q(θ)
                                                                         p(y)
                                                                                    yθ


Figure 7: The 0.25-HDR for a Normal Mixture density. This picture is a replica of (Hyndman, 1996, Figure
1). The geometric representation of “75% probability according to q” is the area between the pdf curve q(θ)
and the horizontal bar corresponding to q 0.25 . A higher probability coverage (according to q) would correspond
to a lower constant, so q α < q 0.25 , for all α < 0.25. In the limit, we recover 100% coverage at q 0 = 0.



C        A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK
Multi-task Learning under Preferences. Learning for Pareto-optimal models under task perfor-
mance trade-offs has been studied by researchers in multi-task learning (Caruana, 1997; Sener and
Koltun, 2018). Various techniques have been applied to obtain models that address particular trade-
off points (Lin et al., 2019; 2020; Ma et al., 2020; Gupta et al., 2021). The idea of preferences on
    4
        Here too, for ease of notation, we do not distinguish between a random variable and its realization.


                                                          16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the trade-off points is introduced in multi-objective optimization (Lin et al., 2020; Sener and Koltun,
2018), and a preference can guide learning algorithms to search for a particular model. We borrow
the formalization of preferences from Mahapatra and Rajan (2020), where a preference is given
by a vector of non-negative real weights w̄, with each entry wi corresponding to task i. That is,
wi ≥ wj ⇐⇒ i ⪰ j. This means that if wi ≥ wj , then task i is preferred to task j. However,
state-of-the-art algorithms require training one model per preference, imposing large overhead when
there is a large number of preferences.
Continual Learning. Continual learning, also known as lifelong learning, is a special case of
multi-task learning, where tasks arrive sequentially instead of simultaneously (Thrun, 1998; Ruvolo
and Eaton, 2013a; Silver et al., 2013; Chen and Liu, 2016). In this paper, we leverage Bayesian
inference in the knowledge base update (Ebrahimi et al., 2019; Farquhar and Gal, 2019; Kao et al.,
2021). Like generic multi-task learning, continual learning also faces the stability-plasticity trade-off
(De Lange et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2023; Raghavan and Balaprakash, 2021), which balances between
performance on new tasks and resistance to catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017b; Lee
et al., 2017; Robins, 1995). Current methods identify models to address trade-off preferences by
techniques such as loss regularization (Servia-Rodriguez et al., 2021), meaning at least one model
needs to be trained per preference.
Researchers in CL have proposed various approaches to retain knowledge while updating a model
on new tasks. These include modified loss landscapes for optimization (Farajtabar et al., 2020; Kirk-
patrick et al., 2017a; Riemer et al., 2019; Suteu and Guo, 2019; Tang et al., 2021), preservation of
critical pathways via attention (Abati et al., 2020; Serra et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2021; Yoon et al.,
2020), memory-based methods (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato, 2017; Rolnick et al., 2019), shared repre-
sentations (He et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2017; Ruvolo and Eaton, 2013b; Vandenhende
et al., 2019; Yoon et al., 2018a), and dynamic representations (Bulat et al., 2020; Mendez and Eaton,
2021; Ramesh and Chaudhari, 2022; Rusu et al., 2016; Schwarz et al., 2018; Yang and Hospedales,
2017). Bayesian, or probabilistic methods such as variational inference are also adopted (Ebrahimi
et al., 2019; Farquhar and Gal, 2019; Kao et al., 2021; Kessler et al., 2023; Li et al., 2020; Nguyen
et al., 2018).

D        2-WASSERSTEIN METRIC
In the main portion of the paper, we endowed ∆X Y with the 2-Wasserstein metric. It is defined as
                                 r
    ∥p − p′ ∥W2 ≡ W2 (p, p′ ) :=      inf ′ E((x1 ,y1 ),(x2 ,y2 ))∼γ [d((x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ))2 ], where
                                        γ∈Γ(p,p )


1. p, p′ ∈ ∆X Y ;
2. Γ(p, p′ ) is the set of all couplings of p and p′ . A coupling γ is a joint probability measure on
   (X × Y) × (X × Y) whose marginals are p and p′ on the first and second factors, respectively;
3. d is the product metric endowed to X × Y (Deza and Deza, 2013, Section 4.2).5

We choose the 2-Wasserstein distance for the ease of computation. In practice, when all distributions
are modeled by Bayesian neural networks with independent Gaussian weights and biases, we have
                             ∥q1 − q2 ∥2W2 = ∥µ2q1 − µ2q2 ∥22 + ∥σq21 1 − σq22 1∥22 ,                  (3)
where ∥ · ∥2 denotes the Euclidean norm, 1 is a vector of all 1’s, and µq and σq are respectively the
mean and standard deviation of a multivariate normal distribution q with independent dimensions,
q = N (µq , σq2 I), I being the identity matrix. Therefore, computing the W2 -distance between two
distributions is equivalent to computing the difference between their means and variances.

E        I MPORTANCE OF A SSUMPTION 1
We need Assumption 1 in light of the results in Kessler et al. (2023). There, the authors show that
misspecified models can forget even when Bayesian inference is carried out exactly. By requiring
    5
        We denote by dX and dY the metrics endowed to X and Y, respectively.


                                                       17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that diam(F) = r, we control the amount of misspecification via r. In Kessler et al. (2023), the
authors design a new approach – called Prototypical Bayesian Continual Learning, or ProtoCL –
that allows dropping Assumption 1 while retaining the Bayesian benefit of remembering previous
tasks. Because the main goal of this paper is to come up with a procedure that allows the designer to
express preferences over the tasks, we retain Assumption 1, and we work in the classical framework
of Bayesian Continual Learning. In the future, we plan to generalize our results by operating with
ProtoCL.6

F     A N EXAMPLE OF A PARAMETERIZED FAMILY F
Let us give an example of a parameterized family F. Suppose that we have one-dimensional data
points and labels. At each task i, the marginal on X of pi is a Normal N (µ, 1), while the conditional
distribution of label y ∈ Y given data point x ∈ X is a categorical Cat(ϑ). Hence, the parameter
for pi is θ = (µ, ϑ), and it belongs to Θ = R × R|Y| . In this situation, an example of a family F
satisfying Assumptions 1 and 2 is the convex hull of distributions that can be decomposed as we just
described, and whose distance according to the 2-Wasserstein metric does not exceed some r > 0.

G     P ROOFS OF THE T HEOREMS
Proof of Theorem 4. Without loss of generality, suppose we have encountered i = 2 tasks so far, so
the FGCS is Q2 . Let ex[Q1 ] = {q1j }m                                           j m2
                                       j=1 and ex[Q2 ] \ ex[Q1 ] = {q2 }j=1 . Let q̂ be any element of
                                         1


Q2 . Then, there exists a probability vector β̄ = (β11 , . . . , β1m1 , β21 , . . . , β2m2 )⊤ such that
                                 m1
                                 X                 m2
                                                   X                     m1
                                                                         X                     m2
                                                                                               X
                         q̂ =          β1j q1j +         β2j q2j ∝ p̂1         β1j q0j + p̂2         β2j q0j .   (4)
                                 j=1               j=1                   j=1                   j=1
            Qi
Here, p̂i = k=1 ℓk , and ℓk is the likelihood at task k. It estimates the pdf of the true data generating
process pi of task i. The proportional relationship in equation 4 is based on the Bayesian inference
step (line 3, approximated via variational inference) of Algorithm 1. We can then find a vector
             Pm1 j            Pm2 j ⊤
w̄ = (w1 = j=1      β1 , w2 = j=1    β2 ) that expresses the designer’s preferences over tasks 1 and
2. As we can see, then, the act of selecting a generic distribution q̂ ∈ Q2 is equivalent to specifying
a preference vector w̄ over tasks 1 and 2. This concludes the proof.

Proof of Theorem 5. For maximum generality, assume Θ is uncountable. Recall from Definition 2
that α-level Highest Density Region Θα w̄ is defined as the subset of the parameter space Θ such that
                      Z                                   Z
                           q̂w̄ (θ)dθ ≥ 1 − α and             dθ is a minimum.
                           Θα
                            w̄                                             Θα
                                                                            w̄


We need Θα dθ to be a minimum because we want Θα
          R
                w̄
                                                              w̄ to be the smallest possible region that gives
us the desired probabilistic coverage. Equivalently, from Definition 6 we can write that Θα             w̄ = {θ ∈
                    α             α
Θ : q̂w̄ (θ) ≥ q̂w̄   }, where q̂w̄ is the largest constant such that Prθ∼q̂w̄ [θ ∈ Θα  w̄ ] ≥ 1 − Rα. Our result
               ⋆
Prθw̄⋆ ∼q̂w̄ [θw̄  ∈ Θαw̄ )] ≥ 1 − α, then, comes from the fact that Prθw̄ ⋆ ∼q̂ [θ
                                                                                w̄
                                                                                    ⋆        α
                                                                                    w̄ ∈ Θw̄ )] = Θα     q̂w̄ (θ)dθ,
                                                                                                      w̄
a consequence of a well-known equality in probability theory (Billingsley, 1986).

H     D ETAILS OF E XPERIMENTS
H.1    S ETUP D ETAILS

We select 15 tasks from CelebA. All tasks are binary image classification on celebrity face images.
Each task i is to classify whether the face has an attribute such as wearing eyeglasses or having a
mustache. The first 15 attributes (out of 40) in the attribute list (Liu et al., 2015) are selected for our
    6
      In Kessler et al. (2023), the authors also show that if there is a task dataset imbalance, then the model can
forget under certain assumptions. To avoid complications, in this work we tacitly assume that task datasets are
balanced.


                                                                18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tasks. The training, validation and testing sets are already split upon download, with 162,770, 19,867
and 19,962 images, respectively. All images are annotated with binary labels of the 15 attributes in
our tasks. We use the same training, validation and testing set for all tasks, with labels being the
only difference.
We select 20 classes from CIFAR100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) to construct 10 Split-CIFAR100 tasks
(Zenke et al., 2017). Each task is a binary image classification between an animal class (label 0) and
a non-animal class (label 1). The classes are (in order of tasks):

1. Label 0: aquarium fish, beaver, dolphin, flatfish, otter, ray, seal, shark, trout, whale.
2. Label 1: bicycle, bus, lawn mower, motorcycle, pickup truck, rocket, streetcar, tank, tractor,
   train.

That is, the first task is to classify between aquarium fish images and bicycle images, and so on. We
want to show that the continual learning model incrementally gains knowledge of how to identify
animals from non-animals throughout the task sequence. For each class, CIFAR100 has 500 training
data points and 100 testing data points. We hold out 100 training data points for validation. There-
fore, at each task we have 400 × 2 = 800 training data, 100 × 2 = 200 validation data and 100 × 2
= 200 testing data.
We also select 20 classes from TinyImageNet (Le and Yang, 2015). The setup is similar to Split-
CIFAR100, with label 0 being animals and 1 being non-animals.

1. Label 0: goldfish, European fire salamander, bullfrog, tailed frog, American alligator, boa con-
   strictor, goose, koala, king penguin, albatross.
2. Label 1: cliff, espresso, potpie, pizza, meatloaf, banana, orange, water tower, via duct, tractor.

The dataset already splits 500, 50 and 50 images for training, validation and testing per class. There-
fore, each task has 1000, 100 and 100 images for training, validation and testing, respectively.
20NewsGroups (Lang, 1995) contains news report texts on 20 topics. We select 10 topics for 5
binary text classification tasks. Each task is to distinguish whether the topic is computer-related
(label 0) or not computer-related (label 1), as follows.

1. Label 0:         comp.graphics,       comp.os.ms-windows.misc,         comp.sys.ibm.pc.hardware,
   comp.sys.mac.hardware, comp.windows.x.
2. Label 1: misc.forsale, rec.autos, rec.motorcycles, rec.sport.baseball, rec.sport.hockey.

Each class has different number of news reports. On average, a class has 565 reports for training and
376 for testing. We then hold out 100 reports from the 565 for validation. Therefore, each binary
classification task has 930, 200 and 752 data points for training, validation and testing, on average
respectively.
All data points are first preprocessed by a feature extractor. For images, the feature extractor is a
pre-trained ResNet18 (He et al., 2016). We input the images into the ResNet18 model and obtain
its last hidden layer’s activations, which has a dimension of 512. For texts, the extractor is TF-IDF
(Aizawa, 2003) succeeded with PCA to reduce the dimension to 512 as well.
Each Bayesian network model is trained with evidence lower bound (ELBO) loss, with a fixed feed-
forward architecture (input=512, hidden=64, output=1). The hidden layer is ReLU-activated and the
output layer is sigmoid-activated. Therefore, our parameter space Θ is the set of all values that can
be taken by this network’s weights and biases.
The three variational inference priors, learning rate, batch size and number of epcohs are tuned on
validation sets. The tuning results are as follows.

1. CelebA: priors = {N (0, 0.22 I), N (0, 0.252 I), N (0, 0.32 I)}, lr = 1e − 3, batch size = 64, epochs
   = 10.
2. Split-CIFAR100: priors = {N (0, 22 I), N (0, 2.52 I), N (0, 32 I)}, lr = 5e − 4, batch size = 32,
   epochs = 50.
3. TinyImageNet: priors = {N (0, 22 I), N (0, 2.52 I), N (0, 32 I)}, lr = 5e − 4, batch size = 32,
   epochs = 30.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4. 20NewsGroup: priors = {N (0, 22 I), N (0, 2.52 I), N (0, 32 I)}, lr = 5e − 4, batch size = 32,
   epochs = 100.

For the baseline methods, we use exactly the same learning rate, batch sizes and epochs. For proba-
bilistic baseline methods (VCL), we use the prior with the median standard deviation. For example,
on CelebA tasks, VCL uses the normal prior N (0, 0.252 I).
For rehearsal-based baselines, the memory size per task for CelebA is 200, and for the rest is 50.
Together with the numbers above, we can compute the numerical values in Table 1.

H.2   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

In Figure 8 and 9, we provide visual representations of the performances of IBCL vs. the baseline
methods on Split CIFAR-100 and CelebA, respectively. So far, to our knowledge, there is no dis-
cussion on how to specify a task trade-off preference in prompt-based continual learning, and we
make an attempt by using a preference-weighted sum of all learned prompts in L2P. We can see how
this approach generally works poorly, except for CelebA, where L2P performs nearly well as IBCL.
We believe the performance by prompts trained in L2P depends on its frozen model, and how to use
prompt-based methods to generate preference-specified models is still an open problem.


                              Figure 8: Results of Split-CIFAR-100.


                                   Figure 9: Results of CelebA.


                                                20
