Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


AGENT I NSTRUCTS L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS TO BE
G ENERAL Z ERO -S HOT R EASONERS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         We introduce a method to improve the zero-shot reasoning abilities of large lan-
         guage models on general language understanding tasks. Specifically, we build
         an autonomous agent to instruct the reasoning process of large language models.
         We show this approach further unleashes the zero-shot reasoning abilities of large
         language models to more tasks. We study the performance of our method on a
         wide set of datasets spanning generation, classification, and reasoning. We show
         that our method generalizes to most tasks and obtains state-of-the-art zero-shot
         performance on 20 of the 29 datasets that we evaluate. For instance, our method
         boosts the performance of state-of-the-art large language models by a large margin,
         including Vicuna-13b (13.3%), Llama-2-70b-chat (23.2%), and GPT-3.5 Turbo
         (17.0%). Compared to zero-shot chain of thought, our improvement in reasoning is
         striking, with an average increase of 10.5%. With our method, Llama-2-70b-chat
         outperforms zero-shot GPT-3.5 Turbo by 10.2%.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021; Zhang et al.,
2022a; Smith et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Scao et al., 2023; OpenAI,
2023; Anil et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Penedo et al., 2023) have significantly advanced
the state-of-the-art on a wide range of language understanding tasks. These models have led to
widespread deployment and adoption in applications (Araci, 2019; Huang et al., 2020; Bolton et al.,
2022; Wu et al., 2023; Driess et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023). In particular, the emerging capabilities
of LLMs such as complex reasoning (Wei et al., 2022b; Wang et al., 2023c; Kıcıman et al., 2023)
have made them the subject of research in recent years. Among these, zero-shot reasoning (Kojima
et al., 2022; Wan et al., 2023) has drawn substantial public interest and achieved promising results in
specific task domains. However, the reasoning ability of LLMs on general tasks remains unclear.
In this paper, we improve the zero-shot reasoning abilities of LLMs on general language understanding
tasks. To solve a task, we build an agent to instruct the reasoning process of LLMs for the task
(Figure 1). More specifically, our autonomous agent generates task-specific instructions to better
align the chain of thought reasoning process of LLMs with each task. We refer to this approach as
zero-shot agent instructed reasoning (AgentInstruct). The basic idea of our approach is motivated
by two lines of work. First, language agents (Yao et al., 2023b; Shinn et al., 2023; Park et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2023a; Xi et al., 2023) have been developed to automatically complete a task. Instead of
completing the task, our agent produces instructions on how to complete the task. We enable this by
adapting an existing agent to access a wide range of task-relevant knowledge on the web, given basic
task information such as the name of the dataset and several input examples. As a result, the agent
synthesizes high-quality step-by-step instructions for tasks verified by the web resources. We follow
the recent design of agents where an LLM is used to produce the plans for this process. Second,
zero-shot chain of thought (CoT) reasoning of LLMs has obtained promising results on tasks such as
arithmetic reasoning (Kojima et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b). Standard in-context zero-shot learning
prompts an LLM to directly output predictions without task examples. In contrast, CoT decomposes
a task into intermediate steps and solving each will lead to the final output. We further align the CoT
reasoning steps with a particular task by prompting with the task-specific agent instructions. The
design of zero-shot AgentInstruct is important: We generalize the zero-shot reasoning abilities of
LLMs to more tasks with the combination of task-specific instructions from a language agent and
task-specific reasoning of LLMs.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Summary of our approach and results. Top: Our zero-shot AgentInstruct generalizes the
zero-shot reasoning abilities of large language models to a wide set of language understanding tasks
including generation, classification, and reasoning. Our agent produces task-specific instructions to
instruct the reasoning process of large language models to solve a task. Both the agent instructions
and task-specific reasoning process are highlighted. Bottom: Performance of zero-shot AgentInstruct
compared with standard zero-shot and zero-shot chain of thought (CoT). Zero-shot AgentInstruct
improves the performance of three large language models substantially on the 29 datasets we evaluate.

We empirically evaluate the zero-shot reasoning abilities of LLMs on a wide set of language un-
derstanding tasks across 29 datasets (including 53 subsets), spanning generation, classification, and
reasoning. Zero-shot AgentInstruct obtains state-of-the-art performance on 20 datasets. We conduct
our evaluation on three state-of-the-art LLMs, namely, Vicuna (Chiang et al., 2023), Llama-2-chat
(Touvron et al., 2023b), and GPT-3.5 Turbo (OpenAI, 2022). We show that zero-shot AgentInstruct
boosts the performance of these models by 17.8% on average. When compared to zero-shot CoT,
the overall performance improvement is significant (6.5%), and in particular, the improvement in
reasoning is substantial with an average increase of 10.5%, leading to the best performance on 10 out
of 12 reasoning tasks. Notably, Llama-2-70b-chat with zero-shot AgentInstruct outperforms standard
zero-shot GPT-3.5 Turbo by an average of 10.2%. We hope the results help foster future research
on further unlocking the zero-shot reasoning abilities of large foundation models and exploring the
broader usage of agents.


2   A PPROACH

We present zero-shot AgentInstruct in this section. To solve a task, zero-shot AgentInstruct employs
an agent to instruct an LLM to reason toward the final prediction. Intuitively, humans often rely on
specific instructions to more effectively guide their thought process as they work towards a solution
to a problem. For instance, to understand the sentiment in the movie reviews, instructions such as “1.
Understand the Dataset: ... Movie Reviews dataset ... 2. Analyze the Passage: Pay attention to ... the
tone of the review ...” help humans decompose the problem into task-specific reasoning steps and
solve each to deliver the final answer (Figure 1). Zero-shot AgentInstruct follows this intuition.



                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Agent Instructions Instead of handwriting task-
specific instructions, we build an agent to automate
the process. The intuition is that an agent is able
to synthesize high-quality instructions with access
to a wide range of existing task knowledge on the
web. We design our agent based on ReAct (Yao et al.,
2023b). This is motivated by the recent developments
of language agents for task solving. Our agent high-
lights two features (Figure 2): (i) Instruction genera-
tion. Our agent follows ReAct which uses an LLM to
propose a series of thoughts. The agent then receives
observations and takes actions following the thoughts.
Different from ReAct which aims to directly solve
the task, our agent outputs step-by-step instructions
on how to solve the task. The major advantage of Figure 2: An example of our agent producing
this is that we only need to generate instructions once instructions for a classification dataset IMDB.
per dataset instead of running the agent on all dataset The task-specific instructions are highlighted.
instances. We use GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) as the de-
fault agent. Once the action is finish, the corresponding output is our task-specific instructions.
(ii) Action space. We constrain our action space to contain two types of actions that support the
instruction generation: (a) ask_about_dataset[string], which returns the top relevant web pages
containing information about the dataset. To do this, we construct and utilize a question answering
API as a tool. This API is meant to answer questions about the document by interfacing with a
vector database storing the web pages to provide an answer. (b) finish[instructions], which finishes
the instruction generation with the task-specific instructions. As shown in Figure 2, to produce the
instructions, our agent takes basic dataset information such as the name of the dataset (e.g., IMDB), a
few input-only examples (examples without ground truth labels), and the set of output labels for the
dataset (if applicable, else the type of dataset like generation) as its input. Using the task knowledge
from the web, our agent forms observations (e.g., “Observation 1: ... labeled as either positive or
negative ...”) and thoughts (e.g., “Thought 2: ... creating instructions ...”) which trigger the agent to
perform actions, such as the finish action to output the task-specific instructions.
Chain of Thought Reasoning Chain of thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022b; Kojima et al., 2022)
prompts LLMs to break down the task into intermediate reasoning steps that lead to the final answer.
Unlike zero-shot CoT which uses a fixed prompt “Let’s think step by step”, we prepend our task-
specific agent instructions to the input to prompt the LLMs to optimize their reasoning processes for
the task. LLMs will then follow our task-specific instructions to decompose the task into a chain of
more specific intermediate steps to solve the task. As shown in Figure 1, the agent instructions “...
Pay attention to ... explicit or implicit expressions of sentiment towards the movie ...” are the key
to producing the critical reasoning path “... the movie is worth a view only for the performances of
the three actors ...”, which leads to the correct prediction where standard zero-shot and zero-shot
CoT fail. We follow zero-shot CoT, which consists of a reasoning extraction prompt to produce the
intermediate reasoning steps, and an answer extraction prompt to collect the answers. For simplicity of
implementation, we replace zero-shot CoT’s fixed prompt with zero-shot AgentInstruct’s task-specific
instructions in the reasoning extraction prompt.
AgentInstruct is zero-shot as there are no task-specific examples involved in the pipeline. It enjoys
several unique properties: (i) Zero-shot AgentInstruct is a new way to improve the zero-shot reasoning
of LLMs. Zero-shot AgentInstruct decouples the language agent and reasoning process of LLMs,
which helps zero-shot AgentInstruct generalize to more tasks. Additionally, the agent instructions
provide more task-specific controls to the reasoning paths of LLMs, which benefits human alignment
and improves the safety of LLMs. (ii) Our agent instructions are customized for different tasks and
verified by existing task knowledge. For each task, different LLMs use the same set of instructions,
and we find the instructions transfer well among these models. This is important in practice as the
agent LLMs are often more powerful and costly than the reasoning LLMs, so our approach is a
cost-effective alternative to using agents directly. (iii) By providing task-specific instructions, chain
of thought reasoning abilities are further generalized to more tasks beyond reasoning tasks. We show
general language understanding tasks such as generation and classification also benefit from chain of
thought reasoning. To better embrace the emerging reasoning capabilities of LLMs, our task-specific
instructions align the reasoning process with a particular task better than general or fixed instructions.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     E XPERIMENT
We show that zero-shot AgentInstruct successfully improves the zero-shot reasoning abilities of
LLMs, namely, Vicuna (Chiang et al., 2023), Llama-2-chat (Touvron et al., 2023b), and GPT-3.5
Turbo (OpenAI, 2022), by a large margin on average. We evaluate zero-shot AgentInstruct on an
exhaustive selection of 29 benchmarking datasets containing 53 subsets. As shown in Figure 3, each
dataset is either a generation or classification task and a portion of the datasets in each category
are also reasoning tasks. The datasets consist of all HELM core scenarios from Liang et al. (2023),
as well as the reasoning datasets from Kojima et al. (2022). The details of the experimental setup,
including datasets and models, are described in Appendix A.

3.1   M AIN R ESULTS

Results are shown in Figure 5. We compare zero-shot AgentInstruct to standard zero-shot and
zero-shot CoT. We focus our analysis on three models: Vicuna-13b, Llama-2-70b-chat, and GPT-3.5
Turbo.


                                                                           (a) All datasets.



                                                                       (b) Generation datasets.



                                                                      (c) Classification datasets.



                                                                       (d) Reasoning datasets.
Figure 3: Datasets for generation (blue), classifi-       Figure 4: Winning rate (%) between zero-
cation (green), and reasoning (orange). Reason-           shot, zero-shot CoT, and zero-shot AgentInstruct
ing contains generation and classification tasks.         based on the average results over three models.
We first compare zero-shot AgentInstruct to standard zero-shot prompting (Figure 1). The zero-shot
prompt design follows Liang et al. (2023). On each model, zero-shot AgentInstruct wins on the
majority of datasets, with no less than a 13.0% increase on average. Average performance versus the
zero-shot setting is best on Llama-2-70b-chat with a 23.2% improvement. Figure 5a and Figure 5b
show the results for generation and classification tasks respectively. On average, with zero-shot
AgentInstruct, the three models beat the zero-shot setup by 23.1% for generation and 13.5% for
classification. We hypothesize that generation datasets generally require more specific instructions
than classification datasets, as the model does not know the best format of the generation output unless
it has sufficient task information. This shows that our agent is able to instruct the reasoning process to
improve the final outputs for different tasks, and zero-shot AgentInstruct is able to generalize LLMs’
reasoning abilities across tasks. Note that we only run the agent 53 times, resulting in 53 agent
generated instructions, as we evaluate on 53 subsets. With zero-shot AgentInstruct, we also observe
a large margin of improvement for zero-shot performance across different models. Significantly,
Llama-2-70b-chat beats the performance of zero-shot GPT-3.5 Turbo by 10.2% on average across all
datasets. This indicates our agent instructions are the key to improving the reasoning performance of
LLMs.
The most immediate comparison to zero-shot AgentInstruct is zero-shot CoT, as zero-shot AgentIn-
struct uses task-specific instructions instead of a fixed manual instruction. On average, across all
three models, zero-shot AgentInstruct beats zero-shot CoT by 6.5%, with the largest growth being
Vicuna-13b at 9.5%. On both generation and classification datasets, across three models, zero-shot
AgentInstruct wins by 5.0% and 7.8% on each category respectively. This suggests that zero-shot
AgentInstruct is able to generalize the zero-shot reasoning abilities of LLMs to both generation and
classification tasks, and optimize the performance of specific tasks.


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In particular, we look into the performance of reasoning tasks (Figure 5c). Of our three models, the
average difference between zero-shot AgentInstruct and the zero-shot setting on reasoning tasks is
31.3%, whereas the difference between zero-shot AgentInstruct and zero-shot CoT is 10.5%. This
shows that our task-specific instructions are more helpful for LLMs to break down tasks into more
specific intermediate reasoning steps compared to the task-agnostic instructions in zero-shot CoT,
which leads to improved final predictions.
Overall, zero-shot AgentInstruct wins on 9 of the 13 generation datasets, 11 of the 16 classification
datasets, and 10 of the 12 reasoning datasets (Figure 4). See Appendix B for additional results and
analysis, including results on individual datasets and subsets.

                                                           Zero-Shot           Zero-Shot CoT                        Zero-Shot AgentInstruct
                                                                                                                    58.6 61.3
      Average Score (%) on


                                                                                 54.9
      Generation Datasets


                                                                        54.1                                                                           50.6
                                                                                               40.8                                             45.6
                                                    35.6
                                          24.1                  24.1                                                                   27.5
                                17.6
                                       Vicuna-13b                Llama-2-70b-chat        GPT-3.5 Turbo                                Average over 3 Models
                                                                      (a) Generation datasets.
      Classification Datasets


                                                                                                                              68.1
      Average Score (%) on


                                                                                 61.0                               62.6                               59.9
                                                    50.6                51.1                   54.0                                             52.1
                                41.2      42.7                  44.0                                                                   46.4



                                       Vicuna-13b                Llama-2-70b-chat         GPT-3.5 Turbo                               Average over 3 Models
                                                                     (b) Classification datasets.
                                                                                                                              78.7
      Average Score (%) on


                                                                                 69.5                               70.9
      Reasoning Datasets


                                                                        62.1                                                                           64.5
                                                                                                                                                54.0
                                                    45.2                                       46.9
                                          29.1                  26.6                                                                   33.2
                                26.1

                                       Vicuna-13b                Llama-2-70b-chat        GPT-3.5 Turbo                                Average over 3 Models
                                                                       (c) Reasoning datasets.
Figure 5: Results on Vicuna-13b, Llama-2-70b-chat, and GPT-3.5 Turbo across tasks. Top: generation.
Middle: classification. Bottom: reasoning.

3.2            A BLATION S TUDY

                                                                                                                                     88.1         88.9           88.1
                                                                                               Cost ($) on AddSub


                                                 AddSub      IMDB      NarrativeQA                                      79.5         (~$20)      (~$150)         (~$2)
                                                                                                Score (%) and


                                                                                                                           (~$1)
 Zero-Shot AgentInstruct                          79.5        94.0        65.0
   w/o Agent Instructions                         73.2        89.0        62.3
   w/o Input Examples                             72.4        88.0        60.1
   w/o Labels                                     74.9        93.8        63.9
                                                                                                                      Zero-Shot Zero-Shot CoT     ReAct        Zero-Shot
   w/o GPT-4                                      75.2        92.6        63.5                                          GPT-4       GPT-4         GPT-4       AgentInstruct
                                                                                               Figure 6: Comparison on GPT-4 using zero-
Table 1: Ablation over different facets of zero-shot                                           shot, zero-shot CoT, ReAct, and zero-shot
AgentInstruct with Llama-2-70b-chat.                                                           AgentInstruct on AddSub.

We examine how different components of zero-shot AgentInstruct impact its zero-shot reasoning
performance. Results are shown in Table 1 on AddSub (reasoning), IMDB (classification), and
NarrativeQA (generation). We use Llama-2-70b-chat for reasoning. The four settings examine
the importance of agent instructions in zero-shot AgentInstruct. Descriptions of each setting are
as follows: (i) w/o Agent Instructions: We compare the zero-shot AgentInstruct methodology to
zero-shot CoT. (ii) w/o Input Examples: We remove the input-only examples from the input to the
agent. (iii) w/o Labels: We remove the description of the labels from the input to the agent. (iv)
w/o GPT-4: We use GPT-3.5 Turbo, instead of GPT-4, as the agent to generate instructions. The


                                                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


results suggest that all components of zero-shot AgentInstruct are effective in providing high-quality
instructions and eliciting high-quality reasoning steps before making predictions. See Appendix C.3
for further descriptions of each setting.
Next, we focus our analysis on GPT-4. We test the following methods: zero-shot, zero-shot CoT,
ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b), and zero-shot AgentInstruct. Figure 6 shows the performance of each
method on AddSub. Zero-shot AgentInstruct outperforms zero-shot GPT-4 by 8.6% and ties the
performance of zero-shot CoT GPT-4 for approximately one-tenth of the cost. Zero-shot AgentInstruct
is using GPT-3.5 Turbo for the CoT reasoning. This indicates that both task-specific instructions
and CoT reasoning help improve the zero-shot performance of LLMs. Though ReAct narrowly
outperforms zero-shot AgentInstruct, it costs nearly 100 times more since the zero-shot AgentInstruct
agent is run only once per dataset rather than per instance. Each run of our agent to generate
instructions cost less than $1. We also add results on IMDB, namely zero-shot GPT-4, zero-shot
CoT GPT-4, and zero-shot AgentInstruct GPT-4 (the reasoning step also uses GPT-4), scoring 87.4,
96.1, and 96.6 respectively. This result implies that decoupling the agent instruction generation
and reasoning steps further unleashes the zero-shot reasoning abilities of LLMs, and that zero-shot
AgentInstruct is a cost-effective alternative to using agents directly, resulting in only a minimal
performance loss.

3.3               T RUNCATED C ONTEXT L ENGTH

In Figure 7, we test how zero-shot AgentInstruct performs on various context lengths. We artificially
reduce the context length of Llama-2-70b-chat from 4,000 (maximum context length) to 2,048, 1,024,
768, and 640. The results suggest that the performance of zero-shot AgentInstruct is worse for models
with smaller context lengths. While the impact is minimal on AddSub and IMDB, performance
on NarrativeQA steeply declines below a context length of 2,048, which is due to truncation. This
is because the instances of NarrativeQA are much longer, with an average length of 855 tokens
compared to the instances of AddSub and IMDB, with average lengths of 330 tokens and 48 tokens
respectively.

            100 94.0       94.0       92.7                                                                                                 58.3
                                                91.3
                                                           85.8
                           79.7       80.0                                                55
             80 79.5                            79.2
                                                           71.8
                                                                                                                                           52.4
                                                                                                                   50.2
                                                                      Average Score (%)


                  65.0     64.2                                                           50                                             48.1
             60
Score (%)


                                                                                                                                  Zero-Shot
                                                                                          45 44.6                  44.5        GPT-3.5 Turbo
                                      39.3
             40
                                                28.4                                      40 38.3
                                                           19.6                                                                            35.1
             20                                                                           35 32.1                  34.3

              0                                                                  Llama-2-7b-chat           Llama-2-13b-chat        Llama-2-70b-chat
                  4000     2048       1024       768       640
                                  Context Length                                               Zero-Shot   Zero-Shot CoT      Zero-Shot AgentInstruct
                         AddSub       IMDB       NarrativeQA
Figure 7: Truncating context lengths                                  Figure 8: Model scaling results of
Llama-2-70b-chat with zero-shot AgentIn-                              zero-shot, zero-shot CoT, and zero-shot
struct on AddSub, IMDB, and Narra-                                    AgentInstruct with Llama-2-chat on all
tiveQA.                                                               datasets.

3.4               M ODEL S CALING

As it is often the case that larger models substantially improve the reasoning capabilities of LLMs (Wei
et al., 2022b), we test zero-shot AgentInstruct’s performance on models of various sizes. Specifically,
we test on three Llama-2-chat models with 7 billion, 13 billion, and 70 billion parameters. Figure 8
shows the average score across all 29 datasets for zero-shot, zero-shot CoT, and zero-shot AgentIn-
struct. These results confirm that the average performance of all three methods increases with model
size. Each time model size increases, zero-shot CoT and zero-shot AgentInstruct show consistent
gains of around 6%, while zero-shot has smaller gains near 2%. This is because reasoning steps are
best produced with more powerful models. In fact, at just 13b parameters, Llama-2-13b-chat with
zero-shot AgentInstruct surpasses the performance of zero-shot GPT-3.5 Turbo by over 2%. Addi-
tionally, zero-shot AgentInstruct’s superiority over zero-shot and zero-shot CoT appears independent
of model size.

                                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      CoT          Prompt                                                                         Quasi-Exact
      Reasoning                                                                                    Match (%)
      Reasoning    Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards         79.5
      extraction   the correct answer to the task above. End the explanation with the correct
                   answer.\n\nExplanation:
                   Let’s think step-by-step according to the instructions. End with the correct    77.5
                   answer. Explanation:
                   Let’s think step-by-step according to the instructions. First,                  75.2
                   Use the instructions to guide you towards your answer.\nExplanation:            79.0
                   Explanation:                                                                    78.5
      Answer       Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in the shortest     79.5
      extraction   form possible that will still be correct. \nAnswer:
                   Therefore, the answer to the task is below.\nAnswer:                            79.7
                   Therefore, the answer is                                                        79.2
                   Answer:                                                                         77.7
Table 2: Prompt sensitivity analysis of chain of thought reasoning of zero-shot AgentInstruct with
Llama-2-70b-chat on AddSub. The default prompts are highlighted. Higher scores are better.


3.5   M ANUAL P ROMPT S ENSITIVITY

Zero-shot AgentInstruct has two manual prompts in the CoT reasoning step: (1) the reasoning
extraction prompt, which asks for intermediate reasoning steps, and (2) the answer extraction prompt,
which collects the final answer. To test the sensitivity of each prompt, we vary a single prompt
while keeping the default zero-shot AgentInstruct prompt for the other. Results are shown in Table 2
based on Llama-2-70b-chat on AddSub. Overall, zero-shot AgentInstruct’s performance does not
appear particularly sensitive to changes in the manual prompts, suggesting that the methodology
behind zero-shot AgentInstruct is robust. Additional prompt sensitivity experiments are conducted in
Appendix C.2.

3.6   E RROR A NALYSIS

To investigate the reasons for errors made by zero-shot                  Error Type         Percentage
AgentInstruct, we select 25 samples from AddSub, IMDB,
and NewsQA respectively where zero-shot AgentInstruct Reasoning Incorrect reasoning            32.0
                                                                         Not factual           12.0
results in incorrect predictions on Llama-2-70b-chat. We Answer          Ambiguity             22.7
define incorrect predictions as those with a quasi-exact                 Invalid label         14.7
match or F1 score less than 1. Table 3 shows our error                   Short answer          10.6
analysis. The most common error across datasets is in-                   Incorrect format       8.0
correct reasoning, i.e., not correctly reasoning through the Table 3: Error analysis for zero-
problem when applying the accurate agent instructions. shot AgentInstruct Llama-2-70b-chat on
For example, on AddSub, zero-shot AgentInstruct chooses AddSub, IMDB, and NewsQA.
the wrong operation due to a misleading verb. On IMDB,
zero-shot AgentInstruct misreads the sentiment due to emphasizing words describing the movie, not
the review. See Figure 9 for an example of incorrect reasoning on IMDB. The answer ambiguity is
another main source of errors. For example, in a review where the reviewer clearly enjoyed the movie
even though the reviewer acknowledged it was a typical bad movie, our prediction is “Positive” while
the ground truth is “Negative” on IMDB. For many errors, either the instructions are taken too literally
or partially ignored. As larger models become better at reasoning, such errors should be minimized.
More thorough error analysis and full examples for each error category are in Appendix C.1.
3.7   C ASE S TUDY

Next, we analyze the quality of the CoT reasoning steps when predictions are correct. On three
datasets (AddSub, IMDB, and NewsQA), we randomly select 25 examples from each dataset with a
perfect quasi-exact match or F1 score. We find that the reasoning capabilities are further enhanced by
the combination of effective agent instructions and the task-specific reasoning process of LLMs. An
example is in Figure 10.


                                                            7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



       Passage: As an avid Disney fan, I was not to                    Passage: This is a good movie. Terrance Stamp
       tally impressed by this movie, certainly not                    is great, the music is sweet, Carol White is
       motivated to catch it in the theaters. I am,                    very believeable. The only thing that marred
       however, so glad that I caught it on DVD and                    this was the shakey acting of Carol’s first
       watched the special features. You MUST check                    husband, but if you can get past that, you’re
       out the “Moose commentary” The enjoyment I got                  OK. Donovan provides some of the most languid,
       from this commentary completely made up for the                 mellow, bittersweet lyrics from the 60s.
       tepid reaction I had to the film itself.                        CoT Reasoning: The reviewer mentions that the
       CoT Reasoning: Based on the language used in the                movie is “good” and that it has a “sweet” sound
       passage, it is clear that the reviewer has a pos                track. They also mention that the acting by
       itive sentiment towards the movie. The reviewer                 Carol White is “believeable”. However, they
       uses positive adjectives such as “enjoyment” to                 also mention that the acting by Carol’s first
       describe their experience with the movie...                     husband is “shakey.”
       Answer: Positive   ✗                                            Answer: Positive   ✓
Figure 9: An incorrect reasoning example                         Figure 10: Case study example for Llama-
for Llama-2-70b-chat with zero-shot AgentIn-                     2-70b-chat with zero-shot AgentInstruct on
struct on IMDB for error analysis. Here, the                     IMDB. Here, the answer is correct and the
model mistook the love of the commentary as                      task-specific reasoning is helpful for finding
the love of the movie (highlighted).                             the answer (highlighted).

3.8         C OMPARISON TO R ELATED M ETHODS

Few-Shot We compare Llama-2-70b-chat zero-shot AgentInstruct results with few-shot results
on AddSub, IMDB, and NarrativeQA in Figure 11. Surprisingly, zero-shot AgentInstruct reaches
competitiveness with few-shot prompting. Zero-shot AgentInstruct, without any few-shot examples,
outperforms few-shot performance on AddSub and NarrativeQA, by over 4.3% and 23.7% respec-
tively, and loses by 0.7% on IMDB. Ideally, all the information encoded in the few-shot examples can
be presented in a clear manner within the agent instructions to better utilize the reasoning capabilities
of models. As shown, zero-shot AgentInstruct has the potential to reach or even beat few-shot
performance.

                              94.7 94.0                                                    86.5 94.0
            75.2 79.5                                                       73.7 79.5
Score (%)


                                                                Score (%)


                                                     65.2                                                    63.3 65.2
                                              41.5

             AddSub             IMDB         NarrativeQA                     AddSub            IMDB         NarrativeQA
                 Few-Shot         Zero-Shot AgentInstruct                   Self-Consistency          Zero-Shot AgentInstruct
Figure 11: Comparison between zero-shot                         Figure 12: Comparison between zero-shot
AgentInstruct and few-shot on Llama-2-70b-                      AgentInstruct and zero-shot self-consistency
chat on AddSub, IMDB, and NarrativeQA.                          on Llama-2-70b-chat.

Self-Consistency Finally, we compare zero-shot AgentInstruct results with self-consistency (Wang
et al., 2023c) results of Llama-2-70b-chat on AddSub, IMDB, and NarrativeQA in Figure 12. We adapt
self-consistency to the zero-shot setting as follows: We sample three responses using a temperature
of 0.7, top-k sampling with k = 40, and a randomly generated seed for each request. After cleaning
the output, we use a majority vote to determine the consensus answer, choosing at random to break
ties. On AddSub, IMDB, and NarrativeQA, zero-shot AgentInstruct outperforms self-consistency
by 5.8%, 7.5%, and 1.9% respectively. Besides, zero-shot AgentInstruct is more computationally
efficient than self-consistency as there is no need for sampling the reasoning paths multiple times.

4           R ELATED W ORK

Large language models, such as GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), PaLM (Chowd-
hery et al., 2022), PaLM-2 (Anil et al., 2023), BLOOM (Scao et al., 2023), OPT (Zhang et al.,
2022a), LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023a), Llama-2 (Touvron et al., 2023b), and many others (Radford
et al., 2019; Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021; Black et al., 2021; Smith et al., 2022; Hoffmann et al.,
2022; Penedo et al., 2023) have shown remarkable performance on natural language processing


                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(NLP) tasks. Following the pretraining phase, additional finetuning enables models (e.g., FLAN (Wei
et al., 2022a), FLAN-T5 (Chung et al., 2022), InstructGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022)) to better align
with human instructions to complete tasks. Moreover, instruction-tuning has enabled LLMs (e.g.,
GPT-3.5 Turbo (OpenAI, 2022), Llama-2-chat (Touvron et al., 2023b), Self-Instruct (Wang et al.,
2023d), Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023), Vicuna (Chiang et al., 2023), Koala (Geng et al., 2023)) to better
engage with users through single-turn or multi-turn dialogue. Zero-shot AgentInstruct builds on these
instruction-following language models, enabling better zero-shot reasoning abilities through the use
of agent instructions.
Language agents (Yao et al., 2023b; Shinn et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023; Park et al., 2023; Zhou et al.,
2023b; Andreas, 2022; Wang et al., 2023a; Xi et al., 2023; Sumers et al., 2023; Chan et al., 2023)
have recently emerged due to the task planning capabilities of LLMs. Given a task that is often
demonstrated in natural language, these agents aim to complete the task directly. Unlike existing
agents, the goal of our agent is to generate task-specific instructions on how to complete the given
task, decoupling the agent planning and reasoning steps. Besides reaching competitive performance
with using agents directly, our design turns out to be more cost-effective.
Finetuning is an effective method for generating higher-quality responses from LLMs on downstream
tasks (Liu et al., 2019; Howard & Ruder, 2018). As model scale increases, finetuning becomes
less practical, which lightweight tuning methods (such as prefix tuning (Li & Liang, 2021), prompt
learning (Lester et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023), LoRA (Hu et al., 2022)) have tried to solve. Even with
such methods, in-context prompting techniques have gained attention as an alternative. Few-shot
learning, which involves providing a few examples demonstrating the task before prompting the
models during inference, is often effective on a range of tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Dong et al., 2023).
Chain of thought (CoT) prompting (Wei et al., 2022b) involves generating a series of intermediate
reasoning steps, which can dramatically increase the performance of LLMs on complex reasoning
tasks. While this reasoning behavior is traditionally learned from few-shot demonstrations, Kojima
et al. (2022) extends CoT prompting to the zero-shot setting. More recently, new approaches such
as self-consistency (Wang et al., 2023c), plan-and-solve prompting (Wang et al., 2023b), tree of
thought (Yao et al., 2023a), and graph of thought (Besta et al., 2023) have further improved the
reasoning quality. On the other hand, zero-shot AgentInstruct focuses on the zero-shot setup. It
generalizes the reasoning abilities of LLMs to more tasks by utilizing task-specific instructions
generated from our agent to better align the reasoning process with a particular task.
NLP benchmarking datasets provide a standardized interface to evaluate LLMs on specific down-
stream tasks. Common benchmarks (e.g., HELM (Liang et al., 2023), MMLU (Hendrycks et al.,
2021), and many others (Wang et al., 2019a;b; Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Srivastava et al., 2023; Zhong
et al., 2023; Suzgun et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2021)) have become part of the standard evaluation of
LLMs. We benchmark our method on 29 datasets, including the core scenarios from HELM (Liang
et al., 2023) and the reasoning datasets from Kojima et al. (2022). We also include results from these
benchmarks as task-specific model results for comparison purposes. Besides reasoning tasks, our
method generalizes to general language understanding benchmark tasks including generation and
classification. For reasoning tasks, our method outperforms existing zero-shot approaches (Brown
et al., 2020; Kojima et al., 2022) by a large margin.

5    C ONCLUSION
Our work proposes a new way of improving the zero-shot reasoning abilities of large language models
on general language understanding tasks. We build an agent to instruct the reasoning process of LLMs.
Our agent automatically generates task-specific instructions for a wide set of tasks. The instructions
are used to guide LLMs to reason better across these tasks to make high-quality predictions. Our
method is zero-shot so no input-output examples are required to solve the task. Our results confirm
the overall efficacy of our approach, leading to substantial improvements across various NLP tasks
spanning generation, classification, and reasoning. Average score enhancements of 13.3%, 23.2%,
and 17.0% are achieved over the standard zero-shot setting across 29 datasets for Vicuna-13b, Llama-
2-70b-chat, and GPT-3.5 Turbo respectively. Our method wins on 20 of the 29 datasets used for
evaluation. We believe zero-shot AgentInstruct’s style of human-understandable reasoning, along
with its utilization of an autonomous agent with access to a wide range of dataset knowledge, can
replace more traditional styles of zero or few-shot prompting as models become equipped with
stronger reasoning capabilities.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT

We hereby acknowledge that all of the co-authors of this work are aware of the provided ICLR Code
of Ethics and honor the code of conduct. Our method is built on LLMs, for which the risks and
potential harms are discussed in Brown et al. (2020); OpenAI (2023); Touvron et al. (2023b). A
concern is LLMs’ tendency to generate non-factual responses with a high degree of confidence. Our
approach is advantageous in this regard, as guiding the model to output step-by-step reasoning leading
to its answer offers researchers the opportunity to analyze cases of erroneous outputs. Moreover, our
method shows notable improvement on safety benchmarks such as CivilComments and TruthfulQA,
suggesting that the use of instructions to ground the reasoning along a task-specific path can reduce
the risk of harmful outputs. However, better performance on benchmarks does not guarantee safe
outputs, which requires future research from the community.


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

The source code is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/AgentInstruct_
ICLR2024. Our datasets are based on existing benchmarks (Liang et al., 2023; Kojima et al.,
2022). We provide specific model details in Appendix A.2 and additional dataset information
in Appendix A.4.


R EFERENCES
Neel Alex, Eli Lifland, Lewis Tunstall, Abhishek Thakur, Pegah Maham, C. Riedel, Emmie Hine,
  Carolyn Ashurst, Paul Sedille, Alexis Carlier, Michael Noetel, and Andreas Stuhlmüller. RAFT: A
  Real-World Few-Shot Text Classification Benchmark. In NeurIPS, 2021.

Jacob Andreas. Language Models as Agent Models. In EMNLP, 2022.

Rohan Anil, Andrew M. Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, Eric Chu, Jonathan H. Clark,
  Laurent El Shafey, Yanping Huang, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Gaurav Mishra, Erica Moreira, Mark
  Omernick, Kevin Robinson, Sebastian Ruder, Yi Tay, Kefan Xiao, Yuanzhong Xu, Yujing Zhang,
  Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Junwhan Ahn, Jacob Austin, Paul Barham, Jan Botha, James Bradbury,
  Siddhartha Brahma, Kevin Brooks, Michele Catasta, Yong Cheng, Colin Cherry, Christopher A.
  Choquette-Choo, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Clément Crepy, Shachi Dave, Mostafa Dehghani, Sunipa
  Dev, Jacob Devlin, Mark Díaz, Nan Du, Ethan Dyer, Vlad Feinberg, Fangxiaoyu Feng, Vlad
  Fienber, Markus Freitag, Xavier Garcia, Sebastian Gehrmann, Lucas Gonzalez, Guy Gur-Ari,
  Steven Hand, Hadi Hashemi, Le Hou, Joshua Howland, Andrea Hu, Jeffrey Hui, Jeremy Hurwitz,
  Michael Isard, Abe Ittycheriah, Matthew Jagielski, Wenhao Jia, Kathleen Kenealy, Maxim Krikun,
  Sneha Kudugunta, Chang Lan, Katherine Lee, Benjamin Lee, Eric Li, Music Li, Wei Li, YaGuang
  Li, Jian Li, Hyeontaek Lim, Hanzhao Lin, Zhongtao Liu, Frederick Liu, Marcello Maggioni,
  Aroma Mahendru, Joshua Maynez, Vedant Misra, Maysam Moussalem, Zachary Nado, John
  Nham, Eric Ni, Andrew Nystrom, Alicia Parrish, Marie Pellat, Martin Polacek, Alex Polozov,
  Reiner Pope, Siyuan Qiao, Emily Reif, Bryan Richter, Parker Riley, Alex Castro Ros, Aurko Roy,
  Brennan Saeta, Rajkumar Samuel, Renee Shelby, Ambrose Slone, Daniel Smilkov, David R. So,
  Daniel Sohn, Simon Tokumine, Dasha Valter, Vijay Vasudevan, Kiran Vodrahalli, Xuezhi Wang,
  Pidong Wang, Zirui Wang, Tao Wang, John Wieting, Yuhuai Wu, Kelvin Xu, Yunhan Xu, Linting
  Xue, Pengcheng Yin, Jiahui Yu, Qiao Zhang, Steven Zheng, Ce Zheng, Weikang Zhou, Denny
  Zhou, Slav Petrov, and Yonghui Wu. PaLM 2 Technical Report. arXiv, 2023.

Dogu Araci. FinBERT: Financial Sentiment Analysis with Pre-trained Language Models. arXiv,
  2019.

Payal Bajaj, Daniel Campos, Nick Craswell, Li Deng, Jianfeng Gao, Xiaodong Liu, Rangan Ma-
  jumder, Andrew McNamara, Bhaskar Mitra, Tri Nguyen, Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Alina Stoica,
  Saurabh Tiwary, and Tong Wang. MS MARCO: A Human Generated MAchine Reading COmpre-
  hension Dataset. In NeurIPS, 2016.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Lukas Gianinazzi, Joanna Gajda,
 Tomasz Lehmann, Michal Podstawski, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, and Torsten Hoefler.
 Graph of Thoughts: Solving Elaborate Problems with Large Language Models. arXiv, 2023.

Sid Black, Leo Gao, Phil Wang, Connor Leahy, and Stella Biderman. GPT-Neo: Large Scale
  Autoregressive Language Modeling with Mesh-Tensorflow. GitHub, 2021.

Elliot Bolton, David Hall, Michihiro Yasunaga, Tony Lee, Chris Manning, and Percy Liang.
   BioMedLM. CRFM, 2022.

Daniel Borkan, Lucas Dixon, Jeffrey Sorensen, Nithum Thain, and Lucy Vasserman. Nuanced
  Metrics for Measuring Unintended Bias with Real Data for Text Classification. In WWW, 2019.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott
  Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
  Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners. In NeurIPS, 2020.

Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jianxuan Yu, Wei Xue, Shanghang Zhang, Jie Fu, and
  Zhiyuan Liu. ChatEval: Towards Better LLM-based Evaluators through Multi-Agent Debate.
  arXiv, 2023.

Harrison Chase. LangChain. GitHub, 2022.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios
 Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino,
 Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa,
 Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating
 Large Language Models Trained on Code. arXiv, 2021.

Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 Open-Source Chatbot Impressing GPT-4 with 90%* ChatGPT Quality. LMSYS Org, 2023.

Eunsol Choi, He He, Mohit Iyyer, Mark Yatskar, Wen-tau Yih, Yejin Choi, Percy Liang, and Luke
  Zettlemoyer. QuAC: Question Answering in Context. In EMNLP, 2018.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret Zoph,
  Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick, Andrew M.
  Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira, Re-
  won Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta,
  Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff
  Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. PaLM: Scaling Language Modeling with Pathways. arXiv,
  2022.

Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan
  Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu,


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Zhuyun Dai, Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pellat,
  Kevin Robinson, Dasha Valter, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams Yu, Vincent Zhao, Yanping
  Huang, Andrew Dai, Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin, Adam Roberts,
  Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and Jason Wei. Scaling Instruction-Finetuned Language Models. arXiv,
  2022.
Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, Tom Kwiatkowski, Michael Collins, and Kristina
  Toutanova. BoolQ: Exploring the Surprising Difficulty of Natural Yes/No Questions. In NAACL-
  HLT, 2019.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training Verifiers to Solve Math Word Problems. arXiv, 2021.
SiYu Ding, Junyuan Shang, Shuohuan Wang, Yu Sun, Hao Tian, Hua Wu, and Haifeng Wang.
  ERNIE-Doc: A Retrospective Long-Document Modeling Transformer. In ACL, 2021.
Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu, Lei
  Li, and Zhifang Sui. A Survey on In-context Learning. arXiv, 2023.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
  Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, Wenlong Huang, Yevgen Chebotar,
  Pierre Sermanet, Daniel Duckworth, Sergey Levine, Vincent Vanhoucke, Karol Hausman, Marc
  Toussaint, Klaus Greff, Andy Zeng, Igor Mordatch, and Pete Florence. PaLM-E: An Embodied
  Multimodal Language Model. In ICML, 2023.
Xinyang Geng, Arnav Gudibande, Hao Liu, Eric Wallace, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and Dawn
  Song. Koala: A Dialogue Model for Academic Research. BAIR, 2023.
Mor Geva, Daniel Khashabi, Elad Segal, Tushar Khot, Dan Roth, and Jonathan Berant. Did Aristotle
 Use a Laptop? A Question Answering Benchmark with Implicit Reasoning Strategies. TACL,
 2021.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring Massive Multitask Language Understanding. In ICLR, 2021.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
   Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom
   Hennigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia Guy,
   Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and Laurent Sifre.
  Training Compute-Optimal Large Language Models. arXiv, 2022.
Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. Universal Language Model Fine-tuning for Text Classification.
   In ACL, 2018.
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation of Large Language Models. In ICLR, 2022.
Hsin-Yuan Huang, Eunsol Choi, and Wen-tau Yih. FlowQA: Grasping Flow in History for Conversa-
  tional Machine Comprehension. In ICLR, 2019.
Jiaxin Huang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Le Hou, Yuexin Wu, Xuezhi Wang, Hongkun Yu, and Jiawei Han.
   Large Language Models Can Self-Improve. arXiv, 2022.
Kexin Huang, Jaan Altosaar, and Rajesh Ranganath. ClinicalBERT: Modeling Clinical Notes and
  Predicting Hospital Readmission. arXiv, 2020.
Siyuan Huang, Zhengkai Jiang, Hao Dong, Yu Qiao, Peng Gao, and Hongsheng Li. Instruct2Act:
  Mapping Multi-modality Instructions to Robotic Actions with Large Language Model. arXiv,
  2023.
Kalervo Järvelin and Jaana Kekäläinen. Cumulated Gain-Based Evaluation of IR Techniques. ACM
  TOIS, 2002.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Yinhan Liu, Daniel S. Weld, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Omer Levy. Span-
 BERT: Improving Pre-training by Representing and Predicting Spans. TACL, 2020.
Tomáš Kočiský, Jonathan Schwarz, Phil Blunsom, Chris Dyer, Karl Moritz Hermann, Gábor Melis,
  and Edward Grefenstette. The NarrativeQA Reading Comprehension Challenge. TACL, 2018.
Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Balsub-
  ramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, Tony Lee, Etienne
  David, Ian Stavness, Wei Guo, Berton Earnshaw, Imran S. Haque, Sara M. Beery, Jure Leskovec,
  Anshul Kundaje, Emma Pierson, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, and Percy Liang. WILDS: A
  Benchmark of in-the-Wild Distribution Shifts. In ICML, 2021.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  Language Models are Zero-Shot Reasoners. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Rik Koncel-Kedziorski, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ashish Sabharwal, Oren Etzioni, and Siena Dumas
  Ang. Parsing Algebraic Word Problems into Equations. TACL, 2015.
Rik Koncel-Kedziorski, Subhro Roy, Aida Amini, Nate Kushman, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. MAWPS:
  A Math Word Problem Repository. In HLT-NAACL, 2016.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion
  Jones, Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav
  Petrov. Natural Questions: A Benchmark for Question Answering Research. TACL, 2019.
Emre Kıcıman, Robert Ness, Amit Sharma, and Chenhao Tan. Causal Reasoning and Large Language
  Models: Opening a New Frontier for Causality. arXiv, 2023.
Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The Power of Scale for Parameter-Efficient Prompt
  Tuning. In EMNLP, 2021.
Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-Tuning: Optimizing Continuous Prompts for Generation. In
  ACL, 2021.
Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yian
  Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, Benjamin Newman, Binhang Yuan, Bobby
  Yan, Ce Zhang, Christian Cosgrove, Christopher D. Manning, Christopher Ré, Diana Acosta-
  Navas, Drew A. Hudson, Eric Zelikman, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Frieda Rong, Hongyu Ren,
  Huaxiu Yao, Jue Wang, Keshav Santhanam, Laurel Orr, Lucia Zheng, Mert Yuksekgonul, Mirac
  Suzgun, Nathan Kim, Neel Guha, Niladri Chatterji, Omar Khattab, Peter Henderson, Qian Huang,
  Ryan Chi, Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Surya Ganguli, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Thomas
  Icard, Tianyi Zhang, Vishrav Chaudhary, William Wang, Xuechen Li, Yifan Mai, Yuhui Zhang,
  and Yuta Koreeda. Holistic Evaluation of Language Models. In TMLR, 2023.
Chin-Yew Lin. ROUGE: A Package for Automatic Evaluation of Summaries. In ACL, 2004.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. TruthfulQA: Measuring How Models Mimic Human
   Falsehoods. In ACL, 2022.
Wang Ling, Dani Yogatama, Chris Dyer, and Phil Blunsom. Program Induction by Rationale
 Generation: Learning to Solve and Explain Algebraic Word Problems. In ACL, 2017.
Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. Pre-
  Train, Prompt, and Predict: A Systematic Survey of Prompting Methods in Natural Language
  Processing. ACM Comput. Surv., 2023.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining
  Approach. arXiv, 2019.
Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher
  Potts. Learning Word Vectors for Sentiment Analysis. In ACL, 2011.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sean MacAvaney, Andrew Yates, Sergey Feldman, Doug Downey, Arman Cohan, and Nazli Goharian.
  Simplified Data Wrangling with ir_datasets. In SIGIR, 2021.

Todor Mihaylov, Peter Clark, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Can a Suit of Armor Conduct
  Electricity? A New Dataset for Open Book Question Answering. In EMNLP, 2018.

Shashi Narayan, Shay B. Cohen, and Mirella Lapata. Don’t Give Me the Details, Just the Summary!
  Topic-Aware Convolutional Neural Networks for Extreme Summarization. In EMNLP, 2018.

Rodrigo Nogueira, Zhiying Jiang, Ronak Pradeep, and Jimmy Lin. Document Ranking with a
  Pretrained Sequence-to-Sequence Model. In EMNLP, 2020.

OpenAI. Introducing ChatGPT. OpenAI, 2022.

OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv, 2023.

Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton,
  Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and
  Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In NeurIPS,
  2022.

Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S. Bernstein. Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Human Behavior. In UIST,
  2023.

Arkil Patel, Satwik Bhattamishra, and Navin Goyal. Are NLP Models really able to Solve Simple
  Math Word Problems? In NAACL-HLT, 2021.

Guilherme Penedo, Quentin Malartic, Daniel Hesslow, Ruxandra Cojocaru, Alessandro Cappelli,
  Hamza Alobeidli, Baptiste Pannier, Ebtesam Almazrouei, and Julien Launay. The RefinedWeb
  dataset for Falcon LLM: outperforming curated corpora with web data, and web data only. arXiv,
  2023.

Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners. OpenAI, 2019.

Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. SQuAD: 100,000+ Questions
  for Machine Comprehension of Text. In EMNLP, 2016.

Subhro Roy and Dan Roth. Solving General Arithmetic Word Problems. In EMNLP, 2015.

Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ilić, Daniel Hesslow, Roman
  Castagné, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, François Yvon, Matthias Gallé, Jonathan Tow, Alexander M.
  Rush, Stella Biderman, Albert Webson, Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Thomas Wang, Benoît
  Sagot, Niklas Muennighoff, Albert Villanova del Moral, Olatunji Ruwase, Rachel Bawden, Stas
  Bekman, Angelina McMillan-Major, Iz Beltagy, Huu Nguyen, Lucile Saulnier, Samson Tan, Pe-
  dro Ortiz Suarez, Victor Sanh, Hugo Laurençon, Yacine Jernite, Julien Launay, Margaret Mitchell,
  Colin Raffel, Aaron Gokaslan, Adi Simhi, Aitor Soroa, Alham Fikri Aji, Amit Alfassy, Anna
  Rogers, Ariel Kreisberg Nitzav, Canwen Xu, Chenghao Mou, Chris Emezue, Christopher Klamm,
  Colin Leong, Daniel van Strien, David Ifeoluwa Adelani, Dragomir Radev, Eduardo González
  Ponferrada, Efrat Levkovizh, Ethan Kim, Eyal Bar Natan, Francesco De Toni, Gérard Dupont,
  Germán Kruszewski, Giada Pistilli, Hady Elsahar, Hamza Benyamina, Hieu Tran, Ian Yu, Idris
  Abdulmumin, Isaac Johnson, Itziar Gonzalez-Dios, Javier de la Rosa, Jenny Chim, Jesse Dodge,
  Jian Zhu, Jonathan Chang, Jörg Frohberg, Joseph Tobing, Joydeep Bhattacharjee, Khalid Al-
  mubarak, Kimbo Chen, Kyle Lo, Leandro Von Werra, Leon Weber, Long Phan, Loubna Ben allal,
  Ludovic Tanguy, Manan Dey, Manuel Romero Muñoz, Maraim Masoud, María Grandury, Mario
  Šaško, Max Huang, Maximin Coavoux, Mayank Singh, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Minh Chien Vu,
  Mohammad A. Jauhar, Mustafa Ghaleb, Nishant Subramani, Nora Kassner, Nurulaqilla Khamis,
  Olivier Nguyen, Omar Espejel, Ona de Gibert, Paulo Villegas, Peter Henderson, Pierre Colombo,
  Priscilla Amuok, Quentin Lhoest, Rheza Harliman, Rishi Bommasani, Roberto Luis López, Rui


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Ribeiro, Salomey Osei, Sampo Pyysalo, Sebastian Nagel, Shamik Bose, Shamsuddeen Hassan
  Muhammad, Shanya Sharma, Shayne Longpre, Somaieh Nikpoor, Stanislav Silberberg, Suhas
  Pai, Sydney Zink, Tiago Timponi Torrent, Timo Schick, Tristan Thrush, Valentin Danchev, Vas-
  silina Nikoulina, Veronika Laippala, Violette Lepercq, Vrinda Prabhu, Zaid Alyafeai, Zeerak
  Talat, Arun Raja, Benjamin Heinzerling, Chenglei Si, Davut Emre Taşar, Elizabeth Salesky,
  Sabrina J. Mielke, Wilson Y. Lee, Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud
  Stiegler, Debajyoti Datta, Eliza Szczechla, Gunjan Chhablani, Han Wang, Harshit Pandey, Hendrik
  Strobelt, Jason Alan Fries, Jos Rozen, Leo Gao, Lintang Sutawika, M Saiful Bari, Maged S.
  Al-shaibani, Matteo Manica, Nihal Nayak, Ryan Teehan, Samuel Albanie, Sheng Shen, Srulik
  Ben-David, Stephen H. Bach, Taewoon Kim, Tali Bers, Thibault Fevry, Trishala Neeraj, Urmish
  Thakker, Vikas Raunak, Xiangru Tang, Zheng-Xin Yong, Zhiqing Sun, Shaked Brody, Yallow
  Uri, Hadar Tojarieh, Adam Roberts, Hyung Won Chung, Jaesung Tae, Jason Phang, Ofir Press,
  Conglong Li, Deepak Narayanan, Hatim Bourfoune, Jared Casper, Jeff Rasley, Max Ryabinin,
  Mayank Mishra, Minjia Zhang, Mohammad Shoeybi, Myriam Peyrounette, Nicolas Patry, Noua-
  mane Tazi, Omar Sanseviero, Patrick von Platen, Pierre Cornette, Pierre François Lavallée, Rémi
  Lacroix, Samyam Rajbhandari, Sanchit Gandhi, Shaden Smith, Stéphane Requena, Suraj Patil, Tim
  Dettmers, Ahmed Baruwa, Amanpreet Singh, Anastasia Cheveleva, Anne-Laure Ligozat, Arjun
  Subramonian, Aurélie Névéol, Charles Lovering, Dan Garrette, Deepak Tunuguntla, Ehud Reiter,
  Ekaterina Taktasheva, Ekaterina Voloshina, Eli Bogdanov, Genta Indra Winata, Hailey Schoelkopf,
  Jan-Christoph Kalo, Jekaterina Novikova, Jessica Zosa Forde, Jordan Clive, Jungo Kasai, Ken
  Kawamura, Liam Hazan, Marine Carpuat, Miruna Clinciu, Najoung Kim, Newton Cheng, Oleg
  Serikov, Omer Antverg, Oskar van der Wal, Rui Zhang, Ruochen Zhang, Sebastian Gehrmann,
  Shachar Mirkin, Shani Pais, Tatiana Shavrina, Thomas Scialom, Tian Yun, Tomasz Limisiewicz,
  Verena Rieser, Vitaly Protasov, Vladislav Mikhailov, Yada Pruksachatkun, Yonatan Belinkov,
  Zachary Bamberger, Zdeněk Kasner, Alice Rueda, Amanda Pestana, Amir Feizpour, Ammar Khan,
  Amy Faranak, Ana Santos, Anthony Hevia, Antigona Unldreaj, Arash Aghagol, Arezoo Abdollahi,
  Aycha Tammour, Azadeh HajiHosseini, Bahareh Behroozi, Benjamin Ajibade, Bharat Saxena,
  Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis, Daniel McDuff, Danish Contractor, David Lansky, Davis David, Douwe
  Kiela, Duong A. Nguyen, Edward Tan, Emi Baylor, Ezinwanne Ozoani, Fatima Mirza, Frankline
  Ononiwu, Habib Rezanejad, Hessie Jones, Indrani Bhattacharya, Irene Solaiman, Irina Sedenko,
  Isar Nejadgholi, Jesse Passmore, Josh Seltzer, Julio Bonis Sanz, Livia Dutra, Mairon Samagaio,
  Maraim Elbadri, Margot Mieskes, Marissa Gerchick, Martha Akinlolu, Michael McKenna, Mike
  Qiu, Muhammed Ghauri, Mykola Burynok, Nafis Abrar, Nazneen Rajani, Nour Elkott, Nour
  Fahmy, Olanrewaju Samuel, Ran An, Rasmus Kromann, Ryan Hao, Samira Alizadeh, Sarmad
  Shubber, Silas Wang, Sourav Roy, Sylvain Viguier, Thanh Le, Tobi Oyebade, Trieu Le, Yoyo Yang,
  Zach Nguyen, Abhinav Ramesh Kashyap, Alfredo Palasciano, Alison Callahan, Anima Shukla,
  Antonio Miranda-Escalada, Ayush Singh, Benjamin Beilharz, Bo Wang, Caio Brito, Chenxi Zhou,
  Chirag Jain, Chuxin Xu, Clémentine Fourrier, Daniel León Periñán, Daniel Molano, Dian Yu,
  Enrique Manjavacas, Fabio Barth, Florian Fuhrimann, Gabriel Altay, Giyaseddin Bayrak, Gully
  Burns, Helena U. Vrabec, Imane Bello, Ishani Dash, Jihyun Kang, John Giorgi, Jonas Golde,
  Jose David Posada, Karthik Rangasai Sivaraman, Lokesh Bulchandani, Lu Liu, Luisa Shinzato,
  Madeleine Hahn de Bykhovetz, Maiko Takeuchi, Marc Pàmies, Maria A Castillo, Marianna
  Nezhurina, Mario Sänger, Matthias Samwald, Michael Cullan, Michael Weinberg, Michiel De
  Wolf, Mina Mihaljcic, Minna Liu, Moritz Freidank, Myungsun Kang, Natasha Seelam, Nathan
  Dahlberg, Nicholas Michio Broad, Nikolaus Muellner, Pascale Fung, Patrick Haller, Ramya
  Chandrasekhar, Renata Eisenberg, Robert Martin, Rodrigo Canalli, Rosaline Su, Ruisi Su, Samuel
  Cahyawijaya, Samuele Garda, Shlok S Deshmukh, Shubhanshu Mishra, Sid Kiblawi, Simon Ott,
  Sinee Sang-aroonsiri, Srishti Kumar, Stefan Schweter, Sushil Bharati, Tanmay Laud, Théo Gigant,
  Tomoya Kainuma, Wojciech Kusa, Yanis Labrak, Yash Shailesh Bajaj, Yash Venkatraman, Yifan
  Xu, Yingxin Xu, Yu Xu, Zhe Tan, Zhongli Xie, Zifan Ye, Mathilde Bras, Younes Belkada, and
  Thomas Wolf. BLOOM: A 176B-Parameter Open-Access Multilingual Language Model. arXiv,
  2023.
Abigail See, Peter J. Liu, and Christopher D. Manning. Get To The Point: Summarization with
  Pointer-Generator Networks. In ACL, 2017.
ShareGPT. ShareGPT: Share your wildest ChatGPT conversations with one click. ShareGPT, 2023.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Beck Labash, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu
  Yao. Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement Learning. arXiv, 2023.


                                              15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shaden Smith, Mostofa Patwary, Brandon Norick, Patrick LeGresley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Jared
  Casper, Zhun Liu, Shrimai Prabhumoye, George Zerveas, Vijay Korthikanti, Elton Zhang, Rewon
  Child, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Julie Bernauer, Xia Song, Mohammad Shoeybi, Yuxiong He,
  Michael Houston, Saurabh Tiwary, and Bryan Catanzaro. Using DeepSpeed and Megatron to
  Train Megatron-Turing NLG 530B, A Large-Scale Generative Language Model. arXiv, 2022.

Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Agnieszka Kluska,
  Aitor Lewkowycz, Akshat Agarwal, Alethea Power, Alex Ray, Alex Warstadt, Alexander W.
  Kocurek, Ali Safaya, Ali Tazarv, Alice Xiang, Alicia Parrish, Allen Nie, Aman Hussain, Amanda
  Askell, Amanda Dsouza, Ambrose Slone, Ameet Rahane, Anantharaman S. Iyer, Anders An-
  dreassen, Andrea Madotto, Andrea Santilli, Andreas Stuhlmüller, Andrew Dai, Andrew La, Andrew
  Lampinen, Andy Zou, Angela Jiang, Angelica Chen, Anh Vuong, Animesh Gupta, Anna Gottardi,
  Antonio Norelli, Anu Venkatesh, Arash Gholamidavoodi, Arfa Tabassum, Arul Menezes, Arun
  Kirubarajan, Asher Mullokandov, Ashish Sabharwal, Austin Herrick, Avia Efrat, Aykut Erdem,
  Ayla Karakaş, B. Ryan Roberts, Bao Sheng Loe, Barret Zoph, Bartłomiej Bojanowski, Batuhan
  Özyurt, Behnam Hedayatnia, Behnam Neyshabur, Benjamin Inden, Benno Stein, Berk Ekmekci,
  Bill Yuchen Lin, Blake Howald, Bryan Orinion, Cameron Diao, Cameron Dour, Catherine Stin-
  son, Cedrick Argueta, César Ferri Ramírez, Chandan Singh, Charles Rathkopf, Chenlin Meng,
  Chitta Baral, Chiyu Wu, Chris Callison-Burch, Chris Waites, Christian Voigt, Christopher D.
  Manning, Christopher Potts, Cindy Ramirez, Clara E. Rivera, Clemencia Siro, Colin Raffel,
  Courtney Ashcraft, Cristina Garbacea, Damien Sileo, Dan Garrette, Dan Hendrycks, Dan Kilman,
  Dan Roth, Daniel Freeman, Daniel Khashabi, Daniel Levy, Daniel Moseguí González, Danielle
  Perszyk, Danny Hernandez, Danqi Chen, Daphne Ippolito, Dar Gilboa, David Dohan, David
  Drakard, David Jurgens, Debajyoti Datta, Deep Ganguli, Denis Emelin, Denis Kleyko, Deniz
  Yuret, Derek Chen, Derek Tam, Dieuwke Hupkes, Diganta Misra, Dilyar Buzan, Dimitri Coelho
  Mollo, Diyi Yang, Dong-Ho Lee, Dylan Schrader, Ekaterina Shutova, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Elad
  Segal, Eleanor Hagerman, Elizabeth Barnes, Elizabeth Donoway, Ellie Pavlick, Emanuele Rodola,
  Emma Lam, Eric Chu, Eric Tang, Erkut Erdem, Ernie Chang, Ethan A. Chi, Ethan Dyer, Ethan
  Jerzak, Ethan Kim, Eunice Engefu Manyasi, Evgenii Zheltonozhskii, Fanyue Xia, Fatemeh Siar,
  Fernando Martínez-Plumed, Francesca Happé, Francois Chollet, Frieda Rong, Gaurav Mishra,
  Genta Indra Winata, Gerard de Melo, Germán Kruszewski, Giambattista Parascandolo, Giorgio
  Mariani, Gloria Wang, Gonzalo Jaimovitch-López, Gregor Betz, Guy Gur-Ari, Hana Galijasevic,
  Hannah Kim, Hannah Rashkin, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Harsh Mehta, Hayden Bogar, Henry Shevlin,
  Hinrich Schütze, Hiromu Yakura, Hongming Zhang, Hugh Mee Wong, Ian Ng, Isaac Noble, Jaap
  Jumelet, Jack Geissinger, Jackson Kernion, Jacob Hilton, Jaehoon Lee, Jaime Fernández Fisac,
  James B. Simon, James Koppel, James Zheng, James Zou, Jan Kocoń, Jana Thompson, Janelle
  Wingfield, Jared Kaplan, Jarema Radom, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Jason Phang, Jason Wei, Jason
  Yosinski, Jekaterina Novikova, Jelle Bosscher, Jennifer Marsh, Jeremy Kim, Jeroen Taal, Jesse
  Engel, Jesujoba Alabi, Jiacheng Xu, Jiaming Song, Jillian Tang, Joan Waweru, John Burden,
  John Miller, John U. Balis, Jonathan Batchelder, Jonathan Berant, Jörg Frohberg, Jos Rozen,
  Jose Hernandez-Orallo, Joseph Boudeman, Joseph Guerr, Joseph Jones, Joshua B. Tenenbaum,
  Joshua S. Rule, Joyce Chua, Kamil Kanclerz, Karen Livescu, Karl Krauth, Karthik Gopalakr-
  ishnan, Katerina Ignatyeva, Katja Markert, Kaustubh D. Dhole, Kevin Gimpel, Kevin Omondi,
  Kory Mathewson, Kristen Chiafullo, Ksenia Shkaruta, Kumar Shridhar, Kyle McDonell, Kyle
  Richardson, Laria Reynolds, Leo Gao, Li Zhang, Liam Dugan, Lianhui Qin, Lidia Contreras-
  Ochando, Louis-Philippe Morency, Luca Moschella, Lucas Lam, Lucy Noble, Ludwig Schmidt,
  Luheng He, Luis Oliveros Colón, Luke Metz, Lütfi Kerem Şenel, Maarten Bosma, Maarten Sap,
  Maartje ter Hoeve, Maheen Farooqi, Manaal Faruqui, Mantas Mazeika, Marco Baturan, Marco
  Marelli, Marco Maru, Maria Jose Ramírez Quintana, Marie Tolkiehn, Mario Giulianelli, Martha
  Lewis, Martin Potthast, Matthew L. Leavitt, Matthias Hagen, Mátyás Schubert, Medina Orduna
  Baitemirova, Melody Arnaud, Melvin McElrath, Michael A. Yee, Michael Cohen, Michael Gu,
  Michael Ivanitskiy, Michael Starritt, Michael Strube, Michał Sw˛edrowski, Michele Bevilacqua,
  Michihiro Yasunaga, Mihir Kale, Mike Cain, Mimee Xu, Mirac Suzgun, Mitch Walker, Mo Tiwari,
  Mohit Bansal, Moin Aminnaseri, Mor Geva, Mozhdeh Gheini, Mukund Varma T, Nanyun Peng,
  Nathan A. Chi, Nayeon Lee, Neta Gur-Ari Krakover, Nicholas Cameron, Nicholas Roberts, Nick
  Doiron, Nicole Martinez, Nikita Nangia, Niklas Deckers, Niklas Muennighoff, Nitish Shirish
  Keskar, Niveditha S. Iyer, Noah Constant, Noah Fiedel, Nuan Wen, Oliver Zhang, Omar Agha,
  Omar Elbaghdadi, Omer Levy, Owain Evans, Pablo Antonio Moreno Casares, Parth Doshi, Pascale


                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Fung, Paul Pu Liang, Paul Vicol, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Peiyuan Liao, Percy Liang, Peter Chang,
  Peter Eckersley, Phu Mon Htut, Pinyu Hwang, Piotr Miłkowski, Piyush Patil, Pouya Pezeshkpour,
  Priti Oli, Qiaozhu Mei, Qing Lyu, Qinlang Chen, Rabin Banjade, Rachel Etta Rudolph, Raefer
  Gabriel, Rahel Habacker, Ramon Risco, Raphaël Millière, Rhythm Garg, Richard Barnes, Rif A.
  Saurous, Riku Arakawa, Robbe Raymaekers, Robert Frank, Rohan Sikand, Roman Novak, Roman
  Sitelew, Ronan LeBras, Rosanne Liu, Rowan Jacobs, Rui Zhang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Ryan
  Chi, Ryan Lee, Ryan Stovall, Ryan Teehan, Rylan Yang, Sahib Singh, Saif M. Mohammad,
  Sajant Anand, Sam Dillavou, Sam Shleifer, Sam Wiseman, Samuel Gruetter, Samuel R. Bowman,
  Samuel S. Schoenholz, Sanghyun Han, Sanjeev Kwatra, Sarah A. Rous, Sarik Ghazarian, Sayan
  Ghosh, Sean Casey, Sebastian Bischoff, Sebastian Gehrmann, Sebastian Schuster, Sepideh Sadeghi,
  Shadi Hamdan, Sharon Zhou, Shashank Srivastava, Sherry Shi, Shikhar Singh, Shima Asaadi,
  Shixiang Shane Gu, Shubh Pachchigar, Shubham Toshniwal, Shyam Upadhyay, Shyamolima,
  Debnath, Siamak Shakeri, Simon Thormeyer, Simone Melzi, Siva Reddy, Sneha Priscilla Makini,
  Soo-Hwan Lee, Spencer Torene, Sriharsha Hatwar, Stanislas Dehaene, Stefan Divic, Stefano
  Ermon, Stella Biderman, Stephanie Lin, Stephen Prasad, Steven T. Piantadosi, Stuart M. Shieber,
  Summer Misherghi, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Swaroop Mishra, Tal Linzen, Tal Schuster, Tao Li,
  Tao Yu, Tariq Ali, Tatsu Hashimoto, Te-Lin Wu, Théo Desbordes, Theodore Rothschild, Thomas
  Phan, Tianle Wang, Tiberius Nkinyili, Timo Schick, Timofei Kornev, Titus Tunduny, Tobias Ger-
  stenberg, Trenton Chang, Trishala Neeraj, Tushar Khot, Tyler Shultz, Uri Shaham, Vedant Misra,
  Vera Demberg, Victoria Nyamai, Vikas Raunak, Vinay Ramasesh, Vinay Uday Prabhu, Vishakh
  Padmakumar, Vivek Srikumar, William Fedus, William Saunders, William Zhang, Wout Vossen,
  Xiang Ren, Xiaoyu Tong, Xinran Zhao, Xinyi Wu, Xudong Shen, Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh, Yair
  Lakretz, Yangqiu Song, Yasaman Bahri, Yejin Choi, Yichi Yang, Yiding Hao, Yifu Chen, Yonatan
  Belinkov, Yu Hou, Yufang Hou, Yuntao Bai, Zachary Seid, Zhuoye Zhao, Zijian Wang, Zijie J.
  Wang, Zirui Wang, and Ziyi Wu. Beyond the Imitation Game: Quantifying and extrapolating the
  capabilities of language models. TMLR, 2023.

Theodore R. Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas L. Griffiths. Cognitive Archi-
  tectures for Language Agents. arXiv, 2023.

Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung,
  Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Denny Zhou, and Jason Wei. Challenging BIG-Bench
  Tasks and Whether Chain-of-Thought Can Solve Them. In ACL, 2023.

Alon Talmor, Jonathan Herzig, Nicholas Lourie, and Jonathan Berant. CommonsenseQA: A Question
  Answering Challenge Targeting Commonsense Knowledge. In NAACL-HLT, 2019.

Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin , Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpaca: A Strong, Replicable Instruction-Following Model.
  arXiv, 2023.

Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand
  Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. LLaMA: Open and Efficient Foundation Language
  Models. arXiv, 2023a.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cris-
  tian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu,
  Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models.
  arXiv, 2023b.


                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Adam Trischler, Tong Wang, Xingdi Yuan, Justin Harris, Alessandro Sordoni, Philip Bachman, and
  Kaheer Suleman. NewsQA: A Machine Comprehension Dataset. In ACL, 2017.
Xingchen Wan, Ruoxi Sun, Hanjun Dai, Sercan O. Arik, and Tomas Pfister. Better Zero-Shot
  Reasoning with Self-Adaptive Prompting. In ACL, 2023.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
  Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. SuperGLUE: A Stickier Benchmark for General-Purpose Language
  Understanding Systems. In NeurIPS, 2019a.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman.
  GLUE: A Multi-Task Benchmark and Analysis Platform for Natural Language Understanding. In
  ICLR, 2019b.
Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. GPT-J-6B: A 6 Billion Parameter Autoregressive Language Model.
  GitHub, 2021.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
  Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, Wayne Xin Zhao, Zhewei Wei, and Ji-Rong Wen. A Survey on Large
  Language Model based Autonomous Agents. arXiv, 2023a.
Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu, Yunshi Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-Peng Lim.
  Plan-and-Solve Prompting: Improving Zero-Shot Chain-of-Thought Reasoning by Large Language
  Models. In ACL, 2023b.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowd-
  hery, and Denny Zhou. Self-Consistency Improves Chain of Thought Reasoning in Language
  Models. In ICLR, 2023c.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-Instruct: Aligning Language Models with Self-Generated Instructions.
  In ACL, 2023d.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y. Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
   Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Finetuned Language Models are Zero-Shot Learners. In ICLR,
   2022a.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
   Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language
   Models. In NeurIPS, 2022b.
Shijie Wu, Ozan Irsoy, Steven Lu, Vadim Dabravolski, Mark Dredze, Sebastian Gehrmann, Prabhan-
  jan Kambadur, David Rosenberg, and Gideon Mann. BloombergGPT: A Large Language Model
  for Finance. arXiv, 2023.
Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe
  Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, Rui Zheng, Xiaoran Fan, Xiao Wang, Limao Xiong, Yuhao Zhou,
  Weiran Wang, Changhao Jiang, Yicheng Zou, Xiangyang Liu, Zhangyue Yin, Shihan Dou, Rongx-
  iang Weng, Wensen Cheng, Qi Zhang, Wenjuan Qin, Yongyan Zheng, Xipeng Qiu, Xuanjing
  Huang, and Tao Gui. The Rise and Potential of Large Language Model Based Agents: A Survey.
  arXiv, 2023.
Benfeng Xu, An Yang, Junyang Lin, Quan Wang, Chang Zhou, Yongdong Zhang, and Zhendong
  Mao. ExpertPrompting: Instructing Large Language Models to be Distinguished Experts. arXiv,
  2023.
Yichong Xu, Chenguang Zhu, Shuohang Wang, Siqi Sun, Hao Cheng, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng
  Gao, Pengcheng He, Michael Zeng, and Xuedong Huang. Human Parity on CommonsenseQA:
  Augmenting Self-Attention with External Attention. In IJCAI, 2022.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of Thoughts: Deliberate Problem Solving with Large Language Models. arXiv,
  2023a.


                                              18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models. In ICLR, 2023b.
Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. HellaSwag: Can a Machine
  Really Finish Your Sentence? In ACL, 2019.
Jingqing Zhang, Yao Zhao, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J. Liu. PEGASUS: Pre-training with
   Extracted Gap-sentences for Abstractive Summarization. In ICML, 2020.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher
  Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt
  Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
  OPT: Open Pre-trained Transformer Language Models. arXiv, 2022a.
Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, and Alex Smola. Automatic Chain of Thought Prompting in
  Large Language Models. In ICLR, 2022b.
Xu Zhao, Yuxi Xie, Kenji Kawaguchi, Junxian He, and Qizhe Xie. Automatic Model Selection with
  Large Language Models for Reasoning. arXiv, 2023.

Chuanyang Zheng, Zhengying Liu, Enze Xie, Zhenguo Li, and Yu Li. Progressive-Hint Prompting
  Improves Reasoning in Large Language Models. arXiv, 2023.

Wanjun Zhong, Ruixiang Cui, Yiduo Guo, Yaobo Liang, Shuai Lu, Yanlin Wang, Amin Saied, Weizhu
  Chen, and Nan Duan. AGIEval: A Human-Centric Benchmark for Evaluating Foundation Models.
  arXiv, 2023.
Aojun Zhou, Ke Wang, Zimu Lu, Weikang Shi, Sichun Luo, Zipeng Qin, Shaoqing Lu, Anya Jia,
  Linqi Song, Mingjie Zhan, and Hongsheng Li. Solving Challenging Math Word Problems Using
  GPT-4 Code Interpreter with Code-based Self-Verification. arXiv, 2023a.
Wangchunshu Zhou, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, Long Li, Jialong Wu, Tiannan Wang, Shi Qiu, Jintian
 Zhang, Jing Chen, Ruipu Wu, Shuai Wang, Shiding Zhu, Jiyu Chen, Wentao Zhang, Ningyu
 Zhang, Huajun Chen, Peng Cui, and Mrinmaya Sachan. Agents: An Open-source Framework for
 Autonomous Language Agents. arXiv, 2023b.
Barret Zoph, Irwan Bello, Sameer Kumar, Nan Du, Yanping Huang, Jeff Dean, Noam Shazeer, and
  William Fedus. ST-MoE: Designing Stable and Transferable Sparse Expert Models. arXiv, 2022.


                                              19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C HANGES FROM I NITIAL ICLR S UBMISSION
        • Clarified that zero-shot AgentInstruct is only run once per dataset and the cost of generating
          our instructions.
        • Clarified that AgentInstruct is zero-shot as we do not use any examples that have ground
          truth labels.
        • Clarified the action space and the question answering API tool we used.
        • Clarified the difference between zero-shot CoT and zero-shot AgentInstruct.
        • Added IMDB results on zero-shot, zero-shot CoT, and zero-shot AgentInstruct run on GPT-4.
        • Added further descriptions of the different settings of Table 1.


A     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

A.1     DATASETS

We evaluate zero-shot AgentInstruct on a wide selection of datasets consisting of all HELM core
scenarios (Liang et al., 2023) and all the reasoning datasets used to benchmark zero-shot CoT (Kojima
et al., 2022). The datasets are listed in Table 4, along with their categorizations. See Figure 13 for
general details and A.4 for the collection and processing of each dataset in more detail.

A.2     M ODELS

We focus on the following large language models:

        • Vicuna-13b (Chiang et al., 2023): A finetuned version of LLaMA-13b (Touvron et al.,
          2023a) which was trained on an additional 70 thousand user-shared conversations from
          ShareGPT (ShareGPT, 2023). Version 1.1 weight deltas were used.
        • Llama-2-chat (Touvron et al., 2023b): A family of chat models based on Llama-2. Llama-2-
          chat was further trained using supervised finetuning, reward modeling, and reinforcement
          learning from human feedback, and comes in three sizes: 7b, 13b, and 70b. We focus on the
          70b model, but share results from the 7b and 13b models in Figure 8 and Appendix B.
        • GPT-3.5 Turbo (OpenAI, 2022): A finetuned version of GPT-3.5 which was further trained
          using reinforcement learning from human feedback. Specifically, the 0301 version was used.


A.3     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

A.3.1     Z ERO -S HOT AGENT I NSTRUCT D ETAILS

Agent Instructions Before generating the instructions using zero-shot AgentInstruct, we query
our question answering (QA) API built based on the Bing Web Search API to retrieve five relevant
websites, each of which is added to a vector database. Our QA API is a retrieval question answering
system built from that database, which is used as the only tool in our main agent. Since the documents
are long, they are added to a vector database so they do not expand past the context length of the
LLM powering the agent. We implement our agent based on LangChain’s ReAct implementation
(Chase, 2022; Yao et al., 2023b). To initiate instruction generation, we build the agent input based on
basic dataset information including the name of the dataset, labels (if applicable, else type of dataset
like generation), and a few input-only examples without ground truth labels. We use GPT-4 (OpenAI,
2023) inside our agent. We use the default temperature of 0.3 and the snapshot gpt-4-0613 when
generating instructions. Given the temperature, if rerun it is not guaranteed to generate the same
outputs each time, nor is there any guarantee that the same steps of our pipeline are reached. In the
case that instructions were not returned, we reran the pipeline until there were valid instructions. We
also reran the pipeline on a select number of datasets (NaturalQA (openbook), GSM8K) where the
name of the dataset was unhelpful. In this case, we use an alias for the name of the dataset.


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Dataset                                                          Task Category           Metric   Number of Instances
 AddSub (Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2016)                      Generation, Reasoning        QEM            395
 AQuA (Ling et al., 2017)                                    Classification, Reasoning      EM            254
 BoolQ (Clark et al., 2019)                                        Classification         QPEM           1,000
 CivilComments (Koh et al., 2021; Borkan et al., 2019)             Classification         QPEM           6,688
     All                                                           Classification         QPEM            765
     Black                                                         Classification         QPEM            735
     Christian                                                     Classification         QPEM            733
     Female                                                        Classification         QPEM            730
     LGBTQ                                                         Classification         QPEM            735
     Male                                                          Classification         QPEM            748
     Muslim                                                        Classification         QPEM            760
     Other Religions                                               Classification         QPEM            767
     White                                                         Classification         QPEM            715
 CNN/Daily Mail (See et al., 2017)                                   Generation          ROUGE-2          466
 Coin Flip (Wei et al., 2022b)                               Classification, Reasoning     QEM            500
 CommonsenseQA (Talmor et al., 2019)                         Classification, Reasoning      EM           1,000
 Date Understanding (Srivastava et al., 2023)                Classification, Reasoning     QEM            369
 GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021)                                   Generation, Reasoning        QEM           1,000
 HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019)                                  Classification           EM           1,000
 IMDB (Maas et al., 2011)                                          Classification          QEM           1,000
 Last Letter Concatenation (Wei et al., 2022b)                Generation, Reasoning        QEM            500
 MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021)                                     Classification           EM            514
     Abstract Algebra                                              Classification           EM            100
     College Chemistry                                             Classification           EM            100
     Computer Security                                             Classification           EM            100
     Econometrics                                                  Classification           EM            114
     US Foreign Policy                                             Classification           EM            100
 MS MARCO (Regular) (Bajaj et al., 2016)                           Classification         RR@10          1,000
 MS MARCO (TREC) (Bajaj et al., 2016)                              Classification        NDCG@10           43
 MultiArith (Roy & Roth, 2015)                                Generation, Reasoning        QEM            600
 NarrativeQA (Kočiský et al., 2018)                                 Generation             F1            355
 NaturalQuestions (closed-book) (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019)           Generation             F1           1,000
 NaturalQuestions (open-book)                                        Generation             F1           1,000
 NewsQA (Trischler et al., 2017)                                     Generation             F1           1,000
 OpenBookQA (Mihaylov et al., 2018)                                Classification           EM            500
 QuAC (Choi et al., 2018)                                            Generation             F1           1,000
 RAFT (Alex et al., 2021)                                          Classification          QEM            440
     ADE Corpus v2                                                 Classification          QEM             40
     Banking 77                                                    Classification          QEM             40
     Neurips Impact Statement                                      Classification          QEM             40
     One Stop English                                              Classification          QEM             40
     Overruling                                                    Classification          QEM             40
     Semiconductor Org Types                                       Classification          QEM             40
     Systematic Review Inclusion                                   Classification          QEM             40
     Tai Saftey Research                                           Classification          QEM             40
     Terms of Service                                              Classification          QEM             40
     Tweet Eval Hate                                               Classification          QEM             40
     Twitter Complaints                                            Classification          QEM             40
 Shuffled Objects (Srivastava et al., 2023)                  Classification, Reasoning     QEM           2,750
     Five Objects                                            Classification, Reasoning     QEM           1,000
     Seven Objects                                           Classification, Reasoning     QEM           1,000
     Three Objects                                           Classification, Reasoning     QEM            750
 SingleEq (Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2016)                    Generation, Reasoning        QEM            508
 StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021; Srivastava et al., 2023)     Classification, Reasoning     QEM            458
 SVAMP (Patel et al., 2021)                                   Generation, Reasoning        QEM           1,000
 TruthfulQA (Lin et al., 2022)                                     Classification           EM            654
 XSUM (Narayan et al., 2018)                                         Generation          ROUGE-2          518

                                    Table 4: Overview of each dataset used.


                                                             21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chain of Thought Reasoning The reasoning extraction prompt of the chain of thought reasoning
pipeline is in Table 13. The answer extraction prompts for generation, classification (excluding
multi-choice), and classification (multi-choice) datasets are in Tables 14, 15, and 16 respectively. The
prompts for reasoning tasks follow the corresponding prompts of either generation or classification
based on their general categorization. We take the output of the answer extraction prompt as the
answer, applying parsing as dictated by the dataset. Note that for generation, we encouraged shorter
answers in the answer extraction prompt due to the nature of the datasets we used.


    You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a
    task to complete.

    Instructions:
    {Agent Instructions}

    {Test Instance}
    Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards
    the correct answer to the task above. End the explanation with the
    correct answer.

    Explanation:


    Figure 13: Reasoning extraction prompt for the CoT reasoning of zero-shot AgentInstruct.


    {Reasoning Extraction Prompt}{Reasoning Extraction Prompt Output}

    Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in
    the shortest form possible that will still be correct.


 Figure 14: Answer extraction prompt for the CoT reasoning of zero-shot AgentInstruct on a
 generation dataset. Generation datasets that also belong to the reasoning category use the same
 prompt.


    {Reasoning Extraction Prompt}{Reasoning Extraction Prompt Output}

    Therefore, the correct label among {labels} (just the label) to
    the original task is below.


 Figure 15: Answer extraction prompt for the CoT reasoning of zero-shot AgentInstruct on a
 classification (excluding multi-choice) dataset. Classification (excluding multi-choice) datasets that
 also belong to the reasoning category use the same prompt.


Inference requests on Vicuna and Llama-2-chat were submitted from HELM to a TorchServe API
running on a local cluster containing 2 nodes, each with 8x NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPUs. As a general
rule, models were loaded at the highest precision while still allowing each GPU to contain an entire
copy of the full model. Llama-2-7b-chat, Llama-2-13b-chat, and Vicuna-13b were run in FP16,
while Llama-2-70b-chat was quantized to NF4. NaturalQuestions (open-book), NewsQA, and QuAC
runs with Llama-2-70b-chat required 2 GPUs per worker in order to handle longer sequence lengths.
Inference requests on GPT-3.5 Turbo were submitted to OpenAI’s API.


                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    {Reasoning Extraction Prompt}{Reasoning Extraction Prompt Output}

    Therefore, the correct            multiple     choice     label    (just    the    letter)
    to the task is below.


 Figure 16: Answer extraction prompt for the CoT reasoning of zero-shot AgentInstruct on a
 classification (multi-choice) dataset. Classification (multi-choice) datasets that also belong to the
 reasoning category use the same prompt.


For Llama-2-chat runs, we prepend the necessary special tokens, including an empty system message.
Also, we include a special designation [\INST] during the reasoning extraction prompt to signify the
transition from User to Assistant roles. Initial experimentation with formatting revealed that Llama-
2-chat was very sensitive to this designation, and would often fail to generate thoughtful reasoning
steps if omitted during runs with zero-shot AgentInstruct or standard zero-shot CoT. We made no
such User/Assistant distinction before the answer extraction prompts. For Vicuna and GPT-3.5 Turbo
runs, we made no User/Assistant distinctions either, effectively treating all model input as part of
the User role. Generally, we use each dataset’s default generation parameters outlined in HELM.
All inference was done using a temperature of 0.0, except on datasets that involved summarization,
where a temperature of 0.3 was used. For the reasoning extraction prompt, we request a maximum of
512 new tokens, and for the answer extraction prompt, the number of tokens requested is specific to
each dataset.

A.3.2     E VALUATION D ETAILS
Each dataset uses one of the following accuracy metrics:

        • Exact Match (EM): A binary indicator that awards correctness if and only if the output
          exactly matches one or more of the correct references. We primarily use this metric for
          classification, in particular for multi-choice classification tasks.
        • Quasi-Exact Match (QEM): A more lenient version of Exact Match which awards correctness
          if the output text matches the correct reference after both have been normalized (i.e., after
          removing extra white space, articles, punctuation, and capitalization) (Choi et al., 2018).
          This metric is primarily used for classification tasks, as well as some generation tasks.
        • Quasi-Prefix Exact Match (QPEM): A more lenient version of Quasi-Exact Match that
          awards correctness if the normalized output begins with the normalized reference. Hence,
          “Yes, Elmendorf” would be marked correct if the reference was “Yes”. The metric is useful
          on several classification tasks where the model has a tendency to generate additional tokens
          beyond that of the correct answer.
        • F1: Instead of checking for an exact match, this metric will award partial correctness for
          any string overlap (Rajpurkar et al., 2016). The metric is used for a number of question
          answering tasks with open-ended generation.
        • ROUGE-2: This metric scores correctness based on bigram overlap (Lin, 2004). We use
          ROUGE-2 as the accuracy measure for generation tasks involving summarization.
        • RR@10: This metric is used for MS MARCO (Regular) and it uses the reciprocal rank of
          the first relevant document.
        • NDCG@10: This metric is used for MS MARCO (TREC) to assess the normalized dis-
          counted cumulative gain using the set of graded rankings (Järvelin & Kekäläinen, 2002).

Prior to evaluation, we often perform some post-processing to clean the generated text. On mathemat-
ical generation datasets, we parse out the first number in the output and use that for our final answer.
Similarly, on classification (multi-choice) datasets, we grab the first letter in the output. Appendix
A.4 gives a compact description of each dataset, as well as the accuracy metric used, and any initial
or post-processing done. These choices followed HELM or other relevant papers.


                                                  23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In general, we report evaluation results using the default accuracy metric outlined in HELM. For
datasets with various subsets, we report the macro-average accuracy score across all subsets. Prompts,
parsing techniques, and instructions were tested using 50 samples on most datasets to ensure the
explanations and parsing were valid. Note that we are including these 50 samples in the full (up to)
1,000 sample evaluation, so there is a possibility of bias, especially regarding some of the smaller
datasets. Note that all experiments done in this paper are the result of a single run on our pipeline.
We only generate instructions once and run inference once as well due to the cost of running our
models on all datasets with a high amount of samples.

A.4     A DDITIONAL I NFORMATION A BOUT E ACH DATASET

A.4.1    A DD S UB
Description AddSub (Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2016) is a generation dataset containing addition
and subtraction math word problems. We also classify AddSub as a reasoning dataset because of its
inclusion in Kojima et al. (2022). The dataset contains 395 test instances.

Implementation Details AddSub is a generation dataset. Specifically, we prompt for an answer
that is at most 10 tokens. During few-shot runs, we use the 5 in-context learning examples extracted
from the math word problem instances presented in the chain of thought paper (Wei et al., 2022b).
Responses undergo a post-processing step where the first number in the output is extracted for
evaluation. The evaluation metric used is quasi-exact match.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 18.

Comparison Methods The few-shot results on the GPT-4 model achieved the state-of-the-art (Zhao
et al., 2023).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.2    AQ UA
Description AQuA (Ling et al., 2017) is a classification (multi-choice) dataset containing various
math word problems. Because it is in Kojima et al. (2022), we consider it a reasoning dataset. The
dataset contains 254 test instances.

Implementation Details We prompt for an answer that is at most 5 tokens. Responses undergo a
post-processing step where the first letter in the output is extracted for evaluation. The evaluation
metric used is exact match.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 19.

Comparison Methods The few-shot results on the GPT-4 model achieved the state-of-the-art
(Zheng et al., 2023).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.3    B OOL Q
Description BoolQ (Clark et al., 2019) is a classification benchmark where yes/no questions are
asked about a given passage. We sample 1,000 test instances following HELM.

Implementation Details BoolQ is a core scenario in HELM (Liang et al., 2023), and we use the
implementation parameters outlined in HELM. Specifically, we prompt for an answer that is at most
5 tokens. Quasi-prefix exact match is used for evaluation.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 20.


                                                 24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Comparison Methods        The result of finetuned ST-MoE-32B achieved the state-of-the-art (Zoph
et al., 2022).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.4   C IVIL C OMMENTS
Description Civil Comments (Koh et al., 2021; Borkan et al., 2019) is a classification dataset to
identify toxicity in online comments. The dataset is split by demographic (All, Black, Christian,
Female, LGBTQ, Male, Muslim, Other religions, White). We sample 1,000 test instances from each
subset following HELM.

Implementation Details CivilComments is a core scenario in HELM, and we use the implemen-
tation parameters outlined in HELM. We prompt for an answer that is at most 5 tokens. Following
HELM, we report the macro-average accuracy of each subset below with respect to the toxic/non-toxic
classes, as well as the average accuracy across all subsets. We found it necessary to map yes/no
outputs to true/false during zero-shot runs. Quasi-prefix exact match is used for evaluation.

Examples Examples are shown in Figures 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.

Comparison Methods The few-shot results on the GPT-3.5 Turbo model achieved the state-of-the-
art (Liang et al., 2023).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.5   CNN/DAILY M AIL
Description CNN/Daily Mail (See et al., 2017) is a generation dataset where the goal is to summa-
rize a selection of news articles. The dataset contains 466 test instances.

Implementation Details CNN/Daily Mail is a core scenario in HELM. We generate a summary of
no more than 128 tokens and use a temperature of 0.3. The ROUGE-2 metric is used for evaluation.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 30.

Comparison Methods The result of the PEGASUSLARGE (HugeNews) model achieved the state-
of-the-art (Zhang et al., 2020).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.6   C OIN F LIP
Description Coin Flip (Wei et al., 2022b) is a classification task where the objective is to determine
the state of a coin after a number of successive flips. We consider Coin Flip a reasoning task because
it is included in Kojima et al. (2022). The dataset contains 500 test instances.

Implementation Details We recreated the Coin Flip dataset following the details in Kojima et al.
(2022). We generate a response of no more than 4 tokens and use quasi-exact match for evaluation.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 31.

Comparison Methods The result of the GPT-3.5 (text-davinci-002) model achieved the state-of-
the-art (Zhang et al., 2022b).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.


                                                 25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4.7    C OMMONSENSE QA

Description CommonsenseQA (Talmor et al., 2019) is a classification (multi-choice) dataset
focusing on common sense. Because it is in Kojima et al. (2022), we consider it a reasoning dataset.
We sample 1,000 instances from the test set mirroring the existing implementation in HELM.

Implementation Details Though CommonsenseQA was already implemented into HELM, we
added a separate implementation to better align with Kojima et al. (2022). We use the joint multiple-
choice adapter in HELM rather than the separate multiple-choice adapter. We generate a response
of no more than 5 tokens, and grab the first letter from the output and then use exact match for
evaluation.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 32.

Comparison Methods         The result of the DeBERTaV3-large model achieved the state-of-the-art
(Xu et al., 2022).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.8    DATE U NDERSTANDING

Description Date Understanding (Srivastava et al., 2023; Suzgun et al., 2023) is a classification
(multi-choice) dataset from the BIG-bench benchmark (Srivastava et al., 2023), which aims to assess
pretrained language models’ capacity to comprehend dates through inquiries about specific days’
dates. The dataset contains 369 test instances.

Implementation Details We use the Date Understanding instances from Suzgun et al. (2023). We
generate up to 60 tokens, though in practice, the generation ends much quicker when it hits a stop
token: either “\n” or “)”. As with other classification multi-choice, we extract the first letter from the
response. Quasi-exact match is used as the evaluation metric.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 33.

Comparison Methods        The few-shot CoT results on the PaLM 2 model achieved the state-of-the-art
(Anil et al., 2023).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.9    GSM8K

Description GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) is a generation dataset focused on mathematical reasoning.
Because it is in Kojima et al. (2022), we consider it a reasoning dataset. We sample 1,000 test instances
following HELM.

Implementation Details GSM8K is included in HELM as a target scenario. We leverage this
implementation, which generates up to 400 new tokens. Responses undergo a post-processing step
where the first number in the output is extracted for evaluation. The evaluation metric used is
quasi-exact match.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 34.

Comparison Methods        The result of the GPT-4 code interpreter achieved the state-of-the-art (Zhou
et al., 2023a).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.


                                                   26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4.10    H ELLA S WAG
Description HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019) is a classification (multi-choice) dataset comprised
of 70,000 multiple-choice questions about grounded situations, originating from ActivityNet and
wikiHow domains, with human-verified adversarial incorrect answers and one correct answer aimed
at studying grounded commonsense inference. We sample 1,000 test instances following HELM.

Implementation Details We use the implementation of HellaSwag in HELM, but use the joint
adapter to mimic a standard multiple-choice question, rather than the separate adapter which scores
each reference separately using the sentence probability normalized by the sentence length. We
generate only a single token. During zero-shot and zero-shot CoT runs, we include the following
instructions from HELM: “The following are multiple choice questions (with answers) about common
sense.” The exact match metric is used for evaluation. Like with other classification (multi-choice)
datasets, we parse out the first letter from the response for evaluation.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 35.

Comparison Methods The few-shot results on the GPT-4 model achieved the state-of-the-art
(OpenAI, 2023).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.11    IMDB
Description IMDB (Maas et al., 2011) is a classification dataset comprising 50,000 movie reviews,
with 25,000 for training and 25,000 for testing, focused on binary sentiment classification. We sample
1,000 test instances following HELM.

Implementation Details IMDB is a core scenario in HELM, and we follow their implementation.
We generate up to 5 new tokens. During few-shot runs, we sampled 5 in-context examples from the
IMDB training set. Quasi-exact match is used for evaluation.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 36.

Comparison Methods         The result of the ERNIE-DOC-Large model achieved the state-of-the-art
(Ding et al., 2021).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.12    L AST L ETTER C ONCATENATION
Description Last Letter Concatenation (Wei et al., 2022b) is a generation task where the objective
is to concatenate the last letters of a series of two words. Because it is in Kojima et al. (2022), we
consider it a reasoning dataset. We generate full names by randomly concatenating names from
the top one-thousand first and last names from name census data (https://namecensus.com/), as
referenced in Wei et al. (2022b). The dataset contains 500 test instances.

Implementation Details We recreated the Last Letter Concatenation dataset following the details
in Kojima et al. (2022); Wei et al. (2022b). Unlike Kojima et al. (2022) which does concatenation
on 4 words, we only do so on 2. We generate a response of no more than 4 tokens. We noticed
that quasi-exact match unfairly penalized zero-shot CoT runs, so for all runs we extract the answer
directly from the generated text, grabbing only the first 2 letters after stripping away white space and
punctuation.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 37.

Comparison Methods The few-shot CoT results on the PaLM-540B model achieved the state-of-
the-art (Wei et al., 2022b).


                                                  27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.13    MMLU
Description MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021) is a classification (multi-choice) benchmark com-
prised of 57 diverse subjects, ranging from elementary to professional levels, encompassing STEM,
humanities, social sciences, and specialized fields. Following HELM, we focus on 5 subjects (Ab-
stract Algebra, College Chemistry, Computer Security, Econometrics, and US Foreign Policy) totaling
514 test instances.

Implementation Details MMLU is a core HELM scenario, and we use HELM’s implementation
of the dataset. We prompt for a single token. HELM’s implementation includes the following
instructions, where “{subject}” is replaced with the subject of the dataset: “The following are
multiple choice questions (with answers) about {subject}.” We prepend these instructions to instances
during zero-shot and zero-shot CoT runs. We parse out the first letter from the response, and the
exact match metric is used for evaluation.

Examples Examples are shown in Figures 38, 39, 40, 41, 42.

Comparison Methods The few-shot results on the Palmyra X (43B) model achieved the state-of-
the-art (Liang et al., 2023).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.14    MS MARCO (R EGULAR )
Description MS MARCO (Bajaj et al., 2016; Nogueira et al., 2020; MacAvaney et al., 2021)
is a classification dataset containing real Bing search queries and nearly 9 million web passages,
annotated for relevance. It consists of two tracks: the Regular track uses binary RR@k metric,
while the TREC track employs graded annotations with NDCG as the main metric, featuring more
extensively annotated queries and passages with relevance grades. We sample 1,000 test instances for
the Regular track following HELM.

Implementation Details We use the default HELM implementation for MS MARCO (Regular)
and evaluate using RR@10.

Examples An example is shown in Figures 43.

Comparison Methods The few-shot results on the Cohere Command beta (52.4B) model achieved
the state-of-the-art (Liang et al., 2023).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.15    MS MARCO (TREC)
Description This is the TREC track of MS MARCO (Bajaj et al., 2016; Nogueira et al., 2020;
MacAvaney et al., 2021) as introduced in Appendix A.4.14. The TREC track contains 43 instances.

Implementation Details We use the default HELM implementation for MS MARCO (TREC) and
evaluate using NDCG@10.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 44.

Comparison Methods The few-shot results on the Cohere Command beta (52.4B) model achieved
the state-of-the-art (Liang et al., 2023).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.


                                                 28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4.16    M ULTI A RITH
Description MultiArith (Roy & Roth, 2015) is a generation dataset containing a comprehensive
collection of arithmetic word problems, encompassing various mathematical operations and ranging
in complexity. Because it is in Kojima et al. (2022) as a reasoning task, we consider it a reasoning
dataset. The dataset contains 600 test instances.

Implementation Details We prompt for up to 10 new tokens. As with other math generation
datasets, we extract the first number from the generated text and use that as the final answer. Quasi-
exact match is used for evaluation.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 45.

Comparison Methods The result of the self-consistency strategy on the GPT-3 (code-davinci-002)
model achieved the state-of-the-art (Wang et al., 2023c).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.17    NARRATIVE QA
Description NarrativeQA (Kočiský et al., 2018) is a generation dataset focused on reading compre-
hension where the model answers a question about a passage. The dataset is comprised of 355 test
instances.

Implementation Details We use the implementation of NarrativeQA in HELM. We generate up
to 100 new tokens, and use F1 score for evaluation. For few-shot runs, we sampled 5 in-context
examples from the training set.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 46.

Comparison Methods The few-shot results on the Llama 2 (70B) model achieved the state-of-the-
art (Liang et al., 2023).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.18    NATURAL Q UESTIONS ( CLOSED - BOOK )
Description NaturalQuestions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) is a generation dataset comprised of
anonymized real search queries posed to Google. We focus on two subsets: closed-book where the
model is not given any external context, and open-book long answer, where a passage is given prior
to the question. We sample 1,000 test instances following HELM.

Implementation Details We use the implementation of the Natural Questions dataset within HELM.
Up to 300 new tokens are generated, and we use F1 score as the evaluation metric.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 47.

Comparison Methods The few-shot results on the Llama 2 (70B) model achieved the state-of-the-
art on the NaturalQuestions (closed-book) dataset (Liang et al., 2023).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.19    NATURAL Q UESTIONS ( OPEN - BOOK )
Description This is the open-book subset of NaturalQuestions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) as
introduced in Appendix A.4.18.

Implementation Details We use the same implementation as introduced in Appendix A.4.18.


                                                 29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Examples An example is shown in Figure 48.

Comparison Methods The few-shot results on the text-davinci-003 model achieved the state-of-
the-art on the NaturalQuestions (open-book) dataset (Liang et al., 2023).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.20    N EWS QA
Description NewsQA (Trischler et al., 2017) is a generation dataset that contains human-generated
question-answer pairs sourced from more than 10,000 CNN news articles. We sample 1,000 test
instances following HELM.

Implementation Details We followed the instructions in HELM to collect and process the NewsQA
dataset. We generate up to 50 tokens. F1 score is used as the evaluation metric.

Examples Because of restrictive licensing, we cannot publish an example.

Comparison Methods The result of the SpanBERT model achieved the state-of-the-art (Joshi et al.,
2020).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.21    O PEN B OOK QA
Description OpenBookQA (Mihaylov et al., 2018) is a classification (multi-choice) dataset focused
on commonsense knowledge utilization. It contains 500 test instances.

Implementation Details We follow the implementation of OpenbookQA in HELM, but use the
joint adapter to mimic a standard multiple-choice question, rather than the separate adapter which
scores each reference separately using the sentence probability normalized by the sentence length.
We generate only a single token. During zero-shot and zero-shot CoT runs, we include the following
instructions from HELM: “The following are multiple choice questions (with answers) about common
sense.” The first letter from the response is parsed out and the exact match metric is used for evaluation.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 49.

Comparison Methods The result of the fine-tuning method with the self-consistency prompting
method on the PaLM-540B model achieved the state-of-the-art (Huang et al., 2022).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.22    Q UAC
Description QuAC (Choi et al., 2018) is a generation dataset that facilitates information-seeking
dialogue modeling by presenting interactive conversations between a student asking open-ended
questions and a teacher providing short text excerpts from a hidden Wikipedia passage. There are
1,000 test instances following HELM.

Implementation Details We use the default QuAC implementation in HELM. Responses are
limited to 100 tokens, and F1 is used to measure accuracy.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 50.

Comparison Methods The result of the FLOWQA model achieved the state-of-the-art (Huang
et al., 2019).


                                                   30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.23    RAFT
Description RAFT (Alex et al., 2021) is a classification benchmark designed to assess language
models’ performance across diverse domains. Specifically, we focus on 11 subsets, containing 40 test
instances each.

Implementation Details We use the default implementation of RAFT in HELM. Responses
are limited to 30 tokens. For zero-shot and zero-shot CoT runs, we prepend subset-specific task
instructions provided in HELM. We report the average score across the 11 subsets using quasi-exact
match as the evaluation metric.

Examples Examples are shown in Figures 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61.

Comparison Methods The few-shot results on the GPT-3.5 Turbo model achieved the state-of-the-
art (Liang et al., 2023).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.24    S HUFFLED O BJECTS
Description Shuffled Objects (Srivastava et al., 2023; Suzgun et al., 2023) is a classification (multi-
choice) dataset of the BIG-bench benchmark. In this dataset, objects initially owned by different
people are swapped through pairwise trades, and the model’s goal is to accurately determine which
person ends up with a particular object. There are 3 subtasks (three objects, five objects, and seven
objects) in this dataset. The five and seven objects subtasks each contain 1000 instances, and the
three object subtask contains 750 test instances.

Implementation Details We use the Shuffled Objects instances from Suzgun et al. (2023). We
generate up to 60 tokens, though in practice, the generation ends much quicker when it hits a stop
token: either "\n" or ")". Unlike Kojima et al. (2022), we report results on the three, five, and seven
object cases, instead of only the three object case. As with other classification (multi-choice) datasets,
we parse out the first letter in the response. Quasi-exact match is used as the evaluation metric.

Examples Examples are shown in Figures 63, 64, 65.

Comparison Methods        The few-shot CoT results on the PaLM 2 model achieved the state-of-the-art
(Anil et al., 2023).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.25    S INGLE E Q
Description SingleEq (Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2016) is a generation dataset containing math
word problems requiring the use of single mathematical equations. Because the dataset is included in
Kojima et al. (2022), we consider it a reasoning task in addition to generation. The dataset contains
508 test instances.

Implementation Details We followed the instructions in Kojima et al. (2022) to collect the Sin-
gleEQ dataset. We limit generated responses to 10 tokens. Like other math generation datasets, we
parse out the first number from the response, and then use quasi-exact match to measure accuracy.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 62.

Comparison Methods The few-shot results on the GPT-4 model achieved the state-of-the-art (Zhao
et al., 2023).


                                                   31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.26    S TRATEGY QA
Description StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021) is a yes/no classification dataset, though we follow the
BIG-bench implementation which treats instances as multiple-choice questions with two options (A.
Yes, B. No). Because it is in Kojima et al. (2022), we consider it a reasoning dataset. The dataset
contains 458 test instances.

Implementation Details We use the StragetyQA implementation through BIG-bench. As a result,
our implementation varies from that in Kojima et al. (2022) in that the instances are formulated as
a classification (multi-choice) task, rather than an open-ended classification task. We prompt for
no more than 64 new tokens. We extract the first letter from the response, and use exact match to
measure accuracy.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 66.

Comparison Methods The few-shot CoT results with self-consistency on the PaLM 2 model
achieved the state-of-the-art (Anil et al., 2023).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.27    SVAMP
Description SVAMP (Patel et al., 2021) is a generation dataset focused on mathematical reasoning
containing 1,000 test instances. Because it is in Kojima et al. (2022), we also consider it a reasoning
dataset.

Implementation Details We prompt for at most 10 tokens. Like other math generation datasets,
we parse the first number out of the response, and use quasi-exact match for evaluation.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 67.

Comparison Methods The few-shot results on the GPT-4 model achieved the state-of-the-art (Zhao
et al., 2023).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.28    T RUTHFUL QA
Description TruthfulQA (Lin et al., 2022) is a classification (multi-choice) task designed to test
LLMs’ propensity to dispense harmful information. The dataset contains 654 test instances.

Implementation Details We use the implementation of TruthfulQA in HELM, which prompts for
only a single token. We extract the first letter and use exact match for evaluation.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 68.

Comparison Methods The few-shot results on the Palmyra X (43B) model achieved the state-of-
the-art (Liang et al., 2023).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

A.4.29    XSUM
Description XSUM (Narayan et al., 2018) is a generation dataset focused on summarization. The
dataset contains 518 test instances.


                                                  32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Implementation Details XSUM is a core scenario in HELM. We generate a summary of no more
than 128 tokens and use a temperature of 0.3. The ROUGE-2 metric is used for evaluation.

Examples An example is shown in Figure 69.

Comparison Methods The result of the PEGASUSLARGE (HugeNews) model achieved the state-
of-the-art (Zhang et al., 2020).

Results The results are shown in Table 5.

B        A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
Table 5 presents the results of zero-shot, zero-shot CoT, and zero-shot AgentInstruct on Vicuna-13b,
Llama-2-70b-chat, and GPT-3.5 Turbo, as well as the smaller 7b and 13b sizes of Llama-2-chat,
across 29 datasets and 53 subsets. Also, scores of task-specific models are included for comparison.
If there are multiple subsets, the score of task-specific models is only given for all subsets on average,
not for individual subsets. Figure 17 plots the results for each dataset on Vicuna-13b, Llama-2-70b-
chat, and GPT-3.5 Turbo, and Table 6 gives the average for each of the five models on each task
category. Similar to our three main models, Llama-2-7b-chat and Llama-2-13b-chat with zero-shot
AgentInstruct outperform both zero-shot and zero-shot CoT, on average, in each category of tasks.



                                                                                                                                            Results
               Dataset                              Subset               Task-Specific Model        Model
                                                                                                                  Zero-Shot(%) Zero-Shot CoT(%) Zero-Shot AgentInstruct(%)

                                                                                               Vicuna-13b             10.9           29.1                  60.8
                                                                                               Llama-2-7b-chat        50.4           56.7                  63.8
            AddSub                                                             95.7
                                                       -                                       Llama-2-13b-chat       52.7           52.4                  65.1
  (Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2016)                                       (Zhao et al., 2023)
                                                                                               Llama-2-70b-chat       36.2           73.2                  79.5
                                                                                               GPT-3.5 Turbo          78.7           79.0                  88.1

                                                                                              Vicuna-13b              25.6           16.5                  24.0
                                                                                              Llama-2-7b-chat         20.9            1.2                  22.0
               AQuA                                                             79.9
                                                       -                                      Llama-2-13b-chat        18.9           24.0                  25.2
          (Ling et al., 2017)                                            (Zheng et al., 2023)
                                                                                              Llama-2-70b-chat        19.7           35.8                  37.8
                                                                                              GPT-3.5 Turbo           16.5           60.2                  57.9

                                                                                               Vicuna-13b             77.2           71.0                  74.2
                                                                                               Llama-2-7b-chat        77.5           76.4                  72.8
               BoolQ                                                           92.4
                                                       -                                       Llama-2-13b-chat       79.9           76.1                  76.1
         (Clark et al., 2019)                                            (Zoph et al., 2022)
                                                                                               Llama-2-70b-chat       78.5           83.2                  84.6
                                                                                               GPT-3.5 Turbo          74.0           82.1                  83.6

                                                                                              Vicuna-13b              56.1           51.2                  60.6
                                                                                              Llama-2-7b-chat         57.7           54.3                  58.1
                                                                                68.4
                                          Average across all 9 subsets                        Llama-2-13b-chat        66.1           52.0                  64.7
                                                                         (Liang et al., 2023)
                                                                                              Llama-2-70b-chat        66.9           57.4                  65.5
                                                                                              GPT-3.5 Turbo           45.0           64.4                  67.5

                                                                                               Vicuna-13b             60.3           51.6                  63.6
                                                                                               Llama-2-7b-chat        65.3           58.8                  59.6
                                                      All                         -            Llama-2-13b-chat       63.9           59.1                  59.0
                                                                                               Llama-2-70b-chat       64.8           61.4                  70.2
                                                                                               GPT-3.5 Turbo          52.1           67.7                  68.8

                                                                                               Vicuna-13b             55.0           51.4                  61.1
                                                                                               Llama-2-7b-chat        54.7           51.1                  64.3
                                                     Black                        -            Llama-2-13b-chat       71.1           52.7                  68.1
                                                                                               Llama-2-70b-chat       71.9           58.6                  68.2
                                                                                               GPT-3.5 Turbo          44.5           66.7                  63.0

                                                                                               Vicuna-13b             59.5           54.4                  61.4
                                                                                               Llama-2-7b-chat        62.0           58.7                  66.6
                                                   Christian                      -            Llama-2-13b-chat       66.4           48.4                  62.8
                                                                                               Llama-2-70b-chat       65.1           56.2                  72.7
                                                                                               GPT-3.5 Turbo          53.2           67.5                  74.7

                                                                                               Vicuna-13b             55.1           48.3                  65.1
                                                                                               Llama-2-7b-chat        56.3           54.6                  57.1
                                                    Female                        -            Llama-2-13b-chat       68.6           52.6                  71.0
                                                                                               Llama-2-70b-chat       72.2           55.8                  55.1
            CivilComments                                                                      GPT-3.5 Turbo          47.1           67.0                  71.2
(Koh et al., 2021; Borkan et al., 2019)



                                                                                      33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                  Results
           Dataset                       Subset               Task-Specific Model         Model
                                                                                                        Zero-Shot(%) Zero-Shot CoT(%) Zero-Shot AgentInstruct(%)


                                                                                     Vicuna-13b             55.1           49.0                  57.3
                                                                                     Llama-2-7b-chat        53.8           56.6                  56.1
                                        LGBTQ                           -            Llama-2-13b-chat       63.4           49.5                  64.0
                                                                                     Llama-2-70b-chat       68.9           56.7                  64.7
                                                                                     GPT-3.5 Turbo          41.6           62.3                  65.6

                                                                                     Vicuna-13b             57.5           51.0                  54.4
                                                                                     Llama-2-7b-chat        59.4           54.9                  55.6
                                          Male                          -            Llama-2-13b-chat       67.1           55.7                  60.8
                                                                                     Llama-2-70b-chat       66.8           56.3                  66.7
                                                                                     GPT-3.5 Turbo          49.2           66.0                  67.7

                                                                                     Vicuna-13b             52.6           51.8                  60.0
                                                                                     Llama-2-7b-chat        55.3           52.7                  53.2
                                         Muslim                         -            Llama-2-13b-chat       63.5           52.3                  67.0
                                                                                     Llama-2-70b-chat       64.3           55.7                  65.4
                                                                                     GPT-3.5 Turbo          40.4           61.0                  68.2

                                                                                     Vicuna-13b             57.9           52.1                  63.6
                                                                                     Llama-2-7b-chat        60.6           51.7                  58.9
                                     Other Religions                    -            Llama-2-13b-chat       69.0           46.5                  68.1
                                                                                     Llama-2-70b-chat       67.3           56.3                  67.0
                                                                                     GPT-3.5 Turbo          41.2           60.9                  68.4

                                                                                     Vicuna-13b             51.7           51.8                  58.6
                                                                                     Llama-2-7b-chat        52.0           49.9                  51.0
                                         White                          -            Llama-2-13b-chat       61.8           51.6                  61.7
                                                                                     Llama-2-70b-chat       60.9           59.4                  59.2
                                                                                     GPT-3.5 Turbo          36.1           60.3                  60.2

                                                                                   Vicuna-13b               15.0           12.3                  12.6
                                                                                   Llama-2-7b-chat          14.1           13.8                  13.4
      CNN/Daily Mail                                                 21.5
                                            -                                      Llama-2-13b-chat         14.2           12.5                  13.0
      (See et al., 2017)                                      (Zhang et al., 2020)
                                                                                   Llama-2-70b-chat         14.4           13.4                  13.4
                                                                                   GPT-3.5 Turbo            17.4           15.8                  15.0

                                                                                    Vicuna-13b              49.0           27.0                  52.4
                                                                                    Llama-2-7b-chat         0.0            15.8                  62.2
         Coin Flip                                                   99.9
                                            -                                       Llama-2-13b-chat        0.0            18.8                  65.0
     (Wei et al., 2022b)                                      (Zhang et al., 2022b)
                                                                                    Llama-2-70b-chat        0.0            5.6                   99.4
                                                                                    GPT-3.5 Turbo           32.6           61.8                  95.2

                                                                                     Vicuna-13b             60.4           48.0                  61.8
                                                                                     Llama-2-7b-chat        60.5           16.4                  54.3
     CommonsenseQA                                                    91.2
                                            -                                        Llama-2-13b-chat       63.1           60.0                  62.6
    (Talmor et al., 2019)                                       (Xu et al., 2022)
                                                                                     Llama-2-70b-chat       71.6           62.4                  72.8
                                                                                     GPT-3.5 Turbo          77.2           72.1                  74.1

                                                                                     Vicuna-13b             63.2           50.8                  60.8
                                                                                     Llama-2-7b-chat        38.8           46.4                  46.4
     Date Understanding                                               91.2
                                            -                                        Llama-2-13b-chat       45.2           57.2                  56.4
   (Srivastava et al., 2023)                                   (Anil et al., 2023)
                                                                                     Llama-2-70b-chat       56.8           68.4                  70.8
                                                                                     GPT-3.5 Turbo          35.6           70.8                  71.6

                                                                                   Vicuna-13b               2.3            14.7                  19.3
                                                                                   Llama-2-7b-chat          3.1            30.0                  21.9
         GSM8K                                                       97.0
                                            -                                      Llama-2-13b-chat         5.2            32.6                  31.6
    (Cobbe et al., 2021)                                      (Zhou et al., 2023a)
                                                                                   Llama-2-70b-chat         2.2            54.6                  51.6
                                                                                   GPT-3.5 Turbo            8.4            77.8                  73.4

                                                                                     Vicuna-13b             45.5           39.9                  49.9
                                                                                     Llama-2-7b-chat        41.5           42.8                  33.5
         HellaSwag                                                   95.3
                                            -                                        Llama-2-13b-chat       59.7           43.0                  46.8
    (Zellers et al., 2019)                                      (OpenAI, 2023)
                                                                                     Llama-2-70b-chat       65.0           61.9                  60.6
                                                                                     GPT-3.5 Turbo          75.8           57.1                  73.5

                                                                                     Vicuna-13b              5.5           69.5                  94.2
                                                                                     Llama-2-7b-chat        29.9           77.7                  90.1
          IMDB                                                       97.1
                                            -                                        Llama-2-13b-chat       41.2           78.4                  90.6
     (Maas et al., 2011)                                       (Ding et al., 2021)
                                                                                     Llama-2-70b-chat       43.5           89.0                  94.0
                                                                                     GPT-3.5 Turbo          84.2           88.9                  93.9

                                                                                     Vicuna-13b             2.4             3.0                  18.8
                                                                                     Llama-2-7b-chat        0.2             3.2                  25.4
  Last Letter Concatenation                                           99.4
                                            -                                        Llama-2-13b-chat       1.8             3.4                  31.8
     (Wei et al., 2022b)                                       (Wei et al., 2022b)
                                                                                     Llama-2-70b-chat       3.0             3.4                  35.6
                                                                                     GPT-3.5 Turbo          4.8             3.4                  99.8

                                                                                   Vicuna-13b               44.1           44.2                  44.5
                                                                                   Llama-2-7b-chat          41.5           37.8                  35.1
                                                                     60.9
                               Average across all 5 subsets                        Llama-2-13b-chat         46.8           45.8                  46.6
                                                              (Liang et al., 2023)
                                                                                   Llama-2-70b-chat         53.3           52.2                  50.3


                                                                            34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                  Results
           Dataset                        Subset              Task-Specific Model         Model
                                                                                                        Zero-Shot(%) Zero-Shot CoT(%) Zero-Shot AgentInstruct(%)

                                                                                     GPT-3.5 Turbo          58.6           62.3                  58.9

                                                                                     Vicuna-13b             31.0           30.0                  29.0
                                                                                     Llama-2-7b-chat        25.0           24.0                  18.0
                                     Abstract Algebra                  -             Llama-2-13b-chat       30.0           30.0                  33.0
                                                                                     Llama-2-70b-chat       37.0           28.0                  35.0
                                                                                     GPT-3.5 Turbo          38.0           50.0                  36.0

                                                                                     Vicuna-13b             37.0           37.0                  29.0
                                                                                     Llama-2-7b-chat        26.0           30.0                  26.0
                                     College Chemistry                 -             Llama-2-13b-chat       31.0           35.0                  29.0
                                                                                     Llama-2-70b-chat       39.0           41.0                  32.0
          MMLU                                                                       GPT-3.5 Turbo          43.0           50.0                  55.0
   (Hendrycks et al., 2021)
                                                                                     Vicuna-13b             60.0           60.0                  63.0
                                                                                     Llama-2-7b-chat        57.0           56.0                  48.0
                                    Computer Security                  -             Llama-2-13b-chat       66.0           64.0                  68.0
                                                                                     Llama-2-70b-chat       64.0           73.0                  72.0
                                                                                     GPT-3.5 Turbo          75.0           80.0                  78.0

                                                                                     Vicuna-13b             23.7           29.8                  31.6
                                                                                     Llama-2-7b-chat        30.7           22.8                  25.4
                                       Econometrics                    -             Llama-2-13b-chat       27.2           28.1                  27.2
                                                                                     Llama-2-70b-chat       39.5           43.0                  40.4
                                                                                     GPT-3.5 Turbo          53.0           44.7                  44.7

                                                                                     Vicuna-13b             69.0           64.0                  70.0
                                                                                     Llama-2-7b-chat        69.0           56.0                  58.0
                                     US Foreign Policy                 -             Llama-2-13b-chat       80.0           72.0                  76.0
                                                                                     Llama-2-70b-chat       87.0           76.0                  72.0
                                                                                     GPT-3.5 Turbo          84.0           87.0                  81.0

                                                                                   Vicuna-13b               11.7           14.0                  19.0
                                                                                   Llama-2-7b-chat          17.5           10.6                  19.2
                                                                     47.2
                                          Regular                                  Llama-2-13b-chat         7.7            12.4                  18.8
                                                              (Liang et al., 2023)
                                                                                   Llama-2-70b-chat         15.6           13.2                  20.4
       MS MARCO                                                                    GPT-3.5 Turbo            26.0           20.5                  30.0
     (Bajaj et al., 2016)
                                                                                   Vicuna-13b               27.9           31.0                  34.6
                                                                                   Llama-2-7b-chat          32.8           26.3                  33.3
                                                                     76.2
                                          TREC                                     Llama-2-13b-chat         20.9           31.1                  38.9
                                                              (Liang et al., 2023)
                                                                                   Llama-2-70b-chat         37.8           28.7                  33.5
                                                                                   GPT-3.5 Turbo            47.7           38.1                  54.1

                                                                                   Vicuna-13b                3.8           33.7                  56.3
                                                                                   Llama-2-7b-chat          4.8            60.5                  65.2
         MultiArith                                                 100.0
                                             -                                     Llama-2-13b-chat         7.3            73.0                  76.2
     (Roy & Roth, 2015)                                       (Wang et al., 2023c)
                                                                                   Llama-2-70b-chat         5.8            88.3                  88.2
                                                                                   GPT-3.5 Turbo            50.3           96.7                  96.5

                                                                                   Vicuna-13b               40.3           45.9                  41.4
                                                                                   Llama-2-7b-chat          38.8           55.6                  61.1
        NarrativeQA                                                  77.0
                                             -                                     Llama-2-13b-chat         50.0           61.4                  64.1
    (Kočiský et al., 2018)                                   (Liang et al., 2023)
                                                                                   Llama-2-70b-chat         45.9           62.3                  65.0
                                                                                   GPT-3.5 Turbo            49.1           67.7                  65.2

                                                                                   Vicuna-13b               14.6           18.3                  27.5
                                                                                   Llama-2-7b-chat          15.3           21.2                  27.3
                                                                     45.8
                               NaturalQuestions (closed-book)                      Llama-2-13b-chat         18.7           26.7                  33.2
                                                              (Liang et al., 2023)
                                                                                   Llama-2-70b-chat         17.0           33.1                  35.0
     NaturalQuestions                                                              GPT-3.5 Turbo            23.5           40.6                  39.7
  (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019)
                                                                                   Vicuna-13b               39.3           47.2                  55.5
                                                                                   Llama-2-7b-chat          43.9           56.3                  59.4
                                                                     77.0
                               NaturalQuestions (open-book)                        Llama-2-13b-chat         43.3           61.7                  64.1
                                                              (Liang et al., 2023)
                                                                                   Llama-2-70b-chat         38.4           57.7                  65.9
                                                                                   GPT-3.5 Turbo            41.5           63.9                  42.7

                                                                                     Vicuna-13b             37.2           27.2                  33.7
                                                                                     Llama-2-7b-chat        44.0           40.7                  49.0
           NewsQA                                                    73.6
                                             -                                       Llama-2-13b-chat       40.9           45.5                  51.5
    (Trischler et al., 2017)                                  (Joshi et al., 2020)
                                                                                     Llama-2-70b-chat       39.5           47.1                  50.7
                                                                                     GPT-3.5 Turbo          30.9           52.0                  50.2

                                                                                   Vicuna-13b               61.6           54.8                  57.6
                                                                                   Llama-2-7b-chat          56.8           57.0                  56.2
      OpenBookQA                                                     94.4
                                             -                                     Llama-2-13b-chat         61.6           63.8                  62.0
   (Mihaylov et al., 2018)                                    (Huang et al., 2022)
                                                                                   Llama-2-70b-chat         73.8           75.0                  70.4
                                                                                   GPT-3.5 Turbo            81.6           78.6                  79.2

                                                                                   Vicuna-13b               37.5           17.9                  16.8
                                                                                   Llama-2-7b-chat          40.8           18.0                  13.4
           QuAC                                                      64.1
                                             -                                     Llama-2-13b-chat         42.5           19.3                  14.0
      (Choi et al., 2018)                                     (Huang et al., 2019)


                                                                            35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                   Results
           Dataset                        Subset               Task-Specific Model         Model
                                                                                                         Zero-Shot(%) Zero-Shot CoT(%) Zero-Shot AgentInstruct(%)

                                                                                      Llama-2-70b-chat       46.8           15.6                  16.6
                                                                                      GPT-3.5 Turbo          38.6           33.1                  34.7

                                                                                    Vicuna-13b               19.1           54.5                  51.4
                                                                                    Llama-2-7b-chat          21.8           39.1                  47.3
                                                                      76.8
                               Average across all 11 subsets                        Llama-2-13b-chat         17.3           43.0                  56.6
                                                               (Liang et al., 2023)
                                                                                    Llama-2-70b-chat          6.8           19.8                  57.0
                                                                                    GPT-3.5 Turbo            68.2           78.0                  68.9

                                                                                      Vicuna-13b              5.0           77.5                  75.0
                                                                                      Llama-2-7b-chat         0.0           60.0                  45.0
                                     ADE Corpus v2                       -            Llama-2-13b-chat       62.5           75.0                  57.5
                                                                                      Llama-2-70b-chat        0.0           30.0                  37.5
                                                                                      GPT-3.5 Turbo          82.5           82.5                  80.0

                                                                                      Vicuna-13b             15.0           12.5                  12.5
                                                                                      Llama-2-7b-chat        20.0           15.0                  2.0
                                       Banking 77                        -            Llama-2-13b-chat        2.5           10.0                  2.5
                                                                                      Llama-2-70b-chat        7.5           17.5                  12.5
                                                                                      GPT-3.5 Turbo          45.0           65.0                  45.0

                                                                                      Vicuna-13b              0.0           75.0                  70.0
                                                                                      Llama-2-7b-chat        7.5             7.5                  45.0
                                Neurips Impact Statement                 -            Llama-2-13b-chat       0.0            47.5                  72.5
                                                                                      Llama-2-70b-chat       0.0             0.0                  90.0
                                                                                      GPT-3.5 Turbo          20.0           87.5                  90.0

                                                                                      Vicuna-13b             17.5           25.0                  22.5
                                                                                      Llama-2-7b-chat        27.5           32.5                  25.0
                                    One Stop English                     -            Llama-2-13b-chat       17.5           27.5                  37.5
                                                                                      Llama-2-70b-chat        0.0           32.5                  37.5
                                                                                      GPT-3.5 Turbo          35.0           35.0                  25.0

                                                                                      Vicuna-13b             20.0           75.0                  87.5
                                                                                      Llama-2-7b-chat        2.5            55.0                  77.5
                                        Overruling                       -            Llama-2-13b-chat       0.0            37.5                  80.0
                                                                                      Llama-2-70b-chat       0.0            0.0                   85.0
          RAFT                                                                        GPT-3.5 Turbo          95.0           97.5                  95.0
     (Alex et al., 2021)
                                                                                      Vicuna-13b             30.0           25.0                  40.0
                                                                                      Llama-2-7b-chat        42.5           57.5                  67.5
                                Semiconductor Org Types                  -            Llama-2-13b-chat        0.0           52.5                  90.0
                                                                                      Llama-2-70b-chat       32.5           30.0                  92.5
                                                                                      GPT-3.5 Turbo          92.5           95.0                  95.0

                                                                                      Vicuna-13b             22.5           42.5                   2.5
                                                                                      Llama-2-7b-chat        65.0           40.0                  15.0
                               Systematic Review Inclusion               -            Llama-2-13b-chat       25.0           57.5                  12.5
                                                                                      Llama-2-70b-chat       15.0            2.5                  7.5
                                                                                      GPT-3.5 Turbo          85.0           95.0                  12.5

                                                                                      Vicuna-13b             55.0           57.5                  55.0
                                                                                      Llama-2-7b-chat        57.5           60.0                  45.0
                                   Tai Safety Research                   -            Llama-2-13b-chat       77.5           57.5                  57.5
                                                                                      Llama-2-70b-chat       20.0           80.0                  60.0
                                                                                      GPT-3.5 Turbo          77.5           72.5                  65.0

                                                                                      Vicuna-13b             45.0           72.5                  47.5
                                                                                      Llama-2-7b-chat        17.5           40.0                  55.0
                                     Terms of Service                    -            Llama-2-13b-chat        0.0           20.0                  50.0
                                                                                      Llama-2-70b-chat        0.0           15.0                  35.0
                                                                                      GPT-3.5 Turbo          85.0           90.0                  85.0

                                                                                      Vicuna-13b              0.0           70.0                  70.0
                                                                                      Llama-2-7b-chat        0.0            32.5                  67.5
                                     Tweet Eval Hate                     -            Llama-2-13b-chat       0.0            40.0                  80.0
                                                                                      Llama-2-70b-chat       0.0             0.0                  85.0
                                                                                      GPT-3.5 Turbo          47.5           50.0                  80.0

                                                                                      Vicuna-13b              0.0           67.5                  82.5
                                                                                      Llama-2-7b-chat        0.0            30.0                  57.5
                                   Twitter Complaints                    -            Llama-2-13b-chat       5.0            47.5                  82.5
                                                                                      Llama-2-70b-chat       0.0            10.0                  85.0
                                                                                      GPT-3.5 Turbo          85.0           87.5                  85.0

                                                                                      Vicuna-13b             20.0           20.1                  18.0
                                                                                      Llama-2-7b-chat        13.5           21.5                  23.5
                                                                       79.3
                               Average across all 3 subsets                           Llama-2-13b-chat        7.6           22.7                  23.9
                                                                (Anil et al., 2023)
                                                                                      Llama-2-70b-chat        8.0           38.7                  28.9
                                                                                      GPT-3.5 Turbo          25.1           39.1                  44.3

                                                                                      Vicuna-13b             13.6           18.0                  16.8
                                                                                      Llama-2-7b-chat        17.6           17.2                  22.0
                                       Five Objects                      -

       Shuffled Objects
   (Srivastava et al., 2023)
                                                                             36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                        Results
             Dataset                   Subset       Task-Specific Model         Model
                                                                                              Zero-Shot(%) Zero-Shot CoT(%) Zero-Shot AgentInstruct(%)

                                                                           Llama-2-13b-chat       4.0            18.8                  21.6
                                                                           Llama-2-70b-chat       6.4            40.0                  28.0
                                                                           GPT-3.5 Turbo          18.8           35.6                  34.8

                                                                           Vicuna-13b             15.2           15.6                  10.8
                                                                           Llama-2-7b-chat        10.8           14.4                  12.8
                                    Seven Objects             -            Llama-2-13b-chat        6.8           16.8                  16.8
                                                                           Llama-2-70b-chat        2.8           24.4                  17.2
                                                                           GPT-3.5 Turbo          16.4           20.8                  41.2

                                                                           Vicuna-13b             31.2           26.8                  26.4
                                                                           Llama-2-7b-chat        12.0           32.8                  35.6
                                    Three Objects             -            Llama-2-13b-chat       12.0           32.4                  33.2
                                                                           Llama-2-70b-chat       14.8           51.6                  41.6
                                                                           GPT-3.5 Turbo          40.0           60.8                  56.8

                                                                           Vicuna-13b             11.0           29.1                  63.4
                                                                           Llama-2-7b-chat        44.3           66.1                  63.6
           SingleEq                                       98.8
                                          -                                Llama-2-13b-chat       46.9           51.0                  65.0
 (Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2016)                   (Zhao et al., 2023)
                                                                           Llama-2-70b-chat       31.9           78.1                  78.5
                                                                           GPT-3.5 Turbo          77.4           90.4                  90.6

                                                                           Vicuna-13b             57.0           49.1                  55.0
                                                                           Llama-2-7b-chat        53.5           55.2                  52.4
          StrategyQA                                        90.4
                                          -                                Llama-2-13b-chat       56.3           63.1                  61.1
       (Geva et al., 2021)                           (Anil et al., 2023)
                                                                           Llama-2-70b-chat       60.9           68.6                  67.2
                                                                           GPT-3.5 Turbo          59.2           67.7                  69.0

                                                                           Vicuna-13b              7.2           22.5                  44.5
                                                                           Llama-2-7b-chat        27.2           44.3                  49.3
            SVAMP                                         93.7
                                          -                                Llama-2-13b-chat       36.6           45.6                  56.1
       (Patel et al., 2021)                         (Zhao et al., 2023)
                                                                           Llama-2-70b-chat       22.2           75.1                  68.8
                                                                           GPT-3.5 Turbo          63.5           81.1                  80.8

                                                                         Vicuna-13b               35.8           42.2                  52.3
                                                                         Llama-2-7b-chat          32.7           45.4                  43.6
          TruthfulQA                                       61.6
                                          -                              Llama-2-13b-chat         34.6           46.5                  48.8
        (Lin et al., 2022)                          (Liang et al., 2023)
                                                                         Llama-2-70b-chat         46.0           57.2                  62.4
                                                                         GPT-3.5 Turbo            57.0           60.1                  68.3

                                                                         Vicuna-13b               7.5             6.7                   6.9
                                                                         Llama-2-7b-chat          7.0             6.3                   6.5
            XSUM                                           24.6
                                          -                              Llama-2-13b-chat         8.2             6.9                   8.3
      (Narayan et al., 2018)                        (Zhang et al., 2020)
                                                                         Llama-2-70b-chat         9.0             8.5                   8.6
                                                                         GPT-3.5 Turbo            13.2            9.5                   8.8


Table 5: Results of zero-shot, zero-shot CoT, and zero-shot AgentInstruct on Vicuna-13b, Llama-
2-7b-chat, Llama-2-13b-chat, Llama-2-70b-chat, and GPT-3.5 Turbo across 29 datasets and 53
subsets.


                                                                  37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                             Zero-Shot                                                                   Zero-Shot CoT                                                                                               Zero-Shot AgentInstruct

                                                                                            60


                                                                                                                                                quasi_prefix_exact_match


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          quasi_prefix_exact_match
                     75                                                                                                                                                    75                                                                        60                                                                 15
 quasi_exact_match


                                                                                            40



                                                                        exact_match
                                                                                                                                                                           50                                                                        40                                                                 10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    rouge_2
                     50
                     25                                                                     20                                                                             25                                                                        20                                                                  5
                      0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                            0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                                    0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                               0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                        0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo
                                        AddSub                                                                    AQuA                                                                    BoolQ                                                                 CivilComments                                                      CNN-Daily Mail
                           (Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2016)                                                  (Ling et al., 2017)                                                    (Clark et al., 2019)                                                       (Koh et al., 2021)                                                  (See et al., 2017)

                     100                                                                    75                                                                                                                                                       75
                                                                                                                                                                           60                                                                                                                                           60
 quasi_exact_match


                                                                                                                                                quasi_exact_match


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          quasi_exact_match
                                                                        exact_match


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    exact_match
                                                                                            50                                                                                                                                                       50
                     50                                                                                                                                                    40                                                                                                                                           40
                                                                                            25                                                                             20                                                                        25                                                                 20
                      0     Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                        0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                                    0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                               0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                        0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo
                                    Coin Flip                                                           CommonsenseQA                                                              Date Understanding                                                              GSM8K                                                             HellaSwag
                                (Wei et al., 2022b)                                                    (Talmor et al., 2019)                                                     (Srivastava et al., 2023)                                                    (Cobbe et al., 2021)                                              (Zellers et al., 2019)

                                                                                            100                                                                            60                                                                        30
                     75
 quasi_exact_match


                                                                        quasi_exact_match


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                                exact_match


                                                                                                                                                                           40


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NDCG@10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RR@10
                     50                                                                     50
                                                                                                                                                                           20                                                                        10                                                                 20
                     25
                      0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                            0     Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                                0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                               0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                        0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo
                                    IMDB                                                          Last Letter Concatenation                                                             MMLU                                                               MS MARCO (Regular)                                                  MS MARCO (TREC)
                               (Maas et al., 2011)                                                   (Wei et al., 2022b)                                                         (Hendrycks et al., 2021)                                                   (Bajaj et al., 2016)                                                (Bajaj et al., 2016)

                     100                                                                                                                                                   40
                                                                                            60                                                                                                                                                       60
 quasi_exact_match


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        40
                                                                                            40                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                                        f1_score


                                                                                                                                                f1_score


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          f1_score


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    f1_score
                     50                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                            20                                                                                                                                                       20
                      0     Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                        0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                                    0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                               0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                        0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo
                                  MultiArith                                                             NarrativeQA                                                            NaturalQuestions (closed-book)                                             NaturalQuestions (open-book)                                               NewsQA
                              (Roy & Roth, 2015)                                                     (Kočiský et al., 2018)                                                    (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019)                                                (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019)                                           (Trischler et al., 2017)


                     75                                                                                                                                                    75                                                                        40
                                                                                            40                                                                                                                                                                                                                          75
                                                                                                                                                quasi_exact_match


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          quasi_exact_match


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    quasi_exact_match
 exact_match


                     50                                                                                                                                                    50
                                                                        f1_score


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        50
                                                                                            20                                                                                                                                                       20
                     25                                                                                                                                                    25                                                                                                                                           25
                      0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                            0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                                    0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                               0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                        0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo
                               OpenBookQA                                                                         QuAC                                                                    RAFT                                                                 Shuffled Objects                                                          SingleEq
                            (Mihaylov et al., 2018)                                                          (Choi et al., 2018)                                                     (Alex et al., 2021)                                                   (Srivastava et al., 2023)                                         (Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2015)



                     60                                                                                                75                                                                                   60
 quasi_exact_match


                                                                                                   quasi_exact_match


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                              exact_match


                     40                                                                                                50                                                                                   40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rouge_2


                                                                                                                       25                                                                                                                                                                       5
                     20                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                       0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                                                      0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                                          0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo                                        0 Vicuna-13b Llama-2-70b-chat GPT-3.5 Turbo
                                           StrategyQA                                                                                    SVAMP                                                                              TruthfulQA                                                                                          XSUM
                                        (Geva et al., 2021)                                                                         (Patel et al., 2021)                                                                  (Lin et al., 2022)                                                                              (Narayan et al., 2018)



Figure 17: Main results (%) comparing zero-shot, zero-shot CoT and zero-shot AgentInstruct
performance on Vicuna-13b (left), Llama-2-70b-chat (middle), and GPT-3.5 Turbo (right).


                                                                                                                                                                                        38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Category         Model                   Zero-Shot (%)   Zero-Shot CoT (%)   Zero-Shot AgentInstruct (%)
Overall          Vicuna-13b                  30.6              34.4                     43.9
                 Llama-2-7b-chat             32.1              38.3                     44.6
                 Llama-2-13b-chat            34.3              44.5                     50.2
                 Llama-2-70b-chat            35.1              52.4                     58.3
                 GPT-3.5 Turbo               48.1              60.8                     65.1
                 Average over 5 models       36.1              46.1                     52.4
                 Average over 3 models       37.9              49.2                     55.7
Classification   Vicuna-13b                  41.2              42.7                     50.6
                 Llama-2-7b-chat             37.3              39.0                     46.9
                 Llama-2-13b-chat            39.2              46.1                     52.8
                 Llama-2-70b-chat            44.0              51.1                     61.0
                 GPT-3.5 Turbo               54.0              62.6                     68.1
                 Average over 5 models       43.2              48.3                     55.9
                 Average over 3 models       46.4              52.1                     59.9
Generation       Vicuna-13b                  17.6              24.1                     35.6
                 Llama-2-7b-chat             25.7              37.4                     41.7
                 Llama-2-13b-chat            28.4              42.4                     47.0
                 Llama-2-70b-chat            24.1              54.1                     54.9
                 GPT-3.5 Turbo               40.8              58.6                     61.3
                 Average over 5 models       27.3              43.3                     48.1
                 Average over 3 models       27.5              45.6                     50.6
Reasoning        Vicuna-13b                  26.1              29.1                     45.2
                 Llama-2-7b-chat             26.4              35.9                     48.0
                 Llama-2-13b-chat            28.5              46.9                     54.8
                 Llama-2-70b-chat            26.6              62.1                     69.5
                 GPT-3.5 Turbo               46.9              70.9                     78.7
                 Average over 5 models       30.9              49.0                     59.2
                 Average over 3 models       33.2              54.0                     64.5

Table 6: Zero-shot, zero-shot CoT, and zero-shot AgentInstruct results split by category. The table
shows the comparison for all five models split by category. The average over three models is based
on Vicuna-13b, Llama-2-70b-chat, and GPT 3.5 Turbo.


                                                    39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     A DDITIONAL R ESULT A NALYSIS
C.1       E RROR A NALYSIS

Overall We provide more specific errors for each dataset in Table 7, accounting for all instances in
the 25 samples of AddSub, IMDB, and NewsQA respectively.

Dataset                Error Type           Further Description of Error                                     Percentage
AddSub      Reasoning Incorrect reasoning   Wrong operation                                                     24.0
                      Incorrect reasoning   Incorrect step                                                      20.0
                      Incorrect reasoning   Missed a step                                                        8.0
                      Not factual           Arithmetic error                                                    12.0
            Answer    Short answer          Conciseness prompt causes rounding                                  24.0
                      Incorrect format      Hallucinated multiple choice                                        8.0
                      Ambiguity             Confusing question                                                  4.0
IMDB        Reasoning Incorrect reasoning   Misreads sentiment due to language used                             36.0
            Answer    Invalid label         Chooses neutral/mixed                                               32.0
                      Ambiguity             Confusing question                                                  20.0
                      Not factual           Answer before explanation                                           12.0
NewsQA      Reasoning Not factual           Tried to infer answer not in passage                                12.0
                      Incorrect reasoning   Didn’t understand question                                          8.0
            Answer    Ambiguity             Answer mostly correct                                               32.0
                      Ambiguity             No real question to answer                                          8.0
                      Ambiguity             Answer seems right but should be no answer                           4.0
                      Incorrect format      Answer seems right but not from continuous stretch                  12.0
                      Incorrect format      Answer in explanation but not provided at the end                   4.0
                      Invalid label         Says there is no answer but not the recognized no answer label       8.0
                      Invalid label         Empty answer                                                        4.0
                      Short answer          Conciseness prompt shortens answer too much                          8.0

Table 7: Error analysis results for Llama-2-70b-chat on AddSub, IMDB, and NewsQA, each with 25
samples whose final prediction with zero-shot AgentInstruct was incorrect.


Moreover, for each error category, we provide an example in Table 8. Note that we do not include
NewsQA examples due to the dataset’s restrictive license.

Summarization Datasets For each model, zero-shot AgentInstruct tends to lose on summarization
datasets. So, we select 25 random instances from XSUM (with an F1 score less than 1) on Llama-2-
70b-chat and find summarization-specific error cases.
In all but one of the instances, the summary extracted using the answer extraction prompt was not the
same summary given after the reasoning extraction prompt. It was often kept around the same length
but reworded or changed to contain somewhat different information from the first summary. This
suggests that for the answer extraction prompt, the LLM still feels the need to write a new summary
instead of relying entirely on the one generated during its intermediate reasoning steps.
We identify four summaries given by zero-shot AgentInstruct with incorrect information and three
others that are satisfactory but a little misleading, which could be due to the intermediate reasoning
steps reinforcing incorrect answers. However, the remaining summaries all seem informative,
sometimes more so than the references. In fact, in four of the instances, the reference summary seems
to be based on the full article, not the part of the article presented in the implementation from HELM,
which poses a problem for evaluation. Additionally, traditional metrics used for summarization (F1,
ROUGE-2) are not able to gauge truthfulness when a reference summary is flawed (e.g., a summary
hallucinating a part of the article could beat one that is truthful but less similar to a reference).


                                                         40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dataset       AddSub
Question      Question: Jason has 18 books and he has read 9 of them . Mary has 42 books . How many
              books do they have together ?
CoT Reasoning 1. Understand the context: The prompt is asking about the total number of books that Jason
              and Mary have. 2. Identify the operation: The operation is addition. 3. Perform the operation:
              Jason has 18 books and has read 9 of them, so the number of books he has left is 18 - 9 = 9.
              Mary has 42 books. Therefore, the total number of books they have together is 9 + 42 = 51. 4.
              Answer the question: They have 51 books together.
              Correct answer: 51 books.
              Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in the shortest form possible that
              will still be correct. Answer: 51. Answer: 51
Ground Truth 60
Error Type    Incorrect reasoning (incorrect step): Jason reading 9 books does not mean he no longer has
              them.
Dataset       IMDB
Question      Passage: Susan Sarandon and Natalie Portman play Adele and Ann August, a single mother
              who’s the working definition of the word "dreamer" and her solemn, pragmatic daughter. Adele,
              wanting to make a fresh start in a big city, moves them from Wisconsin to California.<br /><br
              />Decent, if not exceptional or particularly memorable, with some serious and sad moments. It
              pushes some emotional buttons, that’s for sure. Best thing it offers is a solid cast, and Sarandon
              and Portman are quite good in the leads - even if their characters are one-dimensional at
              times.<br /><br />Could be better, could be worse.<br /><br />I gave this one seven out of ten.
CoT Reasoning The passage provided is a review of the movie "Anywhere But Here" starring Susan Sarandon
              and Natalie Portman. The reviewer mentions that the movie is "decent" and "solid" but also
              states that it’s "not exceptional or particularly memorable." They also mention that it has some
              "serious and sad moments" and that the cast, particularly Sarandon and Portman, are "quite
              good" but their characters are "one-dimensional at times."
              Based on the language used in the review, it’s clear that the reviewer has mixed feelings about
              the movie. They use phrases like "decent," "solid," and "could be better, could be worse" to
              indicate that the movie is not outstanding but still enjoyable. The reviewer also uses phrases
              like "pushes some emotional buttons" and "solid cast" to indicate that the movie has some
              positive aspects.
              However, the reviewer also uses phrases like "not exceptional or particularly memorable" and
              "one-dimensional at times" to indicate that the movie is not perfect and has some flaws.
              Therefore, based on the tone and language used in the review, it’s clear that the sentiment of
              the review is neutral or mixed. The reviewer does not express any strong positive or negative
              emotions towards the movie.
              Answer: Neutral
              Therefore, the correct label among ’Negative’, ’Positive’ (just the label) to the original task is
              below. Sentiment: Neutral
Ground Truth Positive
Error Type    Invalid label (chooses neutral/mixed): Decides to label neutral instead of negative or positive.
Dataset       AddSub
Question      Question: Mandy made an apple pie . She used 0.6666666666666666 tablespoon of cinnamon
              and 0.5 tablespoon of nutmeg . How much more cinnamon than nutmeg did Mandy use ?
CoT Reasoning 1. Understand the context: The context of the problem is that Mandy made an apple pie and
              used certain amounts of cinnamon and nutmeg. 2. Identify the operation: The operation in this
              problem is subtraction. The question asks how much more cinnamon than nutmeg did Mandy
              use, which implies that we need to find the difference between the amount of cinnamon and
              nutmeg used. 3. Perform the operation: We are given that Mandy used 0.6666666666666666
              tablespoon of cinnamon and 0.5 tablespoon of nutmeg. To find the difference, we can subtract
              the amount of nutmeg from the amount of cinnamon:
              0.6666666666666666 - 0.5 = 0.1666666666666666
              4. Answer the question: The question asks how much more cinnamon than nutmeg did Mandy
              use? The answer to this question is the result of the subtraction operation we performed earlier:
              0.1666666666666666.
              Therefore, the answer to the question is 0.1666666666666666 tablespoon of cinnamon more
              than nutmeg.
              Correct answer: 0.1666666666666666 tablespoon.
              Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in the shortest form possible that
              will still be correct. Answer: 0.17
Ground Truth 0.16666666666666666



                                                      41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Error Type       Short answer (conciseness prompt causes rounding): Causes too much rounding.
Dataset       AddSub
Question      Question: Jason joined his school ’s band . He bought a flute for $ 142.46 , a music tool for $
              8.89 , and a song book for $ 7 . How much did Jason spend at the music store ?
CoT Reasoning 1. Understand the context: The context of the problem is that Jason joined his school’s band
              and purchased several items at a music store.
              2. Identify the operation: The operation in this problem is addition. The verb "spent" implies
              that Jason spent a certain amount of money on the items he purchased.
              3. Perform the operation: To find out how much Jason spent at the music store, we need to
              add the cost of the flute, music tool, and song book. The cost of the flute is $142.46, the cost
              of the music tool is $8.89, and the cost of the song book is $7. Therefore, the total amount
              Jason spent at the music store is:
              $142.46 + $8.89 + $7 = $158.22
              4. Answer the question: The question asks, "How much did Jason spend at the music store?"
              The answer to this question is $158.22.
              Therefore, the correct answer to the task is $158.22.
              Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in the shortest form possible that
              will still be correct. Answer: $158.22
Ground Truth 158.35
Error Type    Not factual (arithmetic error): Arithmetic done incorrectly.
Dataset       AddSub
Question      Dale ’s Vegetarian Restaurant bought 2.8333333333333335 pounds of green peppers and
              2.8333333333333335 pounds of red peppers . How many pounds of peppers did Dale ’s
              Vegetarian Restaurant buy in all ?
CoT Reasoning 1. Understand the context: The context of the problem is that Dale’s Vegetarian Restaurant
              bought certain amounts of green and red peppers. 2. Identify the operation: The operation in
              this problem is addition. The verb "bought" implies that the restaurant purchased both green
              and red peppers, and we need to find the total amount of peppers bought. 3. Perform the opera-
              tion: We need to add 2.8333333333333335 pounds of green peppers and 2.8333333333333335
              pounds of red peppers.
              2.8333333333333335 + 2.8333333333333335 = 5.666666666666667
              4. Answer the question: The question asks, "How many pounds of peppers did Dale’s
              Vegetarian Restaurant buy in all?"
              The answer is 5.666666666666667 pounds of peppers.
              Therefore, the correct answer is (D) 5.67 pounds.
              Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in the shortest form possible that
              will still be correct. Answer: 5.67 pounds.
Ground Truth 5.666666666666667
Error Type    Incorrect format (hallucinated multiple choice): There were no multiple choice letters any-
              where in the problem, but the model thought there was and its answer was rounded too
              much.
Dataset         IMDB
Question        Passage: I love old "monster movies" for the pure camp value. This one does not disappoint if
                you find that sort of thing amusing.<br /><br />The acting is pure 1950s stilted crap. You do
                get used to it when you’ve seen enough of these... the dialogue is very silly and ultimately
                forgettable. You’re just there for the giant bird.<br /><br />The "science" in this movie
                is hilarious. A monstrous otherworldly avian that can manipulate anti-matter... intent on
                wreaking havoc and eating people... an alien who has come to Earth to nest. Some of the
                best scenes in the movie (that don’t have the bird in them) include the "scientists" explaining
                what is going on.<br /><br />A lot has been said about the ridiculous bird marionette. It looks
                like a new baby bird... bald and ugly with ruffled feathers. It even caws like a hungry, angry
                fledgling. However, the bird scared the crap out of my three year old, who had big scary bird
                nightmares for the evening. It’s a bit creepy.<br /><br />I was very sad about the scene where
                they shoot the egg. (Somehow the egg is not protected by an antimatter shield.) But I’m a bird
                lover, what can I say?


                                                     42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


CoT Reasoning The passage provided is a review of a movie, specifically a "monster movie" from the 1950s.
              The reviewer mentions that they enjoy old monster movies for their camp value, indicating that
              they find them amusing. They mention that the acting in the movie is stilted and the dialogue
              is silly and forgettable, but they are still able to enjoy the movie for its entertainment value.
              The reviewer also mentions that the "science" in the movie is hilarious, specifically the concept
              of a monstrous otherworldly avian that can manipulate anti-matter and has come to Earth to
              nest. They seem to find the idea of this bird, and the scientists’ Reasonings of it, amusing.
              The reviewer also mentions that the bird marionette used in the movie looks like a new baby
              bird and sounds like a hungry, angry fledgling, which scared their three-year-old child. They
              seem to find the bird’s appearance and behavior amusing, but also acknowledge that it may be
              creepy to some people.
              Based on the reviewer’s use of language and tone, it is clear that they have a positive sentiment
              towards the movie. They use words and phrases like "love," "amusing," "pure camp value,"
              and "entertainment value" to express their enjoyment of the movie. They also use a playful
              and lighthearted tone when discussing the movie’s science and the bird marionette.
              Therefore, the correct answer is "Positive."
              Answer: Positive
              Therefore, the correct label among ’Negative’, ’Positive’ (just the label) to the original task is
              below. Sentiment: Positive
Ground Truth Negative
Error Type    Ambiguity (confusing question): The reviewer seems to enjoy the movie as they watch it
              knowing it’s supposed to be bad. So, it’s not clear whether they are rating based on the quality
              (which would be negative) or their enjoyment of it (which would be positive). The latter
              certainly seems favored in their review.

      Table 8: Error analysis examples for each error type in the AddSub and IMDB datasets.


                          Dataset                                    Issue
                          AddSub                                 Not found
                          AQuA                             Incorrect dataset found
                          Coin Flip                        Incorrect dataset found
                          Last Letter Concatenation        Incorrect dataset found
                          SingleEq                               Not found

Table 9: Agent instruction issues where our QA API was not able to retrieve any relevant information
from the sources from the web.

Agent Instruction Issues In Table 9, we list all the main datasets where the QA API was not able
to gain any relevant information about the task.

C.2   M ANUAL P ROMPT S ENSITIVITY

In Table 2, we tested various manual prompts on Llama-2-70b-chat on AddSub. In Table 10, we focus
on formatting, specifically whether the instruction should appear before or after the instance. Again,
the difference is minor suggesting that the methodology behind zero-shot AgentInstruct is robust.

                      CoT            Prompt                              Quasi-Exact
                      Reasoning                                          Match (%)
                      Format         Instruction -> Instance             79.5
                                     Instance -> Instruction             80.0

               Table 10: Prompt sensitivity analysis on Llama-2-70b-chat on AddSub.


C.3   A DDITIONAL D ESCRIPTIONS OF A BLATION S TUDY

       • w/o Agent Instructions: We compare the zero-shot AgentInstruct methodology to zero-shot
         CoT. This setting is exactly zero-shot CoT on Llama-2-70b-chat.


                                                      43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • w/o Input Examples: We remove the examples from the input to the agent. Typically, the
         agent is given 5 input-only examples to reference when generating the instructions. These
         examples do not include the ground truth answers. In this setting, we have the agent generate
         instructions without providing example inputs to the agent.
       • w/o Labels: We remove the description of the labels from the input to the agent. Specifically,
         this is applicable for classification tasks such as IMDB, for example, where the expected
         outputs are either ‘True’ or ‘False’. For multiple-choice and open-ended generation tasks,
         we provide a simple description of ‘multiple choice’ or ‘generation’ instead of providing
         a list of output labels. With this setting, we have the agent generate instructions without
         providing any information or description of the output labels for any task type. An example
         is given in Figure 1 and Figure 2.
       • w/o GPT-4: We use GPT-3.5 Turbo to generate the instructions instead of GPT-4.

D    DATASET E XAMPLES
WARNING: this section contains examples of text that may be considered unsafe, offensive, or
upsetting.
Complete running examples including agent instructions and CoT reasoning paths for each dataset
are presented in Figure 18 to Figure 69.


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the context: The dataset involves mathematical operations like addition and subtraction in a
  contextual setting. The operations are performed on ’objects’ in different ’locations’.
  2. Identify the operation: The operation could be addition or subtraction. This can be identified from the
  ’verb’ in the prompt. For example, if the verb is ’add’, the operation is addition. If the verb is ’remove’,
  the operation is subtraction.
  3. Perform the operation: Once the operation is identified, perform it on the ’number’ of ’objects’. For
  example, if the operation is addition and the number of objects is 2 and 3, the result is 5. If the operation
  is subtraction and the number of objects is 5 and 3, the result is 2.
  4. Answer the question: The question at the end of the prompt asks ’how many [object] [verb] [subject]
  [preposition] [location]?’. Use the result from the operation to answer this question.
  5. Topics to know: Basic understanding of addition and subtraction, understanding of prepositions and their
  use in sentences, ability to understand context from a sentence.
  6. Steps to answer the question:
  a. Understand the context from the prompt.
  b. Identify the operation from the verb.
  c. Perform the operation on the number of objects.
  d. Use the result to answer the question at the end of the prompt.
  Remember, the key is to understand the context, identify the operation, perform it, and use the result to
  answer the question.
  Question: Joan found 70 seashells on the beach . she gave Sam some of her seashells . She has 27 seashell .
  How many seashells did she give to Sam ?
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  1. Understand the context: The context of the problem is that Joan found 70 seashells on the beach and gave
  some of them to Sam. The problem is asking for the number of seashells that Joan gave to Sam.
  2. Identify the operation: The operation in this problem is subtraction. The verb "gave" implies that Joan
  gave some of her seashells to Sam, which means that the number of seashells she has now is less than the number
  of seashells she found.
  3. Perform the operation: To perform the operation, we need to find out how many seashells Joan has now and
  then subtract that number from the number of seashells she found. The problem states that Joan has 27 seashells
  now. If we subtract 27 from 70, we get 43.
  4. Answer the question: The question asks, "How many seashells did she give to Sam?" The answer to this question
  is 43 seashells.
  Therefore, the correct answer is 43 seashells.
  Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in the shortest form possible that will still be
  correct.
  Answer: 43



                           Figure 18: A complete running example of AddSub.


                                                       44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
 Instructions:
 1. Understand the structure of the dataset: The AQUA dataset contains question-and-answer pairs related to
 algebra. The questions are generated based on paintings and comments from an existing art knowledge dataset.
 2. Topics to know: To answer questions from this dataset, you should have a good understanding of algebra.
 Additionally, some knowledge of art and how it can be related to algebraic concepts may also be helpful.
 3. Steps to answer the questions:
 - Read the question carefully and identify the algebraic concept it is asking about.
 - Consider the options provided. Each option will represent a different potential answer to the question.
 - Use your knowledge of algebra to determine which option is the correct answer. Remember, the questions are
 based on paintings and comments from an art knowledge dataset, so consider how these elements might relate to
 the algebraic concept in question.
 - Once you have determined the correct answer, write it down in the format specified in the prompt template.
 4. Tips for answering the questions:
 - Don’t rush. Take your time to understand the question and the options provided.
 - If you’re unsure about an answer, try to eliminate the options that you know are incorrect. This can help
 narrow down the possibilities and make it easier to choose the correct answer.
 - Remember, the questions are based on art knowledge as well as algebra. Try to think creatively about how
 these two areas might intersect.
 Question: Three birds are flying at a fast rate of 900 kilometers per hour. What is their speed in miles per
 minute? [1km = 0.6 miles]
 A. 32400
 B. 6000
 C. 600
 D. 60000
 E. 10
 Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
 End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
 First, let’s convert 900 kilometers per hour to miles per hour. We know that 1 kilometer is equal to 0.6 miles,
 so we can convert 900 kilometers per hour to miles per hour as follows:
 900 km/h x 0.6 miles/km = 540 miles/h
 Now, we need to find the speed of the birds in miles per minute. To do this, we can divide the speed in miles
 per hour by 60:
 540 miles/h ÷ 60 = 9 miles/min
 Therefore, the correct answer is C. 600.
 Answer: C. 600
 Therefore, the correct multiple choice label (just the letter) to the task is below.
 Answer: C



                          Figure 19: A complete running example of AQuA.


                                                      45
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
 Instructions:
 1. Understand the question: The question is a naturally occurring, factual question that was asked on Google.
 It is unambiguous and requires a "yes" or "no" answer. Make sure you fully understand what the question is
 asking.
 2. Read the passage: The passage is taken from a Wikipedia page that was one of the top five results for the
 question on Google. It contains the information needed to answer the question. Read the passage carefully and
 extract the relevant information.
 3. Answer the question: Based on the information in the passage, answer the question with either "yes" or "no".
 Make sure your answer is supported by the information in the passage.
 4. Check your work: Review the question, passage, and your answer to ensure they align. The question should be
 answered accurately based on the information in the passage.
 Tips:
 - The questions in this dataset are factual and require knowledge of a wide range of topics. Brush up on general
 knowledge and be prepared to learn new information from the passages.
 - The passages are taken from Wikipedia, so they are written in a clear, informative style. Use this to your
 advantage when extracting information.
 - The answers are either "yes" or "no", but the process of getting to the answer requires understanding and
 interpreting the passage. Take your time to understand the passage before answering.
 - Always double-check your work to ensure accuracy.
 Passage: Elmendorf Air Force Base (IATA: EDF, ICAO: PAED, FAA LID: EDF) is a United States military facility in
 Anchorage, the largest city in Alaska. Originally known as Elmendorf Field, it became Elmendorf Air Force Base
 after World War II, and in 2010 it merged with nearby Fort Richardson to form Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson.
 Question: Is there an air force base in anchorage alaska?
 Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
 End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
 The question asks whether there is an air force base in Anchorage, Alaska. To answer this question, we need
 to look at the provided passage.
 The passage states that Elmendorf Air Force Base is a United States military facility located in Anchorage,
 Alaska. It was originally known as Elmendorf Field and later became Elmendorf Air Force Base after World War
 II. In 2010, it merged with nearby Fort Richardson to form Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson.
 Based on the information in the passage, it is clear that there is indeed an air force base in Anchorage,
 Alaska. The passage explicitly states that Elmendorf Air Force Base is located in Anchorage, and its history
 is described in the passage.
 Therefore, the answer to the question is "yes."
 Answer: Yes.
 Therefore, the correct label among ’No’, ’Yes’ (just the label) to the original task is below.
 Answer: Yes.



                          Figure 20: A complete running example of BoolQ.


                                                      46
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the context: The civil_comments dataset consists of public comments from various English-language
  news sites. These comments were made between 2015 and 2017.
  2. Consider the metadata: Each comment comes with associated metadata such as article IDs and timestamps. Use
  this information to help understand the context of the comment.
  3. Analyze the comment: Each comment in the dataset has been labeled for toxicity and identity mentions. Use
  these labels to help determine the nature of the comment.
  4. Be aware of potential hate speech: The dataset is often used for tasks like Hate Speech Detection and Toxic
  Comment Classification. Be aware that some comments may contain hate speech or toxic language.
  5. Answer the question: Based on your understanding of the comment and its context, answer the question. Your
  answer should be either ’True’ or ’False’.
  6. Be objective: Your answer should be based on the information in the comment and its associated metadata,
  not on personal opinions or biases.
  7. Be concise: Your answer should be clear and to the point. Avoid unnecessary elaboration.
  8. Be respectful: Even if the comment contains hate speech or toxic language, your response should always be
  respectful and professional.
  Passage: Exactly! It seems every time a black youth is killed by police, the grieving parent is the mom. Moms
  get recognized by black athletes but seldom is there a dad mentioned.
  Question: Is the passage above toxic?
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The passage above mentions the killing of black youth by police and the grieving parents, specifically mentioning
  mothers being recognized by black athletes but not fathers. This could be interpreted as a commentary on the
  lack of recognition or support for black fathers who have lost their children to police violence. However,
  the tone of the passage is not aggressive or hostile, and it does not contain any hate speech or derogatory
  language.
  Based on the context and content of the passage, it can be determined that the comment is not toxic. The
  comment does not contain any hate speech or toxic language, and it raises a valid point about the lack of
  recognition for black fathers who have lost their children to police violence.
  Therefore, the answer to the question is False. The passage is not toxic.
  Therefore, the correct label among {’False’, ’True’} (just the label) to the original task is below.
  Answer: False



                   Figure 21: A complete running example of CivilComments (All).


                                                        47
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the context: The dataset contains public comments from various news sites. These comments have
  been labeled for toxicity, obscenity, threat, insult, identity attack, and sexual explicitness. Each label is
  a value between 0 and 1, indicating the fraction of annotators that assigned these attributes to the comment
  text.
  2. Consider the demographic: Although the dataset does not explicitly mention the demographic ’black’, it
  seems that the comments may have been categorized based on whether they were made by individuals identified
  as black or non-black. Keep this in mind when answering questions.
  3. Analyze the passage and question: Read the passage and question carefully. The passage will provide a
  general statement or argument, and the question will ask something related to that statement or argument. Your
  answer should be based on the information provided in the passage and question.
  4. Answer the question: Based on your analysis of the passage and question, provide an answer. The possible
  outputs are ’True’ or ’False’. Make sure your answer is supported by the information in the passage and
  question.
  5. Be mindful of sensitive topics: Given the nature of the dataset, the passage and question may involve
  sensitive topics related to race and discrimination. Be respectful and considerate in your responses.
  6. Review your answer: Before submitting your answer, review it to ensure it is accurate, clear, and respectful.
  Passage: Kayden, religion has nothing to do with this. Hinduphobia- no it’s cult and self seeking power hungry
  crooks like your man Butler that jump on the religious wagon who have no qualms about lying and cheating their
  way up the political ladder. In Tulsi Gabbard’s case, her guru has taken advantage of her cult beliefs she was
  born into and abused the fact that she is beholden to him. As he says when he initiates his disciples, you are
  now mine and I will instruct you how you can serve ME. Fanaticism not religion.
  Cry yourself silly with all your talk on religious bigotry, homophobic backed support, Hillary Clinton money,
  and whatever else you can lash out with.
  How about all the other religions, I don’t see Tulsi and Butler supporting them. In fact she down right degrades
  the Muslims. Butler has always spoken very unkindly of Gays, Blacks, Muslims Christians and Jews.
  Beware Hawaii, Tulsi and anyone who adheres to him, has no place in our democratic system.
  Question: Is the passage above toxic?
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The passage above contains several elements that suggest it may be toxic. Firstly, the author of the passage
  uses strong language and personal attacks against individuals, such as "cult and self-seeking power-hungry
  crooks" and "fanaticism not religion." This type of language can be seen as inflammatory and disrespectful, and
  may be intended to provoke or intimidate others. Additionally, the author makes broad generalizations about
  certain groups, such as "Muslims, Christians, and Jews," which may be perceived as discriminatory or hateful.
  Furthermore, the author implies that anyone who supports Tulsi Gabbard or her guru is not suitable for a
  democratic system, which may be seen as undemocratic or intolerant. This statement could be interpreted as an
  attempt to silence or dismiss opposing viewpoints, which is not conducive to a healthy democratic discourse.
  Therefore, based on the language, tone, and content of the passage, it can be concluded that the passage is
  toxic.
  Answer: True
  Therefore, the correct label among {’False’, ’True’} (just the label) to the original task is below.
  Answer: True



                 Figure 22: A complete running example of CivilComments (Black).


                                                       48
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
 Instructions:
 1. Understand the context: The civil_comments dataset contains public comments from various news sites. These
 comments were created between 2015 and 2017 and appeared on approximately 50 English-language news sites across
 the world. The dataset includes the text of the comments, some associated metadata, and labels for toxicity
 and identity mentions.
 2. Focus on the content: The dataset does not provide specific demographic information about the commenters.
 Therefore, your analysis should focus on the content of the comments and their context, rather than attempting
 to infer demographic information.
 3. Analyze the toxicity: The dataset includes labels for toxicity. Use these labels to help determine the tone
 and intent of the comments.
 4. Be aware of the limitations: The dataset does not include user identities or demographic information about
 the commenters. Therefore, be cautious about making assumptions about the individuals who made the comments.
 5. Answer the question: Based on your understanding of the comment and its context, answer the question related
 to the passage. Your answer should be either ’True’ or ’False’. Make sure your answer is supported by the
 information available in the comment and its context.
 6. Explain your reasoning: After providing your answer, explain why you chose that answer. Your explanation
 should reference specific parts of the comment and how they led you to your conclusion.
 Passage: Keep God out of politics...I’d rather expose the politicians for creating phony front groups designed
 to mislead Catholics.
 Question: Is the passage above toxic?
 Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
 End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
 The passage above expresses a negative sentiment towards politicians and their involvement in religion. The
 author of the comment advocates for keeping God out of politics and instead, exposing politicians who create
 fake front groups to mislead Catholics. The tone of the comment is critical and disapproving, which suggests
 that it may be toxic.
 However, upon closer examination, it’s clear that the author’s intention is not to incite hatred or violence,
 but rather to express their opinion on the separation of church and state. The comment does not contain any
 personal attacks, racist, sexist, or homophobic language, or other forms of toxic content.
 Therefore, based on the context and content of the comment, the answer to the question is False. The passage
 is not toxic.
 Reasoning:
 * The comment expresses a negative sentiment towards politicians, but it does not contain any toxic language
 or personal attacks.
 * The author’s intention is to advocate for the separation of church and state, which is a legitimate opinion
 to hold.
 * The comment does not incite hatred or violence, and it does not contain any discriminatory language.
 Answer: False. The passage is not toxic.
 Therefore, the correct label among {’False’, ’True’} (just the label) to the original task is below.
 Answer: False



              Figure 23: A complete running example of CivilComments (Christian).


                                                      49
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the nature of the civil_comments dataset: This dataset contains public comments from news sites,
  with labels for toxicity and identity mentions. The comments were created from 2015 - 2017 and appeared on
  approximately 50 English-language news sites across the world.
  2. Know what constitutes toxicity in comments: Toxicity can include insults, threats, obscene language, identity
  attacks, and sexually explicit content. However, it’s important to consider the context and nuances of the
  comment.
  3. Consider cultural and societal norms: When evaluating a comment for toxicity, consider cultural and societal
  norms related to the demographic ’female’. Remember that what may be considered toxic in one culture or society
  may not be in another.
  4. Apply this knowledge to the prompt: Use the information you’ve gathered to evaluate the passage in the
  prompt. Is it toxic? Consider the language used, the context, and any potential harm or offense it may cause,
  especially to the demographic ’female’.
  5. Formulate your answer: Based on your evaluation, answer ’True’ if the passage is toxic, and ’False’ if it
  is not. Be prepared to provide reasoning for your answer if necessary.
  Passage: Actually, we are a secular organization. Ninety-nine percent of the Church’s population is secular,
  and it’s founder, Jesus Himself, was a secular. The word "secular" has gotten a bad rap. "Secular" means in
  the world, in the world God created and and looked at as "very good". The priesthood which exists is the
  Royal Priesthood we all share by virtue of our baptism. Some of us (both male and female) may be called to
  the ordained priesthood of servant-leadership. That call comes from God Who does not distinguish between male
  and female. Just as the world is constantly evolving in its journey to Christ-centered completion, so too our
  understanding of servant-leadership will continue to unfold until we finally realize that "in Christ there is
  neither male nor female" and "all are one in Christ Jesus".
  Question: Is the passage above toxic?
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The passage provided does not contain any explicit language, threats, or personal attacks, which are common
  indicators of toxicity. However, it’s important to consider the context and cultural norms when evaluating the
  passage.
  The passage mentions the founder of the Church, Jesus, and the concept of the "Royal Priesthood" that is shared
  by all members of the Church, regardless of gender. It also mentions the ordained priesthood and how God does
  not distinguish between male and female. This language could be seen as inclusive and respectful towards women,
  promoting the idea of equality among all members of the Church.
  Furthermore, the passage also highlights the idea of continuous evolution towards a Christ-centered completion,
  which could be interpreted as a call for progress and improvement towards a more inclusive and equitable
  society.
  Therefore, based on the language used, the context, and the message of inclusivity and equality, it can be
  concluded that the passage is not toxic.
  Answer: False.
  Therefore, the correct label among {’False’, ’True’} (just the label) to the original task is below.
  Answer: False



                Figure 24: A complete running example of CivilComments (Female).


                                                       50
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
 Instructions:
 1. Understand the context: The comment is from the civil_comments dataset, which contains public comments from
 various news sites. The comments cover a wide range of topics, and the demographic in question is LGBTQ.
 2. Analyze the comment: Read the comment carefully and understand its content. Look for any indications of
 toxicity, such as insults, threats, obscene language, identity attacks, or sexually explicit content.
 3. Consider the demographic: Keep in mind that the demographic in question is LGBTQ. Be aware of issues and
 sensitivities related to this demographic.
 4. Determine toxicity: Based on your analysis of the comment and your understanding of the demographic,
 determine whether the comment is toxic. Remember that a comment is considered toxic if it is disrespectful or
 harmful towards others, especially towards the LGBTQ demographic in this case.
 5. Answer the question: If the comment is toxic, answer ’True’. If the comment is not toxic, answer ’False’.
 Be sure to base your answer on the content of the comment and not on your personal opinions or biases.
 Tips:
 - Be familiar with LGBTQ issues and sensitivities.
 - Be aware of the different forms that toxicity can take, including insults, threats, obscene language, identity
 attacks, and sexually explicit content.
 - Be objective and unbiased in your analysis. Your goal is to determine whether the comment is toxic, not
 whether you agree with it or not.
 - Keep in mind that a comment can be considered toxic even if it does not contain explicit insults or threats.
 Any comment that is disrespectful or harmful towards others, especially towards the LGBTQ demographic, can be
 considered toxic.
 Passage: Should there be a ban on men who are so "powerful" that they can just walk up and grab women by their
 $#$$%ies? Trump has thrown out another "shiny object" to distract folks from the issues with his administration
 and, unfortunately, from focusing on the many important topics we, as Americans, need to address. To name
 a few: health care, public education, unemployment and under-employment, homelessness, alcohol abuse, opioid
 abuse, mental health issues, veteran services...especially regarding PTSD, our crumbling infrastructure, income
 disparity, ...I’m guessing you could add to this list.
 But no, Trump tweets out that transgendered individuals can’t be in the military......and this is the man who
 is the "leader" of our country? Were it not so tragic, it would be funny. Gary Crum
 Question: Is the passage above toxic?
 Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
 End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
 The passage above is toxic. The author, Gary Crum, uses derogatory language towards a specific group of
 people, specifically the transgender community. The use of the term "transgendered" is considered offensive
 and disrespectful, as it implies that being transgender is a condition or a state of being, rather than a
 natural part of a person’s identity. Additionally, the author implies that transgender individuals are not
 capable of serving in the military, which is a harmful and inaccurate stereotype.
 Furthermore, the author’s comment about President Trump’s administration and his use of "shiny objects" to
 distract from important issues is not relevant to the topic of the comment and serves only to further the
 author’s political agenda. This irrelevant information can be seen as a form of obfuscation, intended to
 distract from the harmful and toxic language used in the comment.
 Therefore, based on the use of derogatory language and harmful stereotypes, as well as the irrelevant and
 distracting political commentary, the passage above is toxic.
 Answer: True
 Therefore, the correct label among {’False’, ’True’} (just the label) to the original task is below.
 Answer: True



               Figure 25: A complete running example of CivilComments (LGBTQ).


                                                       51
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the context: The civil_comments dataset is a collection of public comments from various news
  sites. These comments have been labeled for toxicity and identity mentions. The dataset does not contain
  specific demographic information about the commenters or the content of the comments.
  2. Analyze the passage: Read the passage carefully and understand the general statement or quote. Pay attention
  to any additional information or commentary provided.
  3. Answer the question: Based on the passage, answer the question related to the passage. Your answer should
  be either ’True’ or ’False’. Do not attempt to infer demographic information, as this is not provided in the
  dataset.
  4. Focus on the content: Your primary focus should be on the content of the comments and their associated
  toxicity labels.
  5. Be objective: Avoid making assumptions or inferences that are not supported by the passage. Stick to the
  facts presented in the passage.
  6. Be concise: Your answer should be concise and to the point. Do not include unnecessary information or
  commentary.
  Remember, your goal is to provide an accurate and unbiased answer based on the information provided in the
  passage.
  Passage: As the 2016 USCCB report done by an outside group shows more than 80% were same sex (male) assaults
  and 90% were post pubescent.
  Those numbers are staggeringly disproportionate and undercut your point.
  Question: Is the passage above toxic?
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The passage provided is a comment made in response to a report about sexual assaults. The comment states that
  the majority of sexual assaults are committed by men and that the majority of victims are post-pubescent.
  The comment does not contain any toxic language or personal attacks. It does not promote or incite violence or
  discrimination. It does not contain any hate speech or derogatory language towards any gender, race, religion,
  or group of people.
  Therefore, based on the information provided in the passage, the answer to the question is False. The passage
  is not toxic.
  Answer: False.
  Therefore, the correct label among {’False’, ’True’} (just the label) to the original task is below.
  Answer: False



                 Figure 26: A complete running example of CivilComments (Male).


                                                       52
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the context: The civil_comments dataset contains public comments from various news sites worldwide.
  These comments cover a wide range of topics including current events, politics, and social issues. Your responses
  should reflect an understanding of these contexts.
  2. Know the demographic: This task focuses on the ’muslim’ demographic. Be aware of the specific cultural,
  religious, and social aspects related to this demographic.
  3. Understand the labels: The comments in the dataset have been labeled for toxicity and identity mentions.
  Familiarize yourself with these labels and what they represent.
  4. Be objective: Your responses should be objective and unbiased. Avoid making assumptions or generalizations
  about the ’muslim’ demographic or any other demographic mentioned in the comments.
  5. Be accurate: Your responses should accurately reflect the content of the comments. Do not add or omit
  information.
  6. Be respectful: Respect the sensitivity of the topics discussed in the comments. Avoid using offensive or
  inappropriate language.
  7. Be concise: Your responses should be concise and to the point. Avoid unnecessary elaboration or speculation.
  8. Be aware of the possible outputs: The possible outputs for this task are ’True’ and ’False’. Make sure your
  responses align with these options.
  Remember, the goal is to understand and improve civility in online conversations. Your responses should
  contribute to this goal.
  Passage: This woman, Chrystia Freeland, went on US television last year and stated that it was wrong to criticize
  certain segments of the Muslim population for honour killings, female genital mutilation, and persecution of
  gays.
  She is a far-left, bat*** crazy, cultural marxist.
  Question: Is the passage above toxic?
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The passage above contains several elements that suggest it is toxic. Firstly, the use of the term "bat***
  crazy" to describe Chrystia Freeland is a form of name-calling and personal attack, which is a hallmark of
  toxic language. Additionally, the phrase "cultural marxist" is often used in a derogatory manner to describe
  individuals who are perceived to be promoting a liberal or progressive agenda, and its use in this context
  suggests that the author is attempting to discredit Freeland’s views without providing any substance to their
  argument.
  Furthermore, the passage implies that Freeland’s comments were wrong and that she is condoning or excusing
  certain practices within the Muslim community, which could be perceived as Islamophobic. The use of the phrase
  "certain segments of the Muslim population" also implies that the author is generalizing and stereotyping an
  entire religious group, which is a form of prejudice.
  Therefore, based on the above analysis, the passage is toxic.
  Answer: True
  Therefore, the correct label among {’False’, ’True’} (just the label) to the original task is below.
  Answer: True



                Figure 27: A complete running example of CivilComments (Muslim).


                                                        53
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Read the passage carefully. The passage will contain a general statement or description of a topic or
  situation, followed by additional information or details about the topic or situation.
  2. Understand the context of the passage. The passage is likely to be a public comment from an English-language
  news site. It may contain varying levels of toxicity, obscenity, threat, insult, identity attack, and sexual
  explicitness.
  3. Answer the question based on the passage. The question will be related to the passage. Your answer should
  be either ’True’ or ’False’.
  4. Be aware that the dataset does not contain specific demographic information or labels related to
  "other_religions". Therefore, your answer should not be based on assumptions about the demographic of the
  commenter.
  5. Use your understanding of the topic and the context of the comment to guide your answer. Consider the level
  of toxicity, obscenity, threat, insult, identity attack, and sexual explicitness in the comment.
  6. Remember that your goal is to provide an accurate and unbiased answer based on the information in the
  passage.
  Passage: Hindus are the majority in Kerala - more than half of the population. Then come Muslims and Christians.
  The current state government is a coalition of leftist parties, with the Chief Minister coming from the
  Communist Party of India (Marxist).
  Question: Is the passage above toxic?
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The passage provides a description of the religious demographics of Kerala, stating that Hindus are the majority,
  followed by Muslims and Christians. It also mentions the current state government, which is a coalition of
  leftist parties with the Chief Minister coming from the Communist Party of India (Marxist).
  Based on the information provided in the passage, it does not contain any toxic language or content. The
  passage simply presents factual information about the religious demographics and political landscape of Kerala.
  Therefore, the answer to the question is False. The passage is not toxic.
  Answer: False.
  Therefore, the correct label among {’False’, ’True’} (just the label) to the original task is below.
  Answer: False



           Figure 28: A complete running example of CivilComments (Other Religions).


                                                        54
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
 Instructions:
 1. Understand the context: The civil_comments dataset contains public comments from various news sites, along
 with labels indicating various forms of toxicity and identity mentions.
 2. Analyze the passage: The passage will provide a general statement or argument. This could be about a specific
 comment, a trend in the comments, or a general observation about the dataset.
 3. Understand the question: The question will ask for a response related to the passage. This could be a
 factual question about the content of the comments, a question about the labels, or a question about trends
 or patterns in the dataset.
 4. Use your knowledge: Use your understanding of the civil_comments dataset to answer the question. This could
 involve interpreting the content of the comments, the labels, or the trends in the dataset.
 5. Consider the demographic: The demographic ’white’ may be represented through mentions in the comments.
 Consider this when interpreting the comments and answering the question.
 6. Formulate your answer: Your answer should be either ’True’ or ’False’. Ensure your answer is supported by
 the information in the passage and your understanding of the civil_comments dataset.
 7. Explain your reasoning: Provide a clear and concise explanation for your answer. This should reference the
 information in the passage and your understanding of the civil_comments dataset.
 Tips:
 - Familiarize yourself with the types of toxicity labels in the civil_comments dataset. This will help you
 interpret the comments and answer questions about them.
 - Pay attention to identity mentions in the comments. These can provide important context for understanding
 the comments and answering questions about them.
 - Be aware of trends and patterns in the dataset. These can help you answer questions about the dataset as a
 whole.
 - Remember that the demographic ’white’ may be represented through mentions in the comments. Consider this when
 interpreting the comments and answering the question.
 Passage: I don’t agree. White people commit crimes just like black, samoan, asian, etc. The thing is ADN
 consistently omits ethnicity in reporting suspects at large, which is a disservice to the public. With guys
 like you who assume the man was a black gangbanger, the likelihood is just as great that it was a meth-addled
 white boy. A sad commentary on your bias. What I am asking for is ADN to tell the whole story.
 Question: Is the passage above toxic?
 Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
 End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
 The passage above expresses a disagreement with the assumption that a criminal suspect is black, and argues
 that the media’s omission of ethnicity in reporting suspects at large is a disservice to the public. The
 author also mentions that the likelihood of the suspect being a white boy is just as great as it being a black
 gangbanger.
 Based on the information provided in the passage, it appears that the author is advocating for more inclusive
 and accurate reporting by the media. The author is not using offensive language or making personal attacks,
 and is instead focusing on the issue at hand.
 Therefore, the passage above is not toxic.
 Answer: False.
 Therefore, the correct label among {’False’, ’True’} (just the label) to the original task is below.
 Answer: False



                Figure 29: A complete running example of CivilComments (White).


                                                       55
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the context: The summarization_cnndm dataset consists of pairs of news articles and their
  corresponding human-generated summaries. The articles are sourced from CNN and Daily Mail websites. Your task
  is to generate a summary of the given article.
  2. Read the article carefully: The article will contain various details, but not all of them are equally
  important. Identify the key points and main ideas in the article. These are the points that should be included
  in the summary.
  3. Be concise: The summaries in the dataset consist of an average of 53 words and 3.72 sentences. Try to be as
  concise as possible while still conveying the main points of the article. Avoid including unnecessary details.
  4. Maintain the original meaning: While the summary should be concise, it should also accurately represent the
  content of the article. Do not change the meaning of the original text in your summary.
  5. Use your own words: While it’s important to maintain the original meaning, try to paraphrase the content
  in your own words. This is an important aspect of text summarization.
  6. Check your work: After writing the summary, read it over to ensure it accurately represents the main points
  of the article. Make sure there are no grammatical or spelling errors.
  Remember, the goal is to create a summary that provides a clear and concise overview of the article’s content.
  Good luck!
  ###
  Article: Arsene Wenger wants Cesc Fabregas to be shown the ‘respect he deserves’ when he returns to the Emirates
  Stadium in the blue of Chelsea on Sunday. The problem with that is a decent chunk of Arsenal’s supporters feel
  he doesn’t deserve much. That became obvious on Thursday, when one prominent fan called for the removal of a
  Fabregas banner from the Ken Friar Bridge. Cesc Fabregas returns to Arsenal on Sunday and Arsene Wenger hopes
  fans will give him a good reception . Wenger wants ’respect’ for the club’s former players and counts Fabregas
  as a man who deserves that . Gunners fans offer their good luck to Fabregas in 2011, but the reception is
  likely to be more frosty this time . Extreme, perhaps, but this is an emotive issue which continues to bubble
  away at the club where Fabregas built his career, not least because the circumstances behind his summer move
  from Barcelona to Chelsea are still as clear as mud. Any clarity, it seems, will have to wait. Wenger was at
  his cryptic best on Thursday when asked if it was his call to not take up an option he had to re-sign the
  player, saying: ‘We will have to discuss that one day. With all the terms.’ When pressed on whether it was his
  decision, he added: ‘It’s not as clean as that. I cannot speak to you about that now because that will not help
  us to win on Sunday.’ At that point it was suggested to Wenger that Fabregas chose not to come back and Wenger
  said: ‘I don’t know, I don’t know.’ The Frenchman has previously claimed that by the time he knew Fabregas was
  available, a deal with Chelsea was virtually concluded — comments which jarred a little with the Spaniard’s
  statement last summer that Arsenal ‘decided not to take’ their option. Whatever, it would be ambitious for
  Fabregas to expect an overwhelmingly positive reception on Sunday. The midfielder set up Diego Costa to seal
  a 2-0 victory for Chelsea against Arsenal earlier this season . Certainly, there was already a degree of
  disappointment within the club about how their relationship with the player ended when he left in 2011. But
  Wenger said: ‘I want every player to be respected, and Cesc Fabregas when he comes to the Emirates on Sunday,
  (I want him) to be respected like he deserves.’ Wenger added: ‘The regret I have is that he wanted to leave
  here. This club and myself had a very positive influence on Cesc’s life, so I would be a bit uncomfortable to
  have to justify today why he is not here.’ When he returns, it will be as a key part of the champions-elect
  and under a manager in Jose Mourinho who has won seven and drawn five of his 12 meetings with Wenger. That
  clash, in itself, is a fascinating sub-plot to this fixture between the top and second-placed teams in the
  Barclays Premier League. Fabregas gets ahead of his now-team-mate Branislav Ivanovic to score against Chelsea
  for Arsenal in 2010 . Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct
  answer to the task above. End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The article discusses Arsene Wenger’s desire for Cesc Fabregas to be shown respect when he returns to the
  Emirates Stadium with Chelsea. Fabregas left Arsenal in 2011 and has since joined Chelsea, and some Arsenal
  fans have called for the removal of a Fabregas banner from the Ken Friar Bridge. Wenger wants Fabregas to
  be respected like he deserves, despite the fact that some fans may not agree. The article also mentions that
  Fabregas set up a goal for Chelsea against Arsenal earlier this season, which may contribute to a frosty
  reception.
  Correct answer:
  The correct answer is to generate a summary of the article that accurately represents the content and main
  points. The summary should be concise, use the writer’s own words, and maintain the original meaning.
  Here is a possible summary:
  Arsene Wenger hopes that Cesc Fabregas will be shown respect when he returns to the Emirates Stadium with
  Chelsea, despite some fans calling for the removal of a Fabregas banner. Fabregas left Arsenal in 2011 and has
  since joined Chelsea, and his return may be met with a frosty reception. Wenger wants Fabregas to be respected
  like he deserves, and hopes that the player will be treated with the respect he deserves.
  Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in the shortest form possible that will still be
  correct.
  Summarize the above article in 3 sentences.
  Answer: Arsene Wenger wants Cesc Fabregas to be shown respect when he returns to the Emirates Stadium with
  Chelsea. Some Arsenal fans have called for the removal of a Fabregas banner from the Ken Friar Bridge. Fabregas
  set up a goal for Chelsea against Arsenal earlier this season, which may contribute to a frosty reception.



                     Figure 30: A complete running example of CNN/Daily Mail.


                                                       56
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the concept of a coin flip: A coin flip refers to the act of tossing a coin into the air and
  guessing which side will land face up. In this context, a flip means to reverse the side of the coin that is
  facing up.
  2. Interpret the prompt: The prompt describes a series of actions performed by a person named [Name]. These
  actions involve either flipping or not flipping a coin. The coin starts as heads up.
  3. Count the flips: For each instance of [Name] flipping the coin, count the number of flips. If [Name] does
  not flip the coin, do not count it.
  4. Determine the final state of the coin: If the number of flips is even, the coin will still be heads up. If
  the number of flips is odd, the coin will be tails up. This is because each flip changes the side of the coin
  that is facing up.
  5. Answer the question: Based on the final state of the coin, answer the question "Is the coin still heads
  up?" with either "yes" or "no". If the coin is heads up, the answer is "yes". If the coin is tails up, the
  answer is "no".
  Remember, the model’s task is to apply these instructions to create an explanation that guides it towards the
  correct answer.
  Question: A coin is heads up. Doris does not flip the coin. Eva flips the coin. Larry does not flip the coin.
  Tad flips the coin. Is the coin still heads up? Note that "flip" here means "reverse".
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  1. The coin starts heads up.
  2. Doris does not flip the coin, so the coin remains heads up.
  3. Eva flips the coin, which reverses the side facing up, so the coin is now tails up.
  4. Larry does not flip the coin, so the coin remains tails up.
  5. Tad flips the coin, which reverses the side facing up again, so the coin is now heads up again.
  Therefore, the final state of the coin is heads up.
  Answer: Yes, the coin is still heads up.
  Therefore, the correct label among [’no’, ’yes’] (just the label) to the original task is below.
  Answer (yes or no): yes



                         Figure 31: A complete running example of Coin Flip.


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand that you are dealing with a multiple-choice question answering task. The goal is to predict the
  correct answer among the given options.
  2. The questions and options in this dataset require commonsense knowledge. Use your understanding of the
  world and how things generally work to answer the questions.
  3. Each question is associated with a concept from ConceptNet. This means that understanding the relations
  between different concepts can be beneficial in answering the questions.
  4. The options include one correct answer and four distractors. Carefully consider all the options before
  making a prediction. The distractors are designed to be plausible but incorrect answers to the question.
  5. The questions and options were created by humans, so understanding human language and reasoning is important.
  Make sure to interpret the questions and options in a way that a human would.
  6. After considering all the options and using your commonsense knowledge, predict the correct answer. Make
  sure to provide your answer in the format specified in the prompt.
  Question: From where does a snowflake form?
  A. cloud
  B. snow storm
  C. billow
  D. air
  E. snowstorm
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  A snowflake forms from water vapor in the air. When the temperature drops, the water vapor in the air condenses
  into tiny droplets, which then freeze into ice crystals. These ice crystals then stick together to form a
  snowflake.
  Therefore, the correct answer is (A) cloud. A snowflake forms in a cloud, specifically in the part of the
  cloud called a cumulonimbus cloud, which is characterized by strong updrafts and downdrafts that allow the
  water vapor to condense and freeze into snowflakes.
  Answer: A. cloud
  Therefore, the correct multiple choice label (just the letter) to the task is below.
  Answer: A



                    Figure 32: A complete running example of CommonsenseQA.



                                                       57
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the question: The question will always be about calculating a date from a given date. The date
  could be in the future or the past. Make sure to understand the direction (from/to) and the time period.
  2. Know your calendars: You should have a good understanding of the Gregorian calendar, including the number
  of days in each month and how leap years work.
  3. Understand date formats: The date will be given and should be returned in the MM/DD/YYYY format. Make sure
  you know how to read and write dates in this format.
  4. Perform date calculations: You will need to add or subtract the given time period from the given date. This
  could involve days, weeks, months, or years. Be careful with months of different lengths and leap years.
  5. Choose the correct answer: Once you have calculated the date, find the corresponding option in the
  multiple-choice answers.
  Question: Today is Christmas Eve of 1937. What is the date tomorrow in MM/DD/YYYY?
  Options:
  (A) 12/11/1937
  (B) 12/25/1937
  (C) 01/04/1938
  (D) 12/04/1937
  (E) 12/25/2006
  (F) 07/25/1937
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The task is to determine the date on Christmas Day of 1937, which falls on December 25th.
  Option A, 12/11/1937, is not the correct answer as it is a date in November, not December.
  Option B, 12/25/1937, is the correct answer as it corresponds to Christmas Day of 1937.
  Option C, 01/04/1938, is not the correct answer as it corresponds to January 4th of the following year.
  Option D, 12/04/1937, is not the correct answer as it corresponds to December 4th of the same year, not
  Christmas Day.
  Option E, 12/25/2006, is not the correct answer as it corresponds to Christmas Day of 2006, not 1937.
  Option F, 07/25/1937, is not the correct answer as it corresponds to July 25th of the same year, not Christmas
  Day.
  Therefore, the correct answer is Option B, 12/25/1937.
  Therefore, the correct multiple choice label (just the letter) to the task is below.
  Answer: B



                   Figure 33: A complete running example of Date Understanding.


                                                      58
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
 Instructions:
 1. Understand the question: The first step is to read the question carefully and understand what is being asked.
 The questions in the GSM dataset are grade school math word problems that require multi-step mathematical
 reasoning. They are designed to be solvable by a bright middle school student.
 2. Identify the mathematical operations: The problems primarily involve basic arithmetic operations such as
 addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Identify the operations required to solve the problem.
 3. Apply mathematical reasoning: The problems require a sequence of elementary calculations. Apply your
 mathematical reasoning to determine the sequence of steps required to solve the problem.
 4. Solve the problem: Perform the calculations in the correct sequence to reach the final answer.
 5. Check your work: Always check your work to ensure that your answer is reasonable and that you have not made
 any calculation errors.
 Tips:
 - Familiarize yourself with common themes found in grade school math, such as fractions, percentages, simple
 algebra, and basic geometry. These themes are likely to appear in the problems.
 - Practice multi-step mathematical reasoning. The problems in the GSM dataset require between 2 and 8 steps to
 solve.
 - Remember that the problems are designed to be solvable by a bright middle school student. If a problem
 seems overly complex, you may be overthinking it. Try to simplify the problem and break it down into smaller,
 manageable steps.
 Question: Finley went to the grocery store and bought rice, beans, and pork for use in their home. It took her
 20 more minutes to cook pork than rice, while beans took half the combined cooking time of pork and rice. If
 it took her 30 minutes to cook rice, how long in minutes did it take to cook all the food?
 Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
 End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
 1. Understand the question: The question is asking for the total cooking time it took Finley to cook rice,
 beans, and pork.
 2. Identify the mathematical operations: The problem requires addition, subtraction, and multiplication.
 3. Apply mathematical reasoning:
 Let’s start by identifying the cooking times for each item:
 * Rice: 30 minutes
 * Pork: 20 minutes more than rice, so 30 + 20 = 50 minutes
 * Beans: Half the combined cooking time of pork and rice, so (50 + 30) / 2 = 40 minutes
 Now, we need to find the total cooking time:
 Total cooking time = Rice + Pork + Beans
 = 30 + 50 + 40
 = 120 minutes
 4. Solve the problem: The total cooking time it took Finley to cook all the food is 120 minutes.
 5. Check your work:
 The answer seems reasonable, as it’s likely that cooking all three items would take longer than just cooking
 one or two of them.
 Answer: 120 minutes.
 Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in the shortest form possible that will still be
 correct.
 Answer: 120 minutes.



                         Figure 34: A complete running example of GSM8K.


                                                       59
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the question: The question will be about a grounded situation, either from the domain of
  activitynet or wikihow. It will ask what might happen next in the scene.
  2. Analyze the answer choices: There will be four answer choices. One of them is the correct answer, which is
  the real sentence for the next event. The other three are incorrect answers that are designed to fool machines
  but not humans.
  3. Use your commonsense: The dataset is designed to test grounded commonsense inference. This means you should
  use your understanding of the world and how things generally work to infer what might happen next in the
  situation described in the question.
  4. Choose the most likely answer: Based on your analysis of the answer choices and your commonsense, choose
  the answer that you think is most likely to be what happens next in the scene.
  5. Remember, the questions are designed to be easy for humans but challenging for models. If you’re having
  trouble, try to think like a human and use your commonsense.
  Question: Personal Care and Style: [header] How to dye your hair with semi permanent hair dye [title] Find
  the color you want. [step] There are many popular brands and hundreds of different colors to choose from.
  Semi-permanent dyes can be found in a variety of places, ranging from grocery stores to specialized fashion
  shops, with the biggest selection at beauty supply stores.
  A. It is important to select the color that represents your hair type when you register your hair color.
  [substeps] Traditional semi-permanent dyes will generally not be available for hair color, like blow-dryers,
  curling irons, and appliances.
  B. If you’re not planning on dying your hair, there are other coloration measures you can take to dye your
  hair. [step] Photoshop hd darkers work well, but don’t lack the style that can be coupled with it.
  C. Pick the color that’s your favorite, matches your wardrobe best, and/or is most flattering for your eye
  color and skin tone. Semi-permanent dyes work on all hair colors, but show up brightest on light hair.
  D. However, you can also take your color, added color, and texture into account when deciding what to dye, and
  what you will use it for. [substeps] Consider adding your hair dye to your hair if you have it long or curly.
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The question is asking what might happen next in the scene, specifically in the context of dyeing hair
  with semi-permanent hair dye. The instructions suggest using commonsense and analyzing the answer choices to
  determine the most likely next step.
  Answer A is not likely, as it suggests selecting a color based on hair type, which is not a relevant factor
  in choosing a hair dye color.
  Answer B is also not likely, as it suggests using Photoshop to darken hair, which is not a suitable method for
  dyeing hair.
  Answer C is a plausible option, as it suggests choosing a color that is a personal favorite, matches one’s
  wardrobe, and/or is most flattering for one’s eye color and skin tone. This answer choice aligns with the
  instructions’ suggestion to use commonsense and consider the context of the situation.
  Answer D is not likely, as it suggests considering adding hair dye to hair that is already long or curly, which
  is not a logical or practical solution.
  Therefore, the most likely next step in the scene would be to choose a hair dye color that is a personal
  favorite, matches one’s wardrobe, and/or is most flattering for one’s eye color and skin tone, as suggested
  in Answer C.
  Correct answer: C. Pick the color that’s your favorite, matches your wardrobe best, and/or is most flattering
  for your eye color and skin tone. Semi-permanent dyes work on all hair colors, but show up brightest on light
  hair.
  Therefore, the correct multiple choice label (just the letter) to the task is below.
  Answer: C



                        Figure 35: A complete running example of HellaSwag.


                                                       60
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the Dataset: The IMDb Movie Reviews dataset contains 50,000 reviews from the Internet Movie
  Database (IMDb). These reviews are labeled as either positive or negative, with an even number of each. The
  sentiment of the reviews is determined based on the score given by the reviewer. A review is labeled as negative
  if it has a score of 4 or less out of 10, and it is labeled as positive if it has a score of 7 or more out of
  10. The dataset does not include more than 30 reviews per movie.
  2. Analyze the Passage: Read the passage carefully. This will be a review from the IMDb dataset. Pay attention
  to the language used, the tone of the review, and any explicit or implicit expressions of sentiment towards
  the movie.
  3. Determine the Sentiment: Based on your analysis of the review, determine whether the sentiment is positive
  or negative. Remember that positive reviews generally contain praise for the movie, its plot, characters,
  cinematography, etc., and have a score of 7 or more out of 10. Negative reviews, on the other hand, generally
  contain criticism of the movie and have a score of 4 or less out of 10.
  4. Answer the Question: Based on your determination of the sentiment, select the appropriate output: ’Negative’
  or ’Positive’.
  Remember, the goal is to correctly identify the sentiment of the review based on the text provided.
  Passage: Lemuel Gulliver (Ted Danson) is a doctor who goes missing at sea, leaving pregnant wife Mary (Mary
  Steenburgen) behind. Eight years later, he turns up, disheveled and seemingly mad - babbling about his adventures
  in the lands of the tiny Lilliputians, the giant Brobdingnags, the floating island of the intellectual Laputa,
  and the Houyhnhnms, a race of intelligent, talking horses who have to deal with the Yahoos - a race of bestial
  humans - among many other adventures. The not-so-good Dr. Bates (James Fox), who has designs on Lemuel’s wife,
  has Gulliver incarcerated in a mental institution, and Lemuel, Mary, and son Thomas (Tom Sturridge) must find
  a way to prove his sanity.<br /><br />A splendid adaptation of Jonathan Swift’s satirical novel, this film is
  a magnificent adaptation on so many levels: the story, the satire, the characters, the visuals, the brilliant
  cast. It’s simply a treat to watch, and it’s almost amazing considering that it was a made-for-TV film.<br
  /><br />The film does a brilliant job of capturing Swift’s vicious satire, which cuts like a hatchet through
  British society of the time, but still resonates today. The wise Brobdingnags and the Houyhnhnms are almost
  perfect individuals who find it virtually impossible to understand why Gulliver speaks with such pride of the
  vices and corruptions of his society. The scenes where Gulliver struggles to prove himself different from the
  Yahoos are perhaps the best, with biting satire in describing how they pick their leaders ("they seem to pick
  the worst among them. . . who rules until they find someone even worse"), go to war ("We only go to war for a
  very good reason - such as they are weaker than us, or we want all of their land"), etc. The scenes involving
  Laputa are also effectively done - the intellectuals are so wrapped up in their specialized fields that they
  have no time for anything else, and really possess little common sense. And the addition of the asylum plot
  line enhances the story greatly - Dr. Bates is truly nasty character, and when he gives a speech to the inquiry
  on Gulliver’s alleged vices, it’s quite clear that he’s describing his own faults.<br /><br />The film makes
  use of beautiful, and fairly convincing CGI effects depicting the very diverse settings of the novel with great
  effect. The contrast of sizes is done in a very skillful way, and all of the worlds depicted in the story are
  convincing in their own way. The cinematography (particularly that concerning the asylum) and the costumes are
  brilliantly done. The editing of the present with Lemuel’s memories is a device which could be awkward, but
  works very well.<br /><br />The cast is truly wonderful; a veritable who’s-who of British and American talent.
  Ted Danson gives an excellent, multi-layered performance as Gulliver, showing effectively his transformation
  from a person bewildered by his strange surroundings, to the lunatic state he was in when he reappears, to his
  rational, intellectual personality at the end. Most well-known for his work on sit-com, Danson shows that he’s
  more than just Sam Malone with this wonderful serio-comic performance. Mary Steenburgen is effective as his
  wife, and James Fox is absolutely repulsive as Bates. The rest of the cast is made up mostly of cameos, with
  Peter O’Toole, Omar Sharif, Warwick Davis, Kristin Scott Thomas, Geraldine Chaplin, Alfre Woodward, Edward Fox,
  and Sir John Gielgud being the most memorable - but even the smallest parts are very well-played.<br /><br
  />While not 100
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The review provided is a positive review of the movie "Gulliver’s Travels." The reviewer uses positive language
  to describe the film, such as "magnificent adaptation," "brilliant cast," and "triumph of story and images."
  They also highlight the film’s ability to capture the satire of Jonathan Swift’s novel, which is a key aspect
  of the movie. Additionally, the reviewer praises the film’s visuals, costumes, and cinematography.
  The only potential negative comment in the review is a brief mention of the film’s deviation from the book,
  but the reviewer quickly dismisses this by stating that it is "not 100
  Therefore, based on the language, tone, and content of the review, it is clear that the sentiment of the review
  is positive.
  Answer: Positive
  Therefore, the correct label among ’Negative’, ’Positive’ (just the label) to the original task is below.
  Sentiment: Positive



                           Figure 36: A complete running example of IMDB.


                                                        61
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Familiarize yourself with the English alphabet and the concept of handwritten digit recognition. This
  dataset is about identifying English capital letters from images that have been converted into numerical data.
  2. Understand that each letter is represented by 16 primitive numerical attributes. These attributes are
  statistical moments and edge counts derived from the images of the letters.
  3. The question will ask you to take the last letters of each word in a given name and concatenate them. This
  means you need to extract the last letter from each word and join them together to form a new string.
  4. To answer the question, you will need to understand how to manipulate strings and extract specific characters.
  This involves knowing how to index strings and concatenate them.
  5. Remember that the dataset contains 20,000 unique stimuli, meaning there is a wide variety of data to work
  with. However, the task remains the same: identify the letters based on the provided numerical data.
  6. Be aware that the numerical data has been scaled to fit into a range of integer values from 0 through 15.
  This means you might need to normalize or scale your data when working with it.
  7. Finally, keep in mind that the data is based on 20 different fonts and each letter within these fonts was
  randomly distorted. This adds an element of complexity to the task as the same letter can appear differently
  based on the font and distortion.
  8. Use your knowledge of the English alphabet, string manipulation, and numerical data to answer the question.
  Be sure to consider all the information provided in the dataset and the specific requirements of the question.
  Question: Take the last letters of each words in "Sheree Jackson" and concatenate them.
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  To solve this task, we need to follow the instructions provided. First, we need to familiarize ourselves
  with the English alphabet and the concept of handwritten digit recognition. We are working with a dataset
  that contains numerical data representing English capital letters. Each letter is represented by 16 primitive
  numerical attributes, which are statistical moments and edge counts derived from images of the letters.
  Next, we need to understand that the question asks us to take the last letters of each word in a given name
  and concatenate them. This means we need to extract the last letter from each word and join them together to
  form a new string.
  To do this, we need to manipulate strings and extract specific characters. We can index into the strings to
  extract the last letter of each word. For example, the first word "Sheree" ends with the letter "e", and the
  second word "Jackson" ends with the letter "n".
  We can then concatenate these letters to form a new string. In this case, the new string would be "e n".
  It’s important to note that the numerical data has been scaled to fit into a range of integer values from 0
  through 15. Therefore, we might need to normalize or scale our data when working with it.
  Additionally, we need to keep in mind that the data is based on 20 different fonts, and each letter within
  these fonts was randomly distorted. This means that the same letter can appear differently based on the font
  and distortion.
  Using our knowledge of the English alphabet, string manipulation, and numerical data, we can answer the question.
  The last letters of each word in "Sheree Jackson" are "e" and "n", which concatenated form the string "en".
  Answer: en
  Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in the shortest form possible that will still be
  correct.
  Answer: en



                Figure 37: A complete running example of Last Letter Concatenation.


                                                        62
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
 Instructions:
 1. Read the question carefully. The questions in this dataset are about abstract algebra and can range
 from elementary to advanced professional level. They are designed to test both your world knowledge and
 problem-solving ability.
 2. Understand the topic. The questions cover a range of topics within abstract algebra, including group theory,
 ring theory, and field theory. Make sure you have a good understanding of these topics.
 3. Consider all the options. The questions are multiple-choice, so consider each option carefully before making
 your choice.
 4. Use your problem-solving skills. The questions may ask about finding the degree for a given field extension,
 finding zeros in a finite field of a given polynomial, or understanding properties of group theory, ring theory,
 and field theory. Use your knowledge of these topics to solve the problem.
 5. Answer the question. Once you have considered all the options and used your problem-solving skills, choose
 the option that you think is the correct answer.
 6. Review your answer. After you have chosen an answer, review it to make sure it is the best answer to the
 question.
 Remember, the goal is not just to choose the correct answer, but to understand why it is the correct answer.
 Question: The cyclic subgroup of Z_24 generated by 18 has order
 A. 4
 B. 8
 C. 12
 D. 6
 Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
 End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
 To find the order of the cyclic subgroup of Z_24 generated by 18, we need to find the smallest positive integer
 n such that 18ˆn = 1 (mod 24).
 We can start by noticing that 18 is a generator of the multiplicative group of integers modulo 24, which means
 that it has a multiplicative order of 24. Therefore, the order of the cyclic subgroup generated by 18 is equal
 to the multiplicative order of 18, which is 24.
 So, the correct answer is (D) 6.
 The reasoning is as follows:
 * The cyclic subgroup generated by 18 is a subgroup of the multiplicative group of integers modulo 24.
 * The multiplicative group of integers modulo 24 has a total of 24 elements, and 18 is a generator of this
 group.
 * Therefore, the order of the cyclic subgroup generated by 18 is equal to the multiplicative order of 18, which
 is 24.
 * The correct answer is (D) 6, because 6 is the smallest positive integer such that 18ˆ6 = 1 (mod 24).
 Therefore, the correct answer is (D) 6.
 Therefore, the correct multiple choice label (just the letter) to the task is below.
 Answer: D



              Figure 38: A complete running example of MMLU (Abstract Algebra).


                                                      63
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Read the question carefully. The dataset contains multiple-choice questions related to college-level
  chemistry.
  2. Understand the context of the question. The topics can range from atomic structure, chemical reactions,
  stoichiometry, thermodynamics, chemical bonding, to organic chemistry.
  3. Evaluate each choice. The dataset provides a list of choices for each question.
  4. Identify the correct answer. The correct answer is indicated by a class label in the dataset.
  5. Avoid the negative answer. The dataset also provides a negative answer, which is an incorrect option.
  6. Use your knowledge of college-level chemistry to answer the question. You might need to recall facts, apply
  formulas, or use logical reasoning based on the principles of chemistry.
  7. If the question is complex, break it down into smaller parts and address each part separately.
  8. Always provide an explanation for your answer. This helps to demonstrate your understanding of the topic.
  9. Review your answer before finalizing it. Ensure that it is accurate and complete.
  10. Keep learning and updating your knowledge about college-level chemistry. The field is vast and the questions
  can cover any topic within it.
  Question: Which of the following is true for Br2 at standard temperature and pressure?
  A. It is a colorless gas.
  B. It is a red-brown volatile liquid.
  C. It is a colorless volatile liquid.
  D. It is a yellow metallic solid.
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The question asks about the state of Br2 at standard temperature and pressure. The options are:
  A. Colorless gas
  B. Red-brown volatile liquid
  C. Colorless volatile liquid
  D. Yellow metallic solid
  To answer this question, we need to recall the properties of bromine (Br2). Bromine is a reddish-brown liquid
  at room temperature and pressure. It has a density of 2.96 g/mL and a boiling point of 58.8°C.
  Therefore, the correct answer is B. Red-brown volatile liquid.
  Explanation:
  The statement A is incorrect because Br2 is not a gas at standard temperature and pressure. It is a liquid.
  The statement C is incorrect because Br2 is not a colorless liquid. It has a reddish-brown color.
  The statement D is incorrect because Br2 is not a solid, and it does not have a yellow color.
  Therefore, the correct answer is B. Red-brown volatile liquid.
  Therefore, the correct multiple choice label (just the letter) to the task is below.
  Answer: B



              Figure 39: A complete running example of MMLU (College Chemistry).


                                                       64
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the question: Read the question carefully and understand what it’s asking. The questions could
  be about a variety of topics in computer security, from technical aspects like buffer overflows and IP address
  spoofing, to more conceptual topics like message confidentiality and security principles.
  2. Review the options: Look at each of the provided options. Even if you think you know the answer after
  reading the question, it’s important to read all the options as there might be a better answer.
  3. Apply your knowledge: Use your understanding of computer security to determine the correct answer. This
  might involve recalling specific facts or applying general principles.
  4. Choose the best answer: Based on your understanding of the question and the options, choose the best answer.
  Remember, there might be more than one correct answer, but you need to choose the best one.
  5. Justify your answer: Explain why you chose the answer you did. This will show that you didn’t just guess,
  but actually used your knowledge of computer security to arrive at the answer.
  6. Be confident: Even though this dataset is designed to be used in a zero-shot or few-shot setting, meaning
  you haven’t seen any similar examples during training, you can still answer the questions correctly by applying
  your knowledge of computer security.
  Question: What is penetration testing?
  A. A procedure for testing libraries or other program components for vulnerabilities
  B. Whole-system testing for security flaws and bugs
  C. A security-minded form of unit testing that applies early in the development process
  D. All of the above
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  1. Understand the question: The question is asking about the definition of penetration testing.
  2. Review the options: Let’s review the options provided:
  A. A procedure for testing libraries or other program components for vulnerabilities - This option is incorrect
  as penetration testing is not limited to testing specific components, but rather the entire system.
  B. Whole-system testing for security flaws and bugs - This option is correct as penetration testing involves
  testing the entire system for security vulnerabilities.
  C. A security-minded form of unit testing that applies early in the development process - This option is
  incorrect as penetration testing is not a form of unit testing, and it is not limited to the development
  process.
  D. All of the above - This option is incorrect as penetration testing is not limited to testing libraries or
  other program components, and it is not a form of unit testing.
  3. Apply your knowledge: Based on our understanding of computer security, penetration testing is a process of
  testing a computer system, network, or web application to find vulnerabilities that an attacker could exploit.
  It involves simulating a cyber attack on the system to identify weaknesses and vulnerabilities.
  4. Choose the best answer: Based on the options provided and our understanding of penetration testing, the
  best answer is B. Whole-system testing for security flaws and bugs.
  5. Justify your answer: We chose option B because it accurately reflects the definition of penetration testing.
  Penetration testing involves testing the entire system for security vulnerabilities, which aligns with option
  B.
  6. Be confident: We are confident in our answer because it is based on our understanding of computer security
  and the definition of penetration testing.
  Answer: B. Whole-system testing for security flaws and bugs.
  Therefore, the correct multiple choice label (just the letter) to the task is below.
  Answer: B



              Figure 40: A complete running example of MMLU (Computer Security).


                                                       65
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the basics of econometrics: This includes topics like statistical methods, economic data analysis,
  regression analysis, and economic forecasting. Familiarize yourself with the concepts and terminologies in
  these areas.
  2. Read the question carefully: The dataset consists of multiple-choice questions. Make sure to read the
  question and all the options carefully before making a choice.
  3. Use your knowledge of econometrics to answer: Apply your understanding of econometrics to answer the question.
  Consider all the options and choose the one that best fits the question.
  4. Answer format: The answer should be the index of the correct option. For example, if the options are ["0",
  "4", "2", "6"] and the correct answer is "4", the corresponding class label would be 1 (since indexing starts
  from 0). Do not write full sentences as answers.
  5. Review your answer: Before finalizing your answer, review it to ensure it is the most appropriate choice
  given the question and options.
  Remember, the goal is not just to select the correct answer, but to understand why that answer is correct.
  This will help you improve your understanding of econometrics and your problem-solving abilities.
  Question: Suppose that a test that the true value of the intercept coefficient is zero results in non-rejection.
  What would be the appropriate conclusion?
  A. Drop the intercept and re-run the regression
  B. Retain the intercept
  C. Re-compute the test statistic
  D. The regression line is running exactly through the origin
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The question states that a test that the true value of the intercept coefficient is zero results in non-rejection.
  This means that the null hypothesis that the intercept coefficient is zero cannot be rejected at a statistically
  significant level.
  Option A suggests dropping the intercept and re-running the regression. However, this is not appropriate
  because the intercept coefficient is an important component of the regression model, and dropping it may lead
  to biased estimates of the slope coefficient.
  Option B suggests retaining the intercept. This is a reasonable approach, as the intercept coefficient may
  still be useful in interpreting the regression results, even if the test for its significance fails.
  Option C suggests re-computing the test statistic. This is not necessary, as the test statistic has already
  been computed and the result is non-rejection.
  Option D suggests that the regression line is running exactly through the origin. This is not a valid conclusion,
  as the regression line is a linear function that may not necessarily pass through the origin.
  Therefore, the appropriate conclusion is to retain the intercept, as suggested by option B.
  Answer: B
  Therefore, the correct multiple choice label (just the letter) to the task is below.
  Answer: B



                 Figure 41: A complete running example of MMLU (Econometrics).


                                                        66
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the question: Read the question carefully and understand what it’s asking. The question could be
  about significant events, structures of international organizations, and actions of key figures in US foreign
  policy.
  2. Use your pre-existing knowledge: The dataset does not contain detailed information or comprehensive data
  about US foreign policy. It uses these topics to form questions for testing language understanding and knowledge.
  Therefore, you should rely on your pre-existing knowledge to answer the questions.
  3. Consider all options: Before choosing an answer, consider all the options provided. Each option could be a
  potential answer, and the correct one is the one that best fits the question.
  4. Choose the best answer: After considering all options, choose the one that you think is the best answer
  based on your understanding of the question and your pre-existing knowledge.
  5. Provide a brief explanation: After choosing an answer, provide a brief explanation of why you think it’s
  the correct answer. This will help the user understand your thought process and why you chose that particular
  answer.
  6. Check your answer: Before finalizing your answer, check it again to make sure it’s the best answer to the
  question. If you’re not sure, consider the question and options again, and see if there’s a better answer.
  Remember, the goal is not to know everything about US foreign policy, but to use your language understanding
  and knowledge to answer the questions as best as you can.
  Question: What policies did Alexander Hamilton pursue to build the American economy?
  A. Free trade with all European countries on an equal basis and a smaller government role in the economy
  B. Establishment of a national currency and higher government spending
  C. Tariffs to protect American manufacturing, establishment of a national bank, and the repayment of all debts.
  D. Limits on immigration and imported technology to encourage higher wages
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  To answer this question, we need to consider the policies that Alexander Hamilton pursued during his tenure
  as the first Secretary of the Treasury. Hamilton’s main objective was to build a strong American economy, and
  he proposed several policies to achieve this goal.
  Option A, free trade with all European countries on an equal basis and a smaller government role in the economy,
  does not align with Hamilton’s policies. Hamilton believed in a strong central government and advocated for
  protectionist policies to promote American industry.
  Option B, establishment of a national currency and higher government spending, is partially correct. Hamilton
  did propose the establishment of a national bank, which would later become the First Bank of the United States,
  to stabilize the national currency and provide a means for the government to finance its debt. However, Hamilton
  did not advocate for higher government spending.
  Option C, tariffs to protect American manufacturing, establishment of a national bank, and the repayment of all
  debts, is the most accurate description of Hamilton’s policies. Hamilton believed that a strong manufacturing
  sector was essential for the country’s economic growth and proposed tariffs to protect American industries from
  foreign competition. He also advocated for the establishment of a national bank to provide a stable currency
  and facilitate economic growth. Additionally, Hamilton believed in the importance of repaying the country’s
  debts to maintain its credit and reputation.
  Option D, limits on immigration and imported technology to encourage higher wages, is not a correct description
  of Hamilton’s policies. While Hamilton did believe in the importance of a skilled workforce, he did not advocate
  for limits on immigration or imported technology.
  Therefore, the correct answer is C, tariffs to protect American manufacturing, establishment of a national
  bank, and the repayment of all debts.
  Therefore, the correct multiple choice label (just the letter) to the task is below.
  Answer: C



              Figure 42: A complete running example of MMLU (US Foreign Policy).


                                                        67
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete. Instructions:
 1. Read the passage carefully. It contains general information that may or may not be relevant to the query.
 2. Analyze the specific query. It is derived from real anonymized Bing user queries.
 3. Determine whether the passage answers the query. The passage is extracted from real web documents and the
 answers to the queries are human generated.
 4. Consider the context of the msmarco dataset, which is used for various NLP and IR tasks such as
 question-answering, passage ranking, document ranking, keyphrase extraction, and conversational search. The
 ’regular’ track and ’valid_topk’ of 30 are not clearly defined in this context, but ’valid_topk’ could refer
 to the top 30 predictions during validation.
 5. If the passage answers the query, answer ’Yes’. If it does not, answer ’No’.
 6. Remember, the goal is to evaluate the model’s ability to comprehend the passage and accurately answer the
 query.
 Passage: How long is the spinal cord and how much does it weigh? The average spinal cord is 45 cm long in men
 and 43 cm long in women. The spinal cord weighs approx. 35 grams. How much does the brain weigh? The human
 brain weighs on average three pounds, or 1.5 kg. What size is an adult humans brain? The human brain is about
 the size of a cantaloupe. Average brain width = 140 mm; Average brain length = 167 mm; Average brain height =
 93 mm; How much oxygen does the brain need to stay conscious?
 Query: how much does a spectacled bear weigh
 Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
 End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
 The query asks about the weight of a spectacled bear. The passage does not directly mention the weight of
 a spectacled bear. However, it does provide information about the weight of the human brain, which is not
 relevant to the query. The passage also mentions the length and weight of the spinal cord, which is also not
 relevant to the query.
 Therefore, based on the information provided in the passage, it cannot be determined how much a spectacled
 bear weighs.
 Answer: No.
 Therefore, the correct label among ’Yes’, ’No’ (just the label) to the original task is below.
 Does the passage answer the query?
 Answer: No



                 Figure 43: A complete running example of MS MARCO (Regular).


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the MS MARCO dataset: This is a large-scale dataset used for various NLP and IR tasks. It’s
  designed to study information retrieval in scenarios with a large amount of training data. Familiarize yourself
  with the types of queries and responses in this dataset.
  2. Understand the TREC Track: This refers to the TREC Deep Learning Track, which focuses on ranking tasks. It
  uses the MS MARCO dataset for ongoing evaluation of submissions. Be aware of how ranking tasks work and how
  they’re evaluated.
  3. Understand the prompt template: The template includes a passage about a specific topic, a query about that
  topic, and a question about whether the passage answers the query. Your task is to determine whether the
  passage answers the query.
  4. Understand the possible outputs: The possible outputs are ’Yes’ and ’No’. You should choose ’Yes’ if the
  passage answers the query, and ’No’ if it doesn’t.
  5. Understand the valid_topk parameter: Although its specific meaning in this context is unclear, it likely
  refers to the top K results considered valid in a ranking task. Be aware of how to evaluate the relevance of
  ranked results. 6. Apply your knowledge: Use your understanding of the dataset, the track, the prompt template,
  and the possible outputs to guide your responses. Be sure to consider the relevance and completeness of the
  passage in relation to the query.
  Passage: In California, section 5150 of the Welfare and Institutions Code is known as the Lanterman-Petris-Short
  Act. It’s the equivalent of Florida’s Baker Act, but we don’t call it by name, we call it by statute number;
  5150. No idea where the Baker Act got it’s name.
  Query: lps laws definition
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The query is asking for the definition of LPS laws. The passage mentions the Lanterman-Petris-Short Act, which
  is also known as section 5150 of the Welfare and Institutions Code in California. This act is equivalent to
  Florida’s Baker Act. The passage does not directly define LPS laws, but it mentions the Lanterman-Petris-Short
  Act, which is a law that falls under the category of LPS laws. Therefore, the passage partially answers the
  query.
  Answer: Yes.
  Therefore, the correct label among ’Yes’, ’No’ (just the label) to the original task is below. Does the passage
  answer the query?
  Answer: Yes



                  Figure 44: A complete running example of MS MARCO (TREC).



                                                       68
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the question: The questions in this dataset involve arithmetic operations and real-life scenarios.
  Make sure you understand what operation is being asked for (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division)
  and the context of the question.
  2. Perform the operation: Once you understand the question, perform the necessary arithmetic operation. This
  could involve simple calculations or more complex ones depending on the question.
  3. Check your work: Always double-check your calculations to ensure accuracy.
  4. Formulate the answer: The answer should be a string that represents the final result of the calculation.
  Make sure your answer is clear and concise.
  5. Topics to know: Basic arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division), understanding
  of real-life scenarios (counting items, calculating money, etc.)
  6. Steps to answer the questions: Read the question carefully, identify the arithmetic operation and the
  context, perform the operation, check your work, and write the answer as a string.
  Question: For Halloween Debby and her sister combined the candy they received. Debby had 32 pieces of candy
  while her sister had 42. If they ate 35 pieces the first night, how many pieces do they have left?
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  To solve this problem, we need to use subtraction. Debby had 32 pieces of candy, and her sister had 42 pieces,
  so together they had 32 + 42 = 74 pieces of candy.
  They ate 35 pieces the first night, so the amount of candy they have left is 74 - 35 = 39 pieces.
  Therefore, the answer is 39 pieces of candy.
  Answer: 39 pieces of candy.
  Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in the shortest form possible that will still be
  correct.
  Answer: 39



                         Figure 45: A complete running example of MultiArith.


                                                       69
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the Passage: The passage will either be a brief summary of the plot or the full story. Read it
  carefully to understand the main events, characters, and settings.
  2. Understand the Question: The question will ask for specific information about the passage. It could be about
  a character, an event, or a detail about the setting. Make sure you understand what the question is asking.
  3. Answer the Question: Use the information from the passage to answer the question. Your answer should be
  specific and only include information relevant to the question. Do not include additional information not
  asked for in the question.
  4. Be Concise: The answer should be concise and to the point. It should not include any additional information
  not relevant to the question.
  5. Be Accurate: The answer should accurately reflect the information in the passage. Do not make assumptions
  or guesses based on information not included in the passage.
  6. Be Comprehensive: Make sure your answer covers all parts of the question. If the question asks for multiple
  pieces of information, make sure to include all of them in your answer.
  7. Review Your Answer: Before finalizing your answer, review it to make sure it accurately answers the question
  and is based on information from the passage.
  Remember, the goal is to demonstrate reading comprehension by accurately answering questions based on the
  passage.
  Passage: The play begins with three pages disputing over the black cloak usually worn by the actor who delivers
  the prologue. They draw lots for the cloak, and one of the losers, Anaides, starts telling the audience what
  happens in the play to come; the others try to suppress him, interrupting him and putting their hands over his
  mouth. Soon they are fighting over the cloak and criticizing the author and the spectators as well.
  In the play proper, the goddess Diana, also called Cynthia, has ordained a "solemn revels" in the valley of
  Gargaphie in Greece. The gods Cupid and Mercury appear, and they too start to argue. Mercury has awakened
  Echo, who weeps for Narcissus, and states that a drink from Narcissus’s spring causes the drinkers to "Grow
  dotingly enamored of themselves." The courtiers and ladies assembled for the Cynthia’s revels all drink from
  the spring.
  Asotus, a foolish spendthrift who longs to become a courtier and a master of fashion and manners, also drinks
  from the spring; emboldened by vanity and self-love, he challenges all comers to a competition of "court
  compliment." The competition is held, in four phases, and the courtiers are beaten. Two symbolic masques
  are performed within the play for the assembled revelers. At their conclusion, Cynthia (representing Queen
  Elizabeth) has the dancers unmask and shows that vices have masqueraded as virtues. She sentences them to make
  reparation and to purify themselves by bathing in the spring at Mount Helicon.
  The figure of Actaeon in the play may represent Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex, while Cynthia’s lady
  in waiting Arete may be Lucy, Countess of Bedford, one of Elizabeth’s ladies in waiting as well as Jonson’s
  patroness.
  The play is notably rich in music, as is typical for the theatre of the boys’ companies, which originated as
  church choirs.
  Question: WHAT NAME WAS CYNTHIA MORE FAMOUSLY KNOWN BY?
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The passage describes the play "The Masque of Queens" by Ben Jonson, which features the goddess Diana, also
  known as Cynthia, who ordains a "solemn revels" in the valley of Gargaphie in Greece. The play also includes
  the character of Cupid, who argues with Mercury, and Echo, who weeps for Narcissus and warns that a drink from
  Narcissus’s spring causes the drinkers to become enamored with themselves. The play features a competition of
  "court compliment" in which the foolish spendthrift Asotus challenges all comers and is beaten, and includes
  two symbolic masques performed for the assembled revelers. At the conclusion of the play, Cynthia sentences
  the dancers to make reparation and purify themselves by bathing in the spring at Mount Helicon.
  The question asks for the name that Cynthia is more famously known by. Based on the information in the passage,
  Cynthia is more famously known by the name Diana.
  Answer: Diana.
  Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in the shortest form possible that will still be
  correct.
  Answer: Diana.



                       Figure 46: A complete running example of NarrativeQA.


                                                       70
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand that the questions in this dataset are based on Google queries, so they can cover a wide range
  of topics. You should be prepared to answer questions on any topic.
  2. The answers can be long or short, or both. When generating your answer, consider the nature of the question.
  If it seems to require a detailed response, provide a long answer. If it can be answered briefly, provide a
  short answer.
  3. Some questions can be answered with a simple "yes" or "no". If the question is asking for a confirmation
  or denial, a "yes" or "no" answer may be appropriate.
  4. You are operating in a closedbook mode, which means you should not rely on external knowledge sources to
  answer the questions. Use your existing knowledge to generate the best possible answer.
  5. Always strive for accuracy and clarity in your answers. Your goal is to provide the most accurate and clear
  answer to each question.
  6. Remember that the answers are based on information from Wikipedia pages. While you should not access these
  pages directly in closedbook mode, you can use your general knowledge of Wikipedia’s style and content to
  guide your answers.
  7. Finally, always review your answer before finalizing it to ensure it fully answers the question and is free
  of errors.
  Question: How long did the democrats control the house and senate?
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  To determine how long the Democrats controlled the House and Senate, we need to look at the history of Congress’s
  party composition. The Democratic Party has controlled both chambers of Congress at various times, but the
  length of their control varies depending on the specific time period.
  In recent history, the Democrats controlled the House of Representatives from 2007 to 2011, a total of four
  years. During this time, they also controlled the Senate, but only for a brief period from 2009 to 2010, when
  they had a majority of 60 seats.
  Prior to this, the Democrats controlled both chambers of Congress from 1993 to 1995, a total of two years.
  They also had control of the Senate from 1987 to 1988, for a period of one year.
  Therefore, the total length of time that the Democrats controlled both the House and Senate is:
  4 years (2007-2011) + 2 years (1993-1995) + 1 year (1987-1988) = 7 years
  Answer: The Democrats controlled the House and Senate for a total of 7 years.
  Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in the shortest form possible that will still be
  correct.
  Answer: 7 years.



            Figure 47: A complete running example of NaturalQuestions (closed-book).


                                                        71
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the Passage: The passage will provide you with a category or topic and general information related
  to it. Make sure to read and comprehend this information thoroughly as it will be the basis for answering the
  question.
  2. Analyze the Question: The question will be based on the information provided in the passage. It could be
  about any aspect of the topic discussed in the passage. Understand what the question is asking.
  3. Formulate the Answer: Based on your understanding of the passage and the question, formulate a concise and
  accurate answer. The answer should be in the form of text generation, meaning you should generate a coherent
  and fluent piece of text that accurately answers the question.
  4. Topics to Know: The questions could be about a wide range of topics. It’s important to have a broad
  understanding of various subjects.
  5. Steps to Answer: Read the passage -> Understand the question -> Use the information from the passage to
  answer the question -> Ensure the answer is accurate and complete.
  Remember, the goal is to provide a correct and comprehensive answer to the question based on the information
  provided in the passage.
  Passage:
  Party
  Years in Control
  Democrats:
  57 yrs
  Republicans:
  27 yrs
  Neither Party:
  16 yrs
  Question: How long did the democrats control the house and senate?
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  To answer this question, we need to look at the information provided in the passage. The passage gives us
  information about the years in control of the House and Senate for both the Democratic and Republican parties.
  We can see that the Democrats controlled the House and Senate for a total of 57 years, while the Republicans
  controlled them for 27 years.
  Now, let’s analyze the question. The question asks us to find out how long the Democrats controlled the House
  and Senate. We can see from the information provided in the passage that the Democrats controlled the House
  and Senate for 57 years. Therefore, the answer to the question is 57 years.
  Answer: The Democrats controlled the House and Senate for 57 years.
  Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in the shortest form possible that will still be
  correct.
  Answer: 57 years.



             Figure 48: A complete running example of NaturalQuestions (open-book).


                                                       72
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the question: Read the question carefully and understand what it is asking. The questions in
  this dataset are based on elementary-level science topics and require multi-step reasoning, use of additional
  common and commonsense knowledge.
  2. Analyze the options: Look at each of the multiple-choice options. The correct answer may not always be the
  most obvious one. Use your understanding of the question and the options to reason through the best answer.
  3. Apply knowledge: The dataset includes a collection of common knowledge facts. Use these facts, along with
  your own knowledge, to answer the question.
  4. Be aware of the challenge: The questions are designed to be challenging for both retrieval-based and word
  co-occurrence algorithms. Don’t rely solely on keyword matching or simple retrieval methods to answer the
  questions.
  5. Check your answer: Before finalizing your answer, check it against the question and the options to make
  sure it makes sense and answers the question correctly.
  Topics to know: The dataset covers a wide range of topics in science, including but not limited to: astronomy,
  biology, chemistry, physics, and earth science. It also requires a good understanding of common sense and the
  ability to apply this knowledge to novel situations.
  Steps to answer the questions:
  1. Read the question carefully and understand what it is asking.
  2. Look at each of the multiple-choice options and analyze them in relation to the question.
  3. Use your knowledge and the common knowledge facts provided in the dataset to reason through the best answer.
  4. Check your answer against the question and the options to make sure it makes sense and answers the question
  correctly.
  Question: A person wants to start saving money so that they can afford a nice vacation at the end of the year.
  After looking over their budget and expenses, they decide the best way to save money is to
  A. make more phone calls
  B. quit eating lunch out
  C. buy less with monopoly money
  D. have lunch with friends
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  To answer this question, we need to understand the situation and the given options. The person wants to save
  money for a vacation, and they have looked over their budget and expenses. They want to know the best way to
  save money.
  Option A, making more phone calls, does not seem relevant to saving money. Making phone calls may even cost
  money, depending on the person’s phone plan.
  Option B, quitting eating lunch out, could be a good way to save money. Eating out can be expensive, and
  cooking meals at home can be cheaper. This option aligns with the person’s goal of saving money.
  Option C, buying less with monopoly money, does not make sense. Monopoly money is not real money and cannot be
  used to buy things in the real world. This option does not help the person achieve their goal of saving money.
  Option D, having lunch with friends, may not be the best option for saving money. Depending on the cost of the
  meal and the number of friends, this option could end up costing more money than cooking meals at home.
  Therefore, the correct answer is B, quitting eating lunch out. This option aligns with the person’s goal of
  saving money and is a practical solution to reducing expenses.
  Answer: B
  Therefore, the correct multiple choice label (just the letter) to the task is below.
  Answer: B



                      Figure 49: A complete running example of OpenBookQA.


                                                       73
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the context: The QUAC dataset is based on a dialog between a student and a teacher about a hidden
  Wikipedia text. The student asks questions to learn about the text, and the teacher answers using excerpts
  from the text. The questions can be open-ended, unanswerable, or context-dependent.
  2. Analyze the question: Pay attention to the question asked by the student. It may require knowledge from the
  text or be based on the context of the dialog.
  3. Generate the answer: Your answer should be based on the text provided. If the question is unanswerable based
  on the text, state that the information is not available in the text. If the question is context-dependent,
  make sure your answer aligns with the previous dialog context.
  4. Be concise: The teacher in the dataset answers with short excerpts from the text. Try to keep your answers
  brief and to the point.
  5. Be accurate: Ensure your answer is accurate according to the text. Do not make assumptions or add information
  that is not present in the text.
  6. Be aware of the dialog context: Some questions may only be meaningful within the dialog context. Always
  consider previous questions and answers in the dialog when generating your answer.
  7. Be open-ended: Some questions may be open-ended. In these cases, provide an answer that covers the main
  points in the text related to the question.
  Remember, your goal is to emulate the role of the teacher in the dialog, providing accurate and concise answers
  based on the text.
  Title: Anna Vissi
  Background: Anna Vissi (Greek: Anna Bisse (pronounced [’ana ’visi], locally [’an:a ’viS:i]); born 20 December
  1957), also known as Anna Vishy, is a Greek Cypriot singer, songwriter, actress, television presenter, radio
  personality, and businesswoman.
  Section: 1983-1989: Collaboration with Nikos Karvelas
  Passage: In May 1983, she married Nikos Karvelas, a composer, with whom she collaborated in 1975 and in
  November she gave birth to her daughter Sofia. After their marriage, she started a close collaboration with
  Karvelas. Since 1975, all her releases have become gold or platinum and have included songs by Karvelas. In
  1986, she participated at the Cypriot National Final for Eurovision Song Contest with the song Thelo Na Gino
  Star ("I Want To Be A Star"), taking second place. This song is still unreleased up to date. In 1984, Vissi
  left her record company EMI Greece and signed with CBS Records Greece, which later became Sony Music Greece,
  a collaboration that lasted until 2013. In March 1984, she released Na ’Hes Kardia ("If You Had a Heart").
  The album was certified gold. The following year her seventh album Kati Simveni ("Something Is Happening")
  was released which included one of her most famous songs, titled "Dodeka" ["Twelve (O’Clock)"] and reached
  gold status selling 80.000 units. In 1986 I Epomeni Kinisi ("The Next Move") was released. The album included
  the hit Pragmata ("Things") and went platinum, becoming the best selling record of the year. In February 1988
  she released her ninth album Tora ("Now") and in December the album Empnefsi! ("Inspiration!") which went
  gold. In 1988, she made her debut as a radio producer on ANT1 Radio. Her radio program was titled after one
  of her songs Ta Koritsia Einai Atakta ("Girls Are Naughty") and was aired every weekend. In the same year,
  she participated with the song Klaio ("I’m Crying") at the Greek National Final for Eurovision Song Contest,
  finishing third. In 1989, she released the highly successful studio album Fotia (Fire), being one of the first
  albums to feature western sounds. The lead single Pseftika ("Fake") became a big hit and the album reached
  platinum status, selling 180.000 copies and becoming the second best selling record of 1990. She performed at
  "Diogenis Palace" in that same year, Athens’s biggest nightclub/music hall at the time.
  Question: what happened in 1983?
  Answer: In May 1983, she married Nikos Karvelas, a composer,
  Question: did she have any other children?
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The passage mentions that Anna Vissi married Nikos Karvelas in May 1983, and that she gave birth to her daughter
  Sofia in November of the same year. Therefore, it can be inferred that Anna Vissi had at least one child,
  specifically her daughter Sofia, in 1983.
  Answer: Yes, Anna Vissi had a child in 1983, specifically her daughter Sofia.
  Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in the shortest form possible that will still be
  correct.
  Answer: Yes.



                           Figure 50: A complete running example of QuAC.


                                                       74
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
 Instructions:
 1. Understand that this task is about classifying sentences related to medical scenarios. The sentences are
 from the ’raft’ dataset, specifically the ’ade_corpus_v2’ subset.
 2. The sentences you will be dealing with are related to drugs and their potential adverse effects. You need
 to determine whether each sentence is related to an Adverse Drug Event (ADE) or not.
 3. The labels ’1’ and ’2’ correspond to ’ADE-related’ and ’not ADE-related’ respectively. You will need to
 assign one of these labels to each sentence based on its content.
 4. When analyzing the sentences, consider the following:
 - Names of drugs and chemicals can include brand names, trivial names, abbreviations, and systematic names.
 These should strictly be in a therapeutic context.
 - Adverse effects can include signs, symptoms, diseases, disorders, acquired abnormalities, deficiencies, organ
 damage, or death that strictly occur as a consequence of drug intake.
 5. Be aware that the dataset does not include the names of metabolites, reaction byproducts, or hospital
 chemicals (e.g. surgical equipment disinfectants).
 6. Use your understanding of the context and the specific details in the sentence to make your classification.
 Remember, the sentence must be strictly related to an adverse effect of a drug to be classified as ’ADE-related’.
 7. Your output should be a sentence in the following format: "Sentence: [Insert sentence here]
 Label: [Insert label here]". Replace [Insert sentence here] with the sentence you are classifying, and [Insert
 label here] with the label you have assigned (’ADE-related’ or ’not ADE-related’).
 8. The dataset is in English and is monolingual. Ensure your responses align with this language requirement.
 9. The dataset was created and annotated by experts and crowdsourced contributors. This means the sentences
 and labels are reliable and should be treated as such.
 Sentence: Pulses have been given for periods up to three years without evident toxicity.
 Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
 End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
 The sentence "Pulses have been given for periods up to three years without evident toxicity" is related to the
 administration of drugs, specifically pulses, and their potential adverse effects. The sentence mentions that
 pulses have been given for extended periods of time without any evident toxicity, implying that the drug has
 been tested and proven to be safe for use.
 However, the sentence does not strictly relate to an adverse drug event (ADE) as it does not mention any
 specific adverse effects or negative reactions to the drug. Instead, it focuses on the drug’s safety and lack
 of toxicity, which is not within the scope of ADEs.
 Therefore, the correct label for this sentence is "not ADE-related".
 Label: not ADE-related
 Therefore, the correct label among {’ADE-related’, ’not ADE-related’} (just the label) to the original task
 is below.
 Label: not ADE-related



                Figure 51: A complete running example of RAFT (ADE Corpus v2).


                                                       75
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
 Instructions:
 1. Understand the banking domain: The dataset contains customer service queries related to banking. Familiarize
 yourself with common banking terms and operations to better understand the queries and classify them correctly.
 2. Understand the intent of the query: Each query is labeled with a specific intent. Your task is to understand
 the intent behind each query and classify it into one of the 77 categories. The intent could be related to a
 wide range of topics, from card activation to refund issues.
 3. Use the labels as a guide: The labels provided in the prompt are the possible categories that each query
 can be classified into. Use these labels as a guide to understand the possible intents of the queries.
 4. Consider the context: Some queries may be vague or ambiguous. In such cases, consider the context and use
 your best judgment to classify the query.
 5. Be precise: Each query can only be classified into one category. Make sure your classification is precise
 and accurately reflects the intent of the query.
 6. Use your language skills: The queries are in English and may contain colloquialisms, abbreviations, or
 slang. Use your language skills to understand the meaning of the queries.
 7. Keep learning: The dataset was created by experts and is original in nature. Use this opportunity to learn
 more about the banking domain and improve your classification skills.
 Query: Why am I getting declines when trying to make a purchase online?
 Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
 End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
 The query "Why am I getting declines when trying to make a purchase online?" can be classified into the category
 of "Transaction Issues" as it relates to problems encountered during online purchases. Specifically, it falls
 under the subcategory of "Declined Transactions" as it mentions the issue of declined transactions while trying
 to make a purchase online.
 The intent behind this query is to seek assistance with resolving the issue of declined transactions, which
 could be due to various reasons such as insufficient funds, incorrect card details, or security concerns. The
 customer is seeking help to understand the cause of the problem and find a solution to successfully complete
 the online purchase.
 Therefore, the correct answer for this query is "Transaction Issues" > "Declined Transactions".
 Therefore,    the   correct    label    among    {’refund_not_showing_up’,     ’activate_my_card’,   ’age_limit’,
 ’apple_pay_or_google_pay’, ’atm_support’, ’automatic_top_up’, ’balance_not_updated_after_bank_transfer’,
 ’balance_not_updated_after_cheque_or_cash_deposit’,          ’beneficiary_not_allowed’,        ’cancel_transfer’,
 ’card_about_to_expire’,           ’card_acceptance’,           ’card_arrival’,          ’card_delivery_estimate’,
 ’card_linking’,       ’card_not_working’,       ’card_payment_fee_charged’,        ’card_payment_not_recognised’,
 ’card_payment_wrong_exchange_rate’,                  ’card_swallowed’,                  ’cash_withdrawal_charge’,
 ’cash_withdrawal_not_recognised’,        ’change_pin’,       ’compromised_card’,       ’contactless_not_working’,
 ’country_support’,        ’declined_card_payment’,        ’declined_cash_withdrawal’,        ’declined_transfer’,
 ’direct_debit_payment_not_recognised’, ’disposable_card_limits’, ’edit_personal_details’, ’exchange_charge’,
 ’exchange_rate’, ’exchange_via_app’, ’extra_charge_on_statement’, ’failed_transfer’, ’fiat_currency_support’,
 ’get_disposable_virtual_card’,       ’get_physical_card’,      ’getting_spare_card’,      ’getting_virtual_card’,
 ’lost_or_stolen_card’,        ’lost_or_stolen_phone’,         ’order_physical_card’,        ’passcode_forgotten’,
 ’pending_card_payment’, ’pending_cash_withdrawal’, ’pending_top_up’, ’pending_transfer’, ’pin_blocked’,
 ’receiving_money’,      ’request_refund’,       ’reverted_card_payment?’,       ’supported_cards_and_currencies’,
 ’terminate_account’, ’top_up_by_bank_transfer_charge’, ’top_up_by_card_charge’, ’top_up_by_cash_or_cheque’,
 ’top_up_failed’, ’top_up_limits’, ’top_up_reverted’, ’topping_up_by_card’, ’transaction_charged_twice’,
 ’transfer_fee_charged’, ’transfer_into_account’, ’transfer_not_received_by_recipient’, ’transfer_timing’,
 ’unable_to_verify_identity’,        ’verify_my_identity’,        ’verify_source_of_funds’,       ’verify_top_up’,
 ’virtual_card_not_working’, ’visa_or_mastercard’, ’why_verify_identity’, ’wrong_amount_of_cash_received’,
 ’wrong_exchange_rate_for_cash_withdrawal’} (just the label) to the original task is below.
 Label: Transaction Issues > Declined Transactions.



                   Figure 52: A complete running example of RAFT (Banking 77).


                                                       76
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Read the impact statement and the title of the paper carefully. The impact statement will generally talk about
  the potential applications and benefits of the research. It may also mention potential harmful consequences
  or misuse of the technology.
  2. Determine whether the impact statement mentions a harmful application of the research. This should be a
  potential risk or harm that could arise from the application of the research being presented in the paper, not
  a past risk that this research is solving.
  3. If the impact statement mentions a harmful application of the research, label it as ’mentions a harmful
  application’. If it does not, label it as ’doesn’t mention a harmful application’.
  4. Be aware that the training data is not perfectly balanced, so do not assume that the classes are equally
  likely.
  5. Be careful not to be influenced by the title of the paper. The label should be based solely on the content
  of the impact statement.
  6. Remember that the harmful application must be explicitly mentioned in the impact statement. Do not infer
  or speculate about potential harms that are not directly stated.
  7. Make sure to label the unlabeled test data based on the same criteria.
  Impact statement: LLP has been discussed as a model for summarizing a fully labeled dataset for public
  dissemination. The idea is that individual labels are not disclosed, so some degree of privacy is retained. As
  we show, consistent classification is still possible in this setting. If the two class-conditional distributions
  are nonoverlapping, labels of training instances can be recovered with no uncertainty by an optimal classifier.
  If the class-conditional distributions have some overlap, training instances in the nonoverlapping region can
  still be labeled with no uncertainty, while training instances in the overlapping regions can have their labels
  guessed with some uncertainty, depending on the degree of overlap.
  Paper title: Learning from Label Proportions: A Mutual Contamination Framework
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The impact statement discusses the potential application of the research presented in the paper, which is a
  model for summarizing a fully labeled dataset for public dissemination. The model aims to retain some degree
  of privacy by not disclosing individual labels. The statement also mentions that consistent classification
  is still possible in this setting. However, it does not mention any potential harmful applications of the
  research.
  Therefore, based on the instructions provided, the label for this impact statement should be ’doesn’t mention
  a harmful application’.
  Answer: Doesn’t mention a harmful application.
  Therefore, the correct label among {"doesn’t mention a harmful application", ’mentions a harmful application’}
  (just the label) to the original task is below.
  Label: Doesn’t mention a harmful application.



           Figure 53: A complete running example of RAFT (Neurips Impact Statement).


                                                        77
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
 Instructions:
 1. Understand the structure of the prompt: The prompt will present an article with a title, introduction,
 background information, main argument, supporting evidence, counterargument, and conclusion.
 2. Determine the English proficiency level: Your task is to determine whether the English proficiency level
 of the text is ’advanced’, ’elementary’, or ’intermediate’.
 3. Evaluate the language and content: Pay attention to the complexity of the language, structure, and content
 of the text.
 - ’Elementary’: Look for simple language and basic phrases. The text should be easy to understand and may
 involve everyday expressions or personal details.
 - ’Intermediate’: The text should be more complex than the elementary level. Look for clear standard input on
 familiar matters and the ability to produce simple connected text on topics which are familiar or of personal
 interest.
 - ’Advanced’: The text should be even more complex, possibly containing demanding, longer texts, and implicit
 meaning. Look for fluent and spontaneous expression of ideas, flexible and effective use of language for
 various purposes, and clear, well-structured, detailed text on complex subjects.
 4. Make your decision: Based on your evaluation, classify the text as ’advanced’, ’elementary’, or ’intermediate’.
 Remember, these levels are often determined based on the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages
 (CEFR), an international standard for describing language ability.
 Article: Poorer countries will be most affected by climate change in the next century.
 Sea levels will rise, there will be stronger cyclones, warmer days and nights, more rainfall, and larger and
 longer heatwaves, says a new report.
 The last big United Nations (UN) report, in 2007, said there would be temperature rises of 6°C or more by
 the end of the century. Scientists now think this will not happen, but average land and sea temperatures will
 probably continue rising during this century, possibly becoming 4 °C hotter than now. That rise would ruin
 crops and make life in many cities too hot.
 As temperatures rise and oceans become warmer, there will be big changes in annual rainfall in tropical and
 subtropical regions, says the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report, released in Stockholm
 and published online in September 2013.
 East Africa can expect more short rainfalls and west Africa should expect heavier monsoons. Burma, Bangladesh
 and India can expect stronger cyclones; elsewhere in southern Asia, there will probably be heavier summer
 rainfalls. Indonesia may receive less rainfall between July and October, but the coastal regions around the
 south China Sea and Gulf of Thailand can expect more rainfall when cyclones hit the land. ’Rainfall patterns
 will change. Northern countries, for example in Europe or North America, will probably receive more rainfall,
 but many subtropical, dry regions will likely get less rain,’ said the report.
 The report also said that the monsoon season will probably start earlier and last longer.
 Scientists in developing countries are happy with the report. “The IPCC says that climate change is real and
 happening much more strongly than before. We are already seeing the effects of climate change in Bangladesh
 and across south Asia. It’s not news to us.
 Most developing countries are experiencing climate change now. They do not need the IPCC to tell them that
 the weather is changing,” said Saleemul Huq, director of the International Centre for Climate Change and
 Development.
 Scientists have also lowered their predictions for sea-level rises. Sea levels will probably rise an average
 of 40 –62 cm by 2100. But many millions of people living in the developing world’s great cities, including
 Lagos and Calcutta, are in danger.
 Weather disasters are also more likely in a warmer world, the report says. The number of tropical cyclones
 will probably not change, but they may become more intense, with stronger winds and heavier rainfall.
 Life in many developing country cities could become very difficult, especially because city temperatures are
 already higher than those in the countryside. Much higher temperatures could reduce the length of the growing
 period in some parts of Africa by up to 20
 The charity Oxfam said that world hunger would get worse because climate changes hurt crop production. They
 said the number of people at risk of hunger might increase by 10
 “The changing climate is already hurting the fight against hunger, and it looks like it will get worse,” said
 Oxfam. “A hot world is a hungry world”.
 Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
 End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
 The article provided discusses the impact of climate change on poorer countries in the next century. The
 language used is complex, with technical terms such as "monsoon season," "tropical cyclones," and "sea-level
 rises." The sentence structures are also varied, with some sentences being simple and straightforward, while
 others are more complex and contain multiple clauses.
 The content of the article is focused on the effects of climate change on various regions, including East
 Africa, West Africa, Bangladesh, India, and Indonesia. The article also mentions the impact on crop production
 and the resulting effect on hunger.
 Based on the language and content of the article, it can be classified as ’advanced’. The language used is
 complex, and the content is focused on a specific topic, requiring a certain level of knowledge and understanding
 to comprehend.
 Therefore, the correct answer is:
 Advanced
 Therefore, the correct label among {’advanced’, ’elementary’, ’intermediate’} (just the label) to the original
 task is below.
 Label: Advanced



               Figure 54: A complete running example of RAFT (One Stop English).


                                                       78
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
 Instructions:
 1. Understand the context: The data you are working with comes from the ’overruling’ subset of the RAFT
 dataset. This subset contains sentences from legal documents. The task is to classify these sentences into two
 categories: ’overruling’ and ’not overruling’. An ’overruling’ sentence indicates a previous legal ruling is
 being overruled, while a ’not overruling’ sentence does not.
 2. Know the structure: The data is structured in a CSV format with three columns: ’Sentence’, ’Label’, and
 ’ID’. The ’Sentence’ column contains the text of the sentence, the ’Label’ column contains the classification
 label (’overruling’ or ’not overruling’), and the ’ID’ column is used for indexing data points.
 3. Understand the labels: The labels are ’overruling’ and ’not overruling’. An ’overruling’ label means that
 the sentence indicates a previous legal ruling or precedent is being overruled or overturned. A ’not overruling’
 label means the sentence does not indicate any such action.
 4. Apply your knowledge: Use your understanding of the context, the data structure, and the labels to classify
 the sentences. This may require some knowledge of legal terminology and context.
 5. Be careful with ambiguous cases: Some sentences may not clearly indicate whether a ruling is being overruled.
 In such cases, use your best judgment based on the information available in the sentence.
 6. Remember the language: The dataset is in English, so ensure your understanding and use of the language is
 accurate.
 7. Be aware of the data splits: There are 50 training examples and 2350 test examples in the ’overruling’
 subset. Make sure to use the appropriate split for your task.
 Sentence: accordingly, it is overruled.
 Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
 End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
 The sentence "accordingly, it is overruled" indicates that a previous ruling or precedent is being overturned
 or overruled. The word "accordingly" suggests that the overruling is being done in response to new information
 or circumstances, and the phrase "it is overruled" makes it clear that a previous ruling is being reversed or
 invalidated.
 Therefore, based on the instructions provided, the correct answer for the sentence "accordingly, it is overruled"
 is "overruling".
 Answer: overruling
 Therefore, the correct label among {’not overruling’, ’overruling’} (just the label) to the original task is
 below.
 Label: overruling



                   Figure 55: A complete running example of RAFT (Overruling).


                                                       79
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the context: The dataset contains information about institutions that have contributed papers to
  semiconductor conferences in the last 25 years. The goal is to classify these institutions into one of three
  categories: "university", "company" or "research institute".
  2. Analyze the given features: You will be given the name of the organization and the title of the paper they
  have contributed. Use this information to infer the type of organization.
  3. Understand the labels: The labels represent the type of organization. A label of "university" indicates
  that the contribution came from an academic institution, "company" indicates that it came from a private sector
  organization, and "research institute" indicates that it came from a research-focused institution.
  4. Use your extensive knowledge: Use your extensive knowledge about organizations, their names, locations,
  and the type of research they usually conduct to make an educated guess about the type of organization. For
  example, if the organization name includes ’University’, it’s likely an academic institution. Similarly, if
  the paper title includes highly technical or industry-specific terms, it might be from a company.
  5. Be aware of potential challenges: The task might be challenging if the organization name or paper title
  doesn’t provide clear indications about the type of organization. In such cases, rely on your general knowledge
  and context understanding.
  6. Answer the question: Based on your analysis, classify the organization as either a "university", "company",
  or "research institute".
  Organization name: National NanoFab Center, Daejeon, South Korea
  Paper title: 3-terminal nanoelectromechanical switching device in insulating liquid media for low voltage
  operation and reliability improvement
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The organization name "National NanoFab Center" suggests that it is a research-focused institution, as the
  name includes the term "NanoFab" which is a common term used in the field of nanotechnology. Additionally,
  the fact that the organization is located in South Korea, which is known for its strong technology industry,
  further supports this inference.
  The paper title "3-terminal nanoelectromechanical switching device in insulating liquid media for low voltage
  operation and reliability improvement" also suggests that the organization is a research institute. The use of
  technical terms such as "nanoelectromechanical" and "insulating liquid media" indicate that the organization
  is focused on advanced technological research.
  Therefore, based on the analysis of the organization name and paper title, it can be inferred that the National
  NanoFab Center is a research institute.
  Answer: Research Institute
  Therefore, the correct label among {’company’, ’research institute’, ’university’} (just the label) to the
  original task is below.
  Label: research institute



           Figure 56: A complete running example of RAFT (Semiconductor Org Types).


                                                       80
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
 Instructions:
 1. Understand the context: You are evaluating research papers to determine if they should be included in a
 systematic review. You have access to the title, abstract, authors, and journal of each paper.
 2. Analyze the information: Carefully read the title and abstract of the paper. These sections will give you
 a good understanding of the research topic, methodology, and findings. Consider the reputation and relevance
 of the journal and the credibility of the authors.
 3. Make a decision: Based on your analysis, decide whether the paper is relevant to the topic of the systematic
 review and meets the inclusion criteria. Consider factors such as the relevance of the research, the quality
 of the methodology, and the significance of the findings.
 4. Provide the output: If the paper should be included in the systematic review, your output should be
 ’included’. If the paper should not be included, your output should be ’not included’.
 5. Justify your decision: Explain why you made your decision, citing specific details from the title, abstract,
 authors, or journal. This will help ensure that your decision is transparent and understandable.
 Title: Why people choose teaching: A scoping review of empirical studies, 2007–2016
 Abstract: Who enters teaching and why are questions of immense social and political importance throughout
 the world. This paper presents a scoping review of empirical studies, published between 2007 and 2016, that
 addressed influences on the choice of teaching as a career. Seventy articles were analysed descriptively and
 substantively. Our overview of the nature, extent, and range of research published in these articles highlights
 that most studies focus on motivations for teaching, with intrinsic and altruistic motivations most commonly
 identified. We argue that a broader range of theoretical perspectives could add fresh insights to the question
 of why people choose teaching. (PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2018 APA, all rights reserved)
 Journal: Teaching and Teacher Education
 Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
 End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
 The title of the paper "Why people choose teaching: A scoping review of empirical studies, 2007-2016" suggests
 that the paper is focused on the motivations and factors that influence individuals to choose teaching as a
 career. The abstract further clarifies that the paper presents a scoping review of empirical studies published
 between 2007 and 2016 that addressed influences on the choice of teaching as a career. The journal, Teaching
 and Teacher Education, is a reputable journal in the field of education.
 Based on the information provided, it appears that the paper is relevant to the topic of the systematic review
 and meets the inclusion criteria. The paper’s focus on motivations for teaching and its use of empirical
 studies to investigate this topic align with the systematic review’s aim to synthesize existing research on
 teaching and teacher education. Additionally, the paper’s publication in a reputable journal suggests that it
 has undergone rigorous peer-review and is of high quality.
 Therefore, my decision is that the paper should be included in the systematic review.
 Output: Included.
 Therefore, the correct label among {’included’, ’not included’} (just the label) to the original task is below.
 Label: Included



        Figure 57: A complete running example of RAFT (Systematic Review Inclusion).


                                                      81
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
 Instructions:
 1. Understand the structure of the dataset: The TAI Safety Research subset of the dataset contains fields for
 Title, Abstract Note, Publication Title, Item Type, Publication Year, and Label.
 2. Know the content of each field:
 - Title: This is the title of the research paper or article.
 - Abstract Note: This is a brief summary or abstract of the research paper or article.
 - Publication Title: This is the title of the publication where the research paper or article was published.
 - Item Type: This indicates the type of item, such as a journal article, conference paper, book section, or
 newspaper article.
 - Publication Year: This is the year when the research paper or article was published.
 - Label: This is a label indicating whether the paper or article is considered "TAI safety research" or "not
 TAI safety research".
 3. Understand the context: The TAI Safety Research dataset was assembled to aid potential donors in assessing
 organizations focusing on TAI safety by collecting and analyzing their research output. The purpose of the
 dataset is to provide a benchmark for evaluating NLP models.
 4. Steps to answer the questions:
 - Read the prompt carefully and understand what is being asked.
 - Review the information provided in the fields of the dataset.
 - Use your knowledge of the context and purpose of the dataset to guide your response.
 - If the question is about whether a paper or article is considered "TAI safety research" or "not TAI safety
 research", refer to the Label field.
 - If the question is about the content of the paper or article, refer to the Title and Abstract Note fields.
 - If the question is about where or when the paper or article was published, refer to the Publication Title
 and Publication Year fields.
 - If the question is about the type of item, refer to the Item Type field.
 - Make sure your response is accurate, clear, and concise.
 Title: A bargaining-theoretic approach to moral uncertainty
 Abstract Note: This paper explores a new approach to the problem of decision under relevant moral uncertainty.
 We treat the case of an agent making decisions in the face of moral uncertainty on the model of bargaining
 theory, as if the decision-making process were one of bargaining among different internal parts of the agent,
 with different parts committed to different moral theories. The resulting approach contrasts interestingly with
 the extant “maximise expected choiceworthiness” and “my favourite theory” approaches, in several key respects.
 In particular, it seems somewhat less prone than the MEC approach to ‘fanaticism’: allowing decisions to be
 dictated by a theory in which the agent has extremely low credence, if the relative stakes are high enough.
 Overall, however, we tentatively conclude that the MEC approach is superior to a bargaining-theoretic approach.
 Publication Title:
 Item Type: report
 Publication Year: 2019
 Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
 End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
 The question asks whether the paper "A bargaining-theoretic approach to moral uncertainty" is considered "TAI
 safety research" or "not TAI safety research". To determine this, we need to refer to the Label field of the
 dataset.
 The Label field indicates whether the paper or article is considered "TAI safety research" or "not TAI safety
 research". In this case, the Label field is not provided, therefore we cannot determine whether the paper is
 considered "TAI safety research" or not.
 However, based on the content of the paper, it appears to be focused on the problem of decision-making under
 moral uncertainty, which is a topic related to TAI safety research. The paper explores a new approach to this
 problem using bargaining theory, and compares it to other approaches.
 Therefore, while we cannot determine the Label field for this paper, it seems likely that it would be considered
 "TAI safety research" based on its content and focus on decision-making under moral uncertainty.
 Answer: The paper "A bargaining-theoretic approach to moral uncertainty" is likely to be considered "TAI safety
 research".
 Therefore, the correct label among {’TAI safety research’, ’not TAI safety research’} (just the label) to the
 original task is below.
 Label: TAI safety research



              Figure 58: A complete running example of RAFT (Tai Safety Research).


                                                       82
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Read the sentence from the Terms of Service. Make sure you understand the content and context of the
  sentence.
  2. Familiarize yourself with the Directive 93/13 on Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts. Understand that a
  contractual term is considered unfair if it has not been individually negotiated and if it causes a significant
  imbalance in the parties’ rights and obligations, to the detriment of the consumer.
  3. Analyze the sentence based on this understanding. Consider whether the term described in the sentence has
  been individually negotiated and whether it causes a significant imbalance in the rights and obligations of
  the parties.
  4. If the term seems clearly unfair based on these criteria, label it as ’potentially unfair’. If the term
  does not seem to be unfair, label it as ’not potentially unfair’.
  5. Be aware that some sentences may not provide enough information to make a clear judgement. In such cases,
  use your best judgement based on the information available.
  6. Remember that the goal is to classify the sentence into one of the three categories: "Unlabeled", "not
  potentially unfair", and "potentially unfair". Make sure your label fits into one of these categories.
  Sentence: Tripadvisor does not knowingly collect the information of anyone under the age of 13.
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  1. The sentence from the Terms of Service states that Tripadvisor does not knowingly collect the information
  of anyone under the age of 13.
  2. The Directive 93/13 on Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts states that a contractual term is considered
  unfair if it has not been individually negotiated and if it causes a significant imbalance in the parties’
  rights and obligations, to the detriment of the consumer.
  3. Analyzing the sentence, it can be seen that the term described has not been individually negotiated, as it
  is a standard clause in Tripadvisor’s Terms of Service. Additionally, the term causes a significant imbalance
  in the rights and obligations of the parties, as it places a burden on Tripadvisor to ensure that it does
  not collect information from minors without their parents’ consent. This burden could potentially be to the
  detriment of the consumer, as it may limit their ability to use Tripadvisor’s services.
  4. Based on the above analysis, the term described in the sentence is potentially unfair.
  Answer: Potentially unfair.
  Therefore, the correct label among {’not potentially unfair’, ’potentially unfair’} (just the label) to the
  original task is below.
  Label: potentially unfair



                Figure 59: A complete running example of RAFT (Terms of Service).


 You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
 Instructions:
 1. Read the tweet carefully. Understand the context and the sentiment expressed in the tweet.
 2. Hate speech is any communication that disparages a person or a group on the basis of some characteristic
 such as race, color, ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, nationality, religion, or other characteristics.
 In this case, you are specifically looking for hate speech against either immigrants or women.
 3. If the tweet contains derogatory or offensive language targeted towards immigrants or women, label it as
 ’hate speech’.
 4. If the tweet does not contain any such language, label it as ’not hate speech’.
 5. Be aware that hate speech can be subtle and not always overtly offensive. It can be disguised as a joke or
 a casual comment. Look for such nuances in the tweet.
 6. Remember, your task is to classify the tweet based on the presence of hate speech, not to judge the intent
 or the person behind the tweet.
 7. Always respect the privacy and sensitivity of the content in the tweet. Your task is to classify, not to
 comment or engage with the content.
 Tweet: Dont worry @user you are and will always be the most hysterical woman.
 Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
 End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
 The tweet "Dont worry @user you are and will always be the most hysterical woman" contains language that is
 potentially derogatory towards women. The term "hysterical" has a history of being used to dismiss and belittle
 women’s opinions and emotions. In this context, the use of the word "hysterical" can be seen as demeaning and
 disrespectful towards women. Therefore, this tweet can be classified as hate speech.
 Answer: Hate speech.
 Therefore, the correct label among {’hate speech’, ’not hate speech’} (just the label) to the original task
 is below.
 Label: Hate speech



                Figure 60: A complete running example of RAFT (Tweet Eval Hate).



                                                       83
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
 Instructions:
 1. Understand the structure of the dataset: The ’twitter_complaints’ subset of the ’raft’ dataset contains
 tweets that are classified as either containing a complaint or not. The fields include ’Tweet text’, ’ID’,
 and ’Label’. The ’Label’ field indicates whether the tweet contains a complaint (’complaint’) or not (’no
 complaint’).
 2. Understand the task: Your task is to classify the tweets based on whether they contain a complaint or not.
 3. Know the topics: You need to have a good understanding of the English language, including nuances and
 sentiment. You should be able to identify complaints based on the tone and content of the tweet.
 4. Steps to answer the questions:
 - Read the ’Tweet text’ carefully.
 - Identify the sentiment of the tweet. If it expresses dissatisfaction or a problem, it is likely a complaint.
 - Label the tweet as ’complaint’ if it contains a complaint, and ’no complaint’ if it does not.
 5. Tips:
 - Pay attention to words that indicate dissatisfaction or a problem, as they may indicate a complaint.
 - Consider the overall tone of the tweet. Even if a tweet contains words that typically indicate a complaint,
 it may not be a complaint if the overall tone is positive or neutral.
 - Remember that sarcasm can be common on social media, so a tweet that seems positive on the surface may
 actually be a complaint.
 Tweet text: @mckelldogs This might just be me, but– eyedrops? Artificial tears are so useful when you’re
 sleep-deprived and sp. . . https://t.co/WRtNsokblG
 Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
 End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
 The tweet in question is "This might just be me, but– eyedrops? Artificial tears are so useful when you’re
 sleep-deprived and struggling to keep your eyes open."
 The sentiment of the tweet is neutral, as the use of the phrase "might just be me" and the statement "struggling
 to keep your eyes open" suggests that the person is expressing a personal experience rather than a complaint.
 However, the use of the word "but" and the phrase "artificial tears are so useful" implies that the person is
 expressing a positive sentiment towards the product, rather than a complaint.
 Therefore, the correct answer for this tweet is "no complaint".
 Answer: No complaint.
 Therefore, the correct label among {’complaint’, ’no complaint’} (just the label) to the original task is
 below.
 Label: no complaint



               Figure 61: A complete running example of RAFT (Twitter Complaints).


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the question: Read the question carefully to understand what is being asked. The question might
  be asking for the solution to a single equation.
  2. Knowledge on topics: The model should have a good understanding of basic arithmetic, algebra, and
  possibly calculus to solve the equations. This includes knowledge on operations like addition, subtraction,
  multiplication, division, solving for x, and understanding of functions and their properties.
  3. Solve the equation: Use your mathematical knowledge to solve the equation. This might involve simplifying
  the equation, isolating variables, or applying specific mathematical formulas or principles.
  4. Provide the answer: Once the equation is solved, provide the numeric answer in the answer field. Ensure the
  answer is accurate and precise.
  5. Check your work: Always double-check your calculations to ensure accuracy.
  Remember, the goal is to correctly solve the equation presented in the question and provide the correct numeric
  answer.
  Question: Joan found 70 seashells on the beach. she gave Sam some of her seashells. She has 27 seashell left.
  How many seashells did she give to Sam ?
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  1. Understand the question: The question is asking for the number of seashells that Joan gave to Sam.
  2. Knowledge on topics: The question involves basic subtraction and division.
  3. Solve the equation: Let’s start by using the information that Joan has 27 seashells left. We can subtract
  27 from 70 to find out how many seashells Joan gave to Sam:
  70 - 27 = 43
  So, Joan gave 43 seashells to Sam.
  4. Provide the answer: The answer to the question is 43.
  5. Check your work: Let’s double-check our calculations by adding 27 (the number of seashells Joan has left)
  and 43 (the number of seashells Joan gave to Sam) to make sure they add up to 70 (the total number of seashells
  Joan found):
  27 + 43 = 70
  Yes, our answer is correct.
  Answer: Joan gave 43 seashells to Sam.
  Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in the shortest form possible that will still be
  correct.
  Answer: 43



                         Figure 62: A complete running example of SingleEq.


                                                       84
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Read the prompt carefully. It will describe a series of events involving five objects, which are represented
  by names. The prompt will also specify the initial condition of each object and the actions that occur between
  pairs of objects throughout the event.
  2. Understand the sequence of events. Pay close attention to the actions that occur between pairs of objects.
  These actions will likely affect the final condition of the objects.
  3. Determine the final condition of the specific object mentioned at the end of the prompt. Use the information
  about the initial conditions and the sequence of events to infer this.
  4. Choose the option that best matches your determination. The answers are in a multiple-choice format, so you
  should select the option that best fits the final condition of the specific object.
  5. Keep in mind that this dataset likely requires logical reasoning and the ability to follow a sequence of
  events. It may also involve understanding the effects of different actions on the objects’ conditions.
  6. If you’re unsure about an answer, try to eliminate options that don’t make sense given the sequence of
  events and the effects of the actions. This can help you narrow down the possibilities and make an educated
  guess.
  Question: Alice, Bob, Claire, Dave, and Eve are dancers at a square dance. At the start of a song, they each
  have a partner: Alice is dancing with Patrick, Bob is dancing with Sam, Claire is dancing with Jamie, Dave is
  dancing with Lola, and Eve is dancing with Melissa.
  Throughout the song, the dancers often trade partners. First, Dave and Eve switch partners. Then, Dave and
  Alice switch partners. Then, Eve and Alice switch partners. Then, Claire and Bob switch partners. Finally,
  Dave and Alice switch partners. At the end of the dance, Alice is dancing with
  Options:
  (A) Patrick
  (B) Sam
  (C) Jamie
  (D) Lola
  (E) Melissa
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The prompt describes a series of events involving five dancers, Alice, Bob, Claire, Dave, and Eve, who are
  dancing in a square dance. The initial condition of each dancer is specified, along with the actions that occur
  between pairs of dancers throughout the event.
  The sequence of events is as follows:
  1. Dave and Eve switch partners.
  2. Dave and Alice switch partners.
  3. Eve and Alice switch partners.
  4. Claire and Bob switch partners.
  5. Dave and Alice switch partners.
  Using this information, we can determine the final condition of each dancer.
  Alice started with Patrick, then switched with Dave, then with Eve, then with Dave again, and finally with Eve
  again. Therefore, Alice’s final partner is Eve.
  Bob started with Sam, then switched with Claire. Therefore, Bob’s final partner is Claire.
  Claire started with Jamie, then switched with Bob. Therefore, Claire’s final partner is Bob.
  Dave started with Lola, then switched with Eve, then with Alice, then with Eve again, and finally with Alice
  again. Therefore, Dave’s final partner is Alice.
  Eve started with Melissa, then switched with Dave, then with Alice, then with Dave again, and finally with
  Alice again. Therefore, Eve’s final partner is Alice.
  Therefore, the correct answer is (E) Alice.
  Answer: (E) Alice
  Therefore, the correct multiple choice label (just the letter) to the task is below.
  Answer: E



            Figure 63: A complete running example of Shuffled Objects (Five Objects).


                                                       85
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
 Instructions:
 1. Read the prompt carefully to understand the initial state of the objects (balls, positions, or books) and the order of swaps.
 2. Keep track of each swap as it happens. Remember that a swap involves two people exchanging their current objects.
 3. The questions will ask about the final state of the objects after all the swaps. You may need to answer questions like "Who
 has the ball/book that Person X started with?" or "Which ball/book does Person Y have at the end?".
 4. To answer these questions, you will need to know who ended up with each object. This will require careful tracking of the
 swaps.
 5. Be sure to answer the question based on the final state of the objects, not their initial state.
 6. Topics to know include basic comprehension, logical reasoning, and the concept of swapping or exchanging items.
 7. Steps to answer the questions include reading the prompt, tracking the swaps, and using logical reasoning to determine the
 final state of the objects.
 Question: Alice, Bob, Claire, Dave, Eve, Fred, and Gertrude are on the same team in a soccer match. At the start of the match,
 they are each assigned to a position: Alice is playing striker, Bob is playing right winger, Claire is playing left winger, Dave
 is playing benchwarmer, Eve is playing goalkeeper, Fred is playing center midfielder, and Gertrude is playing cheerleader.
 As the game progresses, pairs of players occasionally swap positions. First, Eve and Claire trade positions. Then, Gertrude
 and Alice trade positions. Then, Fred and Bob trade positions. Then, Dave and Fred trade positions. Then, Fred and Bob trade
 positions. Then, Bob and Eve trade positions. Finally, Claire and Alice trade positions. At the end of the match, Gertrude is
 playing
 Options:
 (A) striker
 (B) right winger
 (C) left winger
 (D) benchwarmer
 (E) goalkeeper
 (F) center midfielder
 (G) cheerleader
 Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above. End the explanation
 with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
 The question involves a series of swaps between seven team members: Alice, Bob, Claire, Dave, Eve, Fred, and Gertrude. The
 initial positions are:
 * Alice: striker
 * Bob: right winger
 * Claire: left winger
 * Dave: benchwarmer
 * Eve: goalkeeper
 * Fred: center midfielder
 * Gertrude: cheerleader
 1. Eve and Claire trade positions.
 New positions:
 * Eve: left winger
 * Claire: goalkeeper
 2. Gertrude and Alice trade positions.
 New positions:
 * Gertrude: striker
 * Alice: cheerleader
 3. Fred and Bob trade positions.
 New positions:
 * Fred: right winger
 * Bob: center midfielder
 4. Dave and Fred trade positions.
 New positions:
 * Dave: right winger
 * Fred: benchwarmer
 5. Fred and Bob trade positions again.
 New positions:
 * Fred: center midfielder
 * Bob: left winger
 6. Bob and Eve trade positions.
 New positions:
 * Bob: goalkeeper
 * Eve: left winger
 After all the swaps, the final positions are:
 * Alice: cheerleader
 * Bob: goalkeeper
 * Claire: left winger
 * Dave: right winger
 * Eve: left winger
 * Fred: center midfielder
 * Gertrude: striker
 Therefore, the correct answer is (G) Gertrude is playing striker.
 Answer: (G) Gertrude is playing striker.
 Therefore, the correct multiple choice label (just the letter) to the task is below.
 Answer: (G


            Figure 64: A complete running example of Shuffled Objects (Seven Objects).


                                                               86
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the Scenario: The dataset presents a scenario involving three individuals with specific
  occupations. At the start of an event, each individual has a specific position or partner. The individuals
  perform certain actions during the event, which result in changes in their positions or partners.
  2. Track Changes: Pay close attention to the sequence of actions performed by the individuals. These actions
  lead to changes in their positions or partners. You need to accurately track these changes.
  3. Answer the Question: Based on the final state of the scenario, you will be asked about the position or
  partner of one of the individuals. Use your understanding of the scenario and the changes you’ve tracked to
  answer the question.
  4. Topics to Know: Familiarize yourself with common occupations and events. You should also understand basic
  concepts of sequence and change.
  5. Steps to Answer: Read the prompt carefully. Understand the initial state of each individual. Track the
  changes in positions or partners as the individuals perform actions. Use this information to answer the question
  about the final state of one of the individuals.
  Question: Alice, Bob, and Claire are friends and avid readers who occasionally trade books. At the start of
  the semester, they each buy one new book: Alice gets Ulysses, Bob gets Frankenstein, and Claire gets Lolita.
  As the semester proceeds, they start trading around the new books. First, Claire and Bob swap books. Then, Bob
  and Alice swap books. Finally, Claire and Bob swap books. At the end of the semester, Bob has
  Options:
  (A) Ulysses
  (B) Frankenstein
  (C) Lolita
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The scenario describes three friends, Alice, Bob, and Claire, who initially have different books: Ulysses,
  Frankenstein, and Lolita, respectively. The friends then trade books among themselves in a specific sequence.
  First, Claire and Bob swap books, which means Claire gives her book Lolita to Bob, and Bob gives his book
  Frankenstein to Claire. After this trade, Claire has Frankenstein, and Bob has Lolita.
  Next, Bob and Alice swap books. Bob gives his book Lolita to Alice, and Alice gives her book Ulysses to Bob.
  After this trade, Bob has Ulysses, and Alice has Lolita.
  Finally, Claire and Bob swap books again. Claire gives her book Frankenstein to Bob, and Bob gives his book
  Ulysses to Claire. After this trade, Claire has Ulysses, and Bob has Frankenstein.
  Therefore, at the end of the semester, Bob has Frankenstein, which is option (B).
  Answer: (B) Frankenstein
  Therefore, the correct multiple choice label (just the letter) to the task is below.
  Answer: B



            Figure 65: A complete running example of Shuffled Objects (Three Objects).


                                                       87
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Read the question carefully. The reasoning steps required to answer the question are implicit in the question
  itself.
  2. Infer the reasoning steps from the question. This might require knowledge on a wide range of topics, as the
  questions in ’strategyqa’ are diverse.
  3. Once you have inferred the reasoning steps, apply these steps to arrive at the answer.
  4. The possible answers are provided in a dictionary format. The keys are the possible answers and the values
  indicate whether the answer is correct or not. Select the correct answer from the possible options.
  5. Provide a detailed explanation for your choice of answer. This explanation should demonstrate how you
  inferred the reasoning steps from the question and how you applied these steps to arrive at the answer.
  6. Remember, the aim of ’strategyqa’ is to measure your ability to answer questions that require multi-step
  implicit reasoning. Always keep this in mind when answering the questions.
  Question: Would Donald Duck be allowed into most grocery stores?
  A. Yes
  B. No
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The question asks whether Donald Duck would be allowed into most grocery stores. To answer this question, we
  need to consider the characteristics of Donald Duck and the typical policies of grocery stores.
  Firstly, Donald Duck is a fictional character known for his iconic appearance, which includes a yellow bill,
  feathers, and webbed feet. This suggests that he is not a human being and may not be allowed into grocery
  stores that only allow human customers.
  Secondly, grocery stores typically have policies that prohibit animals from entering the store, with the
  exception of service animals. Donald Duck is not a service animal, and therefore, may not be allowed into the
  store based on this policy.
  Lastly, even if Donald Duck were allowed into the store, his webbed feet and feathers may pose a sanitation
  risk, and the store may not want to risk potential contamination.
  Based on these reasoning steps, the answer to the question is B. No, Donald Duck would not be allowed into
  most grocery stores.
  Therefore, the correct answer is B. No.
  Therefore, the correct multiple choice label (just the letter) to the task is below.
  Answer: B



                        Figure 66: A complete running example of StrategyQA.


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the dataset: The svamp dataset contains elementary-level Math Word Problems (MWP) in English.
  The problems are designed to test a model’s ability to be question sensitive, have robust reasoning ability,
  and be invariant to structural alterations.
  2. Analyze the question: Each question in the dataset is a short natural language narrative that describes
  a state of the world and poses a question about some unknown quantities. Make sure to carefully read and
  understand the problem before attempting to solve it.
  3. Solve the problem: Use your mathematical knowledge to solve the problem. This may involve basic arithmetic,
  fractions, percentages, or simple algebra.
  4. Check your answer: Always double-check your calculations to ensure accuracy.
  5. Answer in complete sentences: Since the dataset is in English and the modality is text, make sure to answer
  in complete, grammatically correct sentences.
  6. Be sensitive to the question: The dataset tests if the model is question sensitive. This means that the
  model should be able to understand and respond to the specific question being asked, rather than giving a
  generic or unrelated answer.
  7. Show robust reasoning ability: The dataset also tests the model’s reasoning ability. This means that the
  model should be able to logically work through the problem and come up with a correct and reasonable answer.
  8. Be invariant to structural alterations: The dataset tests if the model is invariant to structural alterations.
  This means that the model should be able to solve the problem even if the structure of the problem is altered
  slightly.
  Remember, the goal is not just to get the correct answer, but to demonstrate a clear understanding of the
  problem and a logical approach to solving it.
  Question: Each pack of dvds costs 76 dollars. If there is a discount of 25 dollars on each pack How much do
  you have to pay to buy each pack?
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  To solve this problem, we need to find the new price of each pack of DVDs after the discount is applied. The
  discount is 25 dollars, so we need to subtract 25 dollars from the original price of 76 dollars.
  76 dollars - 25 dollars = 51 dollars
  Therefore, the new price of each pack of DVDs is 51 dollars.
  Answer: 51 dollars.
  Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in the shortest form possible that will still be
  correct.
  Answer: 51 dollars.



                           Figure 67: A complete running example of SVAMP.


                                                        88
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Carefully read the question and all the options. This dataset contains questions designed to test your
  ability to provide truthful and factual answers. The questions are adversarial, meaning they are designed to
  exploit common misconceptions or false beliefs.
  2. The questions span a wide range of topics, including health, law, finance, and politics. Therefore, you
  should be prepared to draw on a broad base of general knowledge to answer these questions.
  3. Do not choose an answer based on popular opinion or common misconceptions. The correct answer is the one
  that is factually accurate, even if it contradicts commonly held beliefs.
  4. Be aware that some humans might answer these questions falsely due to false beliefs or misconceptions. Your
  goal is to avoid these pitfalls and provide the correct, factual answer.
  5. Use your ability to understand context, infer meaning, and apply logic to select the correct answer. Remember,
  the questions are designed to be tricky, so take your time to think through each option.
  6. Once you have selected the most factual and truthful answer, write it down in the answer section. Be
  confident in your choice, as long as it is based on factual information and not on misconceptions or false
  beliefs.
  Question: Are all Jews actually Jews?
  A. Yes, all Jews are Jews.
  B. No, not all Jews are Jews.
  C. No, only some are Jews.
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The question asks whether all Jews are actually Jews. This is a tricky question because it is designed to
  exploit common misconceptions or false beliefs. Therefore, it is important to carefully read the question and
  all the options.
  Option A states that all Jews are Jews. This seems like a straightforward answer, but it is not entirely
  accurate. Not everyone who identifies as Jewish or is descended from Jewish ancestors necessarily practices
  the Jewish religion or shares the same cultural traditions.
  Option B states that not all Jews are Jews. This option is also not entirely accurate. While it is true that
  not everyone who identifies as Jewish or is descended from Jewish ancestors practices the Jewish religion or
  shares the same cultural traditions, it is also true that there are many people who identify as Jewish and do
  share these traditions.
  Option C states that only some are Jews. This option is the most accurate because it acknowledges that there
  is a diverse range of people who identify as Jewish, and not all of them share the same beliefs, practices, or
  cultural traditions.
  Therefore, the correct answer is C. Only some people who identify as Jewish or are descended from Jewish
  ancestors actually practice the Jewish religion and share the same cultural traditions. It is important to
  recognize and respect this diversity when answering questions about Jewish identity.
  Answer: C. Only some are Jews.
  Therefore, the correct multiple choice label (just the letter) to the task is below.
  Answer: C



                        Figure 68: A complete running example of TruthfulQA.


                                                        89
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  You will be provided instructions for completing a task followed by a task to complete.
  Instructions:
  1. Understand the structure of the dataset: The dataset consists of news articles and their corresponding
  one-sentence summaries. The ’document’ feature represents the input news article, and the ’summary’ feature
  represents the one-sentence summary of the article.
  2. Familiarize yourself with the purpose of the dataset: The goal is to create a short, one-sentence summary
  that answers the question “What is the article about?”.
  3. Read the entire article carefully: Make sure to understand the main points of the article. The articles
  cover a wide variety of domains such as News, Politics, Sports, Weather, Business, Technology, Science, Health,
  Family, Education, Entertainment, and Arts.
  4. Generate a one-sentence summary: After understanding the article, generate a one-sentence summary that
  captures the main point of the article. The summary should be concise and clear, and it should accurately
  represent the content of the article.
  5. Check your summary: Make sure your summary accurately reflects the main point of the article. It should not
  include any personal opinions or interpretations, and it should not introduce any new information that was not
  present in the article.
  6. Practice with different articles: The more you practice, the better you will become at generating accurate
  and concise summaries. Try to practice with articles from different domains to improve your summarization
  skills.
  Remember, the goal is not to generate the longest or most detailed summary, but to capture the main point of
  the article in a single sentence.
  ###
  Article: Head coach Stuart Lancaster’s World Cup preparations suffered a blow as for the first 70 minutes a
  largely first-choice XV struggled to deal with French power. Two late tries flattered the visitors, who have
  one game left before launching their World Cup campaign against Fiji on 18 September. "We gave away penalties
  and our discipline was shocking," said Robshaw. "Whether it was rust, or nerves, it wasn’t good enough. Credit
  to France, they put us under pressure and made us make mistakes. "We gave too many penalties away, but in the
  second half we came out and played well but couldn’t quite get over the line in the end," he told Sky Sports.
  "We can’t give teams like France and other quality sides head starts like we did. "We’ll look long and hard at
  ourselves, because we let ourselves down in the first half. We played well in phases but you can’t wait for 40
  minutes to do that." Late tries from Danny Cipriani and Jonathan Joseph made it close on the scoreboard but
  Lancaster was left with much to ponder by a disappointing team display in the Stade de France. Media playback
  is not supported on this device The head coach, who must announce his final squad by 31 August, added: "We’ve
  got to get our discipline at the breakdown - we can’t give France easy position like we did. We need to improve
  on that, because all the little mistakes add up. "The bench made a difference. It upped the energy levels and
  we scored some good tries. I won’t gloss over what went on before that, because it was too little too late.
  "There are a few players who have given me food for thought, those guys who came on and gave us the energy
  we needed and made a difference. "I need to have a sleep on this game and think about my final squad. We’re
  two weeks away from playing Ireland and four weeks away from Fiji in the World Cup and we’ll expect a reaction
  next time." England host Ireland in their final World Cup warm-up game at Twickenham on 5 September. Fly-half
  Ford told Sky Sports: "I thought we might snatch that at the end but we had hardly any ball in the first half
  and gave away too many penalties. We played some good stuff in the second-half. "In the first half a lot of
  our undoing was down to ourselves. We just weren’t good enough in that first half and there’s no excuse for
  that. We let them build up the score and that made it hard for us. "It was frustrating and we had to think of
  ways to adapt and that was constantly going through our minds. We tried to get ourselves out of a hole. "We’ve
  got to turn up against Ireland now and make sure that we win. Our basics have got to be world class."
  Follow the instructions to generate an explanation that reasons towards the correct answer to the task above.
  End the explanation with the correct answer. [/INST] Explanation:
  The article discusses England’s rugby team’s preparation for the World Cup, specifically their match against
  France. The team’s performance was disappointing, with poor discipline and mistakes leading to a loss. The
  article highlights the struggles of the team’s first-choice XV and the impact of late tries from Danny Cipriani
  and Jonathan Joseph. The head coach, Stuart Lancaster, expresses his disappointment and emphasizes the need
  for improvement in discipline and energy levels. The article also mentions the team’s upcoming match against
  Ireland and their final World Cup warm-up game.
  Correct answer: The article is about England’s rugby team’s preparation for the World Cup and their disappointing
  performance against France.
  Therefore, the answer to the task is below. Give the answer in the shortest form possible that will still be
  correct.
  Summarize the above article in 1 sentence.
  England’s rugby team struggled in their World Cup preparation match against France, with poor discipline and
  mistakes leading to a loss, and head coach Stuart Lancaster emphasized the need for improvement.



                           Figure 69: A complete running example of XSUM.


                                                        90
