Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONTRASTIVE LOSSES AS GENERALIZED MODELS OF
GLOBAL EPISTASIS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Fitness functions map large combinatorial spaces of biological sequences to prop-
         erties of interest. Inferring these multimodal functions from experimental data is a
         central task in modern protein engineering. Global epistasis models are an effective
         and physically-grounded class of models for estimating fitness functions from
         observed data. These models assume that a sparse latent function is transformed
         by a monotonic nonlinearity to emit measurable fitness. Here we demonstrate that
         minimizing supervised contrastive loss functions, such as the Bradley-Terry loss,
         is a simple and flexible technique for extracting the sparse latent function implied
         by global epistasis. We argue by way of a fitness-epistasis uncertainty principle
         that the nonlinearities in global epistasis models can produce observed fitness
         functions that do not admit sparse representations, and thus may be inefficient to
         learn from observations when using a Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss (a common
         practice). We show that contrastive losses are able to accurately estimate a ranking
         function from limited data even in regimes where MSE is ineffective and validate
         the practical utility of this insight by demonstrating that contrastive loss functions
         result in consistently improved performance on benchmark tasks.


1    I NTRODUCTION
A fitness function maps biological sequences to relevant scalar properties of the sequences, such as
binding affinity to a target molecule, or fluorescent brightness. Biological sequences span combinato-
rial spaces and fitness functions are typically multi-peaked, due to interactions between positions in
a sequence. Learning fitness functions from limited experimental data (often a minute fraction of
the possible space) can be a difficult task but allows one to predict properties of sequences. These
predictions can help identify promising new sequences for experimentation (Wu et al., 2019) or to
guide the search for optimal sequences (Brookes et al., 2019; Bryant et al., 2021).
Even in the case of where experimental measurements are available for every possible sequence in a
sequence space, inferring a model of the fitness function can be valuable for understanding the factors
that impact sequences’ fitness (Ding et al., 2022) or how evolution might progress over the fitness
landscape (Wu et al., 2016).
Numerous methods have been developed to estimate fitness functions from experimental data,
including classical machine learning techniques (Yang et al., 2019), deep learning approaches
(Gelman et al., 2021), and semi-supervised methods (Hsu et al., 2022). Additionally, there are many
methods that incorporate biological assumptions into the modeling process, such as parameterized
biophysical models (Otwinowski, 2018), non-parametric techniques (Zhou & McCandlish, 2020;
Zhou et al., 2022), and methods for spectral regularization of neural networks (Aghazadeh et al.,
2021). These latter approaches largely focus on accurately modeling the influence of “epistasis"
on fitness functions, which refers to statistical or physical interactions between genetic elements,
typically either amino-acids in a protein sequence or genes in a genome.
“Local" epistasis refers to interactions between a limited number of specific positions in a sequence,
and is often modeled using interaction terms in a linear model of a fitness function (Otwinowski &
Plotkin, 2014). “Global" epistasis, on the other hand, refers to the presence of nonlinear relationships
that affect the fitness of sequences in a nonspecific manner. A model of global epistasis typically
assumes a simple latent fitness function is transformed by a monotonically increasing nonlinearity to
produce observed fitness data (Sailer & Harms, 2017; Otwinowski et al., 2018; Tareen et al., 2022;


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Reddy & Desai, 2021; Sarkisyan et al., 2016). Typically, these models assume a particular parametric
form of the latent fitness function and nonlinearity, and fit the parameters of both simultaneously. It is
most common to assume that the underlying fitness function includes only additive (non-interacting)
effects (Otwinowski et al., 2018), though pairwise interaction effects have been added in some models
(Tareen et al., 2022).
Despite their relative simplicity, global epistasis models have been found to be effective at modeling
experimentally observed fitness functions (Sarkisyan et al., 2016; Pokusaeva et al., 2019; Reddy &
Desai, 2021). Further, global epistasis is not just a useful modeling choice, but a physical phenomenon
that can result from features of a system’s dynamics (Husain & Murugan, 2020) or the environmental
conditions in which a fitness function is measured (Otwinowski et al., 2018). Therefore, even if one
does not use a standard global epistasis model, it is still important to consider the effects of global
epistasis when modeling fitness functions.
Due to the monotonicity of the nonlinearity in global epistasis models, the latent fitness function in
these models can be interpreted as a parsimonious ranking function for sequences. Herein we show
that fitting a model to observed fitness data by minimizing a supervised contrastive, or ranking, loss
is a simple and effective method for extracting such a ranking function. We particularly focus on
the Bradley-Terry loss (Bradley & Terry, 1952), which has been widely used for learning-to-rank
tasks (Burges et al., 2005), and more recently for ordering the latent space of a generative model for
protein sequences (Chan et al., 2021). Minimizing this loss provides a technique for modeling global
epistasis that requires no assumptions on the form of the nonlinearity or latent fitness functions, and
can easily be applied to any set of observed fitness data.
Further, we use an entropic uncertainty principle to show that global epistasis can result in observed
fitness functions that cannot be represented using a sparse set of epistatic interactions. In particu-
lar, this uncertainty principle shows that a fitness function that is sufficiently concentrated in the
fitness domain–meaning that a small number of sequences have fitness values with relatively large
magnitudes–can not be concentrated in the Graph Fourier bases that represent fitness functions in
terms of local epistatic interactions (Stadler, 1995; Weinberger, 1991; Brookes et al., 2022). We show
that global epistasis nonlinearities tend to concentrate observed fitness functions in the fitness domain,
thus preventing a sparse representation in the epistatic domain. This insight has the implication that
observed fitness functions that have been affected by global epistasis may be difficult to estimate
with undersampled training data and a Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss. We hypothesize that esti-
mating the latent ranking fitness function using a contrastive loss can be done more data-efficiently
than estimating the observed fitness function using MSE, and conduct simulations that support this
hypothesis. Additionally, we demonstrate the practical importance of these insights by showing that
models trained with the Bradley-Terry loss outperform those trained with MSE loss on nearly all
FLIP benchmark tasks (Dallago et al., 2021).

2     BACKGROUND
2.1   F ITNESS FUNCTIONS AND THE G RAPH F OURIER TRANSFORM

A fitness function f : S → R maps a space of sequences S to a scalar property of interest. In the case
where S contains all combinations of elements from an alphabet of size q at L sequence positions,
then the fitness function can be represented exactly in terms of increasing orders of local epistatic
interactions. For binary sequences (q = 2), this representation takes the form:
                                  L
                                  X                X                  X
                   f (x) = β0 +         βi x i +        βij xi xj +         βijk xi xj xk + ...,
                                  i=1              ij                 ijk

where xi ∈ {−1, 1} represent elements in the sequence and each term in the expansion represents a
(local) epistatic interaction with weight β{i} , with the expansion continuing up to Lth order terms.
Analogous representations can be constructed for sequences with any size alphabet q using Graph
Fourier bases(Stadler, 1995; Weinberger, 1991; Brookes et al., 2022). These representations can be
compactly expressed as:
                                              f = Φβ,                                             (1)
where f is a length q L vector containing the fitness values of every sequence in S, Φ is a q L × q L
orthogonal matrix representing the Graph Fourier basis, and β is a length q L vector containing the


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


weights corresponding to all possible epistatic interactions. We refer to f and β as representing the
fitness function in the fitness domain and the epistatic domain, respectively. Note that we may apply
the inverse transformation of Eq. 1 to any complete observed fitness function, y to calculate the
epistatic representation of the observed data, βy = ΦT y. Similarly, if fˆ contains the predictions of a
fitness model for every sequence in a sequence space, then β̂ = ΦT fˆ is the epistatic representation
of the model.
A fitness function is considered sparse, or concentrated, in the epistatic domain when β contains
a relatively small number of elements with large magnitudes, and many elements equal to zero or
with small magnitudes. In what follows, we may refer to a fitness function that is sparse in the
epistatic domain as simply being a “sparse fitness function". A number of experimentally-determined
fitness functions have been observed to be sparse in the epistatic domain (Poelwijk et al., 2019; Eble
et al., 2020; Brookes et al., 2022). Crucially, the sparsity of a fitness function in the epistatic domain
determines how many measurements are required to estimate the fitness function using Compressed
Sensing techniques that minimize a MSE loss function (Brookes et al., 2022). Herein we consider the
effect that global epistasis has on a sparse fitness function. In particular, we argue that global epistasis
results in observed fitness functions that are dense in the epistatic domain, and thus require a large
amount of data to accurately estimate by minimizing a MSE loss function. However, in these cases,
there may be a sparse ranking function that can be efficiently extracted by minimizing a contrastive
loss function.

2.2   G LOBAL EPISTASIS MODELS

A model of global epistasis assumes that noiseless fitness measurements are generated according to
the model:
                                          y = g (f (x)) ,                                      (2)
where f is a latent fitness function, g is a monotonically increasing nonlinear function. In most
cases, f is assumed to include only first or second order epistatic terms and the nonlinearity is
explicitly parameterized using, for example, spline functions (Otwinowski et al., 2018) or sums of
hyperbolic tangents (Tareen et al., 2022). The restriction that f includes only low-order terms is
somewhat arbitrary, as higher-order local epistatic effects have been observed in fitness data (see,
e.g., (Wu et al., 2016)). In general we may consider f to be any fitness function that is sparse in the
epistatic domain, and global epistasis then refers to the transformation of a sparse fitness function by
a monotonically-increasing nonlinearity.
Global epistasis models of the form of Eq. 2 have proved effective at capturing the variation
observed in empirical fitness data (Kryazhimskiy et al., 2014; Sarkisyan et al., 2016; Otwinowski
et al., 2018; Pokusaeva et al., 2019; Reddy & Desai, 2021; Tareen et al., 2022), suggesting that global
epistasis is a common feature of natural fitness functions. Further, it has been shown that global
epistasis results from first-principles physical considerations that are common in many biological
systems. In particular, Husain & Murugan (2020) show that global epistasis arises when the physical
dynamics of a system is dominated by slow, collective modes of motion, which is often the case for
protein dynamics. Aside from intrinsic/endogenous sources, the process of measuring fitness can also
introduce nonlinear effects that are dependent on the experiment and not on the underlying fitness
function. For example, fitness data is often left-censored, as many sequence have fitness that falls
below the detection threshold of an assay. Finally, global diminishing-returns epistatic patterns have
been observed widely in both single and multi-gene settings where the interactions are among genes
rather than within a gene (Kryazhimskiy et al., 2014; Reddy & Desai, 2021; Bakerlee et al., 2022).
Together, these results indicate that global epistasis is an effect that can be expected in empirically-
observed fitness functions. In what follows, we argue that global epistasis is detrimental to effective
modeling of fitness functions using standard techniques. In particular, global epistasis manifests itself
by producing observed data that is dense in the epistatic domain. In other words, when observed
fitness data is produced through Eq. 2 then the epistatic representation of this fitness function
(calculated through application of Eq. 1), is not sparse. Further we argue that this effect of global
epistasis makes it to difficult to model such observed data by minimizing standard MSE loss functions
with a fixed amount of data. Further, we argue that fitting fitness models aimed at extracting the latent
fitness function from observed data is a more efficient use of observed data that results in improved
predictive performance (in the ranking sense).


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                         f
             Global
            epistasis


                         y
           Contrastive



                         f̂
              loss


Figure 1: Recovery of latent fitness function from complete fitness data by minimizing Bradley-Terry loss. (a)
Schematic of simulation. (b) Comparison between latent (f ) and observed (y) fitness functions in fitness (left)
and epistatic (right) domains. The latent fitness function is sampled from the NK model with L = 8 and K = 2
and the global epistasis function is g(f ) = exp(10 · f ). Each point in the scatter plot represents the fitness of
a sequence, while each bar in the bar plot (right) represents the squared magnitude of an epistatic interaction
(normalized such that all squared magnitudes sum to 1), with roman numerals indicating the order of interaction.
Only epistatic interactions up to order 3 are shown. The right plot demonstrates that global epistasis produces a
dense representation in the epistatic domain compared to the representation of the latent fitness in the epistatic
domain. (c) Comparison between latent and estimated (fˆ) fitness functions in fitness and epistatic domains.

While the models of global epistasis described thus far could be used for this purpose, they have
the drawback that they assume a constrained form of both g and f , which enforces inductive biases
that may affect predictive performance. Here we propose a flexible alternative to modeling global
epistasis that makes no assumptions on the form of f or g. In particular, we interpret the latent fitness
function f as a parsimonious ranking function for sequences, and the problem of modeling global
epistasis as recovering this ranking function. A natural method to achieve this goal is to fit a model of
f to the observed data by minimizing a contrastive, or ranking, loss function. These loss functions
are designed to learn a ranking function and, as we will show, are able to recover a sparse fitness
function that has been transformed by global epistasis to produce observed data. An advantage of this
approach to modeling global epistasis is that the nonlinearity g is modeled non-parametrically, and is
free to take any form, while the latent fitness function can be modeled by any parametric model, for
example, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) or fine-tuned language models, which have been
found to perform well in fitness prediction tasks (Dallago et al., 2021). An accurate ranking model
also enables effective optimization, as implied by the results in Chan et al. (2021).

2.3    C ONTRASTIVE LOSSES

Contrastive losses broadly refer to loss functions that compare multiple outputs of a model and
encourage those outputs to be ordered according to some criteria. In our case, we desire a loss
function that encourages model outputs to be ranked according to observed fitness values. An
example of such a loss function is the Bradley-Terry (BT) loss (Bradley & Terry, 1952; Burges et al.,
2005), which has the form:
                                       X        h                        i
                          L(θ) =            log 1 + e−(fθ (xi )−fθ (xj )) ,                      (3)
                                        i,j:yi >yj

where fθ is a model with parameters θ, xi are model inputs and yi are the corresponding labels of
those inputs. This loss compares every pair of data points and encourages the model output fθ (xi )
to be greater than fθ (xj ) whenever yi > yj ; in other words, it encourages the model outputs to be
ranked according to their labels. A number of distinct but similar loss functions have been proposed
in the learning-to-rank literature (Chen et al., 2009) and also for metric learning (Chopra et al., 2005).
An example is the Margin ranking loss (Herbrich et al., 1999), which replaces the logistic function in
the sum of Eq. 3 with a hinge function.In our experiments, we largely focus on the BT loss of Eq.
3 as we found it typically results in superior predictive performance; however, we also compare to
models trained with the Margin loss when presenting results in benchmark tasks.
The BT loss was recently used by Chan et al. (2021) to order the latent space of a generative model for
protein sequences such that certain regions of the latent space corresponding to sequences with higher
observed fitness values. In this case, the BT loss is used in conjunction with standard generative
modeling losses. In contrast, here we analyze the use of the BT loss alone in order to learn a ranking
function for sequences given corresponding observed fitness values.


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A key feature of the contrastive loss in Eq. 3 is that it only uses information about the ranking of
observed labels, rather than the numerical values of the labels. Thus, the loss is unchanged when the
observed values are transformed by a monotonic nonlinearity. We will show that this feature allows
this loss to recover a sparse latent fitness function from observed data that has been affected by global
epistasis, and enables more data-efficient learning of fitness functions compared to a MSE loss.

3     R ESULTS

Our results are aimed at demonstrating three properties of contrastive losses. First, we show that
given complete, noiseless fitness data (i.e. noiseless fitness values associated with every sequence
in the sequence space) that has been affected by global epistasis, minimizing the BT loss enables
a model to nearly exactly recover the sparse latent fitness function f . Next, we consider the case
of incomplete data, where the aim is to predict the relative fitness of unobserved sequences. In this
regime, we find through simulation that minimizing the BT loss enables models to achieve better
predictive performance then minimizing the MSE loss when the observed data has been affected with
global epistasis. We argue by way of a fitness-epistasis uncertainty principle that this is due to the
fact that nonlinearities tend to produce fitness functions that do not admit a sparse representation in
the epistatic domain, and thus require more data to learn with MSE loss. Finally, we demonstrate the
practical significance of these insights by showing that minimizing the BT loss results in improved
predictive performance over MSE loss in nearly all tasks in the FLIP benchmark (Dallago et al.,
2021).

3.1   R ECOVERY FROM COMPLETE DATA

We first consider the case of “complete" data, where fitness measurements are available for every
sequence in the sequence space. The aim of our task in this case is to recover a sparse latent
fitness function when the observed measurements have been transformed by an arbitrary monotonic
nonlinearity. In particular, we sample a sparse fitness function f from the NK model (Kauffman
& Weinberger, 1989), a popular model of fitness functions that has been shown to recapitulate the
sparsity properties of some empirical fitness functions (Brookes et al., 2022). The NK model has
three parameters: L, the length of the sequences, q, the size of the alphabet for sequence elements,
and K, the maximum order of (local) epistatic interactions in the fitness function. Roughly, the model
randomly assigns K − 1 interacting positions to each position in the sequence, resulting in a sparse
set of interactions in the epistatic domain. The weights of each of the assigned interactions are then
drawn from a independent unit normal distributions.
We then transform the sampled fitness function f with a monotonic nonlinearity g to produce a
set of complete observed data, yi = g(f (xi )) for all xi ∈ S. The goal of the task is then to
recover the function f given all (xi , yi ) pairs. In order to do so, we model f using a two layer fully
connected neural network and fit the parameters of this model by performing stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) on the BT loss, using the Spearman correlation between model predictions and the yi
values to determine convergence of the optimization. We then compare the resulting model, fˆ, to
the latent fitness function f in both the fitness and epistatic domains, using the forward and inverse
transformation of Eq. 1 to convert between the two domains.
Fig. 1 shows the results of one of these tests. In this case, we used an exponential function to represent
the global epistasis nonlinearity. The exponential function exaggerates the effects of global epistasis
in the epistatic domain and thus better illustrates the usefulness of contrastive losses, although the
nonlinearities in empirical fitness functions tend to have a more sigmoidal shape (Otwinowski et al.,
2018). Fig. 1b shows that the global epistasis nonlinearity substantially alters the representations of
the observed data y in both the fitness and epistatic domains, as compared to the latent fitness function
f . Nonetheless, Fig. 1c demonstrates that the model fitness function fˆ created by minimizing the BT
loss is able to nearly perfectly recover the sparse latent fitness function (where recovery is defined as
being equivalent up to an affine transformation). This is a somewhat surprising result, as there are
many fitness functions that correctly rank the fitness of sequences, and it is not immediately clear why
minimizing the BT loss produces this particular sparse latent fitness function. However, this example
makes clear that fitting a model by minimizing the BT loss can be an effective strategy for recovering
a sparse latent fitness function from observed data that has been affected by global epistasis. Similar
results from additional examples of this task using different nonlinearities and latent fitness functions


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: (a) Demonstration of the fitness-epistasis uncertainty principle where a latent fitness function
is transformed by g(f ) = exp(a · f ) for various settings of a. The dashed black line indicates the lower
bound on the sum of the entropies of the fitness and epistatic representations of the fitness function (b) Test-set
Spearman correlation for models trained with MSE and BT loss on incomplete fitness data transformed by
various nonlinearities, compared to the entropy of the fitness function in the epistatic domain. Each point
corresponds to a model trained on 256 randomly sampled training points from a L = 10, K = 2 latent fitness
function which was then transformed by a nonlinearity. (c) Convergence comparison between models fit with
BT and MSE losses to observed data generated by transforming an L = 10, K = 2 latent fitness function by
g(f ) = exp(10 · f ). Each point represents the mean test set correlation over 200 training set replicates.

are shown in Appendix B.1. Further, in Appendix B.2 we compare the results of Fig. 1c to a baseline
method in which a quantile transformation is applied to the observed data.

3.2    F ITNESS - EPISTASIS UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE

Next, we consider the case where fitness data is incomplete. Our aim is to understand how models
trained with the BT loss compare to those trained with MSE loss at predicting the relative fitness
of unobserved sequence using different amounts of subsampled training data. We take a signal
processing perspective on this problem, and consider how the density of a fitness function in the
epistatic domain affects the ability of a model to accurately estimate the fitness function given
incomplete data. In particular, we demonstrate that global epistasis tends to increase the density
of fitness functions in the epistatic domain, and use an analogy to Compressive Sensing (CS) to
hypothesize that more data is required to effectively estimate these fitness functions when using an
MSE loss (Brookes et al., 2022). In order to support this claim, we first examine the effects of global
epistasis on the epistatic domain of fitness functions.
Fig. 1b provides an example where a monotonic nonlinearity applied to a sparse fitness increases the
density of the the fitness function in the epistatic domain. In particular, we see that many “spurious"
local epistatic interactions must appear in order to represent the nonlinearity (e.g. interactions of
order 3, when we used an NK model with K = 2). This effect can be observed for many different
shapes of nonlinearities (Sailer & Harms, 2017; Baeza-Centurion et al., 2019). We can understand
this effect more generally using uncertainty principles, which roughly show that a function cannot be
concentrated on a small number of values in two different representations. In particular, we consider
the discrete entropic uncertainty principle proved by Dembo et al. (1991). When applied to the
transformation in Eq. 1, this uncertainty principle states:

                                                                1
                                   H(f ) + H(β) ≥ L log              ,                              (4)
                                                               m2
                   P x2           x2
where H(x) = − i ||x||i 2 log ||x||i 2 is the entropy of the normalized squared magnitudes of a vector
             √                                 √                                        √
and m = 1/ q when q = 2, m = 1/(q − q) when q = 3 and m = 1 − 1/(q − q) otherwise.
Low entropy indicates that a vector is highly concentrated on a small set of elements. Thus, the fitness-
epistasis uncertainty principle of Eq. 4 shows that fitness functions cannot be highly concentrated
in both the fitness and epistatic domains. A sparse fitness function (in the epistatic domain) must
therefore be “spread out" (i.e. dense) in the fitness domain, and vice-versa.
The importance of this result for understanding global epistasis is that applying a nonlinearity to a
dense vector will often have the effect of concentrating the vector on a smaller number of values. This
can most easily be seen for convex nonlinearities like the exponential shown in Fig 1a, but is also true
of many other nonlinearities (see Appendix C: for additional examples). If this concentration in the
fitness domain is sufficiently extreme, then the epistatic representation of the fitness function, β, must
be dense in order to satisfy Eq. 4. Fig 2a demonstrates the uncertainty principle by showing how


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the entropy in the fitness and epistatic domains decrease and increase, respectively, as more extreme
nonlinearities are applied to a sparse latent fitness function.
The uncertainty principle quantifies how global epistasis affects a fitness function by preventing a
sparse representation in the epistatic domain. From a CS perspective, this has direct implications
for modeling the fitness function from incomplete data. In particular, if we were to model the
fitness function using CS techniques such as LASSO regression with the Graph Fourier basis
as the representation, then it is well known that the number of noiseless data points required to
perfectly estimate the function scales as O(S log N ) where S is the sparsity of the signal in a
chosen representation and N is the total size of the signal in the representation (Candes et al., 2006).
Therefore, when using these techniques, fitness functions affected by global epistasis will require
more data to effectively model. Notably, the techniques for which these scaling laws apply minimize
a MSE loss functions as part of the estimation procedure. Although these scaling laws only strictly
apply to CS modeling techniques, we hypothesize that the intuition that fitness functions with dense
epistatic representations will require more data to train an accurate model with MSE loss, even when
using neural network models and SGD training procedures. In the next section we present the results
of simulations that support this hypothesis by showing that the entropy of the epistatic representation
is negatively correlated with the predictive performance of models trained with an MSE loss on a
fixed amount of fitness data. Further, these simulations show that models trained with the BT loss
are robust to the dense epistatic representations produced global epistasis, and converge faster to
maximum predictive performance as they are provided more fitness data compared to models trained
with an MSE loss.

3.3   S IMULATIONS WITH INCOMPLETE DATA

We next present simulation results aimed at showing that global epistasis adversely effects the ability
of models to effectively learn fitness functions from incomplete data when trained with MSE loss and
that models trained with BT loss are more robust to the effects of global epistasis.
In our first set of simulations, we tested the ability models to estimate a fitness function of L = 10
binary sequences given one quarter of the fitness measurements (256 measurements out of total
of 210 = 1024 sequences in the sequence space). In each simulation, we (i) sampled a sparse
latent fitness function from the NK model, (ii) produced an observed fitness function by applying
one of three nonlinearities to the latent fitness function: exponential, g(f ) = exp(a · f ), sigmoid,
g(f ) = (1 + e−a·f )−1 , or a cubic polynomial g(f ) = x3 + ax with settings of the parameter a
that ensured the nonlinearity was monotonically increasing, (iii) sampled 256 sequence/fitness pairs
uniformly at random from the observed fitness function to be used as training data, and (iv) trained
models with this data by performing SGD on the MSE and BT losses. We ran this simulation for 50
replicates of each of 20 settings of the a parameter for each of the three nonlinearities. In every case,
the models were fully-connected neural networks with two hidden layers and the optimization was
terminated using early stopping with 20 percent of the training data used as a validation set. After
training, we measured the extent to which the models estimated the fitness function by calculating
Spearman correlation between the model predictions and true fitness values on all sequences in the
sequence space. Spearman correlation is commonly used to benchmark fitness prediction methods
(Dallago et al., 2021; Notin et al., 2022).
The results of each of these simulations are shown in Fig. 2b. We see that the predictive performance
of models trained with the MSE loss degrades as the entropy of the fitness function in the epistatic
domain increases, regardless of the type of nonlinearity that is applied to the latent fitness function.
This is in contrast to the models trained with the BT loss, which often achieve nearly perfect
estimation of the fitness function even when the entropy of the fitness function in the epistatic domain
approaches its maximum possible value of L log 2. This demonstrates the key result that the MSE loss
is sensitive to the density of the epistatic representation resulting from global epistasis (as implied by
the analogy to CS), while the BT loss is robust to these effects. We additionally find that these results
are maintained when the degree of epistatic interactions in the latent fitness function is changed
(Appendix D.1) and when Gaussian noise is added to the observed fitness functions (Appendix D.2
Next we tested how training set size effects the predictive performance of models trained with MSE
and BT losses on a fitness function affected by global epistasis. In order to do so, we sampled a single
L = 10, K = 2 fitness function from the NK model and applied the nonlinearity g(f ) = exp(10 · f )
to produce an observed fitness function. Then, for each of a range of training set sizes between 25


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Comparison between MSE, Margin, and Bradley-Terry losses on FLIP benchmark tasks using the
CNN baseline model. Panels correspond to tasks using the (a) GB1, (b) AAV, and (c) Thermostability datasets.
Bar height and error bars indicate the mean and standard deviation, respectively, of test set Spearman correlation
over 10 random initializations of the model. Asterisks indicate statistically significant improvement over another
loss function (* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001, **** p<0.0001).

and 1000, we randomly sampled a training set and fit models with MSE and BT losses using the
same models and procedure as in the previous simulations. We repeated this process for 200 training
set replicates of each size, and calculated both the Spearman and Pearson correlations between the
resulting model predictions and true observed fitness values for all sequences in the sequence space.
Fig 2c shows the mean correlation values across all 200 replicates of each training set size. There are
two important takeaways from this plot. First, the BT loss achieves higher Spearman correlations
than the MSE loss in all data regimes. This demonstrates the general effectiveness of this loss to
estimate fitness functions affected by global epistasis. Next, we see that models trained with BT
loss converge to a maximum Spearman correlation faster than models trained with MSE loss do to
a maximum Pearson correlation, which demonstrates that the difference in predictive performance
between models trained with MSE and BT losses is not simply due to a result of the evaluation
metric being more tailored to one loss than the other. This result also reinforces our claim that fitness
functions affected by global epistasis require more data to learn effectively with MSE loss, as would
be predicted by CS scaling laws. The BT loss on the other hand, while not performant with the
Pearson metric as expected by a ranking loss, seems to overcome this barrier and can be used to
effectively estimate a fitness function from a small amount of data, despite the effects of global
epistasis.

3.4   FLIP BENCHMARK RESULTS

In the previous sections, we used noiseless simulated data to explore the interaction between global
epistasis and loss functions. Now we present results demonstrating the practical utility of our
insights by comparing the predictive performance of models trained with MSE and BT losses on
experimentally-determined protein fitness data. We particularly focus on the FLIP benchmark
(Dallago et al., 2021), which comprises of a total of 15 fitness prediction tasks stemming from three
empirical fitness datasets. These three datasets explore multiple types of proteins, definitions of
protein fitness, and experimental assays. In particular, one is a combinatorially-complete dataset that
contains the binding fitness of all combinations of mutations at 4 positions to the GB1 protein (Wu
et al., 2016), another contains data about the viability of Adeno-associated virus (AAV) capsids for
many different sets of mutations to the wild-type capsid sequence (Bryant et al., 2021), and another
contains data about the thermostability of many distantly related proteins (Jarzab et al., 2020).
For each of the three datasets, the FLIP benchmark provides multiple train/test splits that are relevant
for protein engineering scenarios. For example, in the GB1 and AAV datasets, there are training sets
that contain only single and double mutations to the protein, while the associated test sets contain
sequences with more than two mutations. This represents a typical situation in protein engineering
where data can easily be collected for single mutations (and some double mutations) and the goal is
then to design sequences that combine these mutations to produce a sequence with high fitness. In
all of the FLIP tasks the evaluation metric is Spearman correlation between model predictions and
fitness labels in the test set, since ranking sequences by fitness is the primary task that models are
used for in data-driven protein engineering.
In the FLIP benchmark paper, the authors apply a number of different modeling strategies to these
splits, including Ridge regression, training a CNN, and a number of variations on fine-tuning the


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ESM language models for protein sequences (Rives et al., 2021). All of these models use a MSE
loss to fit the model to the data, along with any model-specific regularization losses. In our tests, we
consider only the CNN model as it balances consistently high performance in the benchmark tasks
with relatively straightforward training protocols, enabling fast replication with random restarts.
We trained the CNN model on each split using the standard MSE loss as well as the Margin and
BT contrastive losses. The mean and standard deviation of Spearman correlations between the
model predictions and test set labels over 10 random restarts are shown in Fig. 3. By default, the
FLIP datasets contain portions of sequences that are never mutated in any of the data (e.g., only
4 positions are mutated in the GB1 data, but the splits contain the full GB1 sequence of length
56). We found that including these unmodified portions of the sequence often did not improve,
and sometimes hurt, the predictive performance of the CNN models while requiring significantly
increased computational complexity. Therefore most of our results are reported using inputs that
contain only sequence positions that are mutated in at least one train or test data point. We found
that including the unmodified portions of sequences improved the performance for the Low-vs-High
and 3-vs-Rest GB1 well splits, as well as the 1-vs-rest AAV split and so these results are reported in
Fig. 3; in these cases we found both models trained with MSE and contrastive losses had improved
performance.
The results in Fig. 3 show that using contrastive losses (and particularly the BT loss) consistently
results in improved predictive performance across a variety of practically relevant fitness prediction
tasks (for more detail, see Appendix E.1 for the results in table form). Further, in no case does the
BT loss result in worse performance than MSE. Indeed, it is shown in Otwinowski et al. (2018)
that a GB1 landscape closely associated with that in the FLIP benchmark is strongly affected by
global epistasis. Further, many of the FLIP training sets are severely undersampled in the sense of CS
scaling laws, which is the regime in which differences between MSE and contrastive losses are most
apparent when global epistasis is present, as shown in Fig. 2.
Although Spearman correlation is commonly used to benchmark models of fitness functions, in
practical protein engineering settings it also important to consider the ability of the model to classify
the sequences with the highest fitness. To test this, we calculated the “top 10% recall“ for models
trained with the BT and MSE losses on the FLIP benchmark data, which measures the ability of
the models to correctly classify the 10% of test sequences with the highest fitness in the test set
Gelman et al. (2021). These results are shown in Appendix E.2, where it can be seen that the BT loss
consistently outperforms the MSE loss.

4    D ISCUSSION
Our results leave open a few avenues for future exploration. First, it is not immediately clear in what
situations we can expect to observe the nearly-perfect recovery of a latent fitness function as seen
in Fig. 1. A theoretical understanding of this result may either cement the promise of the BT loss,
or provide motivation for the development of techniques that can be applied in different scenarios.
Next, we have made a couple of logical steps in our interpretations of these results that are intuitive,
but not fully supported by any theory. In particular, we have drawn an analogy to CS scaling laws
to explain why neural networks trained with MSE loss struggle to learn a fitness function that has a
dense representation in the epistatic domain. However, these scaling laws only strictly apply for a
specific set of methods that use an orthogonal basis as the representation of the signal; there is no
theoretical justification for using them to understanding the training of neural networks (although
applying certain regularizations to neural network training can provide similar guarantees (Aghazadeh
et al., 2022)). Additionally, it is not clear from a theoretical perspective why the BT loss seems to be
robust to the dense representations produced by global epistasis. A deeper understanding of these
phenomena could be useful for developing improved techniques.
Additionally, our simulations largely do not consider how models trained with contrastive losses may
be affected by the complex measurement noise commonly seen in experimental fitness assays based
on sequencing counts (Busia & Listgarten, 2023). Although our simulations mostly do not consider
the effects of noise (except for the simple Gaussian noise added in Appendix D.2), our results on the
FLIP benchmark demonstrate that contrastive losses can be robust to the effects of noise in practical
scenarios. Further, we show in Appendix F: that the BT loss can be robust to noise in a potentially
pathological scenario. A more complete analysis of the effects of noise on contrastive losses would
complement these results.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Amirali Aghazadeh, Hunter Nisonoff, Orhan Ocal, David H. Brookes, Yijie Huang, O. Ozan Koy-
 luoglu, Jennifer Listgarten, and Kannan Ramchandran. Epistatic Net allows the sparse spectral
 regularization of deep neural networks for inferring fitness functions. Nature Communications, 12
 (1):5225, 2021.
Amirali Aghazadeh, Nived Rajaraman, Tony Tu, and Kannan Ramchandran. Spectral regularization
 allows data-frugal learning over combinatorial spaces, 2022.
Pablo Baeza-Centurion, Belén Miñana, Jörn M Schmiedel, Juan Valcárcel, and Ben Lehner. Combi-
  natorial Genetics Reveals a Scaling Law for the Effects of Mutations on Splicing. Cell, 176(3):
  549—-563.e23, 2019.
Christopher W. Bakerlee, Alex N. Nguyen Ba, Yekaterina Shulgina, Jose I. Rojas Echenique, and
  Michael M. Desai. Idiosyncratic epistasis leads to global fitness–correlated trends. Science, 376
  (6593):630–635, 2022.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E. Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39:324, 1952.
David H. Brookes, Hahnbeom Park, and Jennifer Listgarten. Conditioning by adaptive sampling for
  robust design. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 773–782. PMLR, 09-15 Jun 2019.
David H. Brookes, Amirali Aghazadeh, and Jennifer Listgarten. On the sparsity of fitness functions
  and implications for learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
  States of America, 119(1):e2109649118, 2022.
Drew H. Bryant, Ali Bashir, Sam Sinai, Nina K. Jain, Pierce J. Ogden, Patrick F. Riley, George M.
  Church, Lucy J. Colwell, and Eric D. Kelsic. Deep diversification of an AAV capsid protein by
  machine learning. Nature Biotechnology, pp. 1–6, 2021.
Chris Burges, Tal Shaked, Erin Renshaw, Ari Lazier, Matt Deeds, Nicole Hamilton, and Greg
  Hullender. Learning to rank using gradient descent. In Proceedings of the 22nd International
  Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’05, pp. 89–96, New York, NY, USA, 2005. Association
  for Computing Machinery.
Akosua Busia and Jennifer Listgarten. MBE: model-based enrichment estimation and prediction for
  differential sequencing data. Genome Biology, 24(1):218, 2023.
E.J. Candes, J. Romberg, and T. Tao. Robust uncertainty principles: exact signal reconstruction
  from highly incomplete frequency information. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 52(2):
  489–509, 2006. doi: 10.1109/TIT.2005.862083.
Alvin Chan, Ali Madani, Ben Krause, and Nikhil Naik. Deep extrapolation for attribute-enhanced
  generation. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Wei Chen, Tie-yan Liu, Yanyan Lan, Zhi-ming Ma, and Hang Li. Ranking Measures and Loss
 Functions in Learning to Rank. In Y Bengio, D Schuurmans, J Lafferty, C Williams, and A Culotta
 (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 22. Curran Associates, Inc.,
 2009.
Sumit Chopra, Raia Hadsell, and Yann LeCun. Learning a Similarity Metric Discriminatively, with
  Application to Face Verification. 2005 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’05), 1:539–546, 2005. doi: 10.1109/cvpr.2005.202.
Christian Dallago, Jody Mou, Kadina E. Johnston, Bruce Wittmann, Nick Bhattacharya, Samuel
  Goldman, Ali Madani, and Kevin K. Yang. FLIP: Benchmark tasks in fitness landscape inference
  for proteins. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and
  Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Amir Dembo, Thomas M. Cover, and Joy A. Thomas. Information Theoretic Inequalities. IEEE
 Transactions on Information Theory, 37(6):1501–1518, 1991.
David Ding, Anna G. Green, Boyuan Wang, Thuy-Lan Vo Lite, Eli N. Weinstein, Debora S. Marks,
  and Michael T. Laub. Co-evolution of interacting proteins through non-contacting and non-specific
  mutations. Nature Ecology & Evolution, 6(5):590–603, 2022.
Holger Eble, Michael Joswig, Lisa Lamberti, and Will Ludington. Master regulators of evolution
  and the microbiome in higher dimensions, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.
 12277.
Sam Gelman, Sarah A. Fahlberg, Pete Heinzelman, Philip A. Romero, and Anthony Gitter. Neural
  networks to learn protein sequence–function relationships from deep mutational scanning data.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(48):e2104878118, 2021.
Ralf Herbrich, Thore Graepel, and Klause Obermayer. Large Margin Rank Boundaries for Ordinal
  Regression. In Advances in Large Margin Classifiers, chapter 7, pp. 115–132. The MIT Press,
  1999.
Chloe Hsu, Hunter Nisonoff, Clara Fannjiang, and Jennifer Listgarten. Learning protein fitness
  models from evolutionary and assay-labeled data. Nature Biotechnology, 40(7):1114–1122, 2022.
Kabir Husain and Arvind Murugan. Physical Constraints on Epistasis. Molecular Biology and
  Evolution, 37(10):2865–2874, 2020.
Anna Jarzab, Nils Kurzawa, Thomas Hopf, Matthias Moerch, Jana Zecha, Niels Leijten, Yangyang
  Bian, Eva Musiol, Melanie Maschberger, Gabriele Stoehr, Isabelle Becher, Charlotte Daly, Patrok-
  los Samaras, Julia Mergner, Britta Spanier, Angel Angelov, Thilo Werner, Marcus Bantscheff, Math-
  ias Wilhelm, Martin Klingenspor, Simone Lemeer, Wolfgang Liebl, Hannes Hahne, Mikhail M.
  Savitski, and Bernhard Kuster. Meltome atlas—thermal proteome stability across the tree of life.
 Nature Methods, 17(5):495–503, 2020.
Stuart A. Kauffman and Edward D. Weinberger. The NK model of rugged fitness landscapes and
  its application to maturation of the immune response. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 141(2):
  211–245, 1989.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Yoshua Bengio
  and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015,
  San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, 2015.
Sergey Kryazhimskiy, Daniel P. Rice, Elizabeth R. Jerison, and Michael M. Desai. Global epistasis
  makes adaptation predictable despite sequence-level stochasticity. Science, 344(6191):1519–1522,
  2014.
Pascal Notin, Mafalda Dias, Jonathan Frazer, Javier Marchena Hurtado, Aidan N Gomez, Debora
  Marks, and Yarin Gal. Tranception: Protein fitness prediction with autoregressive transformers
  and inference-time retrieval. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari,
  Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 16990–17017. PMLR,
  17–23 Jul 2022.
Jakub Otwinowski. Biophysical Inference of Epistasis and the Effects of Mutations on Protein
  Stability and Function. Molecular Biology and Evolution, 35(10):2345–2354, 2018.
Jakub Otwinowski and Joshua B. Plotkin. Inferring fitness landscapes by regression produces biased
  estimates of epistasis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(22):E2301–E2309,
  2014.
Jakub Otwinowski, David M. McCandlish, and Joshua B. Plotkin. Inferring the shape of global
  epistasis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(32):E7550–E7558, 2018.
Frank J. Poelwijk, Michael Socolich, and Rama Ranganathan. Learning the pattern of epistasis
  linking genotype and phenotype in a protein. Nature Communications, 10(1):4213, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Victoria O. Pokusaeva, Dinara R. Usmanova, Ekaterina V. Putintseva, Lorena Espinar, Karen S.
  Sarkisyan, Alexander S. Mishin, Natalya S. Bogatyreva, Dmitry N. Ivankov, Arseniy V. Akopyan,
  Sergey Y Avvakumov, Inna S. Povolotskaya, Guillaume J. Filion, Lucas B. Carey, and Fyodor A.
  Kondrashov. An experimental assay of the interactions of amino acids from orthologous sequences
  shaping a complex fitness landscape. PLOS Genetics, 15(4):1–30, 2019.
Gautam Reddy and Michael M. Desai. Global epistasis emerges from a generic model of a complex
  trait. Elife, 10:e64740, 2021.
Alexander Rives, Joshua Meier, Tom Sercu, Siddharth Goyal, Zeming Lin, Jason Liu, Demi Guo,
  Myle Ott, C. Lawrence Zitnick, Jerry Ma, and Rob Fergus. Biological structure and function
  emerge from scaling unsupervised learning to 250 million protein sequences. Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 118(15):e2016239118, 2021. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2016239118.
Zachary R. Sailer and Michael J. Harms. Detecting High-Order Epistasis in Nonlinear Genotype-
  Phenotype Maps. Genetics, 205(3):1079–1088, 2017.
Karen S. Sarkisyan, Dmitry A. Bolotin, Margarita V. Meer, Dinara R. Usmanova, Alexander S.
  Mishin, George V. Sharonov, Dmitry N. Ivankov, Nina G. Bozhanova, Mikhail S. Baranov, Onuralp
  Soylemez, Natalya S. Bogatyreva, Peter K. Vlasov, Evgeny S. Egorov, Maria D. Logacheva,
  Alexey S. Kondrashov, Dmitry M. Chudakov, Ekaterina V. Putintseva, Ilgar Z. Mamedov, Dan S.
  Tawfik, Konstantin A. Lukyanov, and Fyodor A. Kondrashov. Local fitness landscape of the green
  fluorescent protein. Nature, 533(7603):397–401, 2016. ISSN 1476-4687.
Peter F. Stadler. Towards a theory of landscapes. In Ramón López-Peña, Henri Waelbroeck, Riccardo
  Capovilla, Ricardo García-Pelayo, and Federico Zertuche (eds.), Complex Systems and Binary
  Networks, pp. 78–163, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1995. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Ammar Tareen, Mahdi Kooshkbaghi, Anna Posfai, William T. Ireland, David M. McCandlish, and
 Justin B. Kinney. MAVE-NN: learning genotype-phenotype maps from multiplex assays of variant
 effect. Genome Biology, 23(1), 2022.
E. D. Weinberger. Fourier and Taylor series on fitness landscapes. Biological Cybernetics, 65(5):
  321–330, 1991.
Nicholas C. Wu, Lei Dai, C. Anders Olson, James O. Lloyd-Smith, and Ren Sun. Adaptation in
  protein fitness landscapes is facilitated by indirect paths. eLife, 5:e16965, 2016.
Zachary Wu, S. B. Jennifer Kan, Russell D. Lewis, Bruce J. Wittmann, and Frances H. Arnold.
  Machine learning-assisted directed protein evolution with combinatorial libraries. Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences, 116(18):8852–8858, 2019.
Kevin K Yang, Zachary Wu, and Frances H. Arnold. Machine-learning-guided directed evolution for
  protein engineering. Nature Methods, 16(8):687–694, 2019.
Juannan Zhou and David M. McCandlish. Minimum epistasis interpolation for sequence-function
  relationships. Nature Communications, 11(1):1782, 2020.
Juannan Zhou, Mandy S. Wong, Wei-Chia Chen, Adrian R. Krainer, Justin B. Kinney, and David M.
  McCandlish. Higher-order epistasis and phenotypic prediction. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 119(39):e2204233119, 2022.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX A:          S IMULATION DETAILS

Here we provide more specific details about the simulations used to generate Figures 1 and 2 in the
main text.

A.1    C OMPLETE DATA SIMULATION

This section provides more details on the simulation that is described in Section 3.1 and Fig. 1 in
the main text, in which the goal was to recover a latent fitness function given complete fitness data.
For this task, we first sampled a complete latent fitness function, f (xi ) for i = 1, 2, ...2L , from the
NK model, using the parameters L = 8, K = 2 and q = 2. The NK model was implemented as in
Brookes et al. (2022), using the random neighborhood scheme (described in detail in Section A.3,
below) We then applied a monotonic nonlinearity to the fitness function to produce a complete set of
observed data, yi = g(f (xi )) for i = 1, 2, ...2L . We then constructed a neural network model, fθ , in
which input binary sequences of length L were transformed by two hidden layers with 100 nodes
each and ReLU activation functions and a final linear layer that produced a single fitness output. To
fit the parameters of this model, we performed stochastic gradient descent using the Adam method
Kingma & Ba (2015) on the Bradley-Terry (BT) loss with all (xi , yi ) pairs as training data, a learning
rate of 0.001, a batch size of 256. The optimization procedure was terminated when the Spearman
between the model’s predictions and the observed data y failed to improve over 100 epochs. Letting
θ̂ be the parameters of the model at the end of the optimization, we denote the estimated fitness
function as fˆ := fθ̂ .
In order to calculate the epistatic representations of the latent, observed and estimated fitness functions,
we arranged each of these fitness functions into appropriate vectors: f, y, and f̂, respectively. These
vectors are arranged such that the ith element corresponds to the sequence represented by the ith row
of the Graph Fourier basis. In this case of binary sequences, the Graph Fourier basis is known as the
Walsh-Hadamard basis and is easily constructed, as in Aghazadeh et al. (2021) and Brookes et al.
(2022). The epistatic representations of of the latent, observed and estimated fitness functions were
then calculated as β = ΦT f, βy = ΦT y, and β̂ = ΦT f̂, respectively.

A.2    I NCOMPLETE DATA SIMULATIONS

This section provides further details on the simulations in Section 3.3 and Fig. 2 where we tested the
ability of models trained with MSE and BT losses to estimate fitness functions given incomplete data
corrupted by global epistasis. Many of the details of these simulations are provided in the main text.
We used a different set of settings of the a for each nonlinearity used in the simulations shown in Fig.
2b. In particular, for the exponential, sigmoid, and cubic functions we used 20 logarithmically spaced
values of a in the ranges [0.1, 50], [0.5, 25], and [0.001, 10], respectively. In all cases where models
were trained in these simulations, we used the same neural network model described in the previous
section. In all of these cases, we performed SGD on either the MSE or BT loss using the Adam
method with a learning rate of 0.001 and batch size equal to 64. In cases where the size of the training
set was less than 64, we set the batch size to be equal to the size of the training set. In all cases,
the optimization was terminated when the validation metric failed to improve after 20 epochs. The
validation metrics for models trained with the BT and MSE losses were the Spearman and Pearson
correlations, respectively, between the model predictions on the validation set and the corresponding
labels. In order to calculate the yellow curve in Fig. 2a and the values on the horizontal axis in Fig.
2b, the epistatic representations of the observed fitness functions were calculated as described in the
previous section.

A.3    D EFINITION OF THE NK MODEL

The NK model is an extensively studied random field model of fitness functions introduced by
Kauffman & Weinberger (1989). In order to sample a fitness function from the NK model, first one
chooses values of the parameters L, K, and q, which correspond to the sequence length, maximum
degree of epistatic interaction, and size of the sequence alphabet, respectively. Next, one samples a
“neighborhood" V [j] for each position j in the sequence, which represents the K positions that interact
with position j. Concretely, for each position j = 1, ..., L, V [j] is constructed by sampling K values


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


from the set of positions {1, ..., L} \ j uniformly at random, without replacement. Now let S (L,q)
be the set of all q L sequences of length L and alphabet size q. Given the sampled neighborhoods
{V [j] }L
        j=1 , the NK model assigns a fitness to every sequence in S
                                                                    (L,q)
                                                                          through the following two
steps:

     1. Let s[j] := (sk )k∈V [j] be the subsequence of s corresponding to the indices in the neigh-
        borhood V [j] . Assign a ‘subsequence fitness’, fj (s[j] ) to every possible subsequence, s[j] ,
        by drawing a value from the normal distribution with mean equal to zero and variance
        equal to 1/L. In other words, fj (s[j] ) ∼ N (0, 1/L) for every s[j] ∈ S (K,q) , and for every
        j = 1, 2, ..., L.
     2. For every s ∈ S (L,q) , the subsequence fitness values are summed to produce the total fitness
                      PL
        values f (s) = j=1 fj (s[j] ).


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX B:         A DDITIONAL COMPLETE DATA RESULTS
Here we provide additional results to complement those described in Section 3.1 and shown in Fig. 1.

B.1   A DDITIONAL NONLINEARITIES AND LATENT FITNESS FUNCTION

In order to more fully demonstrate the ability of models trained with the BT loss to recover sparse
latent fitness functions, we repeated the test shown in Fig. 1 and described in Sections 3.1 and A.1
for multiple examples of nonlinearities and different settings of the K parameter in fitness functions
sampled from the NK model. In each example, a latent fitness function of L = 8 binary sequences
was sampled from the NK model with a chosen setting of K and a nonlinearity g(f ) was applied to
the latent fitness function to produce observed data y. The results of these simulations are shown in
Fig. 4, below. In all cases, the model almost perfectly recovers the sparse latent fitness function given
complete fitness data corrupted by global epistasis.


Figure 4: Results from multiple examples of the task of recovering a latent fitness function given
complete observed data transformed by a global epistasis nonlinearity. Each sub-plot shows the
results of one such task. The setting of K used to sample the latent fitness function from the NK
model and the particular form of the nonlinearity g(f ) used are indicated in each sub-plot title. The
horizontal axis in each sub-plot represents the values of the latent fitness function, while the vertical
axis represents the values of either the observed data (blue dots) or model predictions (red dots). For
ease of plotting, all fitness functions were normalized to have an empirical mean and std. dev. of 1,
respectively. The R2 correlation between the latent fitness function and the model predictions are
indicated in red text.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2   C OMPARISON TO QUANTILE TRANSFORMATION

In order to provide a baseline for the results shown in Figure 1c, we attempted to recover the
latent fitness function using quantile transformations rather than using the Bradley-Terry loss. In
particular, we applied a quantile transformation the observed fitness data y to produce a vector fq that
approximately follows either a uniform or Gaussian distribution. In both cases, we used 10 quantiles
for discretization. The results of these baseline tests are shown in Figure 5, below. By comparing to
the results in Figure 1c, we can see that the quantile transformations are not as effective at recovering
the latent fitness function as the Bradley-Terry loss.


Figure 5: Complete data recovery from a quantile transformation to a (a) uniform distribution (b)
Gaussian distribution. Plot descriptions are as in Figure 1c.


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX C:         A DDITIONAL EXAMPLES OF UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE
Here we provide additional examples showing that nonlinearities tend to decrease the entropy in the
fitness domain of sparse fitness, which causes corresponding increases in the entropy in the epistatic
domain due to the uncertainty principle of Eq. 4. We show this for four nonlinearities:exponential,
g(f ) = exp(a · f ), sigmoid, g(f ) = (1 + e−a·f )−1 , cubic polynomial g(f ) = x3 + ax with a > 0,
and a hinge function that represents the left-censoring of data, g(f ) = max(0, f − a). Left-censoring
is common in fitness data, as biological sequences will often have fitness that falls below the detection
threshold of an assay. For each of these nonlinearities, we chose a range of settings of the a parameter,
and for each setting of the a parameter, we sampled 200 fitness functions from the NK model with
parameters L = 8, K = 2 and q = 2 and transformed each function by the nonlinearity with the
chosen setting of a. For each of these transformed fitness functions, we calculated the entropy of the
function in the fitness and epistatic domains. The mean and standard deviation of these entropies
across the fitness function replicates are shown in Fig. 6, below. In each case, we can see that the
nonlinearities cause the fitness domain to become increasingly concentrated, and the epistatic domain
to become increasingly sparse.


Figure 6: Demonstration of the fitness-epistasis uncertainty principle for multiple examples of
nonlinearities. The title of the subplot indicates the nonlinearity used to produce the results in that
subplot. The lines and shaded regions represent the mean and std. dev. of entropies, respectively,
across 200 replicates of latent fitness functions sampled from the NK model. The black dotted line
indicates the lower bound on the sum of the entropies in Eq. 4.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX D:          A DDITIONAL INCOMPLETE DATA RESULTS
Here we provide additional results to complement those described in Section 3.3 and shown in Fig. 2.

D.1    A DDITIONAL NONLINEARITY AND LATENT FITNESS FUNCTION PARAMETERS

Here we show results for incomplete data simulations using latent fitness functions with varying
orders of epistatic interactions and for additional parameterizations of the global epistasis nonlinearity.
In particular, we repeated the simulations whose results are shown in Fig. 2b using latent fitness
functions drawn from the NK model with K = 1 and K = 3, with all other parameters of the
simulation identical to those used in the K = 2 simulations described in the main text. We ran
the simulations for 10 replicates of each of the 20 settings of the a parameter for each of the three
nonlinearities. The results of these simulations are shown in Figure 7, below. These results are
qualitatively similar to those in Figure 7, demonstrating that the simulation results are robust to the
degree of epistatic interactions in the latent fitness function.
We also repeated the simulations whose results are shown in Figure 2c using different settings of the
K parameter in the NK model, as well as multiple settings of the a parameter that determines the
strength of the global epistasis nonlinearity. All other parameters of the simulations are identical
to those used in the K = 2 and a = 10 simulation described in the main text. The results of these
simulations, averaged over 40 replicates for each training set size, are shown in Fig 8, below. These
results are qualitatively similar to those shown in Figure 2c, demonstrating the robustness of the
simulation results to different forms of latent fitness functions and nonlinearities.


Figure 7: Results from incomplete data simulations for latent fitness functions drawn from the NK model with
(a) K = 1 and (b) K = 2. Plot descriptions are as in Figure 2b.


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Results from incomplete data simulations using multiple settings of the K parameter in the NK
model and the a parameter in the global epistasis nonlinearity. The settings of K and a used to generate each
subplot are shown in the title of the subplots; results are not shown for the K = 2 and a = 10 case because
these results are shown in Figure 2c of the main text. Plot descriptions are as in Figure 2c; each point in the plots
represents the mean over 40 replicate simulations.


                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2    A DDING NOISE TO THE OBSERVED DATA

Here we test how the addition of homoskedastic Gaussian noise affects the results incomplete data
simulations. In particular, we repeated the set of simulations in which we test the ability of the MSE
and BT losses to estimate a fitness function at varying sizes of training set, but now added Gaussian
noise with standard deviation of either 0.025 or 0.1 to the observed fitness function (first normalized
to have mean and variance equal to 0 and 1, respectively). The results of these tests, averaged over
40 replicates for each training set size, are shown in Figure 9, below. We can see that despite the
noise drastically altering the observed ranking, the BT loss still outperforms the MSE loss in terms of
Spearman correlation at both noise settings.


Figure 9: Incomplete data simulations with additive Gaussian noise with standard deviation equal to (a) 0.025
and (b) 0.1. Left plots show the rankings of sequences in the latent NK fitness function, f, against the ranking
of sequences in the noisy observed fitness function, y. The right plot descriptions are as in Figure 2c, with the
addition of black dashed lines that indicates the Spearman correlation between the latent fitness function, f, and
the noisy observed fitness function, y, which is the maximum Spearman correlation that can be achieved in this
test.


                                                       20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX E:          A DDITIONAL RESULTS ON FLIP BENCHMARK
Here we provide additional results to complement those described in Section 3.4 and shown in Fig. 3.

E.1     R ESULTS IN TABLE FORM

Here we reproduce the FLIP benchmark results shown in Figure 3 in table form, such that these
results can be compared easily to other work that uses the FLIP benchmark.


      DATA SET                     S PLIT           MSE L OSS          M ARGIN         B RADLEY-T ERRY
                                 1- VS - REST     0.133 ± 0.150     0.068 ± 0.093       0.091 ± 0.093
                                 2- VS - REST     0.564 ± 0.026     0.549 ± 0.041       0.607 ± 0.009
      GB1                       3- VS - REST *    0.814 ± 0.049     0.869 ± 0.002       0.880 ± 0.003
                              L OW- VS -H IGH *   0.499 ± 0.010     0.472 ± 0.020       0.567 ± 0.013
                                 S AMPLED         0.930 ± 0.002     0.944 ± 0.004       0.951 ± 0.002
                                  M UT-D ES       0.751 ± 0.006     0.763 ± 0.005       0.757 ± 0.007
                                  D ES -M UT      0.806 ± 0.006     0.806 ± 0.007       0.832 ± 0.002
                                1- VS - REST *    0.335 ± 0.117     0.591 ± 0.042       0.485 ± 0.078
      AAV                        2- VS - REST     0.748 ± 0.010     0.737 ± 0.009       0.798 ± 0.003
                                 7- VS - REST     0.732 ± 0.003     0.730 ± 0.003       0.742 ± 0.003
                               L OW- VS -H IGH    0.401 ± 0.006     0.407 ± 0.007       0.410 ± 0.009
                                  S AMPLED        0.927 ± 0.001     0.922 ± 0.001       0.933 ± 0.000
                                  M IXED          0.349 ± 0.011     0.370 ± 0.009       0.453 ± 0.007
      T HERMOSTABILITY            H UMAN          0.511 ± 0.016     0.526 ± 0.009       0.589 ± 0.002
                               H UMAN -C ELL      0.490 ± 0.021     0.517 ± 0.012       0.570 ± 0.004


Table 1: Comparison between MSE, Margin, and Bradley-Terry losses on FLIP benchmark tasks using the CNN
baseline model. Each row represents a data set and split combination. Numerical columns indicate the mean
and standard deviation of test set Spearman correlation over 10 random initializations of the model. Asterisks
indicate that unmodified portions of sequences were used in training data.


                                                     21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2    A NALYSIS OF TAIL PERFORMANCE

Here we calculate the "top 10% recall" in the test set for the models trained with the BT and MSE
losses on the FLIP benchmark data. The top 10% recall is defined as the fraction of test set sequences
with fitness above the 90th percentile in the test set that are among the sequences with the highest 10%
of model predictions. For examples, if there are 1000 sequences in the test set, then we determine
how many of the 100 sequences with the highest fitness in the test set are in the set of sequences with
the 100 largest model predictions.


               DATA SET                       S PLIT          MSE L OSS       B RADLEY-T ERRY
                                           1- VS - REST     0.097 ± 0.030       0.138 ± 0.051
                                           2- VS - REST     0.250 ± 0.030       0.282 ± 0.008
               GB1                        3- VS - REST *    0.539 ± 0.084       0.664 ± 0.014
                                        L OW- VS -H IGH *   0.381 ± 0.028       0.443 ± 0.024
                                           S AMPLED         0.823 ± 0.009       0.816 ± 0.010
                                            M UT-D ES       0.288 ± 0.004       0.307 ± 0.005
                                            D ES -M UT      0.318 ± 0.013       0.387 ± 0.008
                                          1- VS - REST *    0.052 ± 0.053       0.143 ± 0.049
               AAV                         2- VS - REST     0.490 ± 0.011       0.457 ± 0.010
                                           7- VS - REST     0.694 ± 0.006       0.695 ± 0.006
                                         L OW- VS -H IGH    0.180 ± 0.009       0.170 ± 0.006
                                            S AMPLED        0.650 ± 0.005       0.652 ± 0.010
                                            M IXED          0.636 ± 0.013       0.616 ± 0.011
               T HERMOSTABILITY             H UMAN          0.382 ± 0.022       0.405 ± 0.015
                                         H UMAN -C ELL      0.316 ± 0.018       0.355 ± 0.012


Table 2: Tail performance comparison between MSE and Bradley-Terry losses on FLIP benchmark tasks
using the CNN baseline model. Each row represents a data set and split combination. Numerical columns
indicate the mean and standard deviation of top 10% recall on the test set over 10 random initializations of the
model. Asterisks indicate that unmodified portions of sequences were used in training data. Bold values indicate
significant improvement (p < 0.05) over the other loss.


                                                       22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX F:         N OISY TOY SIMULATION
A potential disadvantage of the BT and Margin losses used in the main text is that neither takes
into consideration the size of the true observed gap between the fitness of pairs of sequences. In
particular, Eq. 3 shows that any two sequences in which yi > yj will be weighted equally in the loss,
regardless of the magnitude of the difference yi − yj . This has implications for how measurement
noise may affect these losses. In particular, the relative ranking between pairs of sequences with a
small gap in fitness in more likely to have been swapped due to measurement noise, compared to a
pair of sequences with a large gap. This suggests that contrastive losses may exhibit pathologies in
the presence of certain types of noise.
Here we examine a toy scenario in which the observed fitness data has the form yi = I(xi ) + ϵ, where
I(xi ) is an indicator function that is equal to zero or one and ϵ ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) is Gaussian noise. One
may expect contrastive loses to exhibit pathologies when trained on this data because the relative
rankings between sequences that have the same value of I(x) is due only to noise.
In order to construct this scenario, we sampled an L = 10, K = 2 binary fitness function f (x from
the NK model, and then let I(x) = 0 when f (x) < med(f ) and 1 otherwise, where med(f ) is the
median NK fitness of all sequences. We then added Gaussian noise with σ = 0.1 to produce the
observed noisy data y. We consider I(x) to be the true binary label of a sequence and y to be the
noisy label of the sequence. The relationship between the NK fitness, true labels and noisy labels is
shown in Fig. 10a, below. Next, we randomly split the data into training and test sets containing 100
and 924 sequences and noisy labels, respectively. We used the training set to fit two neural network
models, one using the MSE loss and the other using the BT loss. The models and training procedure
were the same as described in Appendix A:. The predictions of these models on test sequences,
compared to noisy labels, are shown in 10b. We next constructed Receiver Operating Characteristic
(ROC) curves that test the ability of each model to classify sequences according to their true labels
I(x) (Fig. 10c). These curves show that while the MSE loss does slightly outperform the BT loss in
this classification task, the BT loss still results in an effective classifier and does not exhibit a major
pathology in this scenario.
Notably, on empirical protein landscapes, as shown in Table 2, the performance gain by contrastive
losses out-weighs the potential drawback of further sensitivity to this kind of noise, and contrastive
losses ultimately result in improved predictive performance.


Figure 10: Toy simulation testing the effects of noise on the BT loss. (a) Noisy and true labels
of training and test data (vertical axis), plotted against NK fitness (horizontal axis). True labels
correspond to I(x) values, while noisy labels correspond to y = I(x) + ϵ values. (b) Observed noisy
labels (vertical axis) plotted against model predictions from a models trained with the MSE and BT
losses (horizontal axis). (c) ROC curves comparing the ability of the models trained with MSE and
BT losses to classify test sequences according to true labels. The blue (MSE) and green (BT) curves
have AUC values of 0.977 and 0.932, respectively.


                                                    23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX G:         D ERIVATION OF FITNESS - EPISTASIS UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE
Here we show how to derive the fitness-epistasis uncertainty of Eq. 4, starting from the uncertainty
principle presented in Theorem 23 of Dembo et al. (1991). When applied to the transformation
f = Φβ, this uncertainty principle is stated as:

                                                           1
                                   H(f) + H(β) ≥ log                                             (5)
                                                          M2
where M = maxij |Φij |. This can be further simplified by calculating the maximum absolute value
of the elements in the Graph Fourier basis, Φ. As shown in Brookes et al. (2022), this matrix for
sequences of length L and alphabet size q is calculated as
                                                  L
                                                  O
                                            Φ=            P(q)                                         (6)
                                                    i=1

where ⊗ denotes the Kronecker product, and P(q) is an orthonormal set of eigenvectors of the Graph
Laplacian of the complete graph of size q. Based on Eq. 6, we can make the simplification to the
calculation of the maximum value in Φ that
                                                M = mL                                                 (7)
where m = maxij |Pij (q)|. Further, the value of m can be determined for each setting of q by
considering the following calculation of P(q) used in Brookes et al. (2022):
                                                          2wwT
                                          P(q) = I −                                                   (8)
                                                          ||w||2
                                             √
where I is the identity matrix and w = 1 − qe1 , with 1 representing a vector with all elements equal
to one, and e1 is the vector equal to one in its first element and zero in all other elements. The values
of each element in P(q) can be straightforwardly calculated using Eq. 8. In particular, we have:
                                         1
                                         q
                                          √               if i = 1 or j = 1
                                                    1√
                              Pij (q) = 1 − q− q if i = j ̸= 1                                        (9)
                                         1√
                                        
                                                           otherwise.
                                           q− q

Now all that remains is determining which of these three values has the largest magnitude for each
setting of q. For q = 2, only the first two values appear in the matrix, and both have magnitude
√1 = √1 . For q = 3, we can directly calculate that all three values are positive and we have
  q       2
  1√     √1 > 1 −     1√
q− q >     q        q− q . For q = 4, we can again directly calculate that all three values are equal
    1    1
to √q = 2 . For q > 4, all three of the values are positive. Further, algebraic manipulations can be
used to show that q > 4 implies 1 − q−1√q > q−1√q and √1q > q−1√q . Therefore, 1 − q−1√q is the
maximum value in P(q) for all q > 4.
Putting these results together with Eq. 7, the fitness-epistasis uncertainty principle simplifies to

                                                                     1
                                    H(f) + H(β) ≥ L log                                             (10)
                                                                     m2

where
                                           1
                                            √
                                           q
                                                            if q = 2
                                               1√
                                    m=       q− q            if q = 3
                                                   1√
                                          
                                          1 −
                                                 q− q        if q ≥ 4

which is the form presented in the main text.



                                                    24
