Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T OWARDS ROBUST 3D P OSE T RANSFER WITH A DVER -
SARIAL L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                              A BSTRACT

               3D pose transfer that aims to transfer the desired pose to a target mesh is one of
               the most challenging 3D generation tasks. Previous attempts rely on well-defined
               parametric human models or skeletal joints as driving pose sources, where cum-
               bersome but necessary pre-processing pipelines are inevitable, hindering imple-
               mentations of the real-time applications. This work is driven by the intuition that
               the robustness of the model can be enhanced by introducing adversarial samples
               into the training, leading to a more invulnerable model to the noisy inputs, which
               even can be further extended to the real-world data like raw point clouds/scans
               without intermediate processing. Furthermore, we propose a novel 3D pose
               Masked Autoencoder (3D-PoseMAE), a customized MAE that effectively learns
               3D extrinsic presentations (i.e., pose). 3D-PoseMAE facilitates learning from the
               aspect of extrinsic attributes by simultaneously generating adversarial samples that
               perturb the model and learning the arbitrary raw noisy poses via a multi-scale
               masking strategy. Both qualitative and quantitative studies show that the trans-
               ferred meshes given by our network result in much better quality. Besides, we
               demonstrate the strong generalizability of our method on various poses, different
               domains, and even raw scans. Experimental results also show meaningful insights
               that the intermediate adversarial samples generated in the training can hinder the
               existing pose transfer models.


      Source pose       Identity   Transferred result    Ground truth            Source pose            Identity   Transferred result   Ground truth
        (mesh)                                                              (adversarial point cloud)


      Source pose       Identity    Transferred result   Ground truth             Source pose           Identity   Transferred result   Ground truth
    (point cloud with                                                              (raw scan)
     Gaussian noise)
Figure 1: Examples of our 3D pose transfer results on various pose sources, showing strong ro-
bustness and generalizability. The pose source includes clean mesh (top left) and point clouds with
Gaussian noise (bottom left) from SMPL-NPT dataset (Wang et al., 2020), the adversarial sample of
point cloud generated by our method (top right), and raw scan (bottom right) from DFAUST dataset
(Bogo et al., 2017). Identity meshes are from the SMPL-NPT dataset (Wang et al., 2020) and the
FAUST (Bogo et al., 2014) (bottom right) dataset. Our method can achieve promising pose transfer
performance even on the incomplete raw scan (bottom right), which is extremely challenging. More
experimental results and details can be found in Appendix.

1       I NTRODUCTION

As a promising and challenging task, 3D pose transfer has been consistently drawing research atten-
tion from the computer vision community (Song et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2022;
Liao et al., 2022). The task aims at transferring a source pose to a target identity mesh and keeping


                                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the intrinsic attributes (i.e., shape) of the identity mesh. Aside from pure research interests, transfer-
ring desired poses to target 3D models has various potential applications in the film industry, games,
AR/VR, etc.
To achieve data-driven learning, existing 3D pose transfer methods rely on different prerequisites to
the data sources, which severely limits their further real-world implementations. Firstly, many ex-
isting 3D pose transfer methods (Ma et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021b) cannot directly be generalized
to unseen target meshes, and training on the target meshes is inevitable for them to learn the priors
of the target shape. Secondly, some studies (Groueix et al., 2018; Aberman et al., 2020; Liao et al.,
2022) assume that the paired correspondences between the pose and identity meshes are given, such
as annotated landmarks/meshes, or T-posed target meshes, which also involves extra manual efforts
to obtain. Lastly, all previous attempts of 3D pose transfer rely on pre-processed and clean source
poses to drive the target meshes. However, acquiring those clean data is laborious: cumbersome but
necessary pre-processing pipelines are inevitable. For instance, to register raw human scans/point
clouds to well-defined parametric human models (e.g., SMPL series (Loper et al., 2015; Bogo et al.,
2016; Pavlakos et al., 2019)), it will take roughly 1-2 minutes to process merely a single frame
(Wang et al., 2021a), hindering implementations of the real-time applications.
Inspired by the scaling successes of adversarial learning in the computer vision community (Good-
fellow et al., 2014; Carlini et al., 2019; Croce & Hein, 2020; Awais et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2021)
for enhancing the robustness of the models, we experiment with applying adversarial training to 3D
pose transfer tasks. As shown in Fig. 1, we wish to utilize the strength of adversarial learning to
enhance the robustness and generalizability of the model, and go beyond so that conducting pose
transfer on unseen domains or even directly from raw scans can be possible.
However, although the above idea is intuitive, it’s not feasible to naively extend existing adversarial
training algorithms (Zhang et al., 2021; Xiang et al., 2019; Tsai et al., 2020) to the 3D pose trans-
fer task. Primarily, the current methods (Zhang et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2020) generate adversarial
samples based on discriminative adversarial functions, and to our knowledge, there is no adversar-
ial samples proposed specifically for the 3D generative tasks (i.e., how to justify if an adversarial
sample is good based on generated results). Moreover, previous approaches using 3D adversarial
samples, such as (Wu et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021), do so by taking them as pre-computed input
data and leaving them untouched for the entire training procedure. This protocol is not practical for
our task, as models need to learn the latent pose space via gradients. Thus, we proposed a novel
adversarial learning framework with a new adversarial function and on-the-fly computation of ad-
versarial samples, which enables the successful application of adversarial training of the generative
models.
Another novel ingredient in this paper is inspired by the recent powerful capability of masked au-
toencoding (MAE) architectures (He et al., 2022) in the computer vision community. We adopt
the idea of MAE to 3D pose transfer task by implementing a new model, called 3D-PoseMAE,
that empathizes the learning of extrinsic presentations (i.e., pose). Specifically, unlike any exist-
ing 3D MAE-based models (Yu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; Pang et al., 2022) that merely put
efforts into depicting spatial local regions to capture the geometric and semantic dependence, 3D-
PoseMAE exploits a multi-scale masking strategy to aggregate consistent sampling regions across
scales for robust learning of extrinsic attributes. Besides, we observe that local geometric details
(wrinkles, small tissues, etc.) from the pose sources are intuitively unessential for pose learning.
Thus, we argue that traditional 3D spatial-wise attention/correlation operation (Chen et al., 2022;
Song et al., 2021) might involve a lot of redundant geometric information for pose learning. Instead,
we adopt a progressive channel-wise attention operation to the 3D-PoseMAE so that the attention
is operated gradually and fully on the latent pose code, making the presentations more compact and
computationally efficient.
The contributions are summarized as follows:
• We work on the robustness problem of 3D pose transfer. To our knowledge, it is the first attempt
  made to approach 3D pose transfer from the aspect of adversarial learning. Besides, the current
  community holds the assumption that preprocessed pose sources are available. Instead, we break
  this limitation by providing a new research entry that generates adversarial samples to simulate
  noisy inputs and even raw scans so that conducting pose transfer directly on raw scans and point
  clouds is made possible.



                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                             3D-PoseMAE
                                                                                                             ~
                                                                              (eval mode)
                                                                                                       Mresult       MGT
                                Mid        Mpose

                                                                                                  Adversarial
                                                                  Detach    Pertubation            gradient
                                Baseline
                                networks                 Detach
     Back propagation


                                                                  Mpose
                                                                                             3D-PoseMAE
                                           ~                                     Madv_pose
                                                                                              (train mode)
                                                                                                                           ~
                                      Mresult      MGT                                                               Mresult   MGT

                                                           Mid                                         Back propagation

                        Traditional pipeline                            Adversarial learning-based pipeline (ours)
Figure 2: Left: The traditional pipeline used in previous methods (Wang et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2021; Chen et al., 2022; Liao et al., 2022) for 3D pose transfer. The model is trained with clean mesh
inputs without considering the robustness of the noisy inputs. We use the symbol ∼ to generally refer
to the loss term, which differs according to the actual condition. Right: Our method. Our method
utilizes the strength of adversarial learning to enhance the robustness and generalizability of the
model. It consists of an adversarial sample generating flow(top part in red) and a pose transferring
flow(bottom part in green). The two flows happen iteratively during the adversarial training and the
adversarial samples are calculated on-the-fly. Note that Mid , Mpose , Mresult , and MGT stand for
the identity, pose, generated meshes, and ground truths, the same as below.


• We introduce a novel adversarial learning framework customized for the 3D pose transfer task
  with a novel adversarial function and on-the-fly computation of adversarial samples in backprop-
  agation. It’s the first time that on-the-fly computation of adversarial samples appears in a 3D
  generative deep learning pipeline.
• We propose the 3D-PoseMAE, an MAE-based architecture for 3D pose transfer with carefully
  designed components to capture the extrinsic attributions. It exploits a multi-scale masking strat-
  egy to learn the global features and a progressive channel-wise attention operation which is more
  compact than the traditional spatial ones. The 3D-PoseMAE shows encouraging performances in
  both computational efficiency and generative ability.
• Quantitative or qualitative experimental results on various different datasets and different data
  sources show that our proposed method achieves promising performances with substantial robust-
  ness to noisy inputs and the generalizability to noisy raw scans from the real world without any
  manual intervention. Code will be made available.


2   M ETHODOLOGY

We first present a general introduction to the whole pipeline of the proposed method as shown in
Fig. 2. Compared to the traditional 3D pose transfer pipeline, we introduce adversarial learning.
As shown in Fig. 2, our method consists of an adversarial sample generation procedure (top part
in red flow) and a pose transferring (bottom part in green flow) procedure. In the top adversarial
sample generation flow, the proposed 3D-PoseMAE model will be set as eval mode for obtaining
the gradient of the data. By using the gradient of the output of 3D-PoseMAE, we can obtain the
perturbation to the meshes, resulting in adversarial samples. In the bottom pose transferring flow,
the 3D-PoseMAE model works the same as traditional 3D pose transfer models in a train mode, but
the pose inputs are replaced with adversarial samples, leading to the adversarial training. Note that
the inputs Mpose and Mid of 3D-PoseMAE need to be detached to ensure the backpropagation of
the two flows works without interference.
Next, the overall architecture of the 3D-PoseMAE network together with each component will be
introduced, followed by the implementation details of adversarial training.


                                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  3D-PoseMAE framework                                                                                                                                                                                                     Multi-scale masked encoder                          3D-PoseMAE decoder

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Latent pose code Z                                                                    [N, C']
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [N,C]
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Transferred result


                        Masked encoder
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tiling


                         Multi-scale


                                                  Conv1d


                                                                                               Conv1d


                                                                                                                                                Conv1d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [1,C]


               [N, 3]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Conv1d


                                                                                                             [N, C/2]


                                                                                                                                                             [N, C/4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Aggregating


                                         [N, C]


                                                           [N, C]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Conv1d                  Norm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mresult             [1,C]           [1,C]           [1,C]                                             [N, C']
          Mid                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Norm                  Conv1d
 Target identity                                                                                                                                                                                              [N, 3]            Mini           Mini             Mini                             [N, C']
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Tanh                                                                                                 Norm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PointNet       PointNet         PointNet                                               [N, C']

                                                                                                                                                                                                          Conv1d                    [φN,3]          [φN/2,3]        [φN/4,3]
                        Masked encoder
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           γ


                                                                              3D-PoseMAE


                                                                                                                                  3D-PoseMAE


                                                                                                                                                                                        3D-PoseMAE
                         Multi-scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                              [N, C/4]          Ratio          Ratio            Ratio                                               [N, C']


                                                                    decoder


                                                                                                                        decoder


                                                                                                                                                                              decoder
                                                  Conv1d


                                                                                                    Conv1d


                                                                                                                                                          Conv1d
               [N, 3]


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Masking        Masking          Masking                                       Channel-wise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [N, C']     [C', C']


                                                                                           [N, C]

                                                                                                             [N, C/2]


                                                                                                                                               [N, C/2]

                                                                                                                                                                   [N, C/4]
                                         [N, C]


                                                           [N, C]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cross-Attention

          Mpose                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          v           [N, C']   k [N, C'] q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Conv1d                Conv1d Conv1d
   Source pose
clean/adversarial                                                                                                                                                                                                               [N, 3]          [N/2, 3]         [N/4, 3]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [N, C'] Zpose               Zid [N, C']

Figure 3: An overlook of our 3D-PoseMAE. The left part is the whole architecture of the 3D-
PoseMAE. The middle and right parts illustrate the architectural details of one multi-scale masked
encoder and one 3D-PoseMAE decoder, respectively. The 3D-PoseMAE borrows the idea from the
work of (He et al., 2022) but is extensively extended to 3D data processing and especially for the
3D pose transfer task. Note that Z stands for the encoded pose feature. Zpose and Zid stand for
the specific encoded pose features from pose and identity. Subscripts are the dimensional shape of
variables.


2.1        3D-P OSE MAE

An overview of the 3D-PoseMAE network is presented in Fig. 3. Similar to previous works (Wang
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022), 3D-PoseMAE takes a source pose (in the form of
a mesh or a point could) and a target mesh as input, and outputs a corresponding pose transferred re-
sult. In the following, we will introduce each component of the 3D-PoseMAE in an order following
the data stream.
Multi-scale Masked 3D Encoder. Analogy to the original MAE (He et al., 2022), existing 3D
MAE-based architectures (Zhang et al., 2022; Pang et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2021) invariably chose
to split a given point cloud into multiple subsets to conduct the masking. However, this protocol
involves feature extraction on each subset for later attention and aggregation, which is computation-
ally demanding and only works on small-scale meshes/point clouds (up to 8,192 points). It cannot
be extended to tasks with large-size meshes, such as 3D pose transfer, where the size of the target
mesh can be more than 27,000 vertices. Thus, we propose a novel multi-scale masking strategy that
takes advantage of the masking strategy to boost extrinsic attribute learning. Specifically, as shown
in Fig. 3, we regard the input point cloud Mpose as the 1-th scale. For the i-th scale, 1 ≤ i ≤ 3, we
randomly downsample the points by 2(i−1) times, resulting in a group of the S-scale representations
of the source pose. Then, we adopt masking at a ratio of ϕ to the point cloud at each scale, so that
model will be pushed to learn the same extrinsic attribute shared from those scaled representations
via Mini-pointNet (Qi et al., 2017b). Next, we aggregate the resulting latent pose code from all
scales and form the embedding vector Z with dimension C. At last, we tail the size of Z from [1, C]
to [N, C] for better integration with the identity mesh (N is the vertex number of the identity mesh,
which is flexible according to given target meshes) and feed it into the following 3D-PoseMAE
decoders.
3D-PoseMAE Decoder with Channel-wise Attention. After obtaining the latent codes of pose and
identity Zpose and Zid , we need to adopt the Transformer backbone to integrate two latent codes and
conduct the decoding and generating. As there are many existing 3D transformer backbones (Zhao
et al., 2021; Pang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022) and the work of GC-Transformer (Chen et al.,
2022) is proposed specifically for 3D pose transfer, we implement our 3D-PoseMAE decoder based
on GC-Transformer architecture as shown in the right part of Fig. 3. However, our 3D-PoseMAE
decoder has a core difference from any existing 3D Transformer, which is the design of the atten-
tion operation. To learn the correlations of given meshes, previous models conduct the attention
operation over the spatial channel to perceive the geometric information from the two meshes. Our
intuition is that many redundant local geometric representations (wrinkles, small tissues) from the
source pose are not essential for pose learning. In other words, we only need the compact pose rep-
resentations from source poses, it would be encouraging to conduct channel-wise attention where
the integration will be fully achieved on the compact pose spaces.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


With the above observation, we propose a channel-wise cross-attention module in our 3D-PoseMAE
decoder. Firstly, we construct the channel-wise attention map A between q and k with the following
formula (the subscripts indicate the matrix size):
                                AC ′ ×C ′ = Softmax(qTC ′ ×N kN ×C ′ ),                             (1)
where the representations qk are generated from embedding vectors via different 1D convolution
layers (the same as v below), with the same size as [N, C ′ ] (N for vertex number and C ′ for the
channel dimension in the current decoder). Thus, the size of the resulting attention map becomes
[C ′ , C ′ ]. Next, we can obtain the refined latent embedding Zpose
                                                                ′
                                                                     with following
                                  ′                  T
                                 Zpose = γAC ′ ×C ′ vC ′ ×N + Zpose ,                               (2)
where γ is a learnable parameter. The remaining design of the 3D-PoseMAE decoder is consistent
with the GC-Transformer (Chen et al., 2022), and the whole network structure is presented in Fig.
3. Please refer to the Appendix for more details on network design and parameter setting.
As we can see, by implementing such a channel-wise attention operation, the network can enjoy two
major benefits. Firstly, the size of the intermediate attention map in the network changes from [N, N ]
to [C ′ , C ′ ]. Thus, the model size will be substantially reduced. Especially when the processing mesh
size is huge, e.g., vertex number N could be up to 27,000 while channel size C ′ is fixed no more
than 1,024 in practice. Secondly, the integration of the pose and target information will be more
compact with the cross-attention conducted fully channel-wise, avoiding touching the redundant
spatial information brought from the source pose. Note that, the fine-grained spatial geometric
information of the target meshes is preserved by the gradual integration in the 3D-PoseMAE, which
is refined by the compact pose representations from the channel-wise attention mechanism.
Optimization. To train the 3D-PoseMAE, we define the full objective function as below:
                                     Lf ull = Lrec + λedge Ledge ,                                  (3)
where Lrec and Ledge are the two losses used as our full optimization objective, as reconstruction
loss and edge loss. λedge is the corresponding weight of edge loss. In Eq. 3, reconstruction loss
Lrec is the point-wise L2 norm, and the edge loss Ledge (Groueix et al., 2018) is an edge-wise regu-
larization that prevents flying points with long edges. Note that to make a fair comparison, we only
exploit these two loss terms that are used in existing baselines (Wang et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021)
and did not apply extra loss terms such as Laplacian loss (Sorkine et al., 2004), central geodesic
contrastive (CGC) loss (Chen et al., 2022), although they could boost the generating performance
with higher quality meshes and the potential of the losses could depend on the architecture.

2.2   A DVERSARIAL T RAINING

An overview of our adversarial learning-based pipeline is presented on the right side of Fig. 2.
Below, we introduce the motivation and problem definition of the adversarial training in the pose
transfer task, followed by the implementing details.
Motivation. It’s proven in various computer vision tasks (Carlini et al., 2019; Awais et al., 2021;
Huang et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022) that introducing adversarial samples to
perturb the neural networks during the training can enhance networks’ robustness and increase their
generalizability and adaptability to other/unseen domains. It’s intuitive to think of applying a similar
scheme to the 3D pose transfer task so that transferring poses from unseen domains or even directly
from raw scans can be made possible. However, this would not work naively by transferring the
existing 3D adversarial sample generating methods to our task due to several issues. Below, we will
discuss each issue and illustrate how we approach to the solution.
Problem Definition. We define the problem of adversarial training in the 3D pose transfer task as
follows. Given a source pose Mpose and an identity mesh Mid , let 𭟋 be the target pose transfer
model (e.g., 3D-PoseMAE) with parameters θ. Then 𭟋(Mpose , Mid ; θ) is the pose transferred mesh
generated by the model. For an ideal model we should get: 𭟋(Mpose , Mid ; θ) = MGT , with MGT
as the ground truth mesh. Then, the problem is converted to an inequality problem: adversarial
sample generating method f needs to generate an adversarial sample Madv pose = f (Mpose ) that
can satisfy:
                                 𭟋(Madv pose , Mid ; θ) ̸= MGT .                              (4)


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To solve the inequality problem analogy to Eq. 7, existing 3D adversarial sample generating methods
for 3D object classification tasks (Zhang et al., 2021; Tsai et al., 2020; Dong et al., 2020; Zheng et al.,
2019; Xiang et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2021) convert the inequality into a minimal optimization prob-
lem with adversarial loss term ||argmaxc 𭟋(xadv ; θ)c −t|| by forcing the prediction to an adversarial
sample xadv close to a target class t which is different than the correct one, resulting a successful
adversarial sample. This is known as targeted adversarial samples. However, this discriminative-
based adversarial function cannot directly be applied to generative tasks (e.g., 3D pose transfer) as
a continuous latent space is required to present the pose code.
Untargeted Adversarial Samples for Pose Transfer. Some non-targeted adversarial sample gen-
erating methods (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2017; Su et al., 2019) convert the above adversarial loss
term for targeted adversarial samples into a reversed form of ||argmaxc 𭟋(xadv ; θ)c − t|| as a min-
imal optimization problem by pushing away the prediction from the correct class. Inspired by this,
we construct an adversarial function similar to our 3D generative task in an intuitive way:
                             fadv = ||𭟋(Madv pose , Mid ; θ) − MGT ||−1 .                              (5)

By minimizing the above term, we can push the generated results from the model away from the
ground truth mesh, resulting in an adversarial training effect.
The Magnitude of Adversarial Samples. To guarantee the adversarial sample is visually similar
to the clean data, adversarial sample generating methods (Zhang et al., 2021; Tsai et al., 2020; Dong
et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2019; Xiang et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2021) deploy norms (C&W based ad-
versarial samples) or predefined threshold budget (PGD-based methods) to restrict the perturbations
small enough. While in our case, we wish the perturbation to be strong enough so that model can
handle it without the need to consider the invisibility issue of the perturbation since the goal is not
to obtain effective adversarial samples but a robust model. But if the magnitude of the adversarial
sample is too large, the sample can be easily defended by simple pre-processing such as statistical
outlier removal (SOR) (Wu et al., 2020), thus failing to contribute to the adversarial training. Thus,
to make it closer to real-world applications, we add SOR as pre-processing to all the adversarial
samples to filter out those easy samples.
Adversarial Training for Robustness. After confirming the adversarial loss function as Eq. 8, we
can merge the adversarial samples into the 3D pose transfer training. As mentioned, C&W-based
methods can provide better adversarial samples with less visibility. But they all suffer from the
time-consuming issue due to the binary search and heavy optimization iteration. According to our
preliminary implementation, merging C&W-based methods (Xiang et al., 2019) (the perturbations
with original parameter setting) into the pose transfer learning will extend the training time by
more than 900 times, which is not feasible. Thus, we deploy PGD-based method (Dong et al.,
2020), including the several variants of fast gradient method (FGM) method and PGD method,
into the framework for the adversarial training. We encourage readers to refer to the Appendix
and (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Dong et al., 2020) for a detailed explanation and implementation of
adversarial samples/attacks on 3D data. The training pipeline is demonstrated in Algorithm 1 in
the Appendix by taking the FGM method as an example. With this pipeline, we achieve on-the-fly
computation of adversarial samples, which enables the generative model to cover the whole latent
pose space via gradients. It’s worth emphasizing that our method generates adversarial samples
directly based on the gradients of arbitrary given meshes, with no need of utilizing SMPL models in
the training.

3    E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we present comprehensive experiments conducted to evaluate our approach by com-
paring other state-of-the-art models. Firstly, quantitative evaluations of 3D-PoseMAE are repre-
sented with two protocols for both clean samples training and adversarial training. One step further,
we qualitatively visualize the strong generalization ability of our method as well as the intermediate-
generated adversarial samples. Lastly, we perform ablation studies to evaluate the effectiveness of
our methods.
Datasets. (1) SMPL-NPT (Wang et al., 2020) is a synthesized dataset containing 24,000 body
meshes generated via the SMPL model (Bogo et al., 2016) by random sampling in the parameter
space. 16 different identities paired with 400 different poses are provided for training. At the testing


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Table 1: Comparison with other methods on SMPL-NPT dataset with training on clean samples.
                                                                        PMD ↓ (×10−4 )
                             Methods
                                                                        Seen      Unseen
                             DT (Groueix et al., 2018)                  7.3          7.2
                             NPT-MP (Wang et al., 2020)                 2.1         12.7
                             NPT (Wang et al., 2020)                    1.1          9.3
                             3D-CoreNet (Song et al., 2021)             0.8           -
                             GC-Transformer (Chen et al., 2022)         0.6         4.0
                             3D-PoseMAE (Ours)                          0.6         3.4
Table 2: Comparison with other methods on SMPL-NPT dataset evaluated with adversarial samples.
                                                                     PMD ↓ (×10−4 )
                       Method
                                                            Clean Training     Adversarial Training
                       NPT-MP (Wang et al., 2020)               307.1                 62.3
                       NPT (Wang et al., 2020)                  237.6                 59.0
                       GC-Transformer (Chen et al., 2022)       105.2                 19.3
                       3D-PoseMAE (Ours)                        77.6                  16.9

stage, 14 new identities are paired with those 400 poses used in the training set as the “seen” protocol
and 200 new poses as “unseen” protocols. The models are only trained on SMPL-NPT dataset and
will be generalized to other datasets. (2) FAUST (Bogo et al., 2014) is a well-known 3D human
body scan dataset that the mesh structure of FAUST registrations fits the SMPL body model with
6,890 vertices. We use it for qualitative evaluation. (3) DFAUST (Bogo et al., 2017) dataset is a
large human motion sequence dataset that captures the 4D motion of 10 human subjects performing
14 different body motions. We use it for both qualitative and quantitative evaluation.
Implementation Details. Our algorithm is implemented in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019). All the
experiments are carried out on a server with four Nvidia Volta V100 GPUs with 32 GB of memory
and Intel Xeon processors. We train our networks for 400 epochs with a learning rate of 0.00005
and Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015). The batch size is fixed as 4 for all settings. It takes
around 15 hours for pure training (clean samples) on 3D-PoseMAE and 40 hours for adversarial-
based training (with FGM, which is the fastest) on 3D-PoseMAE. Please refer to the Appendix for
more details on parameter settings and other methods.
The adversarial training of the whole framework is to seek a balance between the magnitude of
the adversarial samples and the generative model’s robustness. Although it can be controlled by
adjusting hyper-parameters such as the adversarial sample budget ϵ, it’s intuitive to assume that
introducing adversarial samples into the early stage of the training would not contribute as the trans-
ferring results are still degenerated and easily fall into local minima and numerical errors in gradient
computation. Thus, similar to many existing methods (Cosmo et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021) that
have trade-offs in training, we conduct the training with two stages. For the first 200 epochs, only
pure training with clean samples is conducted to stabilize the model and avoid local minima, where
the reconstruction loss and edge loss are used. After 200 epochs, the adversarial training starts with
adversarial samples added.

3.1   Q UANTITATIVE E VALUATION

Evaluation on Clean Training. We start the evaluation with training models on clean samples to
solely verify the performance of 3D-PoseMAE. We follow the classical evaluation protocol for 3D
pose transferring from (Wang et al., 2020) to train the model on the SMPL-NPT dataset and evaluate
the resulting model with Point-wise Mesh Euclidean Distance (PMD) as the evaluation metric:
                                         1 X                          2
                             PMD =                ∥Mresult − MGT ∥2 .                          (6)
                                        |V | v
where Mresult and MGT are the point pairs from the ground truth mesh MGT and generated one
Mresult . The corresponding experimental results are presented in Table 1. As we can see, our
3D-PoseMAE achieves the SOTA performance with the lowest PMD (×10−4 ) of: 0.6 and 3.4 on
“seen” and “unseen” settings. We denote PMD (×10−4 ) as PMD for simplicity in the following.
Specifically, although the compared method GC-Transformer has the same performance as ours on
the “seen” setting, their model size and runtime (see below) are much larger than ours.
Evaluation on Adversarial Training. We next conduct the experiments by evaluating models on
adversarial samples to verify the performances of models from the robustness aspect. We continually


                                                            7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Table 3: Evaluation across datasets. Models are trained on SMPL-NPT in an adversarial manner.
                 Datasets                                         Domains            NPT        3D-PoseMAE (Ours)
                 DFAUST (Bogo et al., 2017)                       Raw scan          25.21                  13.70
                 SMPL-NPT (Wang et al., 2020)                   Gaussian noise      12.66                  6.13


                                 Source pose           Target             NPT          3D-PoseMAE (Ours)
                                   (scan)
Figure 4: The performance of our method and compared method (Wang et al., 2020) on an unseen
raw scan from the DFAUST dataset (Bogo et al., 2017). We can see that the compared method failed
to handle the raw scan as a source pose, leading to an arbitrary-generated pose while our method
can preserve the original pose in a better visual effect.

                                                                                                             Latent codes
                            w/o adversarial training                             w/ adversarial training
                                                                                                                 Clean sample 1
                                                                                                                 Clean sample 2
                                                                                                                 Adversarial sample 1
                                                                                                                 Adversarial sample 1


                Clean samples               Adversarial sample with          Adversarial sample with
                                           smaller magnitude (0.0008)        larger magnitude (0.008)

Figure 5: Visualization of latent pose space and the corresponding pose. We present two adversarial
samples to qualitatively analyze the patterns of the perturbation.


use the PMD as the evaluation metric. Specifically, to make a fair comparison, we also conducted
the adversarial training of two baseline methods, NPT (Wang et al., 2020) and GC-Transformer
(Chen et al., 2022), with exactly the same setting for the adversarial training pipeline. To build
the testing set of adversarial samples, we directly utilize the “seen” testing set from the SMPL-
NPT dataset and generate adversarial samples (using the same attacking strategy, i.e., the FGM) to
attack the victim models. The experimental results are presented in Table 2, where we report the
result of using the FGM method with an budget of 0.08. More experiments with different types
can be found in Appendix. When it comes to the pose transferring with adversarial samples, all the
methods’ performances will suffer from the degeneration problem compared to using the clean pose
as the source. Especially for models without adversarial training, the pose transferring performance
will drop dramatically, proving the vulnerability of those “clean” models. Instead, the robustness
of all the compared methods has been enhanced considerably with the adversarial training. It is
worth noting that our 3D-PoseMAE achieves state-of-the-art performance within both of the training
strategies, demonstrating it as a strong baseline network.
Evaluation on Noisy Inputs and Raw Scans. We present extra evaluations on raw scans from
the DFAUST dataset and meshes with Gaussian noises on the SMPL-NPT dataset in Table 3. Our
3D-PoseMAE outperforms the compared methods by a large margin.
Runtime & Model Size. We present Table 4 to demonstrate the computational attribute of 3D-
PoseMAE. The runtime is obtained by taking the average inference times in the same experimental
settings. As shown in the table, the 3D-CoreNet method (Song et al., 2021) takes the longest time
and largest size compared to other deep learning-based methods. The NPT method (Wang et al.,
2020) has the shortest inference time as there is no correlation module involved thus, the generation
performance is degraded. 3D-PoseMAE achieves notable improvements, while the inference time
is also encouraging.


                                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Table 4: Model size and runtime of different methods.
       Model                                  Correlation module          Model size    Pose Source    Runtime
       NPT (Wang et al., 2020)                         -                    24.2M          Mesh        0.0044s
       3D-CoreNet (Song et al., 2021)         Correlation matrix            93.4M          Mesh        0.0255s
       GC-Transformer (Chen et al., 2022)      Spatial-attention            48.1M          Mesh        0.0056s
       3D-PoseMAE (Ours)                      Channel-attention             40.7M      Mesh/Raw scan   0.0048s
Table 5: Ablation study by progressively enabling each component. The rightmost is from the full
3D-PoseMAE.
                  Component           Vanilla          +Multi-scale masking     +Channel Attention
                  PMD ↓ (×10−4 )       0.64                     0.63                    0.60
                          Table 6: Difference masking ratio in 3D-PoseMAE.
                              Ratio                       0.0       0.3   0.5   0.7    0.9
                                              −4
                              PMD ↓ (×10           )      4.0       3.8   3.8   3.9    5.3

3.2   Q UALITATIVE E VALUATION

Robustness to Various Pose Sources. Our final goal of introducing adversarial training is to en-
hance the robustness of the model so that it can be generalized to various noisy and complicated
situations. Thus, we qualitatively display the generality of 3D-PoseMAE over various pose sources,
as shown in Fig. 1. Besides, we compare our method with the existing pose transfer method (Wang
et al., 2020) in Fig. 8, to directly transfer pose from raw scans, and the encouraging performance on
raw scans proves that adversarial samples can effectively improve the robustness of the models.
Visualization of the Perturbations. We further visualized the perturbations of the generated adver-
sarial samples in Fig. 5. Intriguingly, we find that the majority of generated perturbation happened to
locate on the body parts that are consistent with what we usually think of as the key kinetic positions,
such as the knees, elbows, and feet.

3.3   A BLATION S TUDY

Clean vs. Adversarial Training. We verify the efficacy of adversarial training against the adver-
sarial samples/noisy inputs in Table 2. We can see that, when being attacked by adversarial samples,
all the existing methods enjoy benefits from adversarial training compared to the ones being trained
with clean samples, e.g., 19.3 vs. 105.2 for GC-Transformer. The results also prove that generated
adversarial samples can successfully attack the pure models, leading to degenerated results, e.g., the
performance of the NPT model degenerates dramatically with PMD from 1.1 (clean pose source) to
237.6 (attacking pose source).
Each Component. We verify the contributions made from each component in the 3D-PoseMAE
in Table 5. We disable all the key components as a Vanilla model and enable each step by step.
Compared to the Vanilla model, the multi-scale masking strategy, channel-wise cross-attention can
consistently improve the generative performance of the task.
Masking Ratio Scheme. Lastly, we verify different masking ratios of the multi-scale masking
encoder, as shown in Table 6 where we choose the masking ratio as 0.5 for the best performance.
The reported results are on the “unseen” setting of the SMPL-NPT dataset.


4     C ONCLUSION

We work on the robustness problem of the 3D pose transfer, especially on unseen domains and raw
noisy inputs from the aspect of adversarial learning. We propose the 3D-PoseMAE with two novel
components: a multi-scale masking strategy and a progressive channel-wise attention operation. We
further propose a novel adversarial learning framework customized for 3D pose transfer with a new
adversarial function and on-the-fly computation of adversarial samples implementation. Experimen-
tal results on different datasets and various data sources show that our method achieves promising
performances with substantial robustness to noisy inputs. We show that our framework can be suc-
cessfully extended to noisy raw scans from the real world without any manual intervention.


                                                                9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Kfir Aberman, Peizhuo Li, Dani Lischinski, Olga Sorkine-Hornung, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Baoquan Chen.
  Skeleton-aware networks for deep motion retargeting. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 39(4):62–1,
  2020. 2, 12

Muhammad Awais, Fengwei Zhou, Hang Xu, Lanqing Hong, Ping Luo, Sung-Ho Bae, and Zhenguo Li. Ad-
 versarial robustness for unsupervised domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
 Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 8568–8577, 2021. 2, 5

Federica Bogo, Javier Romero, Matthew Loper, and Michael J Black. Faust: Dataset and evaluation for 3d
  mesh registration. In CVPR, 2014. 1, 7, 16

Federica Bogo, Angjoo Kanazawa, Christoph Lassner, Peter Gehler, Javier Romero, and Michael J Black. Keep
  it smpl: Automatic estimation of 3d human pose and shape from a single image. In ECCV, 2016. 2, 6, 14,
  16

Federica Bogo, Javier Romero, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black. Dynamic faust: Registering human
  bodies in motion. In CVPR, 2017. 1, 7, 8, 16

Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. In 2017 ieee
  symposium on security and privacy (sp), pp. 39–57. Ieee, 2017. 12

Nicholas Carlini, Anish Athalye, Nicolas Papernot, Wieland Brendel, Jonas Rauber, Dimitris Tsipras, Ian
  Goodfellow, Aleksander Madry, and Alexey Kurakin. On evaluating adversarial robustness. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1902.06705, 2019. 2, 5, 12

Haoyu Chen, Hao Tang, Henglin Shi, Wei Peng, Nicu Sebe, and Guoying Zhao. Intrinsic-extrinsic preserved
  gans for unsupervised 3d pose transfer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-
  puter Vision, pp. 8630–8639, 2021. 7

Haoyu Chen, Hao Tang, Zitong Yu, Nicu Sebe, and Guoying Zhao. Geometry-contrastive transformer for
  generalized 3d pose transfer. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 258–266,
  2022. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 13

Luca Cosmo, Antonio Norelli, Oshri Halimi, Ron Kimmel, and Emanuele Rodolà. Limp: Learning latent shape
  representations with metric preservation priors. ECCV, 2020. 7

Francesco Croce and Matthias Hein. Reliable evaluation of adversarial robustness with an ensemble of diverse
   parameter-free attacks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2206–2216. PMLR, 2020. 2,
   12

Xiaoyi Dong, Dongdong Chen, Hang Zhou, Gang Hua, Weiming Zhang, and Nenghai Yu. Self-robust 3d point
  recognition via gather-vector guidance. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 11513–11521, 2020. 6, 13, 17

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Un-
  terthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image is worth
  16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. ICLR, 2021. 13

Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014. 2, 6, 12

Thibault Groueix, Matthew Fisher, Vladimir G Kim, Bryan C Russell, and Mathieu Aubry. 3d-coded: 3d
  correspondences by deep deformation. In ECCV, 2018. 2, 5, 7

Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked autoencoders
  are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 16000–16009, 2022. 2, 4, 13

Jiaxing Huang, Dayan Guan, Aoran Xiao, and Shijian Lu. Rda: Robust domain adaptation via fourier ad-
   versarial attacking. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
   8988–8999, 2021. 2, 5

Jaeyeon Kim, Binh-Son Hua, Thanh Nguyen, and Sai-Kit Yeung. Minimal adversarial examples for deep
   learning on 3d point clouds. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
   pp. 7797–7806, 2021. 6

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015. 7


                                                     10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kaidong Li, Ziming Zhang, Cuncong Zhong, and Guanghui Wang. Robust structured declarative classifiers
  for 3d point clouds: Defending adversarial attacks with implicit gradients. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15294–15304, 2022. 13
Zhouyingcheng Liao, Jimei Yang, Jun Saito, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Yang Zhou. Skeleton-free pose transfer
  for stylized 3d characters. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV). Springer, October 2022.
  1, 2, 3, 12
Daniel Liu, Ronald Yu, and Hao Su. Extending adversarial attacks and defenses to deep 3d point cloud clas-
  sifiers. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 2279–2283. IEEE, 2019.
  13
Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black. Smpl: A skinned
  multi-person linear model. ACM transactions on graphics (TOG), 34(6):1–16, 2015. 2
Qianli Ma, Jinlong Yang, Siyu Tang, and Michael J. Black. The power of points for modeling humans in
  clothing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 10974–
  10984, October 2021. 2, 12
Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Alhussein Fawzi, Omar Fawzi, and Pascal Frossard. Universal adversarial
  perturbations. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1765–
  1773, 2017. 6
Yatian Pang, Wenxiao Wang, Francis EH Tay, Wei Liu, Yonghong Tian, and Li Yuan. Masked autoencoders
  for point cloud self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.06604, 2022. 2, 4, 13
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen,
  Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library. In NeurIPS, 2019. 7, 16
Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani, Timo Bolkart, Ahmed A. A. Osman, Dimitrios Tzionas,
  and Michael J. Black. Expressive body capture: 3D hands, face, and body from a single image. In Proceed-
  ings IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10975–10985, 2019. 2
Sida Peng, Junting Dong, Qianqian Wang, Shangzhan Zhang, Qing Shuai, Xiaowei Zhou, and Hujun Bao.
   Animatable neural radiance fields for modeling dynamic human bodies. In ICCV, 2021. 13
Charles R Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets for 3d
  classification and segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 652–660, 2017a. 13
Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical feature learning
  on point sets in a metric space. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017b. 4, 13
Javier Romero, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J. Black. Embodied hands: Modeling and capturing hands and
   bodies together. TOG, 36(6), 2017. 16
Chaoyue Song, Jiacheng Wei, Ruibo Li, Fayao Liu, and Guosheng Lin. 3d pose transfer with correspondence
  learning and mesh refinement. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
  7, 8, 9, 13
Olga Sorkine, Daniel Cohen-Or, Yaron Lipman, Marc Alexa, Christian Rössl, and H-P Seidel. Laplacian
  surface editing. In Proceedings of the 2004 Eurographics/ACM SIGGRAPH symposium on Geometry pro-
  cessing, pp. 175–184, 2004. 5
Jiawei Su, Danilo Vasconcellos Vargas, and Kouichi Sakurai. One pixel attack for fooling deep neural networks.
   IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 23(5):828–841, 2019. 6
Robert W Sumner and Jovan Popović. Deformation transfer for triangle meshes. TOG, 23(3):399–405, 2004.
  16
Jiachen Sun, Weili Nie, Zhiding Yu, Z Morley Mao, and Chaowei Xiao. Pointdp: Diffusion-driven purification
   against adversarial attacks on 3d point cloud recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.09801, 2022. 13
Tzungyu Tsai, Kaichen Yang, Tsung-Yi Ho, and Yier Jin. Robust adversarial objects against deep learning
  models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 954–962, 2020. 2, 6, 12
Jiashun Wang, Chao Wen, Yanwei Fu, Haitao Lin, Tianyun Zou, Xiangyang Xue, and Yinda Zhang. Neural
   pose transfer by spatially adaptive instance normalization. In CVPR, 2020. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 16,
   17, 18


                                                       11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ruibin Wang, Yibo Yang, and Dacheng Tao. Art-point: Improving rotation robustness of point cloud classifiers
  via adversarial rotation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 14371–14380, 2022. 5
Shaofei Wang, Andreas Geiger, and Siyu Tang. Locally aware piecewise transformation fields for 3d human
  mesh registration. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, pp. 7639–7648, 2021a. 2, 12
Shaofei Wang, Marko Mihajlovic, Qianli Ma, Andreas Geiger, and Siyu Tang. Metaavatar: Learning animatable
  clothed human models from few depth images. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and
  J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 2810–
  2822, 2021b. 2, 12
Ziyi Wu, Yueqi Duan, He Wang, Qingnan Fan, and Leonidas J Guibas. If-defense: 3d adversarial point cloud
  defense via implicit function based restoration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.05272, 2020. 2, 6, 13
Chong Xiang, Charles R Qi, and Bo Li. Generating 3d adversarial point clouds. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9136–9144, 2019. 2, 6, 12, 17
Xumin Yu, Yongming Rao, Ziyi Wang, Zuyan Liu, Jiwen Lu, and Jie Zhou. Pointr: Diverse point cloud
  completion with geometry-aware transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference
  on computer vision, pp. 12498–12507, 2021. 2, 4, 13
Jinlai Zhang, Lyujie Chen, Binbin Liu, Bo Ouyang, Qizhi Xie, Jihong Zhu, Weiming Li, and Yanmei Meng. 3d
   adversarial attacks beyond point cloud. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.12146, 2021. 2, 6, 12
Renrui Zhang, Ziyu Guo, Peng Gao, Rongyao Fang, Bin Zhao, Dong Wang, Yu Qiao, and Hongsheng Li.
  Point-m2ae: Multi-scale masked autoencoders for hierarchical point cloud pre-training. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.14401, 2022. 2, 4, 13
Hengshuang Zhao, Li Jiang, Jiaya Jia, Philip HS Torr, and Vladlen Koltun. Point transformer. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 16259–16268, 2021. 4, 13
Tianhang Zheng, Changyou Chen, Junsong Yuan, Bo Li, and Kui Ren. Pointcloud saliency maps. In Proceed-
   ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1598–1606, 2019. 6
Congcong Zhu, Xiaoqiang Li, Jide Li, and Songmin Dai. Improving robustness of facial landmark detection
  by defending against adversarial attacks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 11751–11760, October 2021. 5


A    R ELATED W ORK
Data-driven 3D Pose Transfer. Data-driven 3D pose transfer aims to transfer given source poses
to target shapes by learning the correspondence between the pose and shape automatically. On the
one hand, parametric human model-based methods could bring impressive generated results (Ma
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021b), but their superb performances largely rely on the need for the
priors of the target shape, which limits their generalization ability to unseen target meshes. Besides,
registering raw human scans to well-defined parametric human models is also cumbersome and
time-consuming (Wang et al., 2021a). On the other hand, some linear blending skinning (LBS)
based works (Aberman et al., 2020; Liao et al., 2022) can be extended to unseen target meshes, but
they assume that annotated landmarks/mesh points or T-posed target meshes are given, which is also
a strong condition. Lastly, to our knowledge, all existing methods are within a strong prerequisite
that pre-processed and clean source poses are available to drive the target meshes. However, to our
knowledge, no effort has been made to study the robustness of the 3D pose transfer to the noisy
inputs and even raw scans.
3D Adversarial Learning. Adversarial attacks (Carlini et al., 2019; Croce & Hein, 2020) have
drawn considerable research attention in the 2D vision models as their severe threat to real-world
deployments since it was proposed (Goodfellow et al., 2014). When it comes to the 3D field, the
attack-generating algorithms could be roughly sorted into Carlini& Wagner (C&W) (Carlini & Wag-
ner, 2017), and Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) groups. C&W-based
attacks (Xiang et al., 2019; Tsai et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021) switch the min-max trade-off prob-
lem of adversarial training into jointly minimizing the perturbation magnitude and adversarial loss
of attacks. But C&W attacks all suffer from time-consuming issues due to the binary search and


                                                    12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


optimization iteration. Meanwhile, PGD attacks (Liu et al., 2019; Dong et al., 2020) set the pertur-
bation magnitude as a fixed constraint in the optimization procedure, which can achieve the attack
in a much shorter time. But the attack form is limited to point-shifting, unlike C&W attacks that can
perform adding or dropping operations on the point clouds. However, there is no strategy proposed
specifically for attacking the 3D generative tasks, including pose transfer (i.e., it is unaddressed how
to define a successful attack to a generated point cloud/mesh). Besides, research efforts (Wu et al.,
2020; Sun et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022) have been made to defend against those attacks on point
cloud data for various tasks. But those approaches conduct the defense training directly on 3D pre-
computed adversarial samples. To our knowledge, there is no existing 3D deep learning pipeline that
jointly generates adversarial samples and learns the defense of generative models yet. Note that, for
the convenience to reader better understand our work, we avoid calling those methods as attacking
methods. Instead, we implement them as adversarial sample-generating methods and use them for
the adversarial training process.
Deep Learning Models on Point Cloud. The pioneering and representative deep learning mod-
els on point cloud include PointNet, PointNet++, and Dynamic Graph CNN (DGCNN) (Qi et al.,
2017a;b) as being widely used as benchmark models on various 3D tasks. In the past two years,
with the trend of Transformer-based and MAE-based architectures (He et al., 2022) in the computer
vision community, many 3D-variant models (Zhao et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022;
Pang et al., 2022) have been proposed. An analogy to the patches in the ViT (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2021) and MAE (He et al., 2022) in the 2D field, existing 3D MAE-based architectures represent
a point cloud as a set of point tokens/proxies, making it into a set-to-set translation problem. At-
tention operators will be applied to depict different spatial local regions to better capture the local
geometric and semantic dependence for the tasks of 3D classification, semantic segmentation, etc.
We argue that the 3D pose transfer task is different, and the learning focus of the pose source should
be made on the extrinsic presentations (i.e., pose). Meanwhile, the traditional 3D spatial-wise at-
tention/correlation operation (Chen et al., 2022; Song et al., 2021) can capture much intrinsic (i.e.,
shape) information, which is inevitable for tasks like 3D classification, and semantic segmentation.
But this is partially inefficient for the task of 3D pose transfer as the detailed geometric information
is redundant for learning the pose correlations.


B    A PPENDIX : A LGORITHM FOR THE ADVERSARIAL TRAINING

We show our algorithm for the adversarial training in Algorithm 1.


C    3D-P OSE MAE N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE

Our 3D-PoseMAE framework consists of two main parts: the multi-scale masking feature extractor,
and the 3D-PoseMAE decoder. We first introduce the network structures of each component, and
then give the architectural parameters of the full model.
Multi-scale Masking Feature Extractor. The architecture of the feature extractor is presented in
Table 7. The feature extractor is used to extract a set of latent embeddings from S-scale representa-
tions from the given source pose for further mesh generation with the following decoders. Basically,
it works as a normal 3D feature extractor that encodes the input meshes with vertex number N1 into
a latent vector with C size. The difference is that the latent vector will be expanded up based on the
target meshes along the topology dimension (vertex number N2 ), resulting in a latent vector with
C × N2 . In this way, we align the sizes between source mesh and target mesh as the same and make
the learning of the correspondence possible.
3D-PoseMAE Decoder. The network architecture of a 3D-PoseMAE decoder is presented in Ta-
ble 8. Following previous works regarding the 3D pose learning (Peng et al., 2021; Chen et al.,
2022), we modified the LayerNorm operation from a classical Transformer architecture into an in-
stance normalization (InsNorm) block inspired by (Wang et al., 2020) presented in Table 9. This is
to preserve the geometric structures of the pointcloud while naively using MLP layers will whiten
the 3D geometric information. The 3D-PoseMAE decoder is used to generate the posed target mesh
with given source pose with full geometric details preserved.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Adversarial training with FGM for 3D pose transfer.
Input: N : Total epoch number for training.
  λ: The threshold to determine a successful attack.
  ϵ: The budget for FGM-based attacks.
  Mpose : The source pose.
  Mid : The identity mesh.
  MGT : The ground truth mesh.
  θ: The parameter of target model 𭟋 to attack.
Output: θ′ : The updated parameter of target model 𭟋.
  for epoch in N do
     set 𭟋 as eval()
     Mid .detach(); Mpose .detach()
     Mresult = 𭟋(Mpose , Mid ; θ)
     Ladv = fadv (Mresult , MGT )
     Ladv .backward()
     gradientadv = Mpose .grad.detach()
     ∆ = gradientadv × ϵ
     Madv pose = Mpose + ∆
     set 𭟋 as train()
     Mresult = 𭟋(Madv pose , Mid ; θ)
     Lrec = ||Mresult − MGT ||
     Lrec .backward()
  end for

Table 7: Detailed architectural parameters for the 3D mesh feature extractor. “B” stands for batch
size and “N” stands for vertex number. The first parameter of Conv1D is the kernel size, the second
is the stride size. “N”’ stands for the intermediate pointcloud number. The same as below.
                        Index           Inputs               Operation         Output Shape
                          (1)               -               Input mesh            B×3×N
                          (2)               -               Input mesh           B×3×N/2
                          (3)               -               Input mesh           B×3×N/4
                          (4)              (1)               Masking            B×3×N× ϕ
                          (5)              (2)               Masking           B×3×N/2× ϕ
                          (6)              (3)               Masking           B×3×N/4× ϕ
                      (7),(8),(9)      (4),(5),(6)      Conv1D (1 × 1, 1)        B×64×N’
                    (10),(11),(12)     (7),(8),(9)     Instance Norm, Relu       B×64×N’
                    (13),(14),(15)   (10),(11),(12)     Conv1D (1 × 1, 1)       B×128×N’
                    (16),(17),(18)   (13),(14),(15)    Instance Norm, Relu      B×128×N’
                    (19),(20),(21)   (16),(17),(18)     Conv1D (1 × 1, 1)      B×1024×N’
                    (22),(23),(24)   (19),(20),(21)    Instance Norm, Relu     B×1024×N’
                         (25)        (22),(23),(24)   Max pooling and adding    B×1024×1
                         (26)             (25)                Tiling            B×1024×N



At last, we present the full model architecture in Table 10. The embedded pose features will be fed
into 3D-PoseMAE decoders together with the target mesh and pose mesh will be generated.


D    DATASET S ETTINGS

Training Sets. We use SMPL-NPT dataset (Wang et al., 2020) to prepare the training dataset for
quantitative evaluation. Note that we only need to train on the SMPL-NPT once, and the model can
be generalized and directly conduct the human pose transfer on other testing datasets without further
finetuning. SMPL-NPT is a synthesized dataset containing 24,000 body meshes generated via the
SMPL model (Bogo et al., 2016) by random sampling in the parameter space. 16 different identities
paired with 400 different poses are provided for training. Since the number of paired ground truths
will be exponentially huge (24,000*24,000), we randomly select 4,000 training pairs at each epoch
during the training.
Quantitatively Testing Sets. We use SMPL-NPT dataset (Wang et al., 2020) to prepare the testing
set for quantitative evaluation. Following the training stage, 14 new identities (different than that in


                                                        14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Table 8: Detailed architectural parameters for 3D-PoseMAE decoder.
                   Index     Inputs           Operation          Output Shape
                     (1)         -       Identity Embedding        B×C×N
                     (2)         -         Pose Embedding          B×C×N
                     (3)        (1)       conv1d (1 × 1, 1)        B×C×N
                     (4)        (2)       conv1d (1 × 1, 1)        B×C×N
                     (5)        (3)            Reshape             B×N×C
                     (6)      (5)(4)    Batch Matrix Product       B×C×C
                     (7)        (6)            Softmax             B×C×C
                     (8)        (7)            Reshape             B×C×C
                     (9)        (2)       conv1d (1 × 1, 1)        B×C×N
                    (10)      (2)(8)    Batch Matrix Product       B×C×N
                    (11)       (10)       Parameter gamma          B×C×N
                    (12)     (11)(2)             Add               B×C×N
                    (13)         -           Pose Mesh             B×3×N
                    (14)    (12)(13)          SPAdaIN              B×C×N
                    (15)       (14)     conv1d(1 × 1, 1), Relu     B×C×N
                    (16)    (14)(15)          SPAdaIN              B×C×N
                    (17)       (16)     conv1d(1 × 1, 1), Relu     B×C×N
                    (18)    (12)(13)          SPAdaIN              B×C×N
                    (19)       (18)     conv1d(1 × 1, 1), Relu     B×C×N
                    (20)    (17)(19)             Add               B×C×N


                 Table 9: Detailed architectural parameters for SPAdaIN block.
                   Index    Inputs           Operation           Output Shape
                     (1)       -       Driving Pose Embedding       B×C×N
                     (2)      (1)           Instance Norm           B×C×N
                     (3)       -             Target Mesh            B×3×N
                     (4)      (3)         Conv1D (1 × 1, 1)         B×C×N
                     (5)      (3)         Conv1D (1 × 1, 1)         B×C×N
                     (6)    (4)(2)             Multiply             B×C×N
                     (7)    (6)(5)               Add                B×C×N


                 Table 10: Detailed architectural parameters for the full model.
                  Index Inputs              Operation           Output Shape
                    (1)        -            Target Mesh            B×3×N
                    (2)        -         Driving Pose Mesh         B×3×N
                    (3)       (2)         Feature Extractor       B×1024×N
                    (4)       (3)        Conv1D (1 × 1, 1)        B×1024×N
                    (5)     (4)(1)     3D-PoseMAE decoder 1       B×1024×N
                    (6)       (5)        Conv1D (1 × 1, 1)        B×512×N
                    (7)     (6)(1)     3D-PoseMAE decoder 2       B×512×N
                    (8)       (7)        Conv1D (1 × 1, 1)        B×512×N
                    (9)     (8)(1)     3D-PoseMAE decoder 3       B×512×N
                   (10)       (9)        Conv1D (1 × 1, 1)        B×256×N
                   (11)    (10)(1)     3D-PoseMAE decoder 4       B×256×N
                   (13)      (12)        Conv1D (1 × 1, 1)         B×3×N
                   (14)      (13)               Tanh               B×3×N


                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Table 11: Licenses of the assets used in the paper.
              Data                                           License websites
    SMPL (Bogo et al., 2016)               https://smpl.is.tue.mpg.de/modellicense.html
  SMPL-NPT (Wang et al., 2020)         https://github.com/jiashunwang/Neural-Pose-Transfer
   MANO (Romero et al., 2017)                 https://mano.is.tue.mpg.de/license.html
   DFAUST (Bogo et al., 2017)                https://dfaust.is.tue.mpg.de/license.html
    FAUST (Bogo et al., 2014)                 http://faust.is.tue.mpg.de/data_license
 Animal (Sumner & Popović, 2004)   https://people.csail.mit.edu/sumner/research/deftransfer/



the training set) are paired with 400 poses used in the training set as the “seen” protocol and 200
new poses as “unseen” protocols.
Qualitatively Testing Sets. We use the model trained from SMPL-NPT dataset (Wang et al., 2020)
to conduct the pose transfer directly on the other human mesh datasets (Bogo et al., 2014; 2017) for
quantitative evaluation. Specifically, we chose the meshes from those two datasets which are not
strictly an SMPL model. Then we set them as target meshes and drive them with the source poses
from the SMPL-NPT (Wang et al., 2020).
Other Domains. We also extend the 3D-PoseMAE to other domains. We demonstrate the general-
izability of 3D-PoseMAE over the animal domain on the Animal dataset (Sumner & Popović, 2004)
and hand domain on the MANO dataset (Romero et al., 2017). The Animal dataset provides corre-
spondences and ground truths of identical motions performed by different animals, such as horse,
camel and elephant. Although the vertex number of pose and target meshes are not consistent, i.e.,
the camel mesh has a different vertex number 21,887 than the horse mesh 8,431, our multi-scale
masking encoders can effectively handle it. For hand meshes from MANO dataset, the input and
output meshes are all with 778 vertices. Since the topology structures of hands and animals are
totally different than human meshes, directly conducting pose transfer with a model trained on hu-
man meshes on animals or hands will lead to a degenerated result. Instead, for each domain (i.e.,
hand or animal), we train the pose transfer on those domain (i.e., hand or animal) as domain-specific
learning.
Raw Scans. We further extend our method directly on the raw scans from DFAUST dataset (Bogo
et al., 2017). To do so, we need to canonicalize the scans from the DFAUST dataset so that the world
coordinates can be unified into a norm space as the learnt latent pose space. Specifically, we reset
the world coordinate of the target mesh by shifting the vertices to the center and scaling the vertex
value into the norm space. Then the pose transfer is conducted to the target mesh. Our method is
robust against the global scale and rotation.
Licenses of the Assets. The licenses of the assets used in this paper are shown in Table 11. Their
licenses are given in the websites.


E    E XPERIMENTAL I MPLEMENTATION

Computational setting. Our algorithm is implemented in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019). All the
experiments are carried out on a server with four Nvidia Volta V100 GPUs with 32 GB of memory
and Intel Xeon processors. We train our networks for 400 epochs with a learning rate of 0.00005
and the Adam optimizer. The weight settings in the paper are λrec =1, λedge =0.0005. The weight
settings directly follow the previous work (Wang et al., 2020). The batch size is fixed as 4 for all
the settings. For the first 200 epochs, only pure training with clean samples is conducted to stabilize
the model and avoid local minima, where the reconstruction loss and edge loss are used. After 200
epochs, the adversarial training starts with adversarial samples added.
Design of Adversarial Functions. As mentioned in the main submission, the goal of constructing
the adversarial function is to achieve:


                                      𭟋(Madv pose , Mid ; θ) ̸= MGT .                              (7)

Thus it can be converted to maximizing the ||𭟋(xadv ; θ) − MGT ||. However, we cannot naively
have:


                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Table 12: Different attacking methods and their runtimes.
                                                                 Runtime/
             Methods                           PMD↓ (×10−4 )
                                                                 second per sample
             FGM (Dong et al., 2020)                     237.6                  0.008
             IFGM (Dong et al., 2020)                    244.1                  0.124
             MIFGM (Dong et al., 2020)                   342.3                  0.131
             PGD (Dong et al., 2020)                     242.1                  0.122
             Perturbation (Xiang et al., 2019)           180.7                 20.320



                             fadv = −||𭟋(Madv pose , Mid ; θ) − MGT ||.                                (8)

Because the above function cannot be solved by minimizing the loss during the gradient propa-
gation. Besides, this expression cannot comply with C&W-based attacks. Because for C&W-based
attacks, we have:
                                         floss = fadv + fdist ,                                    (9)
where fdist is the distance between the adversarial samples and original samples. If we implement
adversarial function as Equ. 8, it will offset the fdist , causing the gradient vanishing problem.
Thus, we naturally think of propose to take the exponential function of −||𭟋(xadv ; θ) − MGT || to
convert the maximizing problem into a minimizing problem as below:
                                      fadv = e−||𭟋(xadv ;θ)−MGT || ,                                  (10)
In this way, the adversarial loss term fadv can be positive and decrease when the transfer error gets
bigger, fitting our demand. However, in practice, we find that the expression of Equ. 10 cannot
provide strong gradient for efficiently generating adversarial samples. Thus we modify the above
adversarial function into an even more intuitive way as:

                             fadv = ||𭟋(Madv pose , Mid ; θ) − MGT ||−1 .                             (11)

By minimizing the above term, we can push the generated results from the model away from the
ground truth mesh, resulting in an attack effect.
Settings for Adversarial Attacks. After confirming the adversarial function, we implemented sev-
eral state-of-the-art 3D adversarial attack methods for a preliminary study, including Fast Gradient
Method (FGM) (Dong et al., 2020), Iterative Fast Gradient Method (IFGM) (Dong et al., 2020), Mo-
mentum Iterative Fast Gradient Method (MIFGM) (Dong et al., 2020), Projected Gradient Descent
(PGD) (Dong et al., 2020) and C&W perturbation (Xiang et al., 2019). For FGM-based methods,
the attacking budget are all set as 0.08, the iteration is set as 10, the distance function is L2 norm, the
µ of the MIFGM is 0.1. For C&W perturbation (Xiang et al., 2019), we follow the original setting
from the work (Xiang et al., 2019), with the binary search step as 20 and the iteration as 100.

F    A PPENDIX : E XPERIMENTS R ESULTS
Different Attacking Methods. Firstly, we conduct a preliminary evaluation of different attacking
methods to choose the best-attacking method for the adversarial training. We implemented different
adversarial methods and their runtimes in Table. As shown in Table. 12, we present the pose
transfer results using those adversarial samples on a trained model (NPT (Wang et al., 2020)). We
can see that the trained NPT model is very sensitive to attacks with large PMD values, meaning the
transferred results degenerate. The reason why the Perturbation method shows a smaller PMD is that
C&W-based methods have a distance loss term and this term will constrain the adversarial samples
to be similar to the original meshes, leading to moderated attacks. Taking both the computational
efficiency and adversarial training effectiveness into account, we chose FGM attack (Dong et al.,
2020) as the attack type in all the protocols to achieve the adversarial training.
Different Attacking Budgets. We present adversarial samples of FGM attacks with different mag-
nitudes with attacking budget scales as 0.08, 0.008, and 0.0008. And as shown in Fig. 6 we present


                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    Budget/magnitude of FGM
                                        0.08                     0.008                           0.0008


               Target                                        Source pose


                                                    Result of NPT being attacked
Figure 6: The attacking results of FGM methods on a trained NPT model with different magnitudes.
The NPT model is trained with clean samples, so both the pose and appearance of the generated
meshes are affected a lot. We draw the red line to better visualize the perturbed points and we
can see that the model is vulnerable to the noisy pose source.


                      Source pose        Identity      Transferred result         Ground truth
                    (point cloud with
                     Gaussian noise)


                      Source pose        Identity       Transferred result        Ground truth
                    (point cloud with
                     Gaussian noise)
Figure 7: The performance of our method on other domains. We add Gaussian noise to the input
point cloud to demonstrate the robustness of the model.


                        Source pose     Target               NPT             3D-PoseMAE (Ours)
                          (scan)
          Figure 8: The performance of our method and compared method on raw scans.


the pose transfer results using those adversarial samples on a trained model (NPT (Wang et al.,
2020)). We can see that the trained NPT model is very sensitive to the attacks even when the attack-
ing magnitude is small.
Other Domain. We use 3D-PoseMAE to achieve pose transfer on meshes from different domains
than human meshes, see Fig 7.


                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Raw Scans. We present the pose transfer results of our method and compared method on raw scans
from DFAUST dataset as shown in Fig 8.


                                             19
