Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S TOP OVERKILLING SIMPLE TASKS WITH BLACK - BOX
MODELS , USE MORE TRANSPARENT MODELS INSTEAD

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         The ability of deep learning-based approaches to extract features autonomously
         from raw data while outperforming traditional methods has led to several break-
         throughs in artificial intelligence. However, it is well-known that deep learning
         models suffer from an intrinsic opacity, making it difficult to explain why they pro-
         duce specific predictions. This is problematic not only because it hinders debug-
         ging but, most importantly, because it negatively affects the perceived trustworthi-
         ness of the systems. What is often overlooked is that many relatively simple tasks
         can be solved efficiently and effectively with data processing strategies paired
         with traditional models that are inherently more transparent. This work highlights
         the frequently neglected perspective of using knowledge-based and explainability-
         driven problem-solving in ML. To support our guidelines, we propose a simple
         strategy for solving the task of classifying the ripeness of banana crates. This is
         done by planning explainability and model design together. We showcase how
         the task can be solved using opaque deep learning models and more transparent
         strategies. Notably, there is a minimal loss of accuracy but a significant gain in
         explainability, which is truthful to the model’s inner workings. Additionally, we
         perform a user study to evaluate the perception of explainability by end users and
         discuss our findings.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Over the last decade, Machine Learning (ML) research has been increasingly focused on developing
new deep models based on Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs). Such methods have raised the bar
in accuracy for numerous cognitive tasks, leading to new and exciting opportunities and serious
challenges. Among these challenges, explainability has sparked a vast amount of discourse and
debate; briefly, it can be understood as the endogenous process of communicating information about
the model and data to foster human understanding of the decision-making process of such models
(Rizzo et al., 2022). This is no trivial task, especially for modern deep models, as these are highly
complex and rely upon billions of opaque parameters that must be learned during training.
Deep Learning (DL) models’ incredible performance paired with their inner opacity constitute a
concrete problem. This is because explainability is crucial to verify the model’s properties, such
as fairness and trustworthiness, especially in high-stakes decision-making environments. With the
ever-growing use of AI in many application fields, policymakers are supporting the need for ex-
plainability (Selbst & Powles, 2017). In Europe, for example, a significant effort to regulate models’
decisions by endorsing the user’s right to an explanation is being made in the writing of the AI Act
(EU, 2021). Unfortunately, it is clear how this clashes with much of the design process of DL mod-
els, which is generally guided by researchers’ intuition, relies on trial and error for tuning and lacks
a holistic approach, including the upstream definition of an explanation strategy. Recently, a theoret-
ical framework proposed by Rizzo et al. (2022) has tried to provide common ground for the meaning
of keywords used with no real shared purpose in the XAI community. We resort to this framework
for our backing definitions of the terms above. To briefly summarise these notions, an explanation
is an answer to a why question derived from interpreting some evidence (i.e., factual information)
This splits the concept of explanation into two new atomic components, the latter speaking of how
much of the model we can explain (i.e., how much our evidence is involved in the model’s compu-
tation) and the former telling how the evidence is transformed inside the model. Interpretations are


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Figure 1: Ripeness stages for crates of bananas from least ripe (1) to ripest (4).


hypotheses; thus, they should be tested for faithfulness (i.e., is the interpretation capturing what the
model is doing?) and plausibility (i.e., does the interpretation align with the stakeholders’ intuition
of how the model works?). Lastly, the information content of an explanation should be presented to
the user through an eXplanation User Interface (XUI) (i.e., text, plots, interactive interfaces, etc.) to
verify the effectiveness of the knowledge transfer (Rizzo et al., 2022).
A broad spectrum of methods is now designed for minor accuracy improvements over their prede-
cessors. Unfortunately, the speed at which these are being developed far outpaces the development
of strategies capable of explaining them. Research towards explainability methods has nevertheless
brought exciting results, with milestone techniques such as SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations)
(Lundberg & Lee, 2017). Such a method attempts to explain the prediction of any classifier by us-
ing an approach grounded in game theory. While still widely used, it has received criticism, as it
may provide explanations that are, at the very least, disputable (Kumar et al., 2020; Alvarez-Melis
& Jaakkola, 2018). Unfortunately, using one-fit-all methods such as SHAP does not work around
the need for a better overall understanding of the designed solution. In this paper, we highlight an
approach to problem-solving in ML that draws from often-forgotten simple ML models and applies
a modern all-around design and analysis of model explainability. We showcase our strategy with a
simple, but hopefully very clear, practical example relevant to the industry.

1.1   TASK AND APPROACH

To showcase our design strategy, we analyse a straightforward real-world scenario and how the
aforementioned concepts of accuracy and explainability affect it. Our target task is the classification
of the ripeness of banana crates on a scale from 1 (least ripe) to 4 (ripest) (see Fig. 1 for an example).
In our approach, we design for competitive accuracy and explainability simultaneously. To tackle the
classification task, we select a pool of three DL methods: (i) a simple Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) model with three convolutional blocks, (ii) a pre-trained convolutional model based on the
MobileNetV2 framework (Sandler et al., 2018), and (iii) a pre-trained Vision Transformer (ViT)
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). As we will show, the latter allows for almost perfect results and is
the best neural model across our proposed methods, but at the cost of no current method capable
of explaining its prediction accurately. On the other hand, we show that our approach, based on
simple colour features and a fine-tuned Decision Tree (DT), can provide competitive accuracy while
exposing the information needed for producing adequate and global explanations.

1.2   C ONTRIBUTIONS

Our experiments show that all three selected neural models can converge to very high (and, in some
cases, close-to-perfect) accuracy in a few training epochs. This leads us to question the difficulty
of the task at hand and the actual need for such powerful yet black-box methods. As the results
suggest, the task is somewhat easy, and it is thus legitimate to tackle it with a simpler strategy. The
expectation is that, despite the simplicity, the new model will be able to reach competitive accuracy
while leaving us space for integrating explainability into our design.
In summary, our contributions are the following:

       • We provide high-level design guidelines to tackle ML problems with explainability in mind;
       • We showcase an explicative classification task, for which we provide an analysis of a selec-
         tion of DL methods in terms of accuracy and explainability, utilising relevant models that
         offer a wide panoramic of the task;


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           • Moreover, we show that the same classification task can be solved effectively and efficiently
             by a much simpler and more transparent model, a DT, with minimum feature engineering
             effort;
           • We conduct a user study to determine which explanations best suit the stakeholders’ needs;
           • We release our code and self-collected dataset1 for reproducibility and possible extendibil-
             ity of our experiments.

2       R ELATED W ORK

Our work relates to two main paths of research: (i) the advocacy for more focus on explainability
in the Artificial Intelligence (AI) community and (ii) the optimisation of fruit ripeness grading. We
proceed to briefly introduce previous works on these subjects.

AI explainability. A common problem associated with DL models is their inner opacity. Provid-
ing meaningful explanations for a DL model’s prediction is an arduous task. Much research has gone
towards the extraction of explanations by using, for instance, information from gradients (Selvaraju
et al., 2017), attention scores (Bahdanau et al., 2015a), surrogate models (Ribeiro et al., 2016), and
latent prototypes (Chen et al., 2019). Some methods have been proposed with the promise of being
model-agnostic, i.e., to explain the prediction of any classifier. Prominent examples are the afore-
mentioned LIME and SHAP methods (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg & Lee, 2017). However, the
proposed explanations have been challenged (e.g., (Adebayo et al., 2018; Serrano & Smith, 2019;
Garreau & Mardaoui, 2021; Nauta et al., 2021; Khakzar et al., 2022)) and proved to be unreliable
in multiple scenarios. Nevertheless, SHAP is still considered state-of-the-art for explainability by
many. Moreover, it allows the combination of multiple local explanations to produce a “global” (av-
eraged) explanation of the model instead of the local explanation of a single prediction. Similarly,
our proposed explanation strategy is global. For these reasons, we selected SHAP as our benchmark
strategy to explain the DL models and to compare them against our proposed solution.

Fruit ripeness recognition. Grading the ripeness of the fruit is a long-studied problem for whom
strategies based on statistics (e.g., (Mendoza & Aguilera, 2006; Olarewaju et al., 2016)), traditional
ML (e.g., (Ni et al., 2020; Septiarini et al., 2020)), and DL (e.g., (Saranya et al., 2022; Sa et al.,
2016)) have been proposed. The top-performing methods are those based on DL, which, aside from
reaching astonishing accuracy, do away with the complex and error-prone task of feature engineer-
ing. However, the literature lacks extensive comparisons among the three noted strategies. For more
information on the fruit ripeness grading problem and solutions, a recent survey was authored by
Rizzo et al. (2023).
On another note, the focus of much of the most recent research appears to be on scraping a few
decimals of task accuracy (or other performance indicators) while too often not accounting for ex-
plainability (Marcuzzo et al., 2022). On this topic, works such as the one by Rudin (2019) discuss
the necessity of more carefully gauging the tasks being solved and, whenever possible (or necessary
due to high stakes), using more transparent models rather than black boxes. Our thesis is similar:
we advocate choosing the most simple and transparent model that achieves a satisfying performance
while also devising a strategy to faithfully explain its behaviour.

3       D ESIGNING FOR EXPLAINABILITY

Our proposed guidelines aim to find the problem features that are more intuitive for the stakeholders
and process them as little as possible through the simplest ML method adequate for the task. “Sim-
plicity”, in this case, relates to the number of parameters regulating the model (the lower, the better)
and its reliance on human-understandable processing of the features (the more, the better).
In particular, we want to produce a pipeline from raw data to prediction, where each step is as trans-
parent as possible. The proposed design process follows these high-level steps: (i) understand the
task to be solved by the ML method, the available data, and the stakeholders of the final product;
    1
        Will be made available after anonymous review.


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(ii) for each stakeholder, discuss which attributes they consider relevant in solving the task and de-
fine which features can be considered part of an explanation; (iii) find a ML model that is powerful
enough to process the features but also offers the possibility to extract interesting evidence with a
reasonable effort. The evidence must suggest an interpretation that is faithful by design to how the
model works and possibly aligns with human intuition for plausibility (Rizzo et al., 2022); (iv) test
model performance and effectiveness of the generated explanations: the model should provide com-
petitive accuracy with the state-of-the-art, while also satisfying the expectations of the stakeholders
with the produced explanations. We find that a user study is an effective way to get qualitative
evidence of the efficacy of the proposed XUI.
Step (ii) is perhaps the most challenging point, especially when very little problem-specific knowl-
edge is available to the stakeholders. In this scenario, a preliminary analysis of the performance
of top black-box models can indicate how hard the task is. If the specific task exposes intuitive
features that can be leveraged to solve it, a model that tends towards transparency is worth try-
ing. Intuitiveness is critical to optimising the design and reaching a final explanation faithful to
the model behaviour and plausible to the human stakeholder. On the other hand, we acknowledge
that finding meaningful features or even just effective data representation can be challenging for
some tasks. In Natural Language Processing, for example, handcrafting general context-sensitive
and human-understandable features is often very difficult or impractical, partly due to the inher-
ent complexity of languages. That is why we advocate reasoning about an ML problem and try a
broader explainability-driven approach, especially when the task is simple. For some tasks, simple
or explainable solutions may not be there yet. The following sections showcase how we applied
such guidelines to our example task.

3.1   TASK DEFINITION , STAKEHOLDERS , AND DATA

From a practical perspective, this work deals with a multiclass image classification task. Our stake-
holders are workers at the wholesale fruit market of the city of Treviso, Italy, who are interested in
automating the ripeness grading of banana bunches. Currently, bunches are manually labelled by
operators on an increasing ripeness value (1 to 4, least to most ripe, see Fig. 1). All the bananas
within a crate are assumed to be in the same ripeness stage. The ML classifier resulting from this
work would be used to aid operators in labelling large numbers of incoming crates. Moreover, this
is the first step in the process of digitalization of the fruit processing pipeline, from inspection and
assessment of fruit quality to online sales. Given the impact of the assessment step on the pricing of
fruit, our stakeholders stressed the importance of maintaining transparency in the grading process,
to allow human supervision.
To develop the ML solution, we collected an ad-hoc dataset comprising 927 images, with a reason-
able balance between the four ripeness classes. The dataset was manually labelled by the operators
that perform the quality assessment of incoming products. To understand human performance on
this classification task, we also asked three operators to re-label a subset of images from the dataset.
More technical details on the data are provided in Section 4.1, while the human performance is
reported in Section 5.

3.2   F EATURE SELECTION

After consultation with the stakeholders, we determined that colour is the most reliable and intuitive
factor in determining the ripeness of banana bunches. Images are encoded using the well-known
RGB colour space, a well-known colour model backed up by solid theory based on the human
perception of colours. Since colour is the most important feature of our dataset, we process images
such as to precisely extract valuable colour information and train our classifier to recognise the
ripeness stage by considering such colour. Section 4.1 details how this information is extracted and
used in the proposed solution.

3.3   O N THE CHOICE OF MODELS

We select both state-of-the-art DL-based methods and simpler, more transparent classifiers for this
task. Testing DL models gives us an idea of the best performance that can be achieved, as well as
the difficulty of the problem. As stated previously, our objective is to choose the model of the lowest


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


complexity that achieves adequate performance, as to preserve as much transparency as possible.
We selected a DT, a Support Vector Machine (SVM) with different kernels and a multinomial Naive
Bayes (NB) classifier as baseline models for comparison, eventually choosing the DT as the best
model of the three.
We point out that the DT learns discriminative rules that partition the feature space into sub-spaces
corresponding to each target class (i.e., the ripeness stage). By extracting colour information in
the RGB space and limiting the number of extracted features we can obtain a global explanation
mapping each ripeness stage to specific areas of the colour space. We highlight that this explanation
is faithful, in the sense that it describes the DT “reasoning” process, as well as plausible, meaning
that it is aligned with the human understanding of the problem. These characteristics make this
strategy effective with respect to the point (iii) in our guidelines.


3.4   T ESTING FOR ACCURACY AND EXPLAINABILITY

We compare the performance of the baseline models (DT, SVM, NB) and select the DT to be the
best compromise between the complexity and intuitiveness of the explanation that can be derived
from it, as discussed in the previous section. The NB classifier achieves lower performance than the
DT. Conversely, the SVM with a high-degree polynomial kernel achieved slightly better results (less
than 0.5% accuracy and F1-score improvement). However, given the minimal difference in results
and considering that the decision boundaries of the SVM are more difficult to understand because
of their complexity, the DT appears to be a better choice. The complete results of these tests are
reported in the supplementary material. Additionally, we compare the DT with some state-of-the-art
DL models that would be the obvious off-the-shelf DL solutions for this task. Results are reported
in Section 5, showcasing that the DT achieves competitive performance, and is well above human
classification performance.
Finally, we want to assess the efficacy of the generated explanations for our stakeholders. To do this,
we conducted a user study to investigate the users’ preferences about the generated explanations.
More details on the results are provided in Section 5.2 while the complete questionnaire is reported
in the Supplemental materials.


4     M ETHODS AND EXPLANATIONS

4.1   DATA PROCESSING

Our dataset is composed of 927 RGB pictures of crates filled with various bunches of bananas.
Images were acquired at a native resolution of 4160 x 3120 pixels using a CZUR Shine Ultra scanner,
with an effort to achieve consistent lighting. The dataset is split among classes in a reasonably
balanced way. We detail the class distribution in the supplementary material.
Each image was resized to 224 x 224 pixels to obtain a reasonable inference time. This resizing
was also chosen as it is standard in many pre-trained models, allowing us to use modern transfer
learning approaches easily. The dataset was augmented with random transformations, including
rotation, affine transforms, elastic morphology transforms, random location crop, gaussian blur, as
well as the erasure of patches of the image and changes in perspective. The latter transformations
were applied to account for different angles and accidental occlusions, likely when non-expert users
take pictures with a smartphone (which is one potential end use of this classifier). We augmented
roughly 50% of the dataset, and the new images were added to the original dataset before training.
More details may be found in the supplementary material.
A visual inspection of the dataset reveals that pictures are noisy in that parts of the crate are captured
in the overall image (mostly the boundaries of the crate and, sometimes, its bottom). To circumvent
this problem, we perform semantic segmentation of the images to filter out the background of banana
bunches. Having no manually segmented images, an unsupervised approach was the only feasible
way to achieve this. After testing several algorithms, we selected the SLIC algorithm (Achanta
et al., 2012) for this task. In our experiments, all methods benefit from including segmentation as a
pre-processing step. As such, we only report results on segmented images.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Figure 2: Examples of explanations for DL models generated using SHAP


Moreover, while the selected DL models can automatically extract discriminative features from raw
RGB input images, we devised a minimal feature engineering process to extract colour features and
use them with the DT. Specifically, each image is represented by three features: the R, G and B
channel values of their average colour, normalised in the [0 − 1] range. This way, all the image
structure is discarded, leaving only colour information. One notable thing to consider about RGB
is how the luminance is embedded within its three channels. This is different, for instance, from
colour spaces such as YUV, where luminance is encoded into the physical linear-space brightness
(Y) channel. As the DT is based on average colour values, this method benefits from normalising
the luminance. This is achieved by transposing all the images to the YUV colour space, setting the
Y channel to a common value, and then translating back to RGB.

4.2   D EEP L EARNING A PPROACH

In addressing the task of banana ripeness classification, we run and compare three neural approaches.
The first architecture consists of a simple CNN using three convolutional blocks, each characterised
by two bi-dimensional convolutions and max pooling interleaved by ReLU activation functions.
The convolutional layers extract features fed to a three-layer feed-forward ANN, which outputs the
final prediction. Before being processed by the CNN, the data is normalised to mean and standard
deviation.
The second architecture we consider is the pre-trained MobileNetV2 network (Sandler et al., 2018).
Still convolutional by nature, the strategy at the core of this method is based on depth-wise convolu-
tions (Sifre & Mallat, 2014; Chollet, 2017) and inverted residual connections. The designers aimed
to build a powerful, pre-trainable model for low-tier devices.
The third architecture we examine is the Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). Trans-
formers (Vaswani et al., 2017) are neural architectures based on multi-head attention (Bahdanau
et al., 2015b), widely studied and employed by the NLP community (Gasparetto et al., 2022a;b).
This architecture has seen recent applications to CV tasks with various strategies (see (Khan et al.,
2022) for a survey). Briefly, ViT splits images into fixed-size patches and linearly embeds them.
Positional embeddings are then added to retain position information before feeding the resulting
sequence of vectors to a standard Transformer encoder. Classification is achieved by adding a learn-
able “classification token” to the sequence.

D EEP L EARNING E XPLAINABILITY S TRATEGY
As previously mentioned, we used SHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017) to explain the predictions of the
DL models. When dealing with images, SHAP allows generating heat maps (which constitute the
XUI) to deliver the explanation to the user. These are supposed to describe the importance of each
pixel in the image toward the model’s prediction. Intuitively, warm colours indicate the regions of
the image that contributed the most to the prediction. In contrast, colder colours indicate areas that
contributed negatively to the prediction of the same class. Example explanations generated with
SHAP are presented in Fig. 2. Previous literature found that SHAP, despite being widely used,
produces explanations lacking faithfulness while looking plausible (Rizzo et al., 2022; Alvarez-
Melis & Jaakkola, 2018). This is an alarming condition where the explanations convey to the user
“a convincing lie” about how the model behaves. The following sections show how our design
addresses faithfulness and plausibility.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Explanation generated from the constraints imposed by the DT on the RGB colour gamut.
The four grades identify different areas within the gamut.


4.3   D ECISION T REE

In contrast to the examined DL methods’ inner complexity, we propose tackling the same task using
a simple, more transparent model based on a DT classifier. In particular, we adopt the implementa-
tion offered by scikit-learn, which is based on the CART algorithm (Breiman, 1984).

E XPLAINABILITY S TRATEGY
One may argue that a DT is an intrinsically explainable model. We argue that there is no such thing
as intrinsic explainability: a transparent model still needs to provide some explanation that is some-
what understandable to the users and answers their “why” questions. Different end-users are likely
to have different requirements for explainability. For example, ML experts may be satisfied with
understanding the range of feature values mapped to each target class (in our case, the RGB val-
ues). Non-expert users may need these rules to be further processed to be represented more clearly.
Serving explainability is intuitively much easier with specific models, such as those regulated by a
few parameters, though this is yet to be formalised in the literature. Admittedly, a DT has a very
intuitive and faithful interpretation: for every non-leaf node, the DT learns a threshold value for one
of its given features, thus producing two children (above and below the threshold). In our case, each
instance is classified by following a path to a leaf labelled with a specific ripeness value. Conve-
niently, the set of rules given by the traversed path defines an area within the RGB colour space that
is part of our explanation. Binding the explanation to the intuitive process of discriminating banana
crates based on colour (as our stakeholders do) sets the premises for it to be plausible.
Albeit simple to follow for relatively shallow trees, the decision paths can grow exponentially for
features that have complex interactions. As anticipated, such numerical features split within the DT
can still appear opaque to the average user. Thus, we take our explanation further by devising an
XUI that aims to be human-understandable and tested accordingly. More specifically, we use the
rules extracted from the decision path as constraints on the RGB gamut to identify portions of such a
space representing the four ripeness classes. Hence, it is easy to represent each unknown input data
point as its average colour in the 3D RGB colour space and determine which region it belongs to.
This plot is our proposed explanation for the DT’s behaviour. Fig. 3 is an example visualisation of
the whole process (more examples are reported in the supplementary material). It’s worth stressing
that the area of the colour space extracted from the decision rules learned by the DT is, by definition,
a global explanation. As such, our strategy allows us to unequivocally understand which colours are
associated with each label class. One of the benefits of such an interpretable explanation is the
ability to validate the classifier’s behaviour. Unexpected colours would show up in the proposed
XUI, pointing out a negative bias in the model.

5     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we compare the performance achieved by our employed methods. First, we analyse
the classification metrics achieved by the three DL-based models and the DT. Then, we study the ex-
planations generated according to the strategies proposed in Section 4.2 and Section 4.3 and compare


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Accuracy           Precision           Recall               F1
       Decision Tree         0.9716 (± .0104)   0.9723 (± .0106)   0.9678 (± .0119)   0.9697 (± .0110)
       CNN                   0.9349 (± .0115)   0.9298 (± .0131)   0.9308 (± .0123)   0.9377 (± .0123)
       MobileNet V2          0.9743 (± .0046)   0.9726 (± .0046)   0.9717 (± .0054)   0.9718 (± .0049)
       ViT                   0.9967 (± .0015)   0.9960 (± .0020)   0.9966 (± .0017)   0.9962 (± .0018)
       Human Performance     0.7500 (± .0589)   0.7588 (± .0453)   0.7500 (± .0589)   0.7519 (± .0524)

Table 1: Macro-averaged performance metrics for the models averaged over ten random seeds (stan-
dard deviation in brackets).


them through a user study involving the stakeholders for the task of banana ripeness classification in
a real fruit market.

5.1   P ERFORMANCE

To measure the ability of our selected models to produce correct predictions, we resort to commonly
used classification metrics: accuracy, macro-averaged precision, macro-averaged recall, and macro-
averaged F1-score. All methods are tested using 5-fold cross-validation, repeated ten times with
different random seeds to strengthen the results.
Table 1 showcases the results achieved with both deep-learning methods and the DT. We addition-
ally report the human performance, which is the average of the scores obtained by three stakeholders
on the classification of a balanced dataset of 300 randomly sampled images from the original non-
augmented dataset (∼ 20%). It is easy to see that all methods achieve excellent results, with all
metrics surpassing the 90s percentile scores and improving on a human baseline. It is worth re-
membering that these results are achieved on the datasets augmented with images that have gone
through various augmentations, which makes them more robust at the cost of small decreases in
performance. Further detailed in the supplementary material, error analysis reveals that mistakes
always occur because the classifiers select an adjacent class (e.g., class 2 instead of 1).
The ViT model achieves a near-perfect score among the selected methods for all metrics. The DT
also obtained outstanding results, though this required comparatively more effort (including the
standardisation of the luminance and the extensive grid search). Nevertheless, this process allows
the DT to have results comparable to those of MobileNetV2.

5.2   E XPLAINABILITY

We compare the SHAP explanations for the DL models with the handcrafted explanations based on
RGB colour designed for the DT. Fig. 2 and 3 compare the two types of explanations for the same
input. It is easy to see that the masks produced by SHAP do not highlight meaningful features of
the image. Indeed, we can observe that the regions highlighted are apparently random. Not only
that, in our case, SHAP’s visualisation for the CNN always presented the same result for all classes,
seemingly valuing features for grade 4 highly (even when the CNN correctly classified other ripeness
stages). The situation does not change when we visually examine the explanations generated by
the methods throughout the whole dataset. This does not necessarily mean that the explanations
generated by SHAP are not faithful to the model’s inner workings. Rather, our intuitive interpretation
of the highlighted regions is misaligned with how the model uses those features internally. As such,
we can only conclude that, despite their plausibility, these visualisations are inadequate as significant
explanations.
Conversely, our explanation for the DT is faithful to the model’s inner workings by design. This
strategy provides the user with a much more informative explanation that is intuitively understand-
able, plausible and faithful to how the model works. An ad hoc user study confirms such results.

U SER STUDY

We designed a user study to investigate the users’ preferences about the generated explanations
for the model predictions. The users involved in the study are stakeholders in the grading of banana


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ripeness, consisting of 20 people with different backgrounds and expertise with artificial intelligence
tools. We submitted an online questionnaire to each user. The complete questionnaire is reported
in the supplementary material. The questionnaire introduces the task and asks the users to compare
two types of explanations for the same input and prediction: (i) the mask generated by SHAP and
(ii) the representation of the input colour in the RGB gamut. Explanations (i) pertain to the ViT
model (the best-performing one), while explanation (ii) is generated from the DT. The object of the
comparison is how much the proposed explanation allows you to answer why the model made that
prediction.
When asked about the importance of explaining the model’s behaviour, all participants believed
that an associated explanation is somewhat necessary, with most thinking it to be essential. As for
the preferred explanation method, ten out of twenty respondents considered the RGB gamut area
produced by the DT to be the most effective, eight voted for the SHAP heatmap explanation, and
three declared that no explanation was helpful to them 2 . This result is certainly interesting; though
SHAP’s visualisations do not provide an unambiguous explanation, their visual nature was still
enough to make half of the participants deem them trustworthy in conveying why the prediction was
made. Finally, 80% of respondents declared that the chosen explanation would improve their trust
in the model, and 70% are ready to trade about 5% of the classifier accuracy for a more transparent
and human-explainable decision process. Considering that the accuracy loss between the DT and
the most accurate model is only around 2.5% for our classification task and well above human
performance, there appears to be little reason to prefer the latter to the more explainable one. We
report the complete results of our study as supplementary material.


6       F UTURE W ORK

Using simple classifiers on a few manually extracted features can be much more problematic on
more complex tasks, as this could severely limit the performance of the models. Indeed, we do not
make the point that more transparent models should always be used; many cognitive tasks would
be nearly impossible without the progress obtained through DL. For this specific task, we selected
a simple strategy to provide an intuitive explanation to non-ML-expert users based on the average
colour of the whole image. This can be refined iteratively to incorporate more complex features
while accounting for explainability. We plan to explore strategies to serve explanations using higher
numbers of features, for example, considering the pixel colour distribution. Moreover, in line with
the explainability by design principle, we plan to research the usage of regularisation strategies to
improve the explainability of complex DL models. This topic has already been explored (Wu et al.,
2018), mostly tackling the problem of robustness, which has indeed been linked to the issue of ex-
plainability (Ross & Doshi-Velez, 2018). It would be interesting to explore whether and how adding
constraints on the features extracted by NNs could help produce more understandable explanations
by the end-users.


7       C ONCLUSIONS

This paper discusses the explainability of ML models by providing high-level guidelines to tackle
ML problems. As an example, we compare three DL models to a DT for classifying bananas into
four ripeness stages. While the DT leads to slightly lower accuracy scores, it produces much more
interpretable results. This task showcases how an intuitive explanation strategy can be devised by
model design rather than with a post-hoc approach. We argue that working with a more transparent
model and stakeholder-understandable features, where possible, can allow for satisfactory expla-
nations with minimal loss in accuracy. To validate our claim, we conducted a pilot user study on
20 users, comparing the explanations produced by SHAP, a popular model-agnostic explainability
method for DL models, against those produced by combining colour features and DT rule interpre-
tations. The study results indicate users’ tendency to accept minor accuracy losses, favouring a more
understandable model. However, they also showcase how non-expert users prefer more straightfor-
ward explanations, regardless of whether they are well-founded.

    2
        One participant selected both the RGB explanation and the “neither” option.


                                                         9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Radhakrishna Achanta, Appu Shaji, Kevin Smith, Aurelien Lucchi, Pascal Fua, and Sabine
  Süsstrunk. Slic superpixels compared to state-of-the-art superpixel methods. IEEE Transactions
  on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 34(11):2274–2282, 2012. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.
  2012.120.

Julius Adebayo, Justin Gilmer, Michael Muelly, Ian Goodfellow, Moritz Hardt, and Been Kim.
  Sanity checks for saliency maps. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, NIPS’18, pp. 9525–9536, Red Hook, NY, USA, December 2018.
  Curran Associates Inc.

David Alvarez-Melis and Tommi S. Jaakkola. On the robustness of interpretability methods, 2018.

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly
  learning to align and translate. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Con-
  ference Track Proceedings, 2015a. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.0473.

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly
  learning to align and translate. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Con-
  ference Track Proceedings, 2015b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.0473.

Leo Breiman. Classification and Regression Trees. Routledge, New York, 1984. doi: https://doi.
  org/10.1201/9781315139470.

Chaofan Chen, Oscar Li, Chaofan Tao, Alina Jade Barnett, Jonathan Su, and Cynthia Rudin. This
  Looks like That: Deep Learning for Interpretable Image Recognition. Curran Associates Inc.,
  Red Hook, NY, USA, 2019.

Francois Chollet. Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions. In 2017 IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). IEEE, July 2017.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale. CoRR, abs/2010.11929, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929.

EU. Proposal for a REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE
  COUNCIL LAYING DOWN HARMONISED RULES ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
  (ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACT) AND AMENDING CERTAIN UNION LEGISLA-
  TIVE ACTS. 2021. URL https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
  ?uri=CELEX:52021PC0206.

Damien Garreau and Dina Mardaoui. What does lime really see in images? In ICML 2021 - 38th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, Virtual Conference, United States, July 2021.
  URL https://hal.science/hal-03233014.

Andrea Gasparetto, Matteo Marcuzzo, Alessandro Zangari, and Andrea Albarelli. A survey on text
  classification algorithms: From text to predictions. Information, 13(2), 2022a. ISSN 2078–2489.
  doi: 10.3390/info13020083. URL https://www.mdpi.com/2078-2489/13/2/83.

Andrea Gasparetto, Alessandro Zangari, Matteo Marcuzzo, and Andrea Albarelli. A survey
  on text classification: Practical perspectives on the italian language. PLOS ONE, 17(7):1–
  6, 07 2022b. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0270904. URL https://doi.org/10.1371/
  journal.pone.0270904.

Ashkan Khakzar, Pedram Khorsandi, Rozhin Nobahari, and Nassir Navab. Do explanations explain?
  model knows best. In 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 10234–10243, 2022. doi: 10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01000.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Salman Khan, Muzammal Naseer, Munawar Hayat, Syed Waqas Zamir, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and
  Mubarak Shah. Transformers in vision: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv., 54(10s), sep 2022. ISSN
  0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3505244. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3505244.

I. Elizabeth Kumar, Suresh Venkatasubramanian, Carlos Scheidegger, and Sorelle A. Friedler. Prob-
   lems with shapley-value-based explanations as feature importance measures. In Proceedings of
   the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’20. JMLR.org, 2020.

Scott M. Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. CoRR,
  abs/1705.07874, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.07874.

Matteo Marcuzzo, Alessandro Zangari, Andrea Albarelli, and Andrea Gasparetto. Recommendation
 systems: An insight into current development and future research challenges. IEEE Access, 10:
 86578–86623, 2022. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3194536.

F Mendoza and J M Aguilera. Application of image analysis for classification of ripening bananas.
  J. Food Sci., 69(9):E471–E477, May 2006.

Meike Nauta, Annemarie Jutte, Jesper Provoost, and Christin Seifert. This looks like that, because
 ... explaining prototypes for interpretable image recognition. In Machine Learning and Prin-
 ciples and Practice of Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 441–456. Springer International
 Publishing, 2021.

Xueping Ni, Changying Li, Huanyu Jiang, and Fumiomi Takeda. Deep learning image segmentation
  and extraction of blueberry fruit traits associated with harvestability and yield. Hortic Res, 7:110,
  July 2020.

Olaoluwa Omoniyi Olarewaju, Isa Bertling, and Lembe Samukelo Magwaza. Non-destructive eval-
  uation of avocado fruit maturity using near infrared spectroscopy and PLS regression models. Sci.
  Hortic., 199:229–236, February 2016.

Marco Túlio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. ”why should I trust you?”: Explaining
 the predictions of any classifier. CoRR, abs/1602.04938, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/
 abs/1602.04938.

Matteo Rizzo, Alberto Veneri, Andrea Albarelli, Claudio Lucchese, and Cristina Conati. A theoret-
 ical framework for ai models explainability, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.
 14447.

Matteo Rizzo, Matteo Marcuzzo, Alessandro Zangari, Andrea Gasparetto, and Andrea Albarelli.
 Fruit ripeness classification: A survey. Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture, 7:44–57, 2023.
 ISSN 2589-7217. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2023.02.004. URL https://www.
 sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2589721723000065.

Andrew Ross and Finale Doshi-Velez. Improving the adversarial robustness and interpretability of
  deep neural networks by regularizing their input gradients. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, 32(1), Apr. 2018. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v32i1.11504. URL https://
  ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/11504.

Cynthia Rudin. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and
  use interpretable models instead. Nat Mach Intell, 1(5):206–215, May 2019.

Inkyu Sa, Zongyuan Ge, Feras Dayoub, Ben Upcroft, Tristan Perez, and Chris McCool. DeepFruits:
  A fruit detection system using deep neural networks. Sensors, 16(8), August 2016.

Mark Sandler, Andrew G. Howard, Menglong Zhu, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Liang-Chieh Chen.
 Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks: Mobile networks for classification, detection and seg-
 mentation. CoRR, abs/1801.04381, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.04381.

N Saranya, K Srinivasan, and S K Pravin Kumar. Banana ripeness stage identification: a deep
  learning approach. J. Ambient Intell. Humaniz. Comput., 13(8):4033–4039, August 2022.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Andrew D Selbst and Julia Powles. Meaningful information and the right to explanation. Interna-
  tional Data Privacy Law, 7(4):233–242, 12 2017. ISSN 2044-3994. doi: 10.1093/idpl/ipx022.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1093/idpl/ipx022.
Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 618–626, 2017.
  doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2017.74.
Anindita Septiarini, Hamdani Hamdani, Heliza Rahmania Hatta, and Khoerul Anwar. Automatic
  image segmentation of oil palm fruits by applying the contour-based approach. Sci. Hortic., 261:
  108939, February 2020.
Sofia Serrano and Noah A Smith. Is attention interpretable? In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2931–2951, Florence, Italy, July
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Laurent Sifre and Stéphane Mallat. Rigid-motion scattering for texture classification. CoRR,
  abs/1403.1687, 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1403.1687.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N
  Gomez, Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon,
  U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/
  3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
Chunyang Wu, Mark J. F. Gales, Anton Ragni, Penny Karanasou, and Khe Chai Sim. Improving
  interpretability and regularization in deep learning. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech,
  and Language Processing, 26(2):256–265, 2018. doi: 10.1109/TASLP.2017.2774919.


                                               12
