Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E-MCTS: D EEP E XPLORATION BY P LANNING WITH
E PISTEMIC U NCERTAINTY
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Deep model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) is responsible for many of
         the greatest achievements of reinforcement learning. At the core of two of the
         approaches responsible for those successes, Alpha/MuZero, is a modified version
         of the Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) planning algorithm, replacing compo-
         nents of MCTS with learned models (of value and/or environment dynamics).
         Dedicated deep exploration, however, is a remaining challenge of Alpha/MuZero
         and by extension MCTS-based methods with learned models. To overcome this
         challenge, we develop Epistemic-MCTS. E-MCTS extends MCTS with estimation
         and propagation of epistemic uncertainty, and leverages the propagated uncertainty
         for a novel deep exploration algorithm by explicitly planning to explore. We incor-
         porate E-MCTS into variations of MCTS-based MBRL approaches with learned
         (MuZero) and provided (AlphaZero) dynamics models. We compare E-MCTS
         to non-planning based deep-exploration baselines and demonstrate that E-MCTS
         significantly outperforms them in the investigated deep exploration benchmark.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Deep model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) has shown tremendous achievements in recent
years, from super-human performance in games (Silver et al., 2018; Schrittwieser et al., 2020),
through outperforming human designers in tasks that previously relied on intricate human engineering
(Mandhane et al., 2022), to the design of novel algorithms (Mankowitz et al., 2023; Fawzi et al., 2022).
At the heart of two of the best-performing MBRL approaches, Alpha/MuZero (Silver et al., 2018;
Schrittwieser et al., 2020, responsible among others for the successes listed above) is the Monte-Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) planning algorithm. A remaining challenge in MCTS-based MBRL algorithms
(that extends to Alpha/MuZero) is dedicated deep exploration. Deep exploration refers to the ability
to find interesting states or state-actions, irrespective of how far away they are from the current
state of the agent. This provides the agent with the means to spend its environment-interaction
resources efficiently to gather new information and is critical in sparse-reward domains, providing up
to exponential increases in sample efficiency Osband et al. (2016).
Standard approaches for deep exploration in reinforcement learning (RL) rely on estimates of
epistemic uncertainty to direct the agent to unexplored areas of the state-action space (Osband
et al., 2013; 2018; Bellemare et al., 2016; O’Donoghue et al., 2018). In line with existing literature
(Hüllermeier & Waegeman, 2021) we define epistemic uncertainty as uncertainty that is reducible
with additional observations. Note that this is different from uncertainty that is reducible with
more planning (computation), as in classic MCTS, where the agent plans ahead using only rollouts
of the true dynamics and does therefore not require exploration in the environment, only in the
model. AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2018) replaces those rollouts with value and policy estimates, which
are learned with neural networks and require sufficient exploration of the state-action space to be
accurate. MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2020) additionally learns the transition and reward models
from interactions, allowing it to solve model-free environments, but also increasing the demand
for exploration to observe promising rewards in the environment. Our objective is to incorporate
epistemic uncertainty into MCTS with learned value/dynamics models both to enable native deep
exploration with MCTS-based algorithms, as well as to harness the strengths of MCTS for exploration,
in the same way they are harnessed for exploitation.
In this work, we develop methodology to 1) incorporate epistemic uncertainty into MCTS, enabling
agents to estimate the epistemic uncertainty associated with predictions at the root of the MCTS


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


planning tree (Epistemic-MCTS) and 2) leverage the uncertainty for deep exploration that capitalizes
on the strengths of planning, by modifying the MCTS objective to an exploratory objective. We
evaluate our agent on the benchmark hard-exploration task Deep Sea (Osband et al., 2020) against
exploration baselines that do not leverage planning with uncertainty. In our experiments, our agent
demonstrates deep exploration that significantly outperforms both naive and deep exploration base-
lines. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides relevant background
for MBRL, MCTS and epistemic uncertainty estimation in deep RL. Section 3 describes our contribu-
tions, starting with distinguishing between epistemic and non-epistemic sources in MCTS, followed
by the framework for uncertainty propagation in MCTS (E-MCTS), our approach for harnessing
E-MCTS to achieve deep exploration and finally a discussion regarding the challenges and limitations
in estimating epistemic uncertainty in planning with an abstracted, learned model of the environment.
Section 4 discusses related work. Section 5 evaluates our method with different dynamics models
against a hard-exploration benchmark and compares to standard exploration baselines. Finally,
Section 6 concludes the paper and discusses future work.


2     BACKGROUND
In RL, an agent learns a behavior policy π(a|s) through interactions with an environment, by
observing states (or observations), executing actions and receiving rewards. The environment
is represented by a Markov Decision Process (MDP, Bellman, 1957), or a partially-observable
MDP (POMDP, Åström, 1965). An MDP M is a tuple: M = ⟨S, A, ρ, P, R⟩, where S is a set
of states, A a set of actions, ρ the initial state distribution, R : S × A × S → R a bounded
reward function, and P : S × A × S → [0, 1] is a transition function, where P (st+1 |st , at )
specifies the probability of transitioning from state st to state st+1 after executing action at at
time t. In a POMDP M′ = ⟨S, A, ρ, P, R, Ω, O⟩, the agent observes observations ot ∈ Ω. O :
S × A × Ω → [0, 1] specifies the probability O(o|st , at ) of observing o. In MBRL the agent uses
a model of the environment to optimize its policy, often through planning. The model is either
learned from interactions, or provided. In Deep MBRL (DMBRL) the agent utilizes deep neural
networks as function approximators. Many RL approaches rely on learning a state-action Q-value
function Qπ (s, a) = E[R(s, a, s′ ) + γV π (s′ )| s′ ∼P (·|s,a)] or the corresponding state value function
V π (s) = E[Qπ (s, a)| a∼π(·|s)], which represents the expected return from starting in state s (and
possibly action a) and then following a policy π(at |st ) which specifies the probability of selecting
the action at in state st . The discount factor 0 < γ < 1 is used in infinite-horizon (PO)MDPs to
guarantee that the values remain bounded, and is commonly used in RL for learning stability.

2.1   M ONTE C ARLO T REE S EARCH
MCTS is a planning algorithm that constructs a planning tree with the current state st at its root
to estimate the objective: arg maxa maxπ Qπ (st , a). The algorithm iteratively performs trajectory
selection, expansion, simulation and backup to arrive at better estimates at the root of the tree. At
each planning step i, starting from the root node sit,0 ≡ ŝ0 , the algorithm selects a trajectory in the
existing tree based on the averaged returns q(ŝk , a) experienced in past trajectories selecting the
action a in the same node ŝk , and a search heuristic, such as an Upper Confidence Bound for Trees
(UCT, Kocsis & Szepesvári, 2006):
                                                         q
                                                           2 log( a′ N (ŝk ,a′ ))
                                                                  P
                         ak = arg max q(ŝk , a) + C              N (ŝk ,a)       ,                   (1)
                                    a∈A

where N (ŝk , a) denotes the number of times action a has been executed in node ŝk , and C > 0 trades
off exploration of new nodes with maximizing observed return. When the the trajectory selection
arrives at a leaf node ŝT MCTS expands the node and estimates its initial value as the average of
Monte-Carlo rollouts using a random policy. Recent DMBRL algorithms that use MCTS such as
Alpha/MuZero (Silver et al., 2016; 2017; 2018; Schrittwieser et al., 2020) replace the rollouts with
a value function v(ŝT ) that is approximated by a neural network and use the PUCT (Rosin, 2011)
search heuristic instead of UCT:
                                                               √P              ′
                                                                   a′ N (ŝk ,a )
                         ak = arg max q(ŝk , a) + π(a|ŝk ) C 1+N    (ŝk ,a) .                    (2)
                                   a∈A

Where π(a|ŝk ) is either given, or learned by imitating the MCTS policy π MCTS , to incorporate prior
knowledge into the search. MCTS propagates the return (discounted reward for visited nodes plus


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


leaf’s value) back along the planning trajectory. At the root of the tree, the optimal value maxπ V π (st )
of current state st is estimated based on the averaged returns experienced through every action a, and
averaged over the actions:
       max V π (st ) ≈        P N (ŝ0 ,a) ′ q(ŝ0 , a) =:
                                                             P MCTS
                                                                         (a|st ) q(ŝ0 , a) =: vMCTS
                           P
                                 ′   N (ŝ0 ,a )                  π                             t    . (3)
        π                 a∈A     a ∈A
                                                                a∈A



2.2    MCTS-BASED M ODEL BASED R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
MCTS requires access to three core functions. Those are: (i) a representation function g(st ) = ŝ0 ∈ Ŝ
that encodes the current state at the root of the tree into a latent space, in which (ii) a transition
function f (ŝk , ak ) = ŝk+1 predicts the next latent state and (iii) a function r(ŝk , ak ) = E[rk |ŝk , ak ]
that predicts the corresponding average reward. Such models in an latent state space Ŝ ̸= S do
not have to distinguish between different true states s, s′ ∈ S, i.e., g(s) = g(s′ ), s ̸= s′ , if such a
distinction does not benefit value and reward prediction, and are commonly called value-equivalent
or abstracted models. Note that for an identity function g(st ) = st all models, functions and policies
would be defined in the true state space S, and that in a POMDP g can encode the current observation
ot or the entire action-observation history ⟨o0 , a0 , o1 , a1 , . . . , ot ⟩. As in Mu/AlphaZero (Schrittwieser
et al., 2020; Silver et al., 2018), a value function v(ŝT ) can be learned for replacing rollouts, and a
policy function π(a|ŝk ) imitates the MCTS policy to bias planning towards promising actions based
on prior knowledge. In deep MBRL (DMBRL) these functions are learned with deep neural networks.
Five common learning signals are used to  train the transition model f with varying horizons k:
1) A reconstruction loss Lkre h(ŝk ), st+k , training a decoder h to reconstruct true states st+k from
latent representations ŝk that have been  predicted from ŝ0 = g(st ), shaping both g and f .
2) A consistency loss Lkco ŝk , g(st+k ) , training the model that predicted states should align with
latent representation of states st (or observations/histories in POMDP). Critically, Lkco is not used to
train g, only f . When the representation function g is an identity, Lkre and Lkco can be thought of as
providing the same learning signal. Otherwise,
                                                     they can be used independently or in combination.
3) A reward loss Lkr r(ŝk , ak ), rt+k , where the model is trained to predict representations that
enable predictions of, and are aligned
                                           with, the true rewards observed in the environment rt .
4) A value loss Lkv v(ŝk ), vMCTS
                               t+k    that trains the model to predict states that enable value learning.

5) A policy loss Lkπ π(·|ŝk ), π MCTS (·|st+k ) that trains prior policy π to predict the MCTS policy.
These losses are described in more detail in Appendix D.2.

2.3    E STIMATING E PISTEMIC U NCERTAINTY IN D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
Predictive epistemic uncertainty refers to any uncertainty that is associated with a prediction and
is rooted in lack-of-information. For example, prior to repeated tosses of a coin, there can be high
uncertainty whether the coin is fair or not. The more the coin has been tossed, the more certain we can
be about the coin’s fairness, even if we will always retain uncertainty in the exact prediction of heads
or tails, without access to a precise simulation of the physics of the coin toss (referred to as aleatoric
uncertainty, or the inherent uncertainty in the way we choose to model a coin). Defining, quantifying
and estimating predictive epistemic uncertainty is an active field of research that encompasses many
approaches and many methods (see Hüllermeier & Waegeman, 2021; Lockwood & Si, 2022). In
this work, we take the common approach for quantifying epistemic uncertainty as the variance in a
probability distribution of predictions that are consistent with observations VarX (X|st ) = V[X|st ].
As for estimating epistemic uncertainty, two standard approaches are the distributional approach and
the proxy-based approach. The distributional approach approximates a probability distribution over
possible predictions with respect to the agent’s experiences, while the proxy-based approach aims
to directly predict a measure for novelty of experiences. Two reliable and lightweight methods for
novelty-based epistemic uncertainty estimation are Random Network Distillation (RND) (Burda et al.,
2019) and state-visitation counting. RND evaluates novelty as the difference between the prediction
of a randomly initialized untrained target network ψ ′ and a to-be trained network ψ with a similar
architecture. The network ψ is trained to match the predictions of the target     network for the observed
states (or state-action pairs) with MSE loss Lrnd ψ(st , at ), ψ ′ (st , at ) = ||ψ(st , at ) − ψ ′ (st , at )||2 .

Novel observations are expected to produce unpredictable outputs from the target network, and
thus the difference between the prediction of the target network and the trained network serves as a
proxy-measure for novelty. These methods encapsulate the epistemic uncertainty in a local prediction:


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for example, uncertainty in prediction of reward or next state. Estimating epistemic uncertainty in
value predictions that contain the uncertainty that propagates from future decisions made by a policy
is a different matter. One method to estimate value uncertainty is the Uncertainty Bellman Equation
(UBE, O’Donoghue et al., 2018). UBE approximates an upper bound on the epistemic uncertainty in
value (here interpreted as variance of the Q-value) as the sum of local uncertainties σ 2 (st , at ) that
are associated with the decisions at at states st :
                        ∞                              n−1
         π              P 2i 2           π              P 2i 2           π        2n π
       U (st ) := Eπ       γ σ (st+i , at+i ) = Eπ         γ σ (st+i , at+i ) + γ U (st+n ) .
                         i=0                               i=0
In other words, UBE proposes to approximate the value uncertainty as the sum of twice-discounted
local uncertainties and learn it with (possibly n-step) TD targets in a similar manner to value learning.


3     D EEP E XPLORATION WITH E PISTEMIC MCTS
In this work we are concerned with estimating and leveraging epistemic uncertainty in MCTS to
drive exploration in the environment. In classic MCTS, the uncertainty in value prediction at each
node stems from stochasticity in the environment and in the rollout policy (aleatoric). There are
no learned quantities, and as such, there is no epistemic uncertainty in the model used by MCTS.
When a learned value function v(st ) is used to replace rollouts (such as in AlphaZero, Silver et al.,
2018) the aleatoric uncertainty from MC rollouts is replaced by uncertainty in the value prediction
v(st ). We distinguish between two sources of uncertainty about v(st ): 1. Epistemic sources: errors
resulting from evaluating v(st ) on unobserved states st . 2. Non-epistemic sources: approximation
errors, TD-errors, stochasticity of the environment and the policy and every other source of error
that will not reduce directly by training on additional unique observations. When a model of the
environment transition f (st , at ) and/or reward dynamics r(st , at ) are learned from interactions (such
as in MuZero, Schrittwieser et al., 2020) the uncertainty in value of a node in the planning tree will
contain the uncertainty in the learned dynamics f, r, and a similar separation between epistemic and
non-epistemic sources of uncertainty can be made.
MCTS addresses non-epistemic uncertainty by averaging over node values and using UCB-based
exploration in the planning tree, but does not address epistemic uncertainty in the model (there isn’t
any, in classic MCTS). Unlike the uncertainty estimated by the UCB bonus of MCTS, epistemic
uncertainty cannot be expected to reduce directly as a result of additional planning: rather, epistemic
uncertainty will only reduce as a result of 1. new interactions with the environment and 2. planning
in directions where the agent is more epistemically-certain. Distinguishing between epistemic and
non-epistemic uncertainty allows us to concentrate on propagating only epistemic uncertainty for
exploration. In the following section we develop a method to propagate the epistemic uncertainty
in MCTS (Section 3.1). We follow by leveraging the propagated uncertainty into an exploratory
epistemic-UCB planning objective (Section 3.2). To conclude this section, we discuss challenges in
estimating novelty when planning in latent spaces and possible solutions (Section 3.3).


3.1   P ROPAGATING U NCERTAINTY IN MCTS
At planning step i, selecting a path of length T through a decision tree is equivalent to choosing a
sequence of T actions ai0:T −1 that start at node ŝi0 = g(st ) and end up in a leaf node ŝiT . Deterministic
models f, r predict the transitioned to nodes ŝik and the encountered rewards rki in nodes ŝik , 0 ≤ k <
T , respectively. The value vTi at leaf ŝiT is predicted by Monte-Carlo rollouts with f or directly with
a neural network v. The values and rewards are used to update the n-step discounted return νki of
each node ŝik on the selected path:
                   T −1
       νki :=          γ j−k rji + γ T −k vTi   = rki + γνk+1 i
                                                                                              νTi = vTi , (4)
                   P
                                                                  ,      0≤k<T,
                   j=k

        j−k
where γ        is the discount factor to the power of j − k and the superscript i is indexing the planning
step. Our following analysis is done per planning step i and we will drop the index i for the sake
of readability. If (any of) f, r, v are assumed to be inexact rk and vT can be modelled as random
variables in a Markov chain that is connected by random state-variables. The stochasticity in the chain
captures the uncertainty in f, r, v’s predictions. To clarify notation, we will refer to these as random
states Ŝk , rewards Rk , values Vk and returns Vk . In line with the optimistic exploration literature, we


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


aim to incentivize choosing actions in the environment associated with paths in the planning tree that
have epistemically uncertain returns V0 in order to seek new high-reward interactions. For this we
need to estimate the epistemic variance (variance from epistemic sources) V[V0 |st , a0:T −1 ] ≡ V[V0 ]
of the return along a selected path a0:T −1 , starting with state st . To circumvent having to replace
f, r, v with an explicitly stochastic model to propagate the uncertainty, we instead develop a direct
and computationally efficient approximation for V[V0 ].
We will begin by deriving the mean and variance of the distribution of state-variables in the Markov
chain for a given sequence of actions a0:T −1 . Let us assume we are given a differentiable transition
function f (Ŝk , ak ) := EŜk+1 [Ŝk+1 |Ŝk , ak ] ∈ R|Ŝ| , which predicts the conditional expectation over
the next state, and a differentiable uncertainty function Σ(Ŝk , ak ) := VŜk+1 [Ŝk+1 |Ŝk , ak ] ∈ R|Ŝ|×|Ŝ|
that yields the conditional-covariance matrix of the distribution. In DMBRL the assumption that
models are differentiable is standard (see Section 2.2). We assume that the mean ŝ0 of the first
state-variable Ŝ0 is given as an encoding function ŝ0 = E[Ŝ0 |st ] = g(st ), like in MuZero. The
mean ŝk+1 of a later state-variable Ŝk+1 can be approximated with a first order Taylor expansion
around the previous mean ŝk := E[Ŝk ]:
             ŝk+1   := E[Ŝk+1 ]        =     EŜk [EŜk+1 [Ŝk+1 |Ŝk , ak ]]       =       E[f (Ŝk , ak )]      (5)
                     ≈     E[f (ŝk , ak ) + (Ŝk − ŝk )⊤ ∇ŝ f (Ŝ, ak )|Ŝ=ŝk ]       =      f (ŝk , ak ) .
In other words, under the assumption that the model f predicts the expected next state we reinterpret
the original latent state ŝk as the mean of the uncertain state E[Ŝk ].
To approximate the covariance Σk+1 := V[Ŝk+1 ] or the total uncertainty associated with state
variable Ŝk+1 we need the law of total variance.  The law  of total variance
                                                                              states that for two random
variables X and Y holds V[Y ] = EX VY [Y |X] + VX EY [Y |X] (see Appendix A for a proof in
our notation). Using the law of total variance and again a first order Taylor approximation around the
previous mean state ŝk , where Jf (ŝk , ak ) denotes the Jacobian matrix of function f at ŝk and ak :

    Σk+1 := V[Ŝk+1 ] = EŜk VŜk+1 [Ŝk+1 |Ŝk , ak ]              + VŜk EŜk+1 [Ŝk+1 |Ŝk , ak ]      (6)
                                      |             {z           }      |            {z              }
                               ≈                Σ(ŝk , ak )        + Jf (ŝk , ak ) Σk Jf (ŝk , ak )⊤ .
See Appendix B for the full derivation. Using these state statistics, we can derive the means and
variances of causally connected variables like rewards Rk and values VT . We assume that the
conditional reward distribution has conditional mean r(Ŝk , ak ) := ERk [Rk |Ŝk , ak ] and conditional
          2
variance σR (Ŝk , ak ) := VRk [Rk |Ŝk , ak ], and that the conditional value distribution has conditional
mean v(ŜT ) := EVT [VT |ŜT ] and conditional variance σV2 (ŜT ) := VVT [VT |ŜT ]. Analogous to above
we can derive:
       rk := E[Rk ] ≈ r(ŝk , ak ) ,                     2
                                               V[Rk ] ≈ σR (ŝk , ak ) + Jr (ŝk , ak ) Σk Jr (ŝk , ak )⊤ ,        (7)
                                                                                                         ⊤
       vT := E[VT ] ≈ v(ŝT ) ,                V[VT ] ≈       σV2 (ŝT )   + Jv (ŝT ) ΣT Jv (ŝT ) .               (8)
If we assume that Rk and the n-step return Vk+1 from Equation 4 are independent, we can compute
       E[Vk ]    = ERk ,Vk+1 [Rk + γVk+1 ] = E[Rk ] + γ E[Vk+1 ] ,                        E[VT ] = E[VT ] ,         (9)
                                                                       2
       V[Vk ]    = VRk ,Vk+1 [Rk + γVk+1 ] = V[Rk ] + γ V[Vk+1 ] , V[VT ] = V[VT ] .                               (10)
We can therefore approximate the variance V[V0 |st , a0:T −1 ] using one (E-)MCTS search, expan-
sion and back-propagation steps through the selected path a0:T −1 , similar to the value-estimation
E [V0 |st , a0:T −1 ] that is being done by standard MCTS (see pseudo-code in Algorithm 1). When
applying this approach to model-learning algorithms such as MuZero, we interpret the representa-
tion g, dynamics f , value v and reward r functions as outputting the conditional means ŝ0 , ŝk , vT , rk
respectively. When applying this approach to methods that learn only some of f, r, v (for example
AlphaZero, Silver et al., 2018, which learns only v) the predictions from unlearned components will
be associated with epistemic uncertainty = 0. E-MCTS will propagate the epistemic uncertainty in
the learned components according to the remaining nonzero terms in Equations 6, 7, 8, 10. Finally
we note that while E-MCTS is designed with epistemic uncertainty of the learned models in mind,
any source of uncertainty can be propagated with E-MCTS, so long as it is interpreted as the local
variances in state, reward and value predictions (Equations 6, 7 and 8 respectively).


                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   P LANNING FOR E XPLORATION WITH MCTS

The UCT operator of MCTS takes into account uncertainty about a node’s subtree via the visitation
count (see Equation 1) to drive exploration inside the planning tree and identify the most promising
expected-return-maximizing actions in the model. To drive exploration in the environment we add
the environmental epistemic uncertainty to the selection step, which maximizes an upper confidence
bound on the agent’s knowledge of both the environment (in blue) and the search tree (the original
UCT bonus):
                                               q                  q
                                                                     2 log( a′ N (ŝk ,a′ ))
                                                                           P
             ak := arg max q(ŝk , a) + β σq2 (ŝk , ak ) + C              N (ŝk ,ak )      ,  (11)
                                  a
where β ≥ 0 is a constant that can be tuned per task to encourage more or less exploration in the
environment. The term                                          N (ŝk ,ak )

                      σq2 (ŝk , ak ) := V[Rk ] + γ 2 N (ŝk1,ak )          i
                                                                   P
                                                                        V[Vk+1 ]             (12)
                                                                             i=1

sums the variances computed individually at every backup step i through the node that is reached by
executing action ak in latent state ŝk using Equations 7 and 10. At each backup step i, with actions aik ,
state means ŝki and covariances Σik , the variance V[Vki ] is approximated based on Equations 10 and 7:
                   V[Vki ] ≈ σR
                              2
                                (ŝik , aik ) + Jr (ŝik , aik )Σik Jr (ŝik , aik )⊤ + γ 2 V[Vk+1
                                                                                               i
                                                                                                   ].              (13)
At every backup step we compute the variance at the leaf node (Equation 8), which is then used
to update the parent’s variance along the trajectory iteratively using Equation 13. Pseudo-code can
be found in Algorithm 1, where the modifications introduced to MCTS are marked in blue. When
using other search heuristics such as PUCT or the extension of PUCT   q used in Gumbel MuZero
(Danihelka et al., 2022) we propose to view the term q(ŝk , a) + β σq2 (ŝk , ak ) as an exploratory-
Q-value-estimate (or epistemically-optimistic-Q-value estimate) and use it in place of q(ŝk , a) to
modify the planning objective into the exploratory objective. Once the MCTS-based search with
respect to the exploratory Q-value has completed, action selection in the environment can be done in
the same manner as for exploitation. For example, by sampling actions with respect to the visitation
counts of each action at the root of the tree as done by the original MuZero.

                                                                                 2
Algorithm 1 E-MCTS, requires functions g, f, r, v and uncertainty estimators Σ, σR , σV2
 1: function EMCTS(state st , β)             ▷ β = 0 for unmodified MCTS exploitation episodes
 2:    while within computation budget do
 3:        SELECT(g(st ), β)              ▷ traverses tree from root ŝ0 = g(st ) and adds new leaf
 4:    return action a drawn from π(a|st ) = P N′ N
                                                  (ŝ0 ,a)
                                                     (ŝ0 ,a′ )           ▷ MCTS action selection
                                                             a

 5: function SELECT(node ŝk , β) q                   q
                                                        2 log( a′ N (ŝk ,a′ ))
                                                              P
 6:    ak ← arg maxa q(ŝk , a) + β σq2 (ŝk , a) + C         N (ŝ ,a)        k
                                                                                                         ▷ Equation 11
 7:     if ak already expanded then SELECT(f (ŝk , ak ), β)                                            ▷ traverses tree
 8:     else EXPAND(ŝk , ak )                                                                          ▷ adds new leaf
 9: function EXPAND(node ŝk , not yet expanded action ak )
10:    ŝk+1 , E[Vk+1 ] ← Execute unmodified MCTS expansion that creates a new leaf ŝk+1
11:    Σk+1 ← Σ(ŝk , ak ) + Jf (ŝk , ak ) Σk Jf (ŝk , ak )⊤      ▷ node attribute of ŝk+1 , Equation 6
                   2                                             ⊤
12:    V[Rk ] ← σR (ŝk , ak ) + Jr (ŝk , ak ) Σk Jr (ŝk , ak )   ▷ node attribute of ŝk+1 , Equation 7
13:    V[Vk+1 ] ← σV2 (ŝk+1 ) + Jv (ŝk+1 ) Σk+1 Jv (ŝk+1 )⊤                              ▷ Equation 8
14:    BACKUP(ŝk+1 , E[Vk+1 ], V[Vk+1 ])                          ▷ updates the tree values & variances
15: function BACKUP(node ŝk+1 , return-mean E[Vk+1 ], return-uncertainty V[Vk+1 ])
16:    ŝk , ak , E[Vk ] ← Execute unmodified MCTS backup step (updates q(ŝk , ak ) and N (ŝk , ak ))
17:     V[Vk ] ← V[Rk ] + γ 2 V[Vk+1 ]                                ▷ uses node-attribute V[Rk ], Equation 10
                                                      2
                                            V[Vk ]−σq (ŝk ,ak )
18:     σq2 (ŝk , ak ) ← σq2 (ŝk , ak ) +    N (ŝk ,ak )                ▷ node attribute of ŝk+1 , Equation 12
19:     if k > 0 then BACKUP(ŝk , E[Vk ], V[Vk ])                         ▷ updates the tree values & variances


                                                            6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   E STIMATING E PISTEMIC U NCERTAINTY IN P LANNING
Epistemic uncertainty estimation techniques in RL are designed to evaluate uncertainty on predictions
in the true observation space of the environment (Osband et al., 2018; Burda et al., 2019). These
methods translate naturally into planning with transition models that operate in the environment’s
observation space, such as AlphaZero where the dynamics are given, or when a learned transition
model predicts environmental observations. However, when the latent state space Ŝ is not identical
to the observation space, novelty estimated in latent space may not reflect the novelty in the true
state space. Specifically, before the first observation of a non-zero reward, value-equivalent models
(such as used by MuZero) may abstract all states in sparse-reward environments into one constant
representation that supports the value prediction of zero. As a result, all states (even unobserved
states) may be associated with the same novelty of zero in the latent space. This problem can
be circumvented by driving reconstruction losses (see Section 2.2) through the transition model,
incentivizing the learned model to distinguish between unique states, or by learning an auxiliary
dynamics model which does not need to be robust but only distinguish between novel and observed
starting-states and action sequences. Variations of these methods have been used successfully by
Henaff (2019) and Sekar et al. (2020).
To estimate the novelty of states in the true state space of the environment (whether the model
is learned or provided) we chose the lightweight novelty estimator RND (see Section 2.3 and
Appendix D.4 for additional details) for its expected reliability in detecting unobserved states. To
evaluate E-MCTS with the value-equivalent dynamics model of MuZero we provide the agent with
reliable (but unrealistic) transition uncertainty in the form of state-action visitation counts in the true
state space S (see Appendix D.5 for additional details). To estimate the value uncertainty at the leaf
σV2 (ŝT ) we use a UBE network-head (see Section 2.3) for all three transition models (given, learned
in the true state space, value-equivalent learned in latent space). We allow the gradients with respect
to the UBE head to pass through and train the value-equivalent learned transition model, similarly to
the gradients of the value, policy and reward functions (see Appendix D.2 for additional details).


4     R ELATED W ORK
Different faces of the idea of leveraging planning with learned dynamics models for exploration
have been investigated by a range of previous works, such as Yi et al. (2011), Hester & Stone
(2012), Shyam et al. (2019), Sekar et al. (2020), Lambert et al. (2022) and Henaff (2019). Among a
range of differences, these methods are not tailored for MCTS or deterministic dynamics’s models
MCTS algorithms, which are a very strong class of MBRL algorithms. We add to this line of
work E-MCTS: tailored for MCTS (and planning trees in general), lightweight and applicable to
deterministic models by approximating and propagating the variance directly resulting only in a
constant increase in computation cost to MCTS. Moerland et al. (2020) identify that the further a
state is from a terminal state in the MCTS planning tree, the more uncertainty should be associated
with it in planning, and utilizes this uncertainty to bias search in MCTS. POMCP (Silver & Veness,
2010), POMCPOW (Sunberg & Kochenderfer, 2018) and BOMCP (Mern et al., 2021) extend MCTS
to POMDPs with a probabilisticly modelled Bayesian belief state at the nodes using a probabilistic
model, while Stochastic MuZero Antonoglou et al. (2021) extended MuZero to the stochastic
setting by replacing f with a Vector Quantised Variational AutoEncoder (van den Oord et al., 2017).
Epistemic uncertainty is not distinguished explicitly or used for exploration. A common uncertainty /
novelty estimation alternative to RND Burda et al. (2019) are ensembles Lakshminarayanan et al.
(2016); Ramesh et al. (2022). The uncertainty measure is usually the disagreement between the
ensemble’s predictions. Bootstrapped DQN (BDQN, Osband et al., 2016; 2018) is an effective model-
free deep exploration approach that relies on the epistemic uncertainty estimated by an ensemble to
drive exploration. Wasserstein Temporal Difference (WTD, Metelli et al., 2019) offers an alternative
to UBE O’Donoghue et al. (2018) for propagating epistemic uncertainty in TD-learning, using
Wasserstein Barycenters Agueh & Carlier (2011) to update a posterior over Q functions in place of a
standard Bayesian update. UBE was criticized by Janz et al. (2019) for having unnecessary properties
as well as being insufficient for deep exploration with posterior-sampling based RL (PSRL, Osband
et al., 2013). These shortcomings however do not influence UCB-based exploration algorithms
which E-MCTS can be classified as. Pairing with UBE thus enables E-MCTS to benefit from the
strengths of UBE (such as uncertainty propagation, as discussed by Janz et al., 2019) while avoiding
the shortcomings identified in the paper.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5    E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate the following hypotheses: H1 E-MCTS successfully propagates epistemic uncertainty
in planning. H2 Planning in MCTS with an optimistic objective (Equation 11) is able to achieve
deep exploration. H3 Planning can be leveraged for uncertainty estimation that improves over
non-planning-based uncertainty estimation, even with learned dynamics models. We use BSUITE’s
(Osband et al., 2020) hard exploration benchmark Deep Sea. The Deep Sea environment encapsulates
some of the hardest challenges associated with exploration: The probability of finding the unique
optimal action trajectory through random action selection decays exponentially with the size of the
environment. Every transition in the direction of the goal receives a negative reward that is negligible
in comparison to the goal reward, but is otherwise the only reward the agent sees discouraging
exploration in the direction that leads to the goal. Finally, the action mappings are randomized such
that the effect of the same action is not the same in every state, preventing the agent from generalizing
across actions. Three variations of the transition model f are investigated: (i) An AlphaZero model.
(ii) A MuZero model. (iii) An anchored model (dynamics trained exclusively with a reconstruction
loss). The reward r, value v and policy π functions are always trained in the MuZero manner, using
the framework of EfficientZero (Ye et al., 2021). For implementation details see appendices D.3 D.2
and D.5. We compare four exploration methods: (i) E-MCTS (ours). (ii) An Alpha/MuZero agent
that uses UBE predictions post-planning (see Appendix D.8 for details). (iii) The Alpha/MuZero
exploration baseline which is uninformed with respect to epistemic uncertainty. (iv) Model-free
Bootstrapped DQN (BDQN, Osband et al., 2016). The results are presented in Figures 1 and 2.
E-MCTS demonstrates reliable uncertainty propagation through successful deep exploration with all
three transition models, supporting hypotheses H1 & H2, as well as outperforms the UBE baseline in
all three models, demonstrating improvement from planning with propagated uncertainty, supporting
hypotheses H3 (Figure 1). E-MCTS scales very well, sub-exponentially as expected (Figure 2, left).
Since exploitation and exploration episodes alternate, the exploration parameter β need only be
large enough to induce sufficient exploration to solve Deep Sea, resulting in low average regret
across a wide range of values of β (Figure 2, right). Figure 3 demonstrates the reliability of the
uncertainty estimated by E-MCTS by comparing it with inverse-counts as ground-truth. As expected,
the uncertainty diminishes monotonically throughout training for all visited states.

                                                                   AlphaZero Transition Model
                                                                                                   800
                                                                               Discovered states
       Episodic return


                                                                                                   600                               E-MCTS (RND)
                         0.5                                                                                                         UBE (RND)
                                                                                                   400                               Uninformed
                                                                                                                                     BDQN ensem. size 10
                                                                                                   200                               maximum
                         0.0
                               0   10000       20000       30000       40000                             0   10000   20000       30000            40000
                                           Environment steps                                                     Environment steps
                                                                    MuZero Transition Model
                         1.0
                                                                                                   750
                                                                               Discovered states
       Episodic return


                                                                                                                                     E-MCTS (counts)
                         0.5                                                                       500                               UBE (counts)
                                                                                                                                     Uninformed
                                                                                                   250                               BDQN ensem. size 10
                                                                                                                                     maximum
                         0.0
                               0   10000       20000       30000       40000                             0   10000   20000       30000            40000
                                           Environment steps                                                     Environment steps
                                                                   Anchored Transition Model
                         1.0                                                                       800
                                                                               Discovered states
       Episodic return


                                                                                                   600                               E-MCTS (RND)
                         0.5                                                                       400                               UBE (RND)
                                                                                                                                     Uninformed
                                                                                                                                     BDQN ensem. size 10
                                                                                                   200                               maximum
                         0.0
                               0   10000       20000       30000       40000                             0   10000   20000       30000            40000
                                           Environment steps                                                     Environment steps


Figure 1: Deep Sea 40 by 40, mean and standard error for 20 seeds. Rows: Different transition
models. Left: episodic return in evaluation vs. environment steps. Right: exploration rate (number of
discovered states vs. environment steps).



                                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                   2^(N-1)
                                                                   E-MCTS, AlphaZero transition model, RND
                                                                                                                                                  1.0                E-MCTS, AlphaZero transition model, RND

                                             105                   E-MCTS, anchored transition model, RND


       Episodes until < 90% average regret


                                                                                                              Average regret over 1000 episodes
                                                                   UBE, anchored transition model, RND
                                                                   BDQN, ensemble size 10                                                         0.8
                                             104
                                                                                                                                                  0.6

                                             103                                                                                                  0.4

                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                             102
                                                   10         20         30                40           50                                               0.0 10 3 10 2 10 1 100 101 102 103
                                                                   DeepSea Size                                                                                           Beta


Figure 2: Left: Scaling to growing Deep Sea sizes. Mean of 5 seeds with standard error. Right: The
effect of the exploration perparameter β for Deep Sea 30 by 30. Mean of 3 seeds with standard error.

                                                                                           Root Uncertainty, AlphaZero model (RND)
                                                   t = 1000                     t = 5000                                                           t = 10000               t = 15000
                                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                                                                                                                                                                          50
                                                                                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                       Inverse Counts
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0


Figure 3: Heat maps over states in DeepSea 40 by 40 (lower triangle) at different times (columns)
during an example training run of E-MCTS with an AlphaZero transition model. Upper row:
value uncertainty at the E-MCTS root node. Lower row: inverse visitation counts as reliable local
uncertainty. Score of 2.0 represents unvisited.

6   C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

In this work we present E-MCTS, a novel method for incorporating epistemic uncertainty into
MCTS. We use E-MCTS to modify the planning objective of MCTS to an exploratory objective
to achieve deep exploration with MCTS-based MBRL agents. We evaluate E-MCTS on the Deep
Sea benchmark, which is designed to be a hard exploration challenge, where our method yields
significant improvements in state space exploration and uncertainty estimation. In addition, E-MCTS
demonstrates the benefits of planning for exploration by empirically outperforming non-planning deep
exploration baselines. The framework of E-MCTS provides a backbone for propagating uncertainty
in other tree-based planning methods, as well as for the development of additional approaches
to harnessing epistemic uncertainty. For example: (i) With E-MCTS, it is possible to plan with
a conservative objective by discouraging uncertain decisions to improve reliability in the face of
the unknown, which is paramount in the offline-RL setting. (ii) E-MCTS can be used to avoid
planning into trajectories that increase epistemic uncertainty in value prediction, with the aim of
achieving more reliable planning. (iii) Down-scaling of epistemically-uncertain targets has been
used by Lee et al. (2021) and Wu et al. (2021) to improve the learning process of online and offline
RL agents respectively. Given the advantages in exploration, it stands to reason that the improved
value-uncertainty estimates from E-MCTS can benefit those approaches as well.


                                                                                                             9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Martial Agueh and Guillaume Carlier. Barycenters in the Wasserstein space. SIAM Journal on
 Mathematical Analysis, 43(2):904–924, 2011.
Ioannis Antonoglou, Julian Schrittwieser, Sherjil Ozair, Thomas K Hubert, and David Silver. Planning
  in stochastic environments with a learned model. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.
Karl Johan Åström. Optimal control of Markov processes with incomplete state information I.
 Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 10:174–205, 1965.
Marc Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Remi Munos.
 Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Richard Bellman. A Markovian decision process. Journal of mathematics and mechanics, 6(5):
  679–684, 1957.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos J. Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New
  Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019.
Ivo Danihelka, Arthur Guez, Julian Schrittwieser, and David Silver. Policy improvement by planning
  with Gumbel. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Alhussein Fawzi, Matej Balog, Aja Huang, Thomas Hubert, Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mo-
  hammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Julian Schrittwieser, Grze-
  gorz Swirszcz, David Silver, Demis Hassabis, and Pushmeet Kohli. Discovering faster matrix
  multiplication algorithms with reinforcement learning. Nature, 610(7930):47–53, 2022. doi:
  10.1038/s41586-022-05172-4.
Mikael Henaff. Explicit explore-exploit algorithms in continuous state spaces. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Todd Hester and Peter Stone. Intrinsically motivated model learning for a developing curious agent.
  In 2012 IEEE international conference on development and learning and epigenetic robotics
  (ICDL), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2012.
Eyke Hüllermeier and Willem Waegeman. Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in machine learning:
  An introduction to concepts and methods. Machine Learning, 110(3):457–506, 2021.
David Janz, Jiri Hron, Przemysław Mazur, Katja Hofmann, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato, and
  Sebastian Tschiatschek. Successor uncertainties: exploration and uncertainty in temporal difference
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Yoshua
  Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, 2015. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit based Monte-Carlo planning. In European conference
  on machine learning, pp. 282–293. Springer, 2006.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.01474, 2016.
Nathan Lambert, Markus Wulfmeier, William Whitney, Arunkumar Byravan, Michael Bloesch,
  Vibhavari Dasagi, Tim Hertweck, and Martin Riedmiller. The challenges of exploration for offline
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11861, 2022.
Kimin Lee, Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. Sunrise: A simple unified
  framework for ensemble learning in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 6131–6141. PMLR, 2021.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Owen Lockwood and Mei Si. A review of uncertainty for deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings
 of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment, volume 18,
 pp. 155–162, 2022.
Amol Mandhane, Anton Zhernov, Maribeth Rauh, Chenjie Gu, Miaosen Wang, Flora Xue, Wendy
 Shang, Derek Pang, Rene Claus, Ching-Han Chiang, Cheng Chen, Jingning Han, Angie Chen,
 Daniel J. Mankowitz, Jackson Broshear, Julian Schrittwieser, Thomas Hubert, Oriol Vinyals, and
 Timothy A. Mann. MuZero with self-competition for rate control in VP9 video compression. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2202.06626, 2022.
Daniel J. Mankowitz, Andrea Michi, Anton Zhernov, Marco Gelmi, Marco Selvi, Cosmin Paduraru,
  Edouard Leurent, Shariq Iqbal, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Alex Ahern, Thomas Koppe, Kevin Millikin,
  Stephen Gaffney, Sophie Elster, Jackson Broshear, Chris Gamble, Kieran Milan, Robert Tung,
  Minjae Hwang, Taylan Cemgil, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Yujia Li, Amol Mandhane, Thomas
  Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Demis Hassabis, Pushmeet Kohli, Martin Riedmiller, Oriol Vinyals,
  and David Silver. Faster sorting algorithms discovered using deep reinforcement learning. Nature,
  618(7964):257–263, 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06004-9.
John Mern, Anil Yildiz, Zachary Sunberg, Tapan Mukerji, and Mykel J Kochenderfer. Bayesian
  optimized Monte-Carlo planning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 35, pp. 11880–11887, 2021.
Alberto Maria Metelli, Amarildo Likmeta, and Marcello Restelli. Propagating uncertainty in re-
  inforcement learning via Wasserstein barycenters. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32, 2019.
Thomas M Moerland, Joost Broekens, Aske Plaat, and Catholijn M Jonker. The second type of
  uncertainty in Monte-Carlo tree search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.09645, 2020.
Brendan O’Donoghue, Ian Osband, Remi Munos, and Volodymyr Mnih. The uncertainty Bellman
  equation and exploration. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3836–3845,
  2018.
Ian Osband, Daniel Russo, and Benjamin Van Roy. (More) efficient reinforcement learning via
  posterior sampling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.
Ian Osband, Charles Blundell, Alexander Pritzel, and Benjamin Van Roy. Deep exploration via
  bootstrapped DQN. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29:4026–4034, 2016.
Ian Osband, John Aslanides, and Albin Cassirer. Randomized prior functions for deep reinforcement
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Ian Osband, Yotam Doron, Matteo Hessel, John Aslanides, Eren Sezener, Andre Saraiva, Katrina
  McKinney, Tor Lattimore, Csaba Szepesvári, Satinder Singh, Benjamin Van Roy, Richard Sutton,
  David Silver, and Hado van Hasselt. Behaviour suite for reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=rygf-kSYwH.
Aditya Ramesh, Louis Kirsch, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Exploring through
  random curiosity with general value functions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:18733–18748, 2022.
Christopher D Rosin. Multi-armed bandits with episode context. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial
  Intelligence, 61(3):203–230, 2011.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap, and
  David Silver. Mastering Atari, Go, Chess and Shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature,
  588(7839):604–609, 2020.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
  Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8583–8592. PMLR, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pranav Shyam, Wojciech Jaśkowski, and Faustino Gomez. Model-based active exploration. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5779–5788. PMLR, 2019.
David Silver and Joel Veness. Monte-Carlo planning in large POMDPs. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 23, 2010.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driess-
  che, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Vedavyas Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander
  Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy P. Lillicrap,
  Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game
  of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, Yutian Chen, Timothy Lillicrap, Fan
  Hui, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the
  game of Go without human knowledge. Nature, 550(7676):354–359, 2017.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Arthur Guez, Marc Lanctot,
  Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap, Karen Simonyan, and Demis
  Hassabis. A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters Chess, Shogi, and Go through
  self-play. Science, 362(6419):1140–1144, 2018.
Zachary N Sunberg and Mykel J Kochenderfer. Online algorithms for POMDPs with continuous
  state, action, and observation spaces. In Twenty-Eighth International Conference on Automated
  Planning and Scheduling, 2018.
Aaron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Neural discrete representation learning.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017.
Yue Wu, Shuangfei Zhai, Nitish Srivastava, Joshua M Susskind, Jian Zhang, Ruslan Salakhutdi-
  nov, and Hanlin Goh. Uncertainty weighted actor-critic for offline reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11319–11328. PMLR, 2021.
Weirui Ye, Shaohuai Liu, Thanard Kurutach, Pieter Abbeel, and Yang Gao. Mastering Atari games
 with limited data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:25476–25488, 2021.
Sun Yi, F Gomez, and J Schmidhuber. Planning to be surprised: Optimal Bayesian exploration
  in dynamic environments. In Proc. Fourth Conference on Artificial General Intelligence (AGI),
  Google, Mountain View, CA, 2011.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     L AW OF T OTAL VARIANCE
The law of total variance for two continuous random variables X and Y can be derived as follows:
             Z                                  ZZ
VY [Y ] =       (Y − EY [Y ])2 p(Y ) dY =          (Y − EY [Y ])2 p(X, Y ) dX dY
             ZZ                                                  h                      i
        =          (Y − EY [Y ])2 p(Y |X) p(X) dX dY = EX EY (Y − EY [Y ])2 X
                  h                                              i
        = EX EY (Y − EY [Y |X] + EY [Y |X] − EY [Y ])2 X
                  h                          i       h                                            i
        = EX EY (Y − EY [Y |X])2 X + 2 EX EY [Y |X] − EY [Y |X] EY [Y |X] − EY [Y ]

                    |          {z           }           |         {z        }
                                 VY [Y |X]                                       0
                      h                           i
               + EX (EY [Y |X] − EY [Y ])2

                                                       =     VX EY [Y |X] + EX VY [Y |X]
                 |          {z             }
                            VX [EY [Y |X]]



B     F IRST O RDER TAYLOR A PPROXIMATION OF VARIANCE OF N EXT S TATE
This appendix derives Equation 6:

    Σk+1       :=    V[Ŝk+1 ]     =     EŜk VŜk+1 [Ŝk+1 |Ŝk , ak ]      + VŜk EŜk+1 [Ŝk+1 |Ŝk , ak ]
                                         |            {z               }       |              {z              }
                                   ≈             Σ(ŝk , ak )                + Jf (ŝk , ak ) Σk Jf (ŝk , ak )⊤ .
First note that E[Ŝk ] = ŝk , E[Ŝk+1 |Ŝk , ak ] = f (Ŝk , ak ) and V[Ŝk+1 |Ŝk , ak ] = Σ(Ŝk , ak ) by
definition. The first term is approximated using first order Taylor approximation as follows:
E[V[Ŝk+1 |Ŝk , ak ]] = E[Σ(Ŝk , ak )] ≈ E[Σ(ŝk , ak ) + (Ŝk − ŝk )⊤ JΣ (ŝk , ak )⊤ ] = Σ(ŝk , ak ) .
The second term is approximated in a similar manner:
                                                                             2
V[E[Ŝk+1 |Ŝk , ak ]] = V[f (Ŝk , ak )] ≈ E (Ŝk − ŝk )⊤ Jf (ŝk , ak )⊤      = Jf (ŝk , ak )Σk Jf (ŝk , ak )⊤ ,

                                               |           {z             }
due to                                                      |                        0
                                               z           }|             { z       }|        {
          f (Ŝk , ak ) − E[f (Ŝk , ak )] ≈ (Ŝk − ŝk ) Jf (ŝk , ak ) − E[(Ŝk − ŝk )⊤ ] Jf (ŝk , ak )⊤
                                                          ⊤               ⊤


C     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
We include a table evaluating interactions-to-goal on deep-sea 40 by 40 for all investigated transition
models and the three MCTS agents: E-MCTS (ours), UBE and the uninformed baseline. The results
demonstrate that even when the learned dynamics model is not designed for planning (anchored
model, third block, Table 1), E-MCTS is able to find the goal much faster. Not due to faster-
exploration per-se (1, third row, the exploration rate is very similar across baselines), but due to
apparent higher reliability of the uncertainty prediction, resulting in reliable exploration throughout
the entire state-action space.


        Table 1: Number of environment steps until the first visitation to the goal transition.
                                      Average steps to goal transition for
                     Exploration                                                % seeds that discovered goal
                                      seeds that discovered goal ± STD
      AlphaZero       E-MCTS                   10539 ± 9006                           94% of 35 seeds
      Model             UBE                     22801 ± 7514                          91% of 35 seeds
      + RND          Uninformed                        -                               0% of 20 seeds
      MuZero          E-MCTS                   14339 ± 6845                          100% of 23 seeds
      Model             UBE                     29945 ± 8113                          57% of 21 seeds
      + Counts       Uninformed                        -                               0% of 20 seeds
      Anchored        E-MCTS                   15241 ± 3236                           95% of 20 seeds
      Model             UBE                     22497 ± 6645                          85% of 20 seeds
      + RND          Uninformed                        -                               0% of 20 seeds



                                                        13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS


D.1    TARGETS


                                                                                k
In MuZero, the value targets vMCTS
                              t+k for the prediction of value of latent state ŝt that matches true
state st+k are computed as an n-step TD target:
                                        n−1
                                         P i
                               vMCTS
                                 t+k =      γ rt+k+i + γ n vt+k+n
                                                            MCTS
                                               i=0

       MCTS
Where vt+k+n can be computed in one of two ways:

  (i) The value of the root of an MCTS tree computed for state st+k+n .


 (ii) A prediction of the value network v for latent state ŝ0t+k+n .

Method (i) is expected to result in better value targets, but is more expensive computationally. Method
(ii) is significantly cheaper computationally, but might hinder learning through the lack of value
improvement (a max operator) on the value bootstrap. We refer to (i) as root-based targets.
The UBE target utarget                                                              k
                  t+k for the prediction of value-uncertainty from the UBE head u(ŝt ) is computed
a similar manner:
                                  n−1
                        utarget
                                  P 2i 2 0
                           t+k =      γ σ (ŝt+k+i , at+k+i ) + γ 2n ut+k+n
                                    i=0

Analogous to the value target, the bootstrap ut+k+n can be computed in two different ways:

  (i) When E-MCTS is used, the target can be computed similarly to the MuZero value target, as
      the epistemic uncertainty of the root of an E-MCTS tree computed for state st+k+n . This tree
      can plan for an exploitatory objective (equation 1) to estimate the uncertainty of the value
      V π (st+k+n ), an exploratory objective (equation 11) to estimate the uncertainty of the value
      associated with the exploration policy, or even an uncertainty-maximizing objective:
                                             q                 q
                                                                  2 log( a′ N (ŝk ,a′ ))
                                                                        P
                        ak := arg max σq2 (ŝk , ak ) + C               N (ŝk ,ak )
                                          ak
      Where the q term has been dropped entirely as an optimistic bound over the uncertainty to
      encourage exploration. Similarly, we refer to using as target the E-MCTS uncertainty prediction
      at the root as a root-based target. In our experiments, when UBE root-based target were used,
      we have used the uncertainty-maximizing objective.


 (ii) When E-MCTS is not used, the UBE bootstrap ut+k+n is computed as the maximum UBE over
      possible actions from state st+k+n :
                   ut+k+n = max σ 2 (ŝ0t+k+n , at+k+n ) + γ 2 u(f (ŝ0t+k+n , at+k+n ))
                                at+k+n

      These targets were used for all UBE-only agents, and for the E-MCTS agents that did not use
      root-based targets.

In all experiments we have used n = 1 (one-step targets) for the UBE targets.
In MuZero, the reward and value predictions r(ŝkt , at+k ), v(ŝkt ) are represented as a discrete proba-
bility distribution over a range of discrete values [−M, M ], M ∈ N. To transform the scalar value
and reward targets to a categorical representation of the same representation format, a transformation
function ϕ(x) is used, transforming a real number x into a categorical representation through a linear
interpolation between its adjacent integers.


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2    L OSSES
The original MuZero algorithm uses three loss functions:
                                       P l−1
                                     1
                                              ϕ(rt+k )⊤ log r(ŝkt , at+k )
                                           P
                          Lr := |B|
                                                t∈Bk=0

                                                P l−1           ⊤        k
                                           1
                                                        ϕ(vMCTS
                                                  P
                              Lv    :=    |B|              t+k ) log v(ŝt )
                                                t∈Bk=0

                                                P l−1
                                                         (st+k )⊤ log π(ŝkt )
                                           1
                                                  P MCTS
                              Lπ    :=    |B|         π
                                                t∈Bk=0

Where B ≡ {st , at , rt , st+1 , at+1 , . . . , st+l }t∈B is a training batch containing b trajectories of
length l sampled from different episodes, rt+k is the true reward observed in the environment,
r(ŝkt , ak ), v(ŝkt ), π(ŝkt ) are respectively the reward value and policy predictions for latent state ŝkt
(and action at+k when appropriate). π MCTS (st+k ) is a discrete probability distribution computed
based on the normalized visitation counts to the children of an MCTS root computed at state st+k
(see Equation 3).
In MuZero the gradient from the losses Lr , Lv , Lπ propagates through the transition model f and are
the only learning signal that is used to train the model. For the anchored model (see Section 5) we
use an additional reconstruction loss:
                                                P l−1
                                                   P k
                                             1
                                    Lre := |B|        ||ŝt − st+k ||2
                                                    t∈Bk=0

Which can alternatively be thought of as a consistency loss, where g is the identity function. The
mean squared error loss is denoted with LMSE . To estimate value-uncertainty at the leaves, we train a
UBE function u with a UBE loss Lu :
                                           P l−1
                                         1
                                                 ϕ(utarget T      k
                                               P
                                 Lu := |B|            t+k ) log ût
                                                  t∈Bk=0


The final loss is computed as:
                                   L := λr Lr + λv Lv + λπ Lπ + λu Lu
Where the coefficients λr , λv , λπ , λu are used to weigh the relative effects the individual components
of the loss have on the learned transition model f . When Lre was used (the anchored model in
Section 5), the model parameters of f were affected only by Lre , through a second backwards pass.


D.3    D IFFERENT DYNAMICS M ODELS
We describe the three transition models used in 5 in more detail. The AlphaZero dynamics model is a
true model of the dynamics of the environment, in the true state space of the environment. When
planning with this model local uncertainty is estimated with RND and value-uncertainty is estimated
with UBE. The MuZero model is a value-equivalent model in latent space. g, f are learned by the
agent during training from the value, policy, reward and UBE losses. When planning with this model
local uncertainty is estimated with state-visitation-counts (see D.5 and value-uncertainty is estimated
with UBE. The anchored-MuZero transition model trained only to predict the true transition dynamics
of the environment through a reconstruction loss Lkre (see Appendix D.2). When planning with this
model local uncertainty is estimated with RND and value-uncertainty is estimated with UBE.


D.4    P LANNING WITH R ANDOM N ETWORK D ISTILLATION BASED E PISTEMIC U NCERTAINTY
Many popular novelty-estimators in deep RL (such as RND, or even deep-ensembles Osband et al.,
2018) do not directly provide a reliable variance estimate. Many deep ensemble methods for
example rely on ensemble disagreement (Sekar et al., 2020), but do not assume that the variance
in the ensemble approximates the variance of a distribution, but rather should be high on unknown
and low on known inputs. This problem is exacerbated when a covariance matrix needs to be
approximated (for example, for Equation 6). To circumvent this limitation of standard and popular
uncertainty estimation methods we estimate the uncertainty in latent state Σk and the uncertainty in
the predictions based on latent state σR together into one score. More specifically, we use Σk = 0


                                                         15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and σV (ŝk ) = max Lrnd (ŝk−1 , ak−1 ), u f (ŝk−1 , ak−1 ) . This choice is sufficient for E-MCTS
to significantly improve over a comparable non-planning deep exploration baselines, see Section 5.
When the planning is done with a true model, the agent has access to the true states st+k and can
use RND to evaluate transition uncertainty over the state action pair (st+k , at+k ) directly. When
the planning is done with the anchored model, the latent states outputted by the transition model ŝkt
approximate the true states st+k which allows us to use RND over (ŝkt , at+k ). In both cases, RND is
trained only over the observed transitions (st+k , at+k ), not latent state representations (ŝkt , at+k ), to
achieve the objective of yielding large RND prediction errors the further the latent state prediction ŝkt
is from observed state st+k .


D.5    P LANNING WITH V ISITATION -C OUNTS BASED E PISTEMIC U NCERTAINTY
When planning with the abstracted model, we provide the agent with access to two additional
mechanisms that are used only for local uncertainty estimation: the true model F (st , at ) of the
environment and a state-action visitation counter C(st , at ). During planning, the true transition
model follows the planning decisions at:t+k and keeps track of the true state st+k . When the agent
evaluates the local uncertainty with transition (ŝkt , at+k ) the true model provides the matching true
state st+k to the visitation counter, which produces the local uncertainty based on the following
formula:
                                                                1
                                σ 2 (st+k , at+k ) =
                                                      C(st+k , at+k ) + ϵ
Where 0 < ϵ ≤ 1 is a constant and C(st+k , at+k ) counts the number of times the state action pair
(st+k , at+k ) has been observed in the environment. This allows us to evaluate the abstracted-model
agent in the presence of a reliable source of local uncertainty. The leaf-value uncertainty u(ŝkt )
(which is the dominating factor in visited areas of the state space, as σ 2 (st+k , at+k ) → 0 quickly in
observed transitions) relies entirely on the learned UBE function u which operates directly on latent
states ŝkt .


D.6    S EPARATING E XPLORATION FROM E XPLOITATION
Acting in the environment with a dedicated exploration policy can be expected to result in samples that
are very off-exploitation-policy. Learning from very off-policy data is known for causing instability
in training even in off-policy agents. To mitigate that, the E-MCTS and only-UBE agents (see section
5) alternate between two types of training episodes: exploratory episodes that follow an exploration
policy throughout the episode (such as a policy generated by E-MCTS with an exploratory planning
objective), and exploitatory episodes that follow the standard MuZero exploitation policy throughout
the episode. This enables us to provide the agent with quality exploitation targets to evaluate and train
the value and policy functions reliably, while also providing a large amount of exploratory samples
that explore the environment much more effectively and are more likely to efficiently search for
high-reward interactions.
In practice, rather than alternate between exploration and exploitation episodes we run a certain
number of episodes in parallel, a certain portion of which are exploitatory and the rest are exploratory.
In our experiments the ratio was 50/50. During exploration episodes, we do not wish to bias the search
in the tree with respect to previously tried actions, but rather only with respect to the combination of
value and uncertainty (equation 11). We set the policy prediction π(ŝkt ) (see Equation 2) to uniform
over all actions, for all ŝkt during exploration episodes. In addition, Dirichlet noise was not used to
drive exploration in MCTS with the UBE and E-MCTS agents.


D.7    E NVIRONMENT A DAPTATION
To maintain the exploration difficulty of Deep Sea while reducing numerical challenges, we amplify
the goal reward from 1 to 10. To limit the challenge of learning a model that can distinguish between
approximately N 2 unique states when learning the true dynamics of the environment, while retaining
the exploration challenge of searching for one trajectory in a total of 2N trajectories, we choose
environment size N = 40, for a (40, 40) grid. To further simplify model learning with the anchored
model, the representation function g that was used for the anchored model transforms the observations


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


from 2 dimensional (N, N ) one-hot representations to 1 dimensional (2N ) representations where
the first N entries are a 1-hot vector representing the row and following N entries are a 1-hot vector
representing the column. From this perspective, we can view the Lre loss that was used to train the
anchored model as a consistency loss between the representation and the state prediction rather than
a reconstruction loss. The loss itself is the same loss specified in Appendix D.2.

D.8   UBE BASELINE
The UBE baseline agent uses MCTS to evaluate the value of actions using MCTS in the same
manner as Alpha/MuZero, and explores by taking the action at that maximizes the combination of
the Q-values approximated by MCTS q, local uncertainty σ 2 and UBE u:
                                               p
                  at = arg max q(ŝ0 , at ) + β σ 2 (ŝ0 , at ) + γ 2 u(f (ŝ0 , at )).   (14)
                              a


D.9   C OMPUTE
The experiments were run on the [anonymized for review] computation clusters, using any of the
following GPU architectures: NVIDIA Quadro K2200, Tesla P100, GeForce GTX 1080 Ti, GeForce
RTX 2080 Ti, Tesla V100S and Nvidia A-40. Each seed was ran on one GPU, and was given access
to 100 GB of RAM and 16 CPU cores. Total training time was in the range of 12 to 65 hours per
seed, depending on GPU architecture and whether root-based targets (see Appendix D.1) which
significantly increased training time were used or not.


E     N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE & H YPERPARAMETERS
E.1   H YPERPARAMETER S EARCH
Due to the large number of hyperparameters in the MuZero framework, our optimization process
consisted of manual modifications to the hyperparameters used by Ye et al. (2021) with the objective
of achieving learning stability on the target environment with the simplest network architectures
possible. Two exceptions to this statement are the RND network architecture and scale, and the
exploration parameter β.
The RND architecture was designed with the objective of reliably achieving small RND predictions
over observed state-action pairs and large predictions over unobserved state-action pairs. The RND
scale was tuned with the objective of achieving local uncertainty measures for unobserved state-action
pairs that are significantly larger than the minimum reward of Deep Sea.
The β parameter was tuned with the objective that the E-MCTS and only-UBE agents will prioritize
exploration of the environment over exploitation until the entire environment has been searched, and
was tuned separately for every model.

E.2   N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE
The functions f, g, r, v, u, π, ψ, ψ ′ used fully connected DNNs of varying sizes. The sizes of the
hidden layers and output layers are specified in Table 2.

E.3   H YPERPARAMETER C ONFIGURATION
We detail the full set of hyperparameters in Tables 3 and 4. For the BDQN baseline, we used the
default implementation in https://github.com/deepmind/bsuite, with ensemble size of
10 and matching batch size to E-MCTS: number of unroll steps times batch size 5 · 256 = 1230.
Otherwise, the default hyper parameters were used.


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Table 2: Network architecture hyperparameters
                                                 True Model
                       Function Hidden Layers Sizes Output Layer Size
                          f                 -                    -
                          g                 -                    -
                          r            [256, 256]               21
                          v            [256, 256]               21
                          u            [256, 256]               21
                          π            [256, 256]                2
                                               Anchored Model
                       Function Hidden Layers Sizes Output Layer Size
                          f        [1024, 1024, 1024]           80
                          g                 -                    -
                          r            [256, 256]               21
                          v            [256, 256]               21
                          u            [256, 256]               21
                          π            [256, 256]                2
                                              Abstracted Model
                       Function Hidden Layers Sizes Output Layer Size
                          f        [1024, 1024, 1024]           100
                          g            [512, 512]               100
                          r            [128, 128]               21
                          v            [128, 128]               21
                          u          [128, 128, 128]            21
                          π            [128, 128]                2
                                          RND network architecture
                       Function Hidden Layers Sizes Output Layer Size
                          ψ           [1024, 1024]              512
                         ψ′               [512]                 512


                             Table 3: Shared across all models and agents
              Parameter                           Setting                     Comment
        Stacked Observations                          1
                   γ                               0.995
    Number of simulations in MCTS                    50
       Dirichlet noise ratio (ξ)                    0.3
      Root exploration fraction                       0
              Batch size                            256
            Learning rate                         0.0005
              Optimizer                  Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015)
            Unroll steps l                            5
      Value target TD steps (nv )                     5
      UBE target TD steps (nu )                       1
          value support size                         21
          UBE support size                           21
         Reward support size                         21
       Reanalyzed policy ratio                      0.99                 See (Ye et al., 2021)
                                                                    See (Schrittwieser et al., 2020)
  Prioritized sampling from the replay             True
                                                                             Appendix G
                                                                    See (Schrittwieser et al., 2020)
         Priority exponent (α)                     0.6
                                                                             Appendix G
                                                                    See (Schrittwieser et al., 2020)
        Priority correction (βp )                0.4 → 1
                                                                             Appendix G
           Evaluation episodes                       8
      Min replay size for sampling                 300
   Self-play network updating inerval                5
    Target network updating interval                10



                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Table 4: Specific for models and agents
                                                      Setting
    Parameter             True Model             Abstracted Model          Anchored Model
                     E-MCTS UBE Uninf.        E-MCTS UBE Uninf.         E-MCTS UBE Uninf.
  Training steps /
    environment       45K     45K     45K      35K      35K     35K      45K     45K     45K
    interactions
    Reward loss
                       1       1       1         1        1      1        1       1       1
      weight λr
     Value-loss
                       0.5     0.5     0.5      0.5      0.5    0.5       0.5     0.5     0.5
      weight λv
     Policy-loss
                       0.5     0.5     0.5      0.5      0.5    0.5       0.5     0.5     0.5
     weight λπ
      UBE-loss
                      0.125   0.125     -      0.25     0.25     -       0.125   0.125     -
     weight λu
     RND scale         1.0     1.0      -        -        -      -       0.001   0.001     -
     Root based
                      False   False   False    True     True    True     False   False   False
       targets
      Disabled
        policy        True    True    False    True     True   False     True    True    False
   in exploration
     Number of
       parallel        2       2       2         2        2      2        2       2       2
      episodes
      Out of are
     exploration       1       1        -        1        1      -        1       1        -
      episodes
    Exploration
                       10      10       -        1        1      -        10      10       -
    coefficient β
  Dirichlet noise
                       0       0      0.25       0        0     0.25      0       0      0.25
    magnitude ρ


                                                19
