Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


TACKLING B YZANTINE C LIENTS IN
F EDERATED L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         The possibility of adversarial (a.k.a., Byzantine) clients makes federated learning
         (FL) prone to arbitrary manipulation. The natural approach to robustify FL against
         adversarial clients is to replace the simple averaging operation at the server in
         the standard FedAvg algorithm by a robust averaging rule. While a significant
         amount of work has been devoted to studying the convergence of federated robust
         averaging (which we denote by FedRo), prior work has largely ignored the impact
         of client subsampling and local steps, two fundamental FL characteristics. While
         client subsampling increases the effective fraction of Byzantine clients, local
         steps increase the drift between the local updates computed by honest (i.e., non-
         Byzantine) clients. Consequently, a careless deployment of FedRo could yield poor
         performance. We validate this observation by presenting an in-depth analysis of
         FedRo with two-sided step-sizes, tightly analyzing the impact of client subsampling
         and local steps. Specifically, we present a sufficient condition on client subsampling
         for nearly-optimal convergence of FedRo (for smooth non-convex loss). Also, we
         show that the rate of improvement in learning accuracy diminishes with respect to
         the number of clients subsampled, as soon as the sample size exceeds a threshold
         value. Interestingly, we also observe that under a careful choice of step-sizes, the
         learning error due to Byzantine clients decreases with the number of local steps.
         We validate our theory by experiments on the FEMNIST image classification task.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a prominent machine-learning scheme since its inception
by McMahan et al. (2017), thanks to its ability to train a model without centrally storing the training
data (Kairouz et al., 2021). In FL, the training data is distributed across multiple machines, referred to
as clients. The training procedure is coordinated by a central server that iteratively queries the clients
on their local training data. The clients do not share their raw data with the server, hence reducing
the risk of privacy infringement of training data usually present in traditional centralized schemes.
The most common algorithm to train machine learning models in a federated manner is federated
averaging (FedAvg) (McMahan et al., 2017). In short, at every round, the server holds a model that
is broadcasted to a subset of clients, selected at random. Then, each selected client executes several
steps of local updates using their local data and sends the resulting model back to the server. Upon
receiving local models from the selected clients, the server averages them to update the global model.
However, training over decentralized data makes FL algorithms, such as FedAvg, quite vulnerable
to adversarial, a.k.a., Byzantine (Lamport et al., 1982), clients that could sabotage the learning by
sending arbitrarily bad local model updates. The problem of robustness to Byzantine clients in FL
(and distributed learning at large) has received significant attention in the past (Blanchard et al.,
2017; Data & Diggavi, 2021; Farhadkhani et al., 2022; Karimireddy et al., 2022; Gupta et al., 2023;
Gorbunov et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023; Allouah et al., 2023; Guerraoui et al., 2023). The general
idea for imparting robustness to an FL algorithm consists in replacing the averaging operation of
the algorithm with a robust aggregation rule, basically seeking to filter out outliers. However, most
previous works study the simplified FL setting where the server queries all clients, in every round,
and each client only performs a single local update step. As of now, it remains unclear whether these
results could readily apply to the standard FL setting (McMahan et al., 2017) where the server only
queries a small subset of clients in each round, and each client performs multiple local updates. We


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


address this shortcoming of prior work by presenting an in-depth analysis of robust FL accounting
for both client subsampling and multiple local steps. Our main findings are as follows.
Key results. We consider FedRo, a robust variant of FedAvg obtained by replacing the averaging
operation at the server with robust averaging. We observe that it is impossible to ensure convergence
of FedRo, in the presence of Byzantine clients, when the server samples a small number of clients,
since the subset of clients sampled might contain a majority of Byzantine clients in some learning
rounds with high probability. To circumvent this impossibility, we analyze a sufficient condition
on the client subsampling size. Specifically, let n and b be the total number of clients and an upper
bound on the number of Byzantine clients, respectively.1 Consider T learning rounds in which the
server samples n̂ clients. We show that the number of Byzantine clients sampled in each round is
smaller than b̂, with probability at least p, if
                                                     !−1              
                                                                      
                                                b̂ b           T
                            n̂ ≥ min n, D          ,      ln              ,                        (1)
                                                n̂ n          1−p 

where D (α, β) denotes the Kullback–Leibler divergence between two Bernoulli distributions of
respective parameters α and β. Under the above condition on the client subsampling size n̂, we show
that, ignoring higher order error terms in T , FedRo converges to an ε-stationary point with (refer to
Corollary 1 for the complete expression)
                         vu       "                     ! #                   
                           u 1 σ2                                    2
                                                 n̂ − b̂        b̂  σ
                  ε ∈ O t             + 1−               ζ2 +          + ζ2  ,                   (2)
                              n̂T K              n−b            n̂ K

where K is the number of local steps performed by each honest (i.e., non-Byzantine) client, σ 2 is
the variance of the stochastic noise of the computed gradients and ζ 2 measures the heterogeneity of
the losses across the honest clients. The first term is similar to the one obtained for FedAvg with
two-sided step-sizes and without the presence of Byzantine clients (Karimireddy et al., 2020), and
it vanishes when T → ∞. The second term is the additional non-vanishing error we incur due to
Byzantine clients. Notably, our convergence analysis shows that the asymptotic error, in the presence
of Byzantine clients, might improve upon increasing the number of local update steps executed by
honest clients. This arises from the fact that an honest client’s update is approximately the average of
K stochastic gradients, effectively reducing the variance of local updates while we maintain control
over the deviation of local models through a careful choice of two-sided step-sizes. It is important
to note that this observation does not contradict the findings of previous works (Karimireddy et al.,
2020; Yang et al., 2021) regarding the additional error due to multiple local steps, as this error term
exhibits a more favorable dependence on T and is omitted in (2) (see Corollary 1).
We remark that condition (1) is quite intricate since it intertwines two tunable parameters of the
algorithm, i.e., n̂ and b̂. We provide a practical approach to validate this condition. First, we show
(by construction) that there exists a subsampling threshold n̂th such that, for all n̂ ≥ n̂th , there exists
b̂ < n̂/2 such that (1) is satisfied. Moreover, we show that increasing n̂ further leads to a provable
reduction in the asymptotic error. However, for another threshold value n̂opt , the rate of improvement
in the asymptotic error with the sample size n̂ diminishes, i.e., effectively saturates once n̂ exceeds
n̂opt . We refer to this phenomenon as the diminishing return of FedRo.
Comparison with prior work. As noted earlier, most prior work on Byzantine robustness in FL
considers a simplified FL setting. Specifically, the impact of client subsampling is often overlooked.
Moreover, clients are often assumed to take only a single local step, with the exception of the work
by Gupta et al. (2023). The only existing work, to the best of our knowledge, that considers both
client subsampling and multiple local steps is the work of Data & Diggavi (2021). However, we note
that our convergence guarantee is significantly tighter on several fronts, expounded below.
In the absence of Byzantine clients, we recover the standard convergence rate of FedAvg (see
Section 4.2). Whereas, the convergence rate of Data & Diggavi (2021) has a residual asymptotic
error O(Kσ 2 + Kζ 2 ). Then, we show that the asymptotic error with Byzantine clients is inversely
proportional to the number of local steps K (see (2)), contrary to the aforementioned bound of Data &
   1
       We assume that b < n/2, otherwise the goal of robustness is rendered vacuous (Liu et al., 2021).


                                                         2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Diggavi (2021) that is proportional to K. Moreover, while client subsampling is considered by Data
& Diggavi (2021), it is assumed that Byzantine clients represent less than one-third of the subsampled
clients in all learning rounds, which need not be true in general. Indeed, we prove that if the sample
size n̂ is small, then the fraction of subsampled Byzantine clients is larger than 1/2 in some learning
rounds with high probability (see Section 5.1). Lastly, our analysis applies to a broad spectrum of
robustness schemes, unlike that of Data & Diggavi (2021), which only considers a specific scheme.
In fact, the scheme considered in that paper has time complexity O(min(d, n̂) · n̂2 d), where d is the
model size. Importantly, our findings eliminate the need for non-standard aggregation rules when
incorporating local steps and client subsampling in Byzantine federated learning.
Paper outline. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we formalize the problem
of FL in the presence of Byzantine clients. Section 3 presents the FedRo algorithm and the property
of robust averaging. In Section 4, we provide a theoretical analysis of the algorithm and give its
convergence guarantees. In Section 5, we present a practical approach for choosing the subsampling
size and show the diminishing return of the algorithm. Lastly, in Section 6, we validate our theoretical
results through numerical experiments.

2       P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
We consider the standard FL setting comprising a server and n clients, represented by set [n] :=
{1, . . . , n} and a scenario where at most b (out of the total n) clients may be adversarial2 , i.e.,
Byzantine. We define B ⊂ [n] as the associated subset containing the Byzantine clients and H ⊂ [n]
the subset of honest clients such that H ∪ B = [n] and H ∩ B = ∅. Consider a data space Z and a
differentiable loss function f : Rd × Z → R. Given a parameter x ∈ Rd , a data point ξ ∈ Z incurs
a loss of f (x, ξ). For each honest client i ∈ H, we consider a local data distribution D(i) and its
associated local loss function f (i) (x) := Eξ ∼D(i) [f (x, ξ)]. The goal is to minimize the global loss
function defined by the average loss function over all honest clients (Karimireddy et al., 2022):
                                                 1 X (i)
                                       F (x) :=           f (x) ,                                    (3)
                                                |H|
                                                        i∈H
More precisely, the goal, formally defined below, is to find an ε-stationary point of the global loss
function in the presence of Byzantine clients.
Definition 1 ((n, b, ε)-Byzantine resilience). A federated learning algorithm is (n, b, ε)-Byzantine
resilient if, despite the presence of at most b Byzantine clients out of n clients, it outputs x̂ such that
                                            h            i
                                                       2
                                          E ∥∇F (x̂)∥ ≤ ε ,
where the expectation is over the randomness of the algorithm.
Assumptions. We make the following three assumptions. The first two assumptions are standard in
first-order stochastic optimization (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013; Bottou et al., 2018). The third assumption
is essential for obtaining a meaningful Byzantine robustness guarantee (Allouah et al., 2023).
Assumption 1 (Smoothness). There exists L < ∞ such that ∀i ∈ H, and ∀x, y ∈ Rd , we have
                                  ∇f (i) (x) − ∇f (i) (y) ≤ L ∥x − y∥ .

Note that for all i ∈ H, as f is a differentiable function, by definition of f (i) (x), we have
                                    Eξ ∼D(i) [∇f (x, ξ)] = ∇f (i) (x) .
Assumption 2 (Bounded local noise). There exists σ < ∞ such that ∀i ∈ H, and ∀x ∈ Rd , we have

                                                          2
                                                    (i)
                        Eξ ∼D(i) ∇f (x, ξ) − ∇f (x)           ≤ σ2 .

Assumption 3 (Bounded heterogeneity). There exists ζ < ∞ such that for all x ∈ Rd , we have
                            1 X                         2
                                    ∇f (i) (x) − ∇F (x) ≤ ζ 2 .
                           |H|
                                       i∈H
    2
    Considering a known upper bound on the total number of Byzantine clients is standard and essential for
obtaining tight convergence guarantees (Blanchard et al., 2017; Karimireddy et al., 2022; Allouah et al., 2023).


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3    ROBUST F EDERATED L EARNING
We present here the natural Byzantine-robust adaptation of FedAvg. In FedAvg, the server iteratively
updates the global model using the average of the partial updates sent by the clients. However,
averaging can be manipulated by a single Byzantine client (Blanchard et al., 2017). Thus, in order to
impart robustness to the algorithm, previous work often replaces averaging with a robust aggregation
rule A. We call this robust variant Federated Robust averaging (or FedRo).
Robust aggregation rule. At the core of FedRo is the robust aggregation function A that provides a
good estimate of the honest clients’ updates in the presence of Byzantine updates. Notable robust
aggregation functions are Krum (Blanchard et al., 2017), geometric median (Pillutla et al., 2022;
Acharya et al., 2022), mean-around-median (MeaMed) (Xie et al., 2018), coordinate-wise median
and trimmed mean (Yin et al., 2018b), and minimum diameter averaging (MDA) (El-Mhamdi
et al., 2021). Considering a total number of n̂ input vectors, most aggregation rules are designed
under the assumption that the maximum number of Byzantine vectors is upper bounded by a given
parameter b̂ < n̂/2. To formalize the robustness of an aggregation rule, we use the robustness
criterion of (n̂, b̂, κ)-robustness, introduced by Allouah et al. (2023). This criterion is satisfied by
most existing aggregation rules, and allows obtaining optimal convergence guarantees. Formally,
(n̂, b̂, κ)-robustness is defined as follows.
Definition 2 ((n̂, b̂, κ)-robustness (Allouah et al., 2023)). Let b̂ < n̂/2 and κ ≥ 0. An aggregation
rule A : Rd×n̂ → Rd is said to be (n̂, b̂, κ)-robust, if for any vectors w1 , . . . , wn̂ ∈ Rd , and any
subset S ⊆ [n̂] of size n̂ − b̂, we have
                                      2   κ X                2                      1 X
         ∥A (w1 , . . . , wn̂ ) − wS ∥ ≤        ∥wi − wS ∥ , where wS =                    wi .
                                         |S|                                       |S|
                                             i∈S                                      i∈S



Algorithm 1: FedRo: FedAvg with a robust aggregation rule A
Input :Initial model x0 , number of rounds T , number of local steps K, client step-size γc ,
          server step-size γs , sample size n̂, and tolerable number of Byzantine clients b̂.
for t = 0 to T − 1 do
    Server selects a subset St of n̂ clients, uniformly at random from the set of all clients [n],
      and broadcasts xt to them;
    for each honest client i ∈ St (in parallel) do
              (i)
        Set xt,0 = xt ;
        for k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1} do
                                   (i)                                       (i)            (i)  (i)
            Sample a data point ξt,k ∼ D(i) , compute a stochastic gradient gt,k := ∇f (xt,k , ξt,k )
                            (i)        (i)         (i)
             and perform xt,k+1 := xt,k − γc gt,k ;
                             (i)     (i)
        Send to the server ut := xt,K − xt ;
                                                             (i)
   (A Byzantine client i may send an arbitrary value for ut  to the server.)

                                                                (i)
   Server updates the parameter vector xt+1 = xt + γs A ut , i ∈ St ;

Output : x̂ selected uniformly at random from x0 , . . . , xT −1 .

Description of FedRo as presented in Algorithm 1. The server starts by initializing a model x0 .
Then at each round t ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1}, it maintains a parameter vector xt which is broadcast to a
subset St of n̂ clients selected uniformly at random from [n] without replacement. Among those n̂
selected clients, some of them might be Byzantine. We assume that at most b̂ out of the n̂ clients are
Byzantine where b̂ is a parameter given as an input to the algorithm. We show later in sections 4
and 5 how to set n̂ and b̂ such that this assumption holds with high probability. Each honest client
                                             (i,0)
i ∈ St updates its current local model as xt       = xt . The round proceeds in three phases:
    • Local computations. Each honest client i ∈ St performs K successive local updates where
                                                                   (i)
      each local update k ∈ [K] consists in sampling a data point ξt,k ∼ D(i) , computing a stochastic


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  (i)          (i)   (i)
        gradient gt,k := ∇f (xt,k , ξt,k ) and making a local step:
                                             (i)             (i)    (i)
                                           xt,k+1 := xt,k − γc gt,k ,
        where γc is the client step-size.
      • Communication phase. Each honest client i ∈ St computes the difference between the global
        model and its own model after K local updates as:
                                                   (i)        (i)
                                               ut := xt,K − xt ,
        and sends it to the server.
      • Global model update. Upon receiving the update vectors from all the selected clients (Byzantine
        included) in St , the server updates the global model using an (n̂, b̂, κ)-robust aggregation rule
        A : Rn̂×d → Rd . Specifically, the global update can be written as follows

                                                            (i)
                                       xt+1 = xt + γs A ut , i ∈ St ,
        where γs is called the server step-size.

4     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
In this section, we present a detailed theoretical analysis of Algorithm 1. We first present a sufficient
condition on the parameters b̂ and n̂ for the convergence of FedRo. Then, we present our main result
demonstrating the convergence of FedRo in the presence of at most b Byzantine clients. Finally,
we explain how this result matches our original goal of designing a (n, b, ε)-Byzantine resilient
algorithm, and highlight the impact of local steps on the robustness of the scheme.

4.1     S UFFICIENT CONDITION ON n̂ AND b̂

We first make a simple observation by considering the sampling of only one client at each round,
i.e., n̂ = 1. Then, convergence can only be ensured if this client is non-Byzantine in all T rounds
of training. Indeed, if a Byzantine client is sampled, it gets full control of the learning process,
compromising any possibility for convergence. Accordingly, we can have convergence only with
probability (1 − b/n)T , which decays exponentially in T . This simple observation indicates that
having an excessively small sample size can be dangerous in the presence of Byzantine clients. More
generally, recall that the aggregation function requires a parameter b̂, which is an upper bound on the
number of Byzantine clients in the sample. If, at a given round, we have more than b̂ in the sample,
Byzantine clients can control the output of the aggregation and we cannot provide any learning
guarantee. Specifically, denoting by B̂t the set of Byzantine clients selected at round t, the learning
process can only converge if the following event holds true:
                                    n                                o
                               E = ∀t ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1}, B̂t ≤ b̂ .                               (4)
That is, in all rounds, the number of selected Byzantine clients is at most b̂. This motivates us to
devise a condition on n̂ and b̂ in FedRo that will be sufficient for E to hold with high probability. This
condition is provided in Lemma 1 below, considering the non-trivial case where b > 0.
Lemma 1. Let p < 1 and b be such that 0 < b/n < 1/2. Consider FedRo as defined in Algorithm 1.
Suppose that n̂ and b̂ are such that b/n < b̂/n̂ < 1/2 and
                                                     !−1                 
                                                                         
                                                b̂ b              T
                            n̂ ≥ min n, D          ,        ln               ,                         (5)
                                                n̂ n             1−p 
with D (α, β) := α ln (α/β ) + (1 − α) ln (1−α/1−β ), for α, β ∈ (0, 1). Then, Event E as defined in (4)
holds true with probability at least p.

Lemma 1 presents a sufficient condition on n̂ and b̂ to ensure that, with probability at least p, the
server does not sample more Byzantine clients than the expected number b̂. Note, however, that this
condition is non-trivial to satisfy due to the convoluted dependence between b̂ and n̂. We defer to
Section 5 an explicit strategy to choose both n̂ and b̂ so that (5) holds. In the next section, we will
first demonstrate the convergence of FedRo given this condition.


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2      C ONVERGENCE OF FedRo

We now present the convergence analysis of FedRo in Theorem 1 below. Essentially, we consider
Algorithm 1 with sufficiently small constant step-sizes γc and γs , and when assumptions 1, 2, and 3
hold true. We show that, with high probability, FedRo achieves a training error similar to FedAvg
(Karimireddy et al., 2020), plus an additional error term due to Byzantine clients.

 Theorem 1. Consider Algorithm 1. Suppose assumptions 1, 2, and 3 hold true. Let p < 1,
 and assume n̂ and b̂ are such that b/n < b̂/n̂ < 1/2 and (5) hold. Suppose A : Rd×n̂ → Rd is a
 (n̂, b̂, κ)-robust aggregation rule and the step-sizes are such that γc ≤ 1/16LK and γc γs ≤ 1/36LK .
 Then, with probability at least p we have,
     T −1
                                                                                     ! !
  1 X h                  2
                           i       5           20LKγc γs σ 2                 n̂ − b̂
           E ∥∇F (xt )∥ ≤               ∆0 +                      +6 1−               ζ2
  T t=0                       T Kγc γs              n̂        K              n−b
                                                                                           2
                                  10                      40                              σ
                               + γc2 L2 (K − 1)σ 2 + γc2 L2 K(K − 1)ζ 2 + 165κ               + 6ζ 2 ,
                                  3                        3                              K
 where ∆0 is a real value such that F (x0 ) − minx∈Rd F (x) ≤ ∆0 .

Setting γc = 1, n̂ = n, b̂ = b and K = 1, FedRo reduces to the robust implementation of distributed
SGD studied by several previous works (Blanchard et al., 2017;  Yin et al., 2018b). In this case, the
last term of our convergence guarantee is in O κ(σ 2 + ζ 2 ) , which is an additive factor O(κσ 2 )
away from the optimal bound (Allouah et al., 2023; Karimireddy et al., 2022). However, the
dependency on σ for FedRo is unavoidable because the algorithm does not use noise reduction
techniques, as prescribed by Karimireddy et al. (2021); Farhadkhani et al. (2022); Gorbunov et al.
(2023). These techniques typically rely on the observation that, when a client computes stochastic
gradients over several rounds, one can construct update vectors with decreasing variance by utilizing
previously computed stochastic gradients. However, in a practical federated learning setting, when
we typically have n ≫ n̂, individual clients may only be selected for a limited number of rounds,
rendering it impractical to rely on previously computed gradients to reduce the variance. It thus
remains open to close the O(κσ 2 ) gap between the upper and lower bounds in the federated setting.
Byzantine resilience of FedRo. Using Theorem 1, we can show that Algorithm 1 guarantees (n, b, ε)-
resilience. In doing so, we first need to select step-sizes that would both simplify the upper bound
and respect the conditions of Theorem 1. One suitable choice of step-sizes is γs = 1 and
                                                                               
                          v                          s                         
                     1   1 u       n̂∆0                           3∆0
                          u                                                    
                                                      3
        γc = min       ,                            ,                             .                    (6)
                  36LK 2K LT σ + 6 1 − n̂−b̂ ζ 2       2K(K − 1)T L (σ + 4Kζ ) 
                                                                    2  2     2
                           t   2
                                                                               
                                           K             n−b


Using the above step-sizes, we obtain the following corollary on the resilience of FedRo.
                                                                                 n̂−b̂
Corollary 1. Under the same conditions as Theorem 1, denoting r := 1 − n−b , Algorithm 1 with
γs = 1 and γc as defined in (6) guarantees (n, b, ε)-Byzantine resilience, with high probability, for
           s                                                                               
                        2           s          1       2 σ2
                                                                                  2
                L∆0 σ                  3 (1 −       2          2
                                                 )L ∆0 ( K + ζ )      L∆0         σ
    ε ∈ O                  + rζ 2 +           K
                                                                  +         +κ        + ζ2  .
                 n̂T    K                            T2                T           K


The first three terms in Corollary 1 are similar to the convergence rate we would obtain for FedAvg
without Byzantine clients (Karimireddy et al., 2020). These terms vanish when T → ∞ with a
                       √
leading term in O (1/ n̂T ). Hence FedRo preserves the linear speedup in n̂ of FedAvg (Yang et al.,
2021). Moreover, similar to the non-Byzantine case (Karimireddy et al., 2020), employing multiple
local steps (i.e., K > 1) introduces an additional bias, resulting in the second error term in Corollary 1
which is in O(T −2/3 ). On the other hand, the last term in Corollary 1 is the additional error caused
by Byzantine clients, and does not decrease with T . Using an aggregation function with3 κ ∈ O(b̂/n̂),
   3
       This is the optimal value for κ as shown by Allouah et al. (2023).


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


such as coordinate-wise trimmed mean (Allouah et al., 2023), this term will be in
                                                       !
                                        b̂ σ 2

                                                    2
                                   O           +ζ          .                                            (7)
                                       n̂ K

                                         2
Intuitively, the non-vanishing term σ /K quantifies the uncertainty due to the stochastic noise in
gradient computations, which may be exploited by Byzantine clients at each aggregation step. Inter-
estingly, this uncertainty decreases by increasing the number of local steps K, for a sufficiently small
local step-size. This is because, intuitively, with more local steps, we are effectively approximating
the average of a larger number of stochastic gradients. This shows the advantage of having multiple
local steps for federated learning in the presence of Byzantine clients. The same benefit of local
steps has been observed in other constrained learning problems, e.g., in the trade-off between utility
and privacy in distributed differentially private learning (Bietti et al., 2022). Note that the error term
in (7) also features a multiplicative term b̂/n̂. Hence, we can reduce the asymptotic error by carefully
selecting the parameters n̂ and b̂ satisfying condition (5) such that b̂/n̂ is minimized. We present in
the next section an order-optimal methodology for choosing these parameters.

5     O N THE C HOICE OF b̂ AND n̂

Condition (5) involves a complex interplay between parameters n̂ and b̂. Recall that the value of n̂
affects the communication complexity of FedRo, while the fraction b̂/n̂ controls the upper bound on
the asymptotic error in (7). Thus, it is primary to understand how to set n̂ and b̂ while minimizing the
complexity overhead and optimizing the error. First, note that for a fixed n̂, the optimal choice of b̂ is
given as a solution to the following optimization problem.
                                     (                      !                   )
                                                      b̂ b       1        T
                       min            b̂ subject to D   ,     ≥ ln                   .                (8)
                   b̂∈( n
                        b
                          n̂, 12 n̂)                  n̂ n       n̂     1−p

We denote
   b     1
                the minimizer by b̂⋆ . In essence, we aim to select the smallest b̂ within the interval
  n  n̂, 2 n̂  that satisfies condition (5), thereby minimizing the asymptotic error in (7). Notably, since
b̂ is an integer ranging from ⌈b/n · n̂⌉ to ⌊n̂/2⌋, and the second inequality is monotonic within this
range, we can efficiently compute the solution to (8) in O(log n̂) steps using binary search.
The selection of n̂ is more involved, as we aim to satisfy a number of potentially conflicting objectives.

      • On one hand, n̂ must be sufficiently large to ensure the convergence of FedRo. In Section 5.1,
        we introduce a threshold value n̂th such that, for any n̂ ≥ n̂th , the feasible region of (8)
        remains non-empty, thereby guaranteeing the convergence of FedRo by Theorem 1. We also
        show that the value of n̂th is nearly optimal in this context.
      • On the other hand, while increasing n̂ improves the asymptotic error in (7), it also induces
        more communication overhead to the system. We show, in Section 5.2, the existence of a
        second threshold, denoted as n̂opt , which lies above n̂th . Beyond this threshold, FedRo attains
        an order-optimal error with respect to the fraction of Byzantine clients. Thus, increasing n̂
        beyond n̂opt does not lead to any further improvement in the asymptotic error of FedRo.

5.1     S AMPLE SIZE THRESHOLD FOR CONVERGENCE

We begin by presenting Lemma 2, which establishes a lower bound n̂th on the sample size necessary
to ensure the convergence of FedRo:
Lemma 2. Consider the sampling threshold n̂th defined as follows
                               &            −1              '
                                     1 b              4T
                        n̂th := D      ,        ln             +2 ,                                     (9)
                                     2 n             1−p

with D as defined in Lemma 1. If n̂ ≥ n̂th , then there exist b̂ such that (5) holds and b/n < b̂/n̂ < 1/2.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that n̂th as defined in Lemma 2 is tight, in the sense that for any n̂ smaller than n̂th by more
than a constant multiple, any algorithm which relies on sampling clients uniformly at random will
fail to converge with non-negligible probability, i.e., ¬E holds with probability greater than 1 − p.
Lemma 3. Let p ≥ 1/2 and suppose that the fraction b/n < 1/2 is a constant. Consider FedRo as
defined in Algorithm 1 with
                                            −1
                                 1 b                    T
                         n̂ < D   ,    +2       ln               −1 ,
                                 2 n                 3(1 − p)

where D is defined in Lemma 1. Then for large enough n and any b̂ < n̂/2, Event E as defined in (4)
holds true with probability strictly smaller than p.

5.2    S AMPLE SIZE THRESHOLD FOR ORDER - OPTIMAL ERROR

Now note that increasing n̂ further beyond n̂th enables us to decrease the fraction b̂/n̂ leading to a
better convergence guarantee in (7). Previous works (Karimireddy et al., 2021; 2022) suggest that the
                                                2
asymptotic error is lower bounded by4 Ω(b/n(σ /K + ζ 2 )). As such, we aim to find the values of n̂
                                                       2
for which we can obtain an asymptotic error in O(b/n(σ /K + ζ 2 )). In Lemma 4 below, we provide a
sufficient condition on the sampling parameter for such a convergence rate to hold.
Lemma 4. Suppose we have 0 < nb < 21 and consider the sampling threshold n̂opt defined as follows
                        &      (                     )             '
                                       1          3          4T
                n̂opt := max                  2,        ln           +2 .                     (10)
                                 (1/2 − b/n) b/n            1−p

If n̂ ≥ n̂opt , then, the solution b̂⋆ to (8) exists and satisfies b̂⋆/n̂ ∈ O (b/n) .
Remark 1. Note that in Lemma 2 (resp. Lemma 4), we may set n̂th (resp. n̂opt ) to n if the quantity
on the right hand side exceeds n without violating the conclusion of the lemma.

Diminishing returns. Combining (7) and Lemma 4, we conclude that for n̂ ≥ n̂opt , FedRo achieves
the order-optimal asymptotic error. Notably, this implies that the performance improvement saturates
when n̂ = n̂opt . Beyond this point, further increases in n̂ do not affect the error order. In other
words, we can obtain the best asymptotic error (leading term in convergence guarantee) in Byzantine
federated learning without sampling all clients. This contrasts with (non-Byzantine) federated
                                                  √
learning where often the leading term is in O(1/ n̂T ), and always improves by increasing n̂.

6     E MPIRICAL R ESULTS
In this section, we first illustrate the dependencies of n̂th and n̂opt to the global fraction of Byzantine
clients b/n and show the diminishing return of FedRo. In a second step, we demonstrate the existence
of an empirical threshold on the number of subsampled clients, below which FedRo does not converge.
Next, we show the performance of FedRo with chosen values of n̂ and b̂ as described in Section 5.
Finally, we evaluate the impact of the number of local steps on the performance of FedRo. For more
details on the different configurations, refer to Appendix C.
Understanding the diminishing return. First, we study the variation of n̂th and n̂opt with respect
to the fraction of Byzantine clients b/n using (9) and (10) respectively. By setting the number of
rounds T to 500, the probability of success p to 0.99 and the number of clients n to 1000, we observe
in Figure 1 that in some regimes, for example when the fraction of Byzantine clients is about 0.2,
sampling only 20% of the clients allows converging and gives an order-optimal error.
Existence of an empirical threshold. In a second experiment, we train a convolutional neural
network (CNN) on a portion of the FEMNIST dataset (Caldas et al., 2018) using FedRo over
T = 500 rounds. We consider n = 150 clients where 30 of them are Byzantine, hence b = 30. We
use different values of n̂ to emphasize the need for subsampling beyond a threshold and choose
   4
     More precisely, Karimireddy et al. (2021) prove the lower bound with respect to σ for a family of the
algorithms called permutation invariant (which includes FedAvg and Algorithm 1). Even though the lower
bound is proved without considering local steps, it can be easily generalized to this case.


                                                        8
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                   100
              1000
                                                                                                     80
              800

                                                                                                     60
Sample size

              600


                                                                                        Accuracy
              400                                                                                    40

              200                                                      nth                           20
                                                                                                                             Without Byzantine clients
                                                                       nopt                                                  With 20% of Byzantine clients
                   0                                                                                  0
                    0.0     0.1        0.2        0.3           0.4           0.5                         0   10      20        30         40        50
                               Fraction of Byzantine clients bn                                                    Number of sampled clients

   Figure 1: Variation of n̂th and n̂opt with re-                                       Figure 2: Accuracy of FedRo with respect to
   spect to the fraction of Byzantine clients.                                          the number of subsampled clients.

   b̂ = ⌊n̂/2⌋. Here we use the state-of-the-art NNM robustness scheme (Allouah et al., 2023) coupled
   with coordinate-wise trimmed-mean (Yin et al., 2018a) and observe that FedRo fails when the number
   of sampled clients is below 30. This validates our theoretical result in Lemma 3.
   Empirical performance of FedRo. Next, we use our results from Section 5 to run FedRo on a CNN
   with appropriate and optimal values of n̂ and b̂. Specifically, we run the algorithm for 500 rounds on
   a portion of the FEMNIST dataset (Caldas et al., 2018) with n = 150 and b = 15. We compute the
   minimum number of clients n̂th that we need to sample per round to have a guarantee of convergence
   with probability p = 0.99 and obtain n̂th = 26. For n̂ = 26, using (8), we compute the optimal
   value of b̂⋆ = 11 and thus fix b̂ = 11. To evaluate FedRo, we use different Byzantine attacks, namely
   sign flipping (SF) (Allen-Zhu et al., 2020), fall of empires (FOE) (Xie et al., 2019), a little is enough
   (ALIE) (Baruch et al., 2019) and mimic (Karimireddy et al., 2022). We present the results in Figure 3.
   Impact of the number of local steps. In the same configuration as the prior experiment, we vary K
   from 5 to 35 and assess FedRo against the same set of attacks. The local step size γc is set as Θ(1/K )
   as suggested by Corollary 1. There are n = 150 total clients, with 30 being Byzantine (b = 30).
   Figure 4 illustrates that increasing the number of local steps K enhances model accuracy against
   stronger attacks, validating our theoretical worst-case guarantees.

                   80                                                                                                                                SF
                                                                                                                                                     FOE
                   70                                                                                80                                              ALIE
                                                                                                                                                     mimic
                   60
                   50                                                                                75
        Accuracy


                                                                                          Accuracy


                   40
                                                                                                     70
                   30
                   20                                                 SF                             65
                                                                      FOE
                   10                                                 ALIE
                                                                      Mimic                          60
                    0
                        0   100        200           300       400            500                         5   10     15      20         25      30           35
                                             Round                                                                   Number of local steps

   Figure 3: Accuracy of FedRo with NNM and                                             Figure 4: Accuracy of FedRo with respect to
   Trimmed Mean on the FEMNIST dataset.                                                 the number of local steps on FEMNIST.

    7               C ONCLUSION
   We address the challenge of robustness to Byzantine clients in federated learning by analyzing FedRo,
   a robust variant of FedAvg. We precisely characterize the impact of client subsampling and multiple
   local steps, standard features of FL, often overlooked in prior work, on the convergence of FedRo.
   Our analysis shows that when the sample size is sufficiently large, FedRo achieves near-optimal
   convergence error that reduces with the number of local steps. For client subsampling, we demonstrate
   (i) the importance of tuning the client subsampling size appropriately to tackle the Byzantine clients,
   and (ii) the phenomenon of diminishing return where increasing the subsampling size beyond a
   certain threshold yields only marginal improvement on the learning error.


                                                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Anish Acharya, Abolfazl Hashemi, Prateek Jain, Sujay Sanghavi, Inderjit S Dhillon, and Ufuk
 Topcu. Robust training in high dimensions via block coordinate geometric median descent. In
 International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 11145–11168. PMLR, 2022.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Faeze Ebrahimianghazani, Jerry Li, and Dan Alistarh. Byzantine-resilient non-
  convex stochastic gradient descent. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.
Youssef Allouah, Sadegh Farhadkhani, Rachid Guerraoui, Nirupam Gupta, Rafaël Pinot, and John
  Stephan. Fixing by mixing: A recipe for optimal Byzantine ML under heterogeneity. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1232–1300. PMLR, 2023.
Robert B Ash. Information theory. Courier Corporation, 2012.
Moran Baruch, Gilad Baruch, and Yoav Goldberg. A little is enough: Circumventing defenses
 for distributed learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual
 Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019, 8-14 December 2019, Long Beach,
 CA, USA, 2019.
Alberto Bietti, Chen-Yu Wei, Miroslav Dudik, John Langford, and Steven Wu. Personalization
  improves privacy-accuracy tradeoffs in federated learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 1945–1962. PMLR, 2022.
Peva Blanchard, El Mahdi El Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui, and Julien Stainer. Machine learning
  with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Léon Bottou, Frank E Curtis, and Jorge Nocedal. Optimization methods for large-scale machine
  learning. SIAM review, 60(2):223–311, 2018.
Sebastian Caldas, Sai Meher Karthik Duddu, Peter Wu, Tian Li, Jakub Konečnỳ, H Brendan McMa-
  han, Virginia Smith, and Ameet Talwalkar. Leaf: A benchmark for federated settings. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.01097, 2018.
V. Chvátal. The tail of the hypergeometric distribution. Discrete Mathematics, 25(3):285–287, 1979.
Deepesh Data and Suhas Diggavi. Byzantine-resilient high-dimensional sgd with local iterations on
  heterogeneous data. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2478–2488. PMLR,
  2021.
Werner Ehm.    Binomial approximation to the poisson binomial distribution.  Statistics
 & Probability Letters, 11(1):7–16, 1991.   ISSN 0167-7152.    doi: https://doi.org/10.
 1016/0167-7152(91)90170-V. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
 article/pii/016771529190170V.
El Mahdi El-Mhamdi, Sadegh Farhadkhani, Rachid Guerraoui, Arsany Guirguis, Lê-Nguyên Hoang,
  and Sébastien Rouault. Collaborative learning in the jungle (decentralized, byzantine, hetero-
  geneous, asynchronous and nonconvex learning). Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:25044–25057, 2021.
Sadegh Farhadkhani, Rachid Guerraoui, Nirupam Gupta, Rafael Pinot, and John Stephan. Byzantine
  machine learning made easy by resilient averaging of momentums. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 6246–6283. PMLR, 2022.
Saeed Ghadimi and Guanghui Lan. Stochastic first-and zeroth-order methods for nonconvex stochastic
  programming. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 23(4):2341–2368, 2013.
Eduard Gorbunov, Samuel Horváth, Peter Richtárik, and Gauthier Gidel. Variance reduction is an
  antidote to byzantines: Better rates, weaker assumptions and communication compression as a
  cherry on the top. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=pfuqQQCB34.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rachid Guerraoui, Nirupam Gupta, and Rafael Pinot. Byzantine machine learning: A primer. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 2023.
Nirupam Gupta, Thinh T Doan, and Nitin Vaidya. Byzantine fault-tolerance in federated local sgd
  under 2f -redundancy. IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems, 2023.
Wassily Hoeffding. Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random variables. In The collected
 works of Wassily Hoeffding, pp. 409–426. 1994.
Susan Holmes. Stein’s method for birth and death chains. Lecture Notes-Monograph Series, pp.
  45–67, 2004.
Divyansh Jhunjhunwala, Pranay Sharma, Aushim Nagarkatti, and Gauri Joshi. FedVARP: Tackling
  the variance due to partial client participation in federated learning. In The 38th Conference on
  Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  HlWLLdUocx5.
Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Ad-
  vances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning,
  14(1–2):1–210, 2021.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5132–5143. PMLR, 2020.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Lie He, and Martin Jaggi. Learning from history for byzantine robust
  optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5311–5319. PMLR, 2021.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Lie He, and Martin Jaggi. Byzantine-robust learning on heterogeneous
  datasets via bucketing. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=jXKKDEi5vJt.
Leslie Lamport, Robert Shostak, and Marshall Pease. The byzantine generals problem. ACM Trans.
  Program. Lang. Syst., 4(3):382–401, jul 1982. ISSN 0164-0925. doi: 10.1145/357172.357176.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1145/357172.357176.
Shuo Liu, Nirupam Gupta, and Nitin H Vaidya. Approximate byzantine fault-tolerance in distributed
  optimization. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing,
  pp. 379–389, 2021.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-Efficient Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data. In Aarti Singh
  and Jerry Zhu (eds.), Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, volume 54 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR,
  20–22 Apr 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v54/mcmahan17a.html.
Krishna Pillutla, Sham M Kakade, and Zaid Harchaoui. Robust aggregation for federated learning.
  IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 70:1142–1154, 2022.
Jianyu Wang, Qinghua Liu, Hao Liang, Gauri Joshi, and H Vincent Poor. Tackling the objective
   inconsistency problem in heterogeneous federated optimization. Advances in neural information
   processing systems, 33:7611–7623, 2020.
Cong Xie, Oluwasanmi Koyejo, and Indranil Gupta. Generalized byzantine-tolerant sgd. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1802.10116, 2018.
Cong Xie, Oluwasanmi Koyejo, and Indranil Gupta. Fall of empires: Breaking byzantine-tolerant
  SGD by inner product manipulation. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Conference on Uncertainty
  in Artificial Intelligence, UAI 2019, Tel Aviv, Israel, July 22-25, 2019, pp. 83, 2019.
Haibo Yang, Minghong Fang, and Jia Liu. Achieving linear speedup with partial worker participation
  in non-IID federated learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=jDdzh5ul-d.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dong Yin, Yudong Chen, Ramchandran Kannan, and Peter Bartlett. Byzantine-robust distributed
  learning: Towards optimal statistical rates. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine
 Learning Research, pp. 5650–5659. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018a. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v80/yin18a.html.
Dong Yin, Yudong Chen, Ramchandran Kannan, and Peter Bartlett. Byzantine-robust distributed
  learning: Towards optimal statistical rates. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  5650–5659. PMLR, 2018b.
Banghua Zhu, Lun Wang, Qi Pang, Shuai Wang, Jiantao Jiao, Dawn Song, and Michael I Jordan.
  Byzantine-robust federated learning with optimal statistical rates. In International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3151–3178. PMLR, 2023.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             Appendix
O RGANIZATION
The appendices are organized as follows:

       • In Appendix A, we analyze the convergence of FedRo.
       • In Appendix B, we discuss the results regarding the subsampling process in FedRo.
       • In Appendix C, we provide the details about the experimental results of the paper.

A     C ONVERGENCE P ROOF
In this section, we prove Theorem 1 showing the convergence of Algorithm 1.
For any set A, and integer a, we denote by U a (A), the uniform distribution over all subsets of A
of size a. Recall that at each round t ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1}, the server selects a set St ∼ U n̂ ([n]) of n̂
clients uniformly at random from [n] without replacement. Recall also that under event E, defined
in (4), the number of selected Byzantine clients at all rounds is bounded by b̂. As we show that, under
the condition stated in Theorem 1, this event holds with high probability (Lemma 1), to simplify the
notation, throughout this section, we implicitly assume that event E holds and we assume it is given in
all subsequent expectations. Now denoting by Ht∗ , the set of selected honest clients at round t, given
event E, the cardinality of Ht∗ is at least ĥ := n̂ − b̂. We then define Ĥt ∼ U ĥ (Ht∗ ), a randomly
selected subset of Ht∗ of size ĥ. As (by symmetry) any two sets H(1) ⊂ H, and H(2) ⊂ H of size ĥ
have the same probability of being selected, we have Ĥt ∼ U ĥ (H). Our convergence proof relies
on analyzing the trajectory of the algorithm considering the average of the updates from the honest
clients Ĥt , while taking into account the additional error that is introduced by the Byzantine clients.

A.1    BASIC DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS

Let us denote by
                                                K−1               (i)
                                      (i)    1 X (i)    u
                                    Gt :=       gt,k = − t ,                                            (11)
                                             K          Kγc
                                                 k=0
the average of stochastic gradients computed by client i along their trajectory at round t, where in the
                                        (i)     (i)      (i)
second equality we used the facts that ut := xt,K − xt,0 from Algorithm 1. Moreover, we denote
by
                                                  K−1
                                       (i)     1 X          (i)
                                     ∆t :=         ∇f (i) (xt,k ),                                      (12)
                                               K
                                                  k=0

the average of the true gradients along the trajectory of client i at round t. Also, denote by
                                                        1 X
                                           (i)                        (i)
                                et := A ut , i ∈ St −               ut ,                                (13)
                                                           ĥ
                                                               i∈Ĥt

the difference between the output of the aggregation rule and the average of the honest updates.
We denote by Pt all the history up to the computation of xt . Specifically,
                              n                                                 o
                                (i)
    Pt := {x0 , . . . , xt } ∪ xs,k : ∀k ∈ [K], ∀i ∈ [n], ∀s ∈ {0 . . . , t − 1} ∪ {S0 . . . St−1 } .

We denote by Et [·] and E [·] the conditional expectation E [· Pt ] and the total expectation, respec-
tively. Thus, E [·] = E0 [· · · ET [·]]. Note also for computing xt+1 from xt , we have two sources
of randomness: one for the set of clients that are selected and one for the random trajectory of
each honest client. To obtain a tight bound, we sometimes require to take the expectation with
respect to each of these two randomnesses separately. In this case, by the tower rule, we have


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                      h h      ii
Et [·] = EĤ ∼U ĥ (H) Et ·|Ĥt . Finally, for any k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}, and t ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1} we
            t
denote by                               n                                  o
                                                      (i)          (i)
                           Pt,k := Pt ∪ ∀i ∈ [n] : xt,0 , . . . , xt,k ; St ,
                                                               (i)
the history of the algorithm up to the computation of xt,k , the k-th local update of the clients at round
t, and we denote by Et,k [·] := E [·|Pt,k ], the conditional expectation given Pt,k .

A.2    S KELETON OF THE PROOF FOR T HEOREM 1

Our convergence analysis follows the standard analysis of FedAvg (e.g., (Wang et al., 2020; Jhun-
jhunwala et al., 2022; Karimireddy et al., 2020)) considering additional error terms that are introduced
by the presence of Byzantine clients. Let us first show that given that the number of sampled clients is
sufficiently large, with a high probability for all t ∈ [T ], the number of Byzantine clients is bounded
by b̂. The proof is deferred to Appendix B.
Lemma 1. Let p < 1 and b be such that 0 < b/n < 1/2. Consider FedRo as defined in Algorithm 1.
Suppose that n̂ and b̂ are such that b/n < b̂/n̂ < 1/2 and
                                                      !−1               
                                                                        
                                                b̂ b               T
                             n̂ ≥ min n, D          ,         ln             ,                        (5)
                                                n̂ n              1−p 

with D (α, β) := α ln (α/β ) + (1 − α) ln (1−α/1−β ), for α, β ∈ (0, 1). Then, Event E as defined in (4)
holds true with probability at least p.
Now note that combining the global step of Algorithm 1, and (13), we have

                    (i)
                                           1 X (i)                         1 X (i)
xt+1 = xt + γs A ut , i ∈ St = xt + γs            ut + γs et = xt − Kγs γc    Gt + γs et .
                                           ĥ                              ĥ
                                                    i∈Ĥt                                   i∈Ĥt

Thus, denoting γ := Kγs γc , we have
                                                      1 X            (i)
                                      xt+1 = xt − γ                Gt + γs et ,                             (14)
                                                      ĥ
                                                           i∈Ĥt

Accordingly, the computation of xt+1 is similar to FedAvg update but with an additional error term
γs et . To bound this error, we first prove that the variance of the local updates from the honest clients
is bounded as follows.
Lemma 5. Consider Algorithm 1. Suppose that assumptions 1, 2, and 3 hold true. Suppose also that
γc ≤ 1/16LK and γc γs ≤ 1/36LK . Then for any t ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1}, and K ≥ 1, we have
                                                      
                             1  X (i)                2
                        E            xt,K − x̂t,K  ≤ 3Kσ 2 γc2 + 18K 2 γc2 ζ 2 ,
                             ĥ
                               i∈Ĥt

                  1
                    P         (i)
where x̂t,K := ĥ      i∈Ĥt xt,K .


Combining the above lemma with the fact that the aggregation rule satisfies (n̂, b̂, κ)-robustness
(Defintion 2), we can find a uniform bound on the expected error as follows.
Lemma 6. Consider Algorithm 1. Suppose that assumptions 1, 2, and 3 hold true. Suppose also that
γc ≤ 1/16LK and γc γs ≤ 1/36LK and the aggregation rule A is (n̂, b̂, κ)-robust. Recall the definition
of et from (13). Then for any t ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1}, and K ≥ 1, we have
                                 h        i
                                        2
                               E ∥et ∥ ≤ 3Kκσ 2 γc2 + 18K 2 κγc2 ζ 2

Next,
    for any  global step t ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1}, we analyze the change in the expected loss value i.e.,
E F (xt+1 ) − E [F (xt )]. Formally, denoting by h := |H|, the total number of honest clients and
assuming5 h ≥ 2, we have the following lemma.
   5
     When h = 1, as b < n/2, we must have b = 0 (Liu et al., 2021). Thus, there is only one client in the system.
Assumption h ≥ 2 is only made to avoid this trivial case, in the following results.


                                                       14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 7. Consider Algorithm 1. Suppose that assumptions 1, 2, and 3 hold true. Suppose also that
γc ≤ 1/16LK and γc γs ≤ 1/36LK and the aggregation rule A is (n̂, b̂, κ)-robust. Recall the definition
of et from (13). Then for any t ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1}, and K ≥ 1, we have
                                                                                    h
                                     2γ                              γ
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                     i
                                        + 6Lγ 2 + 8γc2 L2 K(K − 1)      + 6Lγ 2

 E F (xt+1 ) ≤ E [F (xt )] + −                                                      E ∥∇F (xt )∥
                                      5                               2
             2
           σ              h − ĥ 2        γ
 + 2Lγ 2         + 6Lγ 2                      + 6Lγ 2 2γc2 L2 (K − 1)σ 2 + 8γc2 L2 K(K − 1)ζ 2

                                   ζ +
          ĥK            (h − 1)ĥ        2
                      h
       10 2                   2
                                i
 +       γs + Lγs2 E ∥et ∥ .
       γ

A.3     C OMBINING ALL ( PROOF OF T HEOREM 1)

By Lemma 7, we have
                                     h            i   h       i
                                                2           2
      E F (xt+1 ) ≤ E [F (xt )] + A E ∥∇F (xt )∥ + B E ∥et ∥ .

                   σ2               h − ĥ
         + 2Lγ 2         + 6Lγ 2               ζ 2 + C 2γc2 L2 (K − 1)σ 2 + 8γc2 L2 K(K − 1)ζ 2 ,

                   ĥK             (h − 1)ĥ
where
                                2γ                                 γ
                         A := −    + 6Lγ 2 + 8γc2 L2 K(K − 1)          + 6Lγ 2 ,
                                 5                                  2
                                                  γ
                                           B := + 6Lγ 2
                                                  2
                                                 10 2
                                          C :=      γ + Lγs2
                                                 γ s
                                                 1                1
We now analyze A, B, and C given that γ ≤ 36L       , and γc ≤ 16KL   . Then, we have
                                     2γ    γ      1 γ                     γ
                              A≤−        + +              + 6Lγ 2 ≤ −
                                      5    6 32 2                         5
and
                                               γ      γ     2γ
                                          B≤ + ≤
                                                2      6     3
and
                                          10 2        1 2      11 2
                                    C≤      γ +          γ ≤     γ
                                          γ s 36γ s             γ s
Therefore, we have
                                      γ  h                    i   11   h             i
                                                            2                      2
                                                                       γs2 E ∥et ∥

     E F (xt+1 ) ≤ E [F (xt )] + −          E ∥∇F (xt )∥ +
                                        5                           γ
                 2

               σ              h − ĥ 2        2γ
     + 2Lγ 2         + 6Lγ 2                          2γc2 L2 (K − 1)σ 2 + 8γc2 L2 K(K − 1)ζ 2 .

                                       ζ +
              ĥK            (h − 1)ĥ         3
Rearranging the terms, we obtain that
                      i 5                                          h
        h
                    2                                       55 2              2
                                                                                i
      E ∥∇F (xt )∥ ≤        E [F (xt )] − E F (xt+1 ) +       γ    E  ∥e    ∥
                         γ                                  γ2 s          t

               σ2

                            h − ĥ 2        5
                                                2γc2 L2 (K − 1)σ 2 + 8γc2 L2 K(K − 1)ζ 2 .

      + 10Lγ       + 30Lγ             ζ +
              ĥK          (h − 1)ĥ        3

Then by Lemma 6, we have
                  i 5
      h
                2                                        55 2
                                                             γs 3Kκσ 2 γc2 + 18K 2 κγc2 ζ 2

    E ∥∇F (xt )∥ ≤       E [F (xt )] − E F (xt+1 ) +       2
                     γ                                   γ
              2

            σ            h − ĥ 2        5
                                             2γc2 L2 (K − 1)σ 2 + 8γc2 L2 K(K − 1)ζ 2 .

    + 10Lγ      + 30Lγ            ζ +
           ĥK         (h − 1)ĥ         3


                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Recall that γ = Kγc γs , hence, we obtain that
                                                                               2
             h
                          2
                              i       5                                       σ       2
         E ∥∇F (xt )∥             ≤         E [F (xt )] − E F (xt+1 ) + 165κ     + 6ζ
                                     Kγc γs                                   K
                                                  !
             10LKγc γs            σ2     h − ĥ 2      10                 40
         +                           +3        ζ    + γc2 L2 (K − 1)σ 2 + γc2 L2 K(K − 1)ζ 2 .
                     ĥ           K      h−1            3                  3


Taking the average over t ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1}, we have

           T −1                                                             2
         1 X h              2
                              i       5                                    σ
                E ∥∇F (xt )∥ ≤             (F (x0 ) − E [F (xT )]) + 165κ     + 6ζ 2
         T t=0                    T Kγc γs                                 K
                                         !
           10LKγc γs σ 2        h − ĥ 2     10                      40
         +                  +3        ζ    + γc2 L2 (K − 1)σ 2 + γc2 L2 K(K − 1)ζ 2 .
                 ĥ     K       h − 1         3                       3


Denoting F ∗ = minx∈Rd F (x), and noting that ĥ ≥ n̂/2, h − 1 ≥ h/2, we obtain that

         T −1                                                  2
       1 X h              2
                            i    5                 ∗          σ       2
              E ∥∇F (xt )∥ ≤           (F (x0 ) − F ) + 165κ     + 6ζ
       T t=0                  T Kγc γs                        K
                                     ! !
         20LKγc γs σ 2            ĥ           10                 40
       +                  +6 1−        ζ 2 + γc2 L2 (K − 1)σ 2 + γc2 L2 K(K − 1)ζ 2 ,
               n̂     K           h             3                  3

Noting that F (x0 ) − F ∗ ≤ ∆0 yields the desired result.


A.4    P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 1

Proof. We set

                                                    γs = 1,                                      (15)

and
                                                                      
                   v                   s                              
              1  1 u
                    u     n̂∆0                      3∆0                
 γc = min       ,                     , 3                                . (16)
           36LK 2K LT σ + 6 1 − ĥ ζ 2   2K(K − 1)T L2 (σ 2 + 4Kζ 2 ) 
                    t   2
          
                                           K          h
                                                                       

                          1                1                 1
Therefore, we have γc ≤ 16LK and γc γs ≤ 36LK . Also, as min{a,b,c} = max{ a1 , 1b , 1c }, for any
a, b > 0, we obtain that
                       v                                                            
                        u
                     
                       u LT σ2 + 6 1 − ĥ ζ 2 s                  2     2
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                   2 
      1                                              3 2K(K − 1)L T (σ + 4Kζ )
                       t      K           h
         = max 36LK, 2K                           ,
      γc      
                                   n̂∆0                         3∆0                 
                                                                                     
                                                                                    
                     v                       s
                     u
                     u LT σ2 + 6 1 − ĥ ζ 2
                           K           h            2K(K − 1)L2 T (σ 2 + 4Kζ 2 )
                                              + 3
                     t
         ≤ 36LK + 2K                                                             .     (17)
                               n̂∆0                           3∆0


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Plugging (15), (16), and (17) into Theorem 1, we obtain that

                                                                  r
                                                                                σ2
                                                                       LT       K +6   1− ĥ
                                                                                          h ζ
                                                                                               2             q
                                                                                                                        2    2    2
1
    T
    X −1    h
                       2
                         i (a) 180LK + 10K                                        n̂∆0                     + 3 2K(K−1)L3∆T0(σ +4Kζ )
           E ∥∇F (xt )∥ ≤                                                                                                                 ∆0
T t=0                                                                                      TK
                                              !           !
                       σ2                                                                                                                     σ2

  20LKγc                        ĥ                    2        10                  40
+                         +6 1−                   ζ           + γc2 L2 (K − 1)σ 2 + γc2 L2 K(K − 1)ζ 2 + 165κ                                    + 6ζ 2
     n̂                K        h                               3                   3                                                         K
                       r
                                σ2
                        LT      K +6       1− ĥ
                                              h ζ
                                                   2
                                                                  r
(b) 180L + 10                                                           2(K − 1)∆20 L2 (σ 2 + 4Kζ 2 )                              σ2

                                      n̂∆0                         3
 ≤                                                        ∆0 +                                        + 165κ                          + 6ζ 2
                            T                                                    3T 2 K 2                                          K
                                                          !
                       r
                  1                   n̂∆
     20LK        2K

                                    σ2
                                         0                                                 !           !
                           LT       K +6 1− ĥ
                                            h ζ
                                                 2
                                                                 σ2       ĥ                       2
+                                                                   +6 1−                      ζ
                             n̂                                  K        h
            s                                                    !2
  10                      3∆0
+           3
                                                                       L2 (K − 1)(σ 2 + 4Kζ 2 ),
   3            2K(K − 1)T L2 (σ 2 + 4Kζ 2 )

where (a) uses (17), and (b) uses the second and third terms of the minimum in (16). Rearranging the
terms, we obtain that
                                                          v
                                                          u
                T −1                                      u L∆ σ2 + 6 1 − ĥ ζ 2
                                                                                                                          σ2

            1   X  h            i                             0 K         h
                              2
                                                                                                                             + 6ζ 2
                                                          t
                  E ∥∇F (xt )∥ ≤ 20                                                                          + 165κ
            T t=0                                                                n̂T                                      K
                                  s
                                                                                       2
                                                      3   8(K − 1)∆20 L2 ( σK + 4ζ 2 ) 180L∆0
                                               +                                      +       .
                                                                  3KT 2                   T

                                                                                           n̂−b̂
Recalling ĥ = n̂ − b̂, and h = n − b, and denoting r = 1 − n−b , we then have

         T −1
       1 X h               2
                             i
              E ∥∇F (xt )∥ ∈
       T t=0
         s                       s                                                 
                                         1   2 ∆2 ( σ 2 + ζ 2 )
                                                                            2
                                       −
                       2
              L∆   0  σ           3 (1     )L   0 K               L∆ 0     σ
       O                + rζ 2 +        K
                                                                +      +κ     + ζ2  ,
               n̂T    K                       T2                   T       K


which is the desired result.


A.5     P ROOF OF THE LEMMAS

First, we prove a useful lemma.

Lemma 8. For any set {x(i) }i∈S of |S| vectors, we have

                                     1 X (i)   2 1  1 X            2
                                         x − x̄ = ·   2 x(i) − x(j) .
                                    |S|          2 |S|
                                       i∈S                                         i,j∈S


                                                                         17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof.
   1         X                          2          1        X                                        2
        2            x(i) − x(j)            =          2           (x(i) − x̄) − (x(j) − x̄)
  |S|       i,j∈S
                                                 |S|       i,j∈S

                                                   1        X                      2                     2      D                     E
                                            =          2            x(i) − x̄          + x(j) − x̄           + 2 x(i) − x̄, x(j) − x̄
                                                 |S|       i,j∈S
                                                                 *                   +
                                               2 X       2   2 X           X
                                                    (i)             (i)        (j)
                                            =      x − x̄ +    2   x − x̄,   (x − x̄) .
                                              |S|           |S|
                                                        i,j∈S                                 i∈S                 j∈S

                         (j)
             P
Now as          j∈S (x         − x̄) = 0, we conclude the desired result:
                                     1          X                          2        2 X          2
                                            2              x(i) − x(j)         =        x(i) − x̄ .
                                   |S|                                             |S|
                                                i,j∈S                                   i,j∈S



Lemma 5. Consider Algorithm 1. Suppose that assumptions 1, 2, and 3 hold true. Suppose also that
γc ≤ 1/16LK and γc γs ≤ 1/36LK . Then for any t ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1}, and K ≥ 1, we have
                                                
                        1                      2
                                  (i)
                           X
                    E           xt,K − x̂t,K  ≤ 3Kσ 2 γc2 + 18K 2 γc2 ζ 2 ,
                        ĥ
                                            i∈Ĥt

                       1
                         P            (i)
where x̂t,K := ĥ              i∈Ĥt xt,K .


Proof. For any k ∈ [K], we have
               (i)     (j)        (i)                      (i)       (j)                (j)
             xt,k − xt,k = xt,k−1 − γc gt,k−1 − xt,k−1 + γc gt,k−1

                  (i)          (i)                (i)                  (i)
             = xt,k−1 − γc gt,k−1 − ∇f (i) (xt,k−1 ) − γc ∇f (i) (xt,k−1 ) − ∇f (i) (x̂t,k−1 )

             − γc ∇f (i) (x̂t,k−1 ) − ∇f (j) (x̂t,k−1 )

                                                (j)                  (j)        (j)       (j)
             − γc ∇f (j) (x̂t,k−1 ) − ∇f (j) (xt,k−1 ) − γc ∇f (j) (xt,k−1 ) − gt,k−1 − xt,k−1

Now denoting

                                (i)
            D := −γc ∇f (i) (xt,k−1 ) − ∇f (i) (x̂t,k−1 ) − γc ∇f (i) (x̂t,k−1 ) − ∇f (j) (x̂t,k−1 )

                                                (j)
              − γc ∇f (j) (x̂t,k−1 ) − ∇f (j) (xt,k−1 ) ,

we have

 (i)    (j)     (i)           (i)               (i)                           (j)      (j)        (j)
xt,k − xt,k = xt,k−1 − γc gt,k−1 − ∇f (i) (xt,k−1 ) + D − γc ∇f (j) (xt,k−1 ) − gt,k−1 − xt,k−1

                (i)       (j)                 (i)               (i)               (j)       (j)
            = xt,k−1 − xt,k−1 + D − γc gt,k−1 − ∇f (i) (xt,k−1 ) − ∇f (j) (xt,k−1 ) − gt,k−1 .
                                                                      h                         i
                                                                          (i)             (i)
Now note that given the history Pt,k−1 , D is a constant. Also, Et,k−1 gt,k−1 − ∇f (i) (xt,k−1 ) = 0
            h                        i
              (j)              (j)
and Et,k−1 gt,k−1 − ∇f (j) (xt,k−1 ) = 0. Therefore,

                                          2                                         2
                              (i)    (j)                     (i)      (j)
                    Et,k−1 xt,k − xt,k        ≤ 2σ 2 γc2 + xt,k−1 − xt,k−1 + D

by Young’s inequality for any α > 0, we have

                              2                    1                 2
                 (i)      (j)                          (i)      (j)                2
      Et,k−1 xt,k − xt,k          ≤ 2σ 2 γc2 + (1 + ) xt,k−1 − xt,k−1 + (1 + α) ∥D∥ .
                                                   α


                                                                           18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now by the definition of D and using the fact that (by Jensen’s inequality) for a, b, c ≥ 0, (a + b +
c)2 ≤ 3a2 + 3b2 + 3c2 , we have

                                 2                    1                      2
                      (i)    (j)                            (i)      (j)
          Et,k−1 xt,k − xt,k         ≤ 2σ 2 γc2 + (1 + ) xt,k−1 − xt,k−1
                                                      α
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                (i)
                                               + 3(1 + α)γc2 ∇f (i) (xt,k−1 ) − ∇f (i) (x̂t,k−1 )
                                                                                                                         2
                                               + 3(1 + α)γc2 ∇f (i) (x̂t,k−1 ) − ∇f (j) (x̂t,k−1 )
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                   (j)
                                               + 3(1 + α)γc2 ∇f (j) (xt,k−1 ) − ∇f (j) (x̂t,k−1 )                            .

Taking the average over i, j ∈ Ĥt , we have

   1 X                              2                 1 X     1                  2
                      (i)     (j)                                 (i)      (j)
            Et,k−1 xt,k − xt,k          ≤ 2σ 2 γc2 +      (1 + ) xt,k−1 − xt,k−1                                                     (18)
  ĥ 2                                               ĥ 2     α
        i,j∈Ĥt                                                      i,j∈Ĥt
                                                                1 X                                                              2
                                                                                               (i)
                                                + 6(1 + α)γc2                  ∇f (i) (xt,k−1 ) − ∇f (i) (x̂t,k−1 )
                                                                ĥ
                                                                     i∈Ĥt
                                                                                                                                      2
                                                             2 1
                                                                        X
                                                + 3(1 + α)γc                          ∇f (i) (x̂t,k−1 ) − ∇f (j) (x̂t,k−1 )
                                                                ĥ 2
                                                                       i,j∈Ĥt

Now note that by Assumption 1, we have
          1 X                                         2     1 X (i)              2
                           (i)
                  ∇f (i) (xt,k−1 ) − ∇f (i) (x̂t,k−1 ) ≤ L2     xt,k−1 − x̂t,k−1
          ĥ                                                ĥ
                    i∈Ĥt                                                             i∈Ĥt
                                                                               2                                             2
                                                                           L         X               (i)         (j)
                                                                       ≤                        xt,k−1 − xt,k−1                      (19)
                                                                           ĥ 2
                                                                                   i,j∈Ĥt

where in the second inequality we used Lemma 8. Also, by Lemma 8, we have
  1 X                                             2  2 X                                   2
             ∇f (i) (x̂t,k−1 ) − ∇f (j) (x̂t,k−1 ) =     ∇f (i) (x̂t,k−1 ) − ∇f̂ (x̂t,k−1 ) , (20)
 ĥ 2                                                ĥ
        i,j∈Ĥt                                                      i∈Ĥt

                      1                 (i)
                        P
where f̂ (x) = ĥ             i∈Ĥt f  (x). Plugging (19), and (20) into (18), we have

 1                                        2                            1 X                                        2
                               (i)    (j)
        X
                 Et,k−1       xt,k − xt,k     ≤ 2σ 2 γc2 + 6(1 + α)γc2         ∇f (i) (x̂t,k−1 ) − ∇f̂ (x̂t,k−1 )
ĥ 2                                                                   ĥ
       i,j∈Ĥt                                                                       i∈Ĥt
                                                    1 1 X                                                   2
                                                                               (i)             (j)
                                              + (1 + )                     xt,k−1 − xt,k−1
                                                    α ĥ 2
                                                             i,j∈Ĥt
                                                                 1                                               2
                                                                                         (i)               (j)
                                                                        X
                                              +6(1 + α)L2 γc2                         xt,k−1 − xt,k−1                .
                                                                ĥ 2
                                                                       i,j∈Ĥt

Taking the total expectation from both sides, we have
                                                                                                            
     1                       2                                1                                              2
                  (i)    (j)
           X                                                       X
E               xt,k − xt,k  ≤ 2σ 2 γc2 + 6(1 + α)γc2 E                ∇f (i) (x̂t,k−1 ) − ∇f̂ (x̂t,k−1 ) 
    ĥ 2                                                      ĥ
         i,j∈Ĥt                                                  i∈Ĥt
                                                                                    
                                        1       1                                  2
                                                              (i)         (j)
                                                      X
                                 + (1 + ) E                xt,k−1 − xt,k−1 
                                        α      ĥ 2
                                                    i,j∈Ĥt
                                                                                          
                                                        1                                2
                                                                      (i)         (j)
                                                            X
                                 + 6(1 + α)L2 γc2 E                xt,k−1 − xt,k−1                     (21)
                                                       ĥ 2
                                                                        i,j∈Ĥt



                                                           19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now recall that Ĥt ∼ U ĥ (H), therefore, for any x ∈ Rd , we have
                                                  
                 1  X                            2      1 X                          2
            E             ∇f (i) (x) − ∇F (x)  =               ∇f (i) (x) − ∇F (x) .
                 ĥ                                    |H|
                       i∈Ĥt                                                     i∈H

                                                                                   2
Also, as ∇f̂ (x) is the minimizer of the function g(z) := ĥ1 i∈Ĥ ∇f (i) (x) − z , for any x ∈ Rd ,
                                                             P
                                                                  t
we have
                                                                                     
                1   X                           2         1  X                        2
            E            ∇f (i) (x) − ∇f̂ (x)  ≤ E             ∇f (i) (x) − ∇F (x) 
                ĥ                                        ĥ
                      i∈Ĥt                                                      i∈Ĥt
                                                                      1 X                     2
                                                                   ≤      ∇f (i) (x) − ∇F (x)
                                                                     |H|
                                                                               i∈H
                                                                         2
                                                                   ≤ζ ,

   in the last inequality we used Assumption 3. Combining this with (21), and denoting uk :=
where
                            2
                 (i)    (j)
E ĥ12 i,j∈Ĥ xt,k − xt,k
      P
                              , we obtain that
                  t


                                       1
                      uk ≤ (1 +          + 6(1 + α)L2 γc2 )uk−1 + 2σ 2 γc2 + 6(1 + α)γc2 ζ 2 .
                                       α
For α = 2K − 1, we have
                                          1
                       uk ≤ (1 +               + 12KL2 γc2 )uk−1 + 2σ 2 γc2 + 12Kγc2 ζ 2
                                        2K − 1
As γc2 ≤ 24K12 L2 , we have6
                                                   1
                                uk ≤ (1 +             )uk−1 + 2σ 2 γc2 + 12Kγc2 ζ 2 .
                                                 K −1
Therefore,
                                                                          K−1
                                                                         τ
                                                                     1    X
                               uK ≤ 2σ 2 γc2 + 12Kγc2 ζ 2                            1+
                                                            τ =0
                                                                  K −1
                                                                        K−1
                                       2 2           2 2
                                                                   1
                                   ≤ 2σ γc + 12Kγc ζ K 1 +
                                                                 K −1
                                   (a)
                                   ≤ 2σ 2 γc2 + 12Kγc2 ζ 2 Ke


                                   ≤ 3K 2σ 2 γc2 + 12Kγc2 ζ 2


                           = 6Kσ 2 γc2 + 36K 2 γc2 ζ 2 ,                                                     (22)
                                                               K−1
                                                           1
where e is Euler’s number and (a) uses the facts that 1 + K−1      is increasing in K and
                                                                              K−1
                                                                 1
                                                lim       1+                           = e.
                                            K→∞                K −1
Now note that by Lemma 8, we have


                          1 X                              2        1                                2
                                          (i)                                            (i)   (j)
                                                                              X
                                        xt,K − x̂t,K           =                       xt,K − xt,K       .
                          ĥ                                       2ĥ 2
                               i∈Ĥt                                         i,j∈Ĥt

Combining this with (22) yields the result.

   6
       Note that here the results holds trivially for K = 1, so hereafter we assume K ≥ 2.


                                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 6. Consider Algorithm 1. Suppose that assumptions 1, 2, and 3 hold true. Suppose also that
γc ≤ 1/16LK and γc γs ≤ 1/36LK and the aggregation rule A is (n̂, b̂, κ)-robust. Recall the definition
of et from (13). Then for any t ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1}, and K ≥ 1, we have
                                 h        i
                                        2
                               E ∥et ∥ ≤ 3Kκσ 2 γc2 + 18K 2 κγc2 ζ 2

Proof. Follows directly from Lemma 5 and the fact the aggregation rule A is (n̂, b̂, κ)-robust (Defini-
tion 2).

Before proving Lemma 7, we prove a few useful lemmas.
Lemma 9 (Equation (3) in (Yang et al., 2021)). Consider Algorithm 1. Suppose that Assumption 2
holds true. Then for any t ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1}, and K ≥ 1, we have
                                                                        
                                            2                            2
                                                     2
                         1   X         (i)    2σ            1  X  (i)
                                     Gt       ≤       + 2Et       ∆t     .
                                                                           
                     Et 
                           ĥ                     ĥK          ĥ
                                  i∈Ĥt                                      i∈Ĥt


Proof.
                                                         
                      2                                  2
                                               K−1
       1   X     (i)            1    X    1   X    (i)
                 Gt      = Et                     gt,k 
                                                           
   Et 
        ĥ                         ĥ       K
           i∈Ĥt                      i∈Ĥt     k=0
                                                                     
                                                                    2
                      K−1
         1 1     X    X     (i)            (i)               (i)
   = Et                   (gt,k − ∇f (i) (xt,k ) + ∇f (i) (xt,k )) 
                                                                      
            ĥ K
                    i∈Ĥt k=0
                                                                                                                     
                                                            2                                                       2
                 K−1                                                            K−1
          1 1 X X (i)               (i)                                 1 1 X X            (i)
   ≤ 2Et           (gt,k − ∇f (i) (xt,k ))                      + 2Et            ∇f (i) (xt,k )                      ,
                                                                                                                       
           ĥ K                                                           ĥ K
                     i∈Ĥt k=0                                                       i∈Ĥt k=0

where we used Young’s inequality. Now note that by definition, we have
                                            K−1
                                 1 1 X X          (i)     1 X (i)
                                         ∇f (i) (xt,k ) =    ∆t .
                                 ĥ K                     ĥ
                                       i∈Ĥt k=0                         i∈Ĥt

Also,
                                                                                                                            
                                                   2                                                                       2
            K−1                                                              K−1
     1 1 X X (i)               (i)                             1            X X               (i)            (i)
               (gt,k − ∇f (i) (xt,k ))                 =                                    (gt,k − ∇f (i) (xt,k ))
                                                                                                                             
 Et                                                                  Et 
      ĥ K
                                                                                                                               
                                                            ĥ2 K 2
               i∈Ĥt k=0                                                     k=0 i∈Ĥ
                                                                                         t
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                       2
                                                       K−2
      1                X (i)               (i)
                                                       X X (i)              (i)
 =                       (gt,K−1 − ∇f (i) (xt,K−1 )) +     (gt,k − ∇f (i) (xt,k ))                                          .
                                                                                                                          
           Et Et,K−1 
   ĥ2 K 2                                             k=0
                               i∈Ĥt                                             i∈Ĥt

Now note that given the history Pt,K−1 , the second term of above is constant and by Assumption 2,
for each i ∈ Ĥt , we have

            h         i                                                              2
               (i)               (i)                         (i)              (i)
     Et,K−1 gt,K−1 = ∇f (i) (xt,K−1 ) and Et,K−1 gt,K−1 − ∇f (i) (xt,K−1 )               ≤ σ2 .

Therefore, as the stochastic gradients computed on different honest clients are independent of each
other, we have
                                                                                                       
                                             2                                                    2
                 K−1                                            K−2
    1 1 X X (i)                      (i)           1   X X (i)                          (i)
                     (gt,k − ∇f (i) (xt,k ))  ≤                          (gt,k − ∇f (i) (xt,k ))  + ĥσ 2  .
                                                                                                          
Et                                                     Et 
       ĥ K      k=0
                                                 ĥ2K 2
                                                                k=0
           i∈Ĥt                                                                     i∈Ĥt



                                                           21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using the same approach for k = {K − 2, . . . , 0}, we obtain that
                                                                    
                                                                   2
                                   K−1
                         1 1 X X (i)                       (i)        σ2
                                         (gt,k − ∇f (i) (xt,k ))  ≤        .
                                                                     
                     Et 
                           ĥ K                                        K ĥ
                                    i∈Ĥt k=0

This completes the proof.
Lemma 10. Consider Algorithm 1. Suppose that assumptions 1, and 2 hold true. Recall that
γ := Kγs γc . Recall also the definition of et from (13). Then for any t ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1}, and K ≥ 1,
we have
                                                                                                           
                                                                    2
                            γ                          1                                                   2
                                                                (i)   − 1                             (i)
                                            2
                                                          X                 X
                                                                                  Et ∇f (i) (xt ) − ∆t

Et F (xt+1 ) ≤ F (xt ) − ∥∇F (xt )∥ + Et                    ∆t                                              
                            2                          h                  h
                                                          i∈H               i∈H
                                        
                                        2
             2
        2σ            1 X (i)                 γ                 10       h          i         h     i
                                                                2                     2               2
+ Lγ 2        + 2Et             ∆t       +       ∥∇F (xt )∥ + γs2 Et ∥et ∥ + Lγs2 Et ∥et ∥
         ĥK             ĥ                       10                  γ
                            i∈Ĥt


Proof. Using smoothness (Assumption 1), and (14), we have
                                                        L h       2
                                                                    i
  Et F (xt+1 ) ≤ F (xt ) + ∇F (xt ), Et xt+1 − xt + Et xt+1 − xt
                                                        2                       
              *                                   +                          2
                                1  X      (i)             L  1  X    (i)
   = F (xt ) + ∇F (xt ), Et −γ        Gt + γs et  + Et  −γ       Gt + γs et 
                                                                                 
                                ĥ                        2   ĥ
                                          i∈Ĥt                                     i∈Ĥt
                                                                                       
                     *                                 +                          2
   (a)                              1 X                                1 X (i)
                                                  (i)     + Lγ 2 Et 
   ≤ F (xt ) − γEt  ∇F (xt ),                   Gt                       Gt
                                                                                        
                                                                                       
                                    ĥ                                 ĥ
                                         i∈Ĥt                        i∈Ĥt
                                       h      i
                                            2
   + Et [⟨∇F (xt ), γs et ⟩] + Lγs2 Et ∥et ∥
                                                                       
                    *                           +                   2
   (b)                              1  X     (i)           1  X  (i)
   ≤ F (xt ) − γEt  ∇F (xt ),             Gt  + Lγ 2 Et       Gt
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    ĥ                      ĥ
                                         i∈Ĥt                        i∈Ĥt

     γ            2 10     h
                                 2
                                   i       h
                                                 2
                                                   i
   +    ∥∇F (xt )∥ + γs2 Et ∥et ∥ + Lγs2 Et ∥et ∥ ,
     10             γ
                                                                               2
where (a) uses Young’s inequality and (b) uses the fact that ⟨a, b⟩ ≤ ∥a∥
                                                                                            2
                                                                        c + c ∥b∥ . We now have
          *                             +         *                                     +
                        1    X       (i)                                   1   X     (i)
   − γEt  ∇F (xt ),              Gt  = −γ ∇F (xt ), EĤ ∼U (H) Et               Gt |Ĥt 
                        ĥ                                       t
                                                                           ĥ
                            i∈Ĥt                                             i∈Ĥt
          *                                                +
   (a)                                      1 X (i)
   = −γ ∇F (xt ), EĤ ∼U (H) Et                    ∆t |Ĥt 
                          t
                                            ĥ
                                               i∈Ĥt
            *                            +
                            1 X (i) 
   = −γEt  ∇F (xt ),                ∆t
                            ĥ
                               i∈Ĥt
                                                                              
                                             2                                  2
       γ                     1 X (i)                       2      1 X    (i)
   =       Et ∇F (xt ) −               ∆t        − ∥∇F (xt )∥ − Et       ∆t       ,
       2                       h                                     h
                                i∈H                                           i∈H

where (a) comes from the fact that
          h            i     h     h             ii   h      h                      ii
            (i)                      (i)                               (i)
       Et gt,k |i ∈ Ĥt = Et Et,k−1 gt,k |i ∈ Ĥt = Et Et,k−1 ∇f (i) (xt,k )|i ∈ Ĥt .


                                                         22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By Lemma 9, we also have
                                                                             
                                         2                                  2
                                                  2
                         1 X (i)             2σ          1 X (i)
                             Gt              ≤     + 2Et     ∆t               .
                                                                                
                     Et 
                          ĥ                    ĥK         ĥ
                              i∈Ĥt                              i∈Ĥt


Combining all we have
                                                                                            
                                                            2                                 2
                          γ            2        1 X (i)                          1 X (i)
Et F (xt+1 ) ≤ F (xt ) −      ∥∇F (xt )∥ + Et         ∆t      − Et  ∇F (xt ) −       ∆t      
                          2                      h                                h
                                                   i∈H                              i∈H
                                     
                                     2
        2σ 2         1 X (i)             γ                10      h    i          h      i
                                                          2              2                 2
+ Lγ 2       + 2Et            ∆t      +     ∥∇F (xt )∥ + γs2 Et ∥et ∥ + Lγs2 Et ∥et ∥
         MK              ĥ                 10                 γ
                             i∈Ĥt



Lemma 11 (Lemma 7 in (Jhunjhunwala et al., 2022)). Consider Algorithm 1. Suppose that assump-
tions 1, 2, and 3 hold true. Then for any t ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1}, and K ≥ 1, we have
                          
                         2

        1     X     (i)    3X                (i)            (i)
                                                                  2     3(h − ĥ) 2                2
    Et            ∆t      ≤         Et ∇f (xt ) − ∆t                +           ζ + 3 ∥∇F (xt )∥
            ĥ                 h                                        (h − 1)ĥ
            i∈Ĥt                i∈H

Lemma 12 (Lemma 6 in (Jhunjhunwala et al., 2022)). Consider Algorithm 1. Suppose that assump-
tions 1, 2, and 3 hold true. Then for any t ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1}, and K ≥ 1, we have

  1X                              2
                              (i)                                                             2
        Et ∇f (i) (xt ) − ∆t          ≤ 2γc2 L2 (K − 1)σ 2 + 8γc2 L2 K(K − 1) ζ 2 + ∥∇F (xt )∥ .
  h
   i∈H
Lemma 7. Consider Algorithm 1. Suppose that assumptions 1, 2, and 3 hold true. Suppose also that
γc ≤ 1/16LK and γc γs ≤ 1/36LK and the aggregation rule A is (n̂, b̂, κ)-robust. Recall the definition
of et from (13). Then for any t ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1}, and K ≥ 1, we have
                                                                                     h
                                     2γ         2      2 2
                                                                     γ
                                                                                2                  2
                                                                                                     i
 E F (xt+1 ) ≤ E [F (xt )] + −          + 6Lγ + 8γc L K(K − 1)          + 6Lγ       E ∥∇F (xt )∥
                                      5                               2
             2
           σ              h − ĥ 2        γ
 + 2Lγ 2         + 6Lγ 2                      + 6Lγ 2 2γc2 L2 (K − 1)σ 2 + 8γc2 L2 K(K − 1)ζ 2

                                   ζ +
          ĥK            (h − 1)ĥ        2
                      h
       10 2                   2
                                i
 +       γ + Lγs2 E ∥et ∥ .
       γ s

Proof. Combining lemmas 10 and 11, we obtain that
                             γ     γ
                                                       2         σ2           h − ĥ 2
                                     + 6Lγ 2 ∥∇F (xt )∥ + 2Lγ 2     + 6Lγ 2

  Et F (xt+1 ) ≤ F (xt ) + − +                                                         ζ
                             2 10                               ĥK          (h − 1)ĥ
      γ            X                           2
                                                                  h
                2 1                                  10 2                  i
                               (i)         (i)                2          2
   +     + 6Lγ           Et ∇f (xt ) − ∆t         +    γs + Lγs Et ∥et ∥
       2          h                                  γ
                      i∈H


Combining this with Lemma 12, we have

                                  2γ        2      2 2
                                                                γ
                                                                          2              2
  Et F (xt+1 ) ≤ F (xt ) + −          + 6Lγ + 8γc L K(K − 1)       + 6Lγ       ∥∇F (xt )∥
                                    5                            2
             σ2            h − ĥ 2   γ
   + 2Lγ 2       + 6Lγ 2                    + 6Lγ 2 2γc2 L2 (K − 1)σ 2 + 8γc2 L2 K(K − 1)ζ 2

                                    ζ +
            ĥK          (h − 1)ĥ        2
                       h
        10 2                    2
                                  i
   +       γ + Lγs2 Et ∥et ∥
        γ s
Taking total expectation from both sides yields the result.


                                                 23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     S UBSAMPLING

In this section, we prove results related to the subsampling process in FedRo. We will first show
a few simple properties of the quantity D (α, β) as defined in Lemma 1, which will be useful in
the subsequent proofs. We will then prove Lemma 1 which provides a sufficient condition for the
convergence of FedRo. We then give proofs of Lemma 2, 3, 4, which help us set parameters b̂ and n̂.
In the remaining, let b̂t := B̂t .


B.1   P ROPERTIES OF D (α, β)

We first prove a few simple properties of D (α, β) that will be useful in subsequent proofs.
Property 1. For any α, β ∈ [0, 1], we have

                               ∂                  α         1−α
                                 D (α, β) = ln       − ln         .
                              ∂α                  β         1−β

Proof. Note that

                               α                  1−α
            D (α, β) = α ln        + (1 − α) ln
                               β                  1−β
                      = α ln (α) + (1 − α) ln (1 − α) − α ln(β) − (1 − α) ln(1 − β).
Differentiating this expression with respect to α, we get
                    ∂
                      D (α, β) = ln(α) + 1 − ln(1 − α) − 1 − ln(β) + ln(1 − β)
                   ∂α
                                     α          1−α
                               = ln      − ln           .
                                     β          1−β



Property 2. D (α, β) is a decreasing function of the first argument for α < β, and an increasing
function of the first argument if α > β.

Proof. Suppose α < β. Then, ln(α/β ) < 0 and ln(1−α/1−β ) > 0, hence, the derivative from
Property 1 is negative. Case α > β follows in a similar fashion.

Property 3. D (α, β) > 0 for α ̸= β, and D (α, β) = 0 for α = β.

Proof. Observe that D (β, β) = β ln(β/β ) + (1 − β) ln(1−β/1−β ) = 0. Now, recall that the derivative
with respect to α is negative for all α < β and positive for all α > β. Then, we have D (α, β) > 0
for any α ̸= β.

Property 4. D (α, β) is convex in the first argument.

Proof. Note that, from Property 1
                           ∂2

                                          ∂        α         1−α
                              D (α, β) =       ln     − ln
                          ∂α2            ∂α        β         1−β
                                         1       1
                                       = +
                                         α 1−α
                                             1
                                       =           ≥ 4 > 0,
                                         α(1 − α)
since α(1 − α) ≤ 1/4 for any α ∈ (0, 1). This concludes the proof.


                                                 24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2   P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

For M, K, m ∈ N such that M ≥ K, m ≥ 0, consider a population of size M of K distinguished
objects, and consider sampling m objects without replacement. Then, the number of distinguished
objects in the sample follows a hypergeometric distribution, which we denote by HG (M, K, m).
Then, b̂t ∼ HG (n, b, n̂) for every t. By (Chvátal, 1979; Hoeffding, 1994), b̂t obeys Chernoff bounds.
Moreover, we will show that Chernoff bounds are tight for certain regimes of the parameters M, K, m
by using binomial approximations of hypergeometric distribution (e.g., Theorem 3.2 of (Holmes,
2004), Theorem 2 of (Ehm, 1991)). These results are summarized in the following lemma.
Lemma 13. Let X ∼ HG (M, K, m) be a random variable following a hypergeometric distribution,
and let β := K/M . Then, for any 1 > α > β, we have
                                P [X ≥ αm] ≤ exp (−mD (α, β)) ,
where D (α, β) is as in Lemma 1. Moreover, if αm is an integer, then
                                           1                              m−1
                  P [X ≥ αm] ≥ p                    exp (−mD (α, β)) −         .
                                      8mα(1 − α)                          M −1

Proof. The upper bound is shown in (Chvátal, 1979; Hoeffding, 1994)
                                P [X ≥ αm] ≤ exp (−mD (α, β)) .
Now, we show the lower bound. Suppose αm is an integer. Then, Lemma 4.7.1 of (Ash, 2012) gives
                                          1
                     P [B ≥ αm] ≥ p                 exp (−mD (α, β)) ,                    (23)
                                      8mα(1 − α)
where B ∼ Bin (m, β) is a binomial random variable. Finally, Theorem 3.2 of (Holmes, 2004) (also
Theorem 2 of (Ehm, 1991)) gives
                                                             m−1
                           |P [B ≥ αm] − P [X ≥ αm]| ≤             .                        (24)
                                                             M −1
Combining (23) and (24), we get
                                               m−1
                P [X ≥ αm] ≥ P [B ≥ αm] −
                                               M −1
                                       1                              m−1
                              ≥p                exp (−mD (α, β)) −            ,
                                   8mα(1 − α)                         M −1
which concludes the proof.

Lemma 14. Suppose b and b̂ are such that b/n < b̂/n̂ < 1/2. Suppose we have
                                              !−1
                                         b̂ b              T
                               n̂ ≥ D      ,         ln                                          (25)
                                         n̂ n            1−p
for some p < 1. Then for every t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , T − 1}, we have
                                         h          i 1−p
                                       P b̂t ≥ b̂ ≤           .
                                                          T

Proof. Recall that b̂t ∼ HG (n, b, n̂) follows a hypergeometric distribution. Then, by an upper bound
from Lemma 13, we get
                                                              !!
                            h        i                   b̂ b
                          P b̂t ≥ b̂ ≤ exp −n̂D            ,      .
                                                         n̂ n
Using (25), we have

                            h        i              T       1−p
                           P b̂t ≥ b̂ ≤ exp − ln          =     ,
                                                   1−p       T
which concludes the proof.


                                                  25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 1. Let p < 1 and b be such that 0 < b/n < 1/2. Consider FedRo as defined in Algorithm 1.
Suppose that n̂ and b̂ are such that b/n < b̂/n̂ < 1/2 and
                                                             !−1                     
                                                                                      
                                                     b̂ b                       T
                             n̂ ≥ min       n, D        ,              ln             ,                         (5)
                                                     n̂ n                      1−p 


with D (α, β) := α ln (α/β ) + (1 − α) ln (1−α/1−β ), for α, β ∈ (0, 1). Then, Event E as defined in (4)
holds true with probability at least p.



                                                                                             −1
Proof. We will consider two cases: when n̂ = n, and when n̂ ≥ D b̂/n̂, b/n                        ln (T/1−p).

(i) Case of n̂ = n. By assumption of the lemma b/n < b̂/n̂, which implies b < b̂ since n̂ = n. Note
that we also have b̂t = b < b̂ for all t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , T − 1}, since the entire set of clients is sampled
in each round. Then, assertion E holds with probability 1.
                                −1
(ii) Case of n̂ ≥ D b̂/n̂, b/n      ln (T/1−p). Using Lemma 14 and a union bound over all t ∈
{0, 1, . . . , T − 1}, we have
                                                                                     
                                                           _                n        o
                               Pr [¬E] = Pr                                 b̂t > b̂ 
                                                     t∈{0,1,...,T −1}
                                              T
                                              X −1     h         i
                                          ≤          Pr b̂t > b̂
                                              t=0
                                                    1−p
                                          ≤T·           = 1 − p.
                                                     T

Hence,

                                                     Pr [E] ≥ p,

which concludes the proof.


B.3    P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

Lemma 2. Consider the sampling threshold n̂th defined as follows
                                      &                  −1                      '
                                                  1 b                   4T
                              n̂th := D            ,          ln                     +2 ,                       (9)
                                                  2 n                  1−p


with D as defined in Lemma 1. If n̂ ≥ n̂th , then there exist b̂ such that (5) holds and b/n < b̂/n̂ < 1/2.



Proof. Let β = b/n, and let α ∈ [1/2 − 1/n̂, 1/2) be arbitrary. We denote by Dα (α, β) the derivative
of D (α, β) with respect to α. Recall that, from Property 1, we have

                                      ∂                             α         1−α
                         Dα (α, β) =    D (α, β) = ln                  − ln
                                     ∂α                             β         1−β

                                                         26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By Property 4, D (α, β) is convex in the first argument. Then, by Taylor expansion around α = 1/2,
we have
                          1                1          1
        D (α, β) ≥ D        ,β + α −            Dα      ,β
                          2                2          2

                          1            1              1
                  =D        ,β −         − α Dα         ,β
                          2            2              2

                     1       1/2       1       1/2          1             1/2           1/2
                  = ln              + ln               −      −α     ln         − ln
                     2        β        2      1−β           2              β           1−β

                            1/2                      1/2
                  = α ln           + (1 − α) ln
                              β                     1−β

                           1      1/2       1       1/2                        1/2
                  = 2α       ln          + ln                 + (1 − 2α) ln
                           2       β        2      1−β                        1−β

                                1 b                        1/2
                  = (2α) D       ,      + (1 − 2α) ln
                                2 n                      1−β

                                   1/2            1
Since β ∈ (0, 1), we have ln 1−β         = ln 1−β      − ln(2) > − ln(2). Since α < 1/2, this implies a
strict inequality as follows

                                1 b
        D (α, β) > (2α) D        ,      − (1 − 2α) ln(2)
                                2 n

Recall that α ∈ [1/2 − 1/n̂, 1/2). Hence, α ≥ 1/2 − 1/n̂, and we get

                                               2          1 b         2 ln(2)
                          D (α, β) > 1 −            D       ,      −
                                               n̂         2 n            n̂
                                                      1 b

                                      (n̂ − 2)D 2 , n − 2 ln(2)
                                   ≥
                                                       n̂
                                −1
Since n̂ ≥ n̂th ≥ D ( /2, /n) ln ( /1−p) + 2, we have
                         1   b          4T
                                                   −1   4T
                                      D 12 , nb        ln 1−p D 12 , nb − 2 ln(2)

                          D (α, β) >
                                                                n̂
                                             4T
                                      ln 1−p         − 2 ln(2)
                                   =
                                                   n̂
                                              T
                                      ln 1−p
                                   =                                                           (26)
                                            n̂
Note that since p ≥ 0 and T ≥ 1, the value on the right hand side is non-negative. Hence, for
any α ∈ [1/2 − 1/n̂, 1/2), we have D (α, β) > 0. Since D (β, β) = 0, this means that we have
β ̸∈ [1/2 − 1/n̂, 1/2). Since β < 1/2, this implies
                                                        1     1
                                                   β< − .                                      (27)
                                                        2 n̂
Now, set b̂ := ⌈n̂ (1/2 − 1/n̂)⌉. First, note that b̂ = ⌈n̂ (1/2 − 1/n̂)⌉ = ⌈n̂/2⌉ − 1. Hence,

                                                  1    1             n̂
                                           n̂       −        ≤ b̂ <                            (28)
                                                  2 n̂               2
Hence, b̂/n̂ ∈ [1/2 − 1/n̂, 1/2), and we get from (26)

                                                   !          T
                                              b̂       ln   1−p
                                        D        ,β >             .
                                              n̂            n̂
Hence, such value of b̂ satisfies (5). Using (27) and (28), we also get b/n < b̂/n̂ < 1/2, which
concludes the proof.



                                                   27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.4    P ROOF OF L EMMA 3

Lemma 15. Suppose 0 < β < 1/2, and α is such that α ∈ [1/2, 1/2 + 1/2n̂] for n̂ ≥ 2. Then

                                          1          1
                       D (α, β) ≤ 1 +           D      ,β + 1 .
                                          n̂         2

Proof. Let α0 = 1/2 + 1/2n̂. Note that
   D (α, β) ≤ D (α0 , β)

                      α0                     1 − α0
            = α0 ln         + (1 − α0 ) ln
                       β                     1−β

                      1/2                      1/2
            = α0 ln          + (1 − α0 ) ln           + α0 ln(2α0 ) + (1 − α0 ) ln(2(1 − α0 ))
                        β                     1−β

                    1       1/2      1       1/2
            = 2α0      ln         + ln
                    2        β       2      1−β

                                 1/2
              + (1 − 2α0 ) ln            + α0 ln(2α0 ) + (1 − α0 ) ln(2(1 − α0 ))
                                1−β

                       1                         1/2
            = 2α0 D      , β + (1 − 2α0 ) ln            + α0 ln(2α0 ) + (1 − α0 ) ln(2(1 − α0 ))
                       2                        1−β

                       1                         1/2
            = 2α0 D      , β + (1 − 2α0 ) ln            + ln(2) − H(α0 ),
                       2                        1−β
where H(α0 ) = −α0 ln(α0 ) − (1 − α0 ) ln(1 − α0 ). Note that ln(α0 ), ln(1 − α0 ) < 0, hence
H(α0 ) ≥ 0. Therefore, we get

                         1                        1/2
  D (α, β) ≤ 2α0 D         , β + (1 − 2α0 ) ln           + ln(2).
                         2                       1−β

                                  1/2           1
Note that β ∈ (0, 1/2), hence ln 1−β    = ln 1−β     −ln(2) ≥ − ln(2). Also, recall that (1−2α0 ) =
− n̂1 . Therefore,

                       1       1
   D (α, β) ≤ 2α0 D      , β + ln(2) + ln(2)
                       2       n̂

                    1         1
            = 1+            D   , β + ln(2)
                    n̂        2

                    1         1
            ≤ 1+            D   ,β + 1 ,
                    n̂        2
which concludes the proof.
Lemma 3. Let p ≥ 1/2 and suppose that the fraction b/n < 1/2 is a constant. Consider FedRo as
defined in Algorithm 1 with
                                            −1
                                 1 b                    T
                         n̂ < D   ,    +2       ln               −1 ,
                                 2 n                 3(1 − p)
where D is defined in Lemma 1. Then for large enough n and any b̂ < n̂/2, Event E as defined in (4)
holds true with probability strictly smaller than p.

Proof. Note that for any b̂ < n̂/2, we have
                                                                                           

                                 ^                                  ^                      n̂ 
           Pr[E] = Pr                     b̂t ≤ b̂  ≤ Pr                          b̂t <      .   (29)
                                                                                           2
                           t∈{0,1,...,T −1}                   t∈{0,1,...,T −1}

Recall that b̂t ∼ HG (n, b, n̂). For the duration of this proof, set β := b/n.


                                                   28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Case n̂ ≥ 2. Note that, for any n̂ ∈ N, one of n̂/2 and n̂+1/2 is an integer. Let λn̂ be that integer.
Then λ ∈ [1/2, 1/2 + 1/2n̂]. Then, by Lemma 15, we get

                                              1           1
                              D (λ, β) ≤ 1 +         D      ,β + 1 .                             (30)
                                              n̂          2
Since n̂ ≥ 2, we also have λ ≤ 1/2 + 1/2n̂ < 1. Then, by the lower bound in Lemma 13, we have

            P[b̂t ≥ n̂/2] ≥ P[b̂t ≥ λn̂]
                                   1                            n̂ − 1
                          ≥p                exp (−n̂D (λ, β)) −
                               8n̂λ (1 − λ)                     n−1

Note that λ(1 − λ) ≤ 1/4, hence, we have
                             1                    n̂ − 1
            P[b̂t ≥ n̂/2] ≥ √ exp (−n̂D (λ, β)) −        .
                             2n̂                  n−1
By (30), we get

                              1                     1             n̂ − 1
            P[b̂t ≥ n̂/2] ≥ √ exp − (n̂ + 1) D        ,β + 1    −
                              2n̂                   2             n−1

                                              1            1             n̂ − 1
                          ≥ exp − (n̂ + 1) D    , β + 1 − ln(2n̂) −
                                              2            2             n−1
Using ln(2n̂) ≤ 2(n̂ + 1), we get

                                              1             n̂ − 1
            P[b̂t ≥ n̂/2] ≥ exp − (n̂ + 1) D    ,β + 2    −
                                              2             n−1
                                  −1
Recall that n̂ < (D (1/2, β) + 2) ln (T/3(1−p)) − 1. We then get

                                            T          n̂ − 1
              P[b̂t ≥ n̂/2] > exp − ln               −
                                         3(1 − p)      n−1
                               1 − p n̂ − 1
                            >3      −
                                 T     n−1
Since n̂−1/n−1 → 0 as n → ∞, for all large enough n, we have
                                      1−p
                     P[b̂t ≥ n̂/2] > 2
                                        T
                                      (1 − p1/T )(1 + p1/T + . . . + p(T −1)/T )
                                   =2
                                                         T
Using p ≥ 1/2, we have
                                     (1 − p1/T ) · T /2
                                   >2
                                             T
                                         1/T
                                   =1−p


Since sampling is done in an i.i.d. manner, we get
                                                   
                              ^                             h          i T
                    P                  b̂t < n̂/2  = 1 − P b̂1 ≥ n̂/2
                         t∈{0,1,...,T −1}
                                                                         T
                                                       < 1 − (1 − p1/T )
                                                       < p,
which concludes the proof of this case by (29).


                                                  29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Case n̂ = 1. We have
                                                                              −1
                                                             1                                 T
                          2 = n̂ + 1 <               D         ,β       +2         ln                      .
                                                             2                              3(1 − p)
Hence,


                                 T                   1
                     ln                      > 2D      ,β + 4
                              3(1 − p)               2

                                                    1/2           1/2
                                             = ln         + ln           +4
                                                     β           1−β

                                                               1           1
                                             = −2 ln(2) + ln       + ln         + 4.
                                                               β          1−β
Since ln(2) < 1 and ln (1/1−β ) > 0, we have

                           T               1
                   ln               > ln     + 2.
                        3(1 − p)           β
Then
                                                            T      e2
                                                                  > ,
                                                         3(1 − p)  β
where e is the Euler’s number. This implies
                                                               3e2 (1 − p)
                                                     β>                    .                                       (31)
                                                                    T
Since n̂ = 1, we have
                                                                                                            
                                ^                                                       ^
                 P                              b̂t < n̂/2  = P                                    b̂t = 0 
                      t∈{0,1,...,T −1}                                        t∈{0,1,...,T −1}

                                                                        = (1 − β)T .
Using (31), we get
                                                            
                                                                                 T
                                                                    3e2 (1 − p)
                                ^
                 P                              b̂t < n̂/2  ≤ 1 −                .
                                                                         T
                      t∈{0,1,...,T −1}

                2
                        T
Note that 1 − 3e (1−p)
                  T       is an increasing function of T which approaches exp(−3e2 (1 − p)) in
the limit T → ∞. Hence,
                                               
                         ^
                P                  b̂t < n̂/2  ≤ exp(−3e2 (1 − p)).                     (32)
                      t∈{0,1,...,T −1}


Consider a function g(p) = 3e2 (1 − p) + ln(p). We have g ′ (p) = p1 − 3e2 < 0 since p ≥ 1/2. Then,
for any p ∈ [1/2, 1), we have 3e2 (1 − p) + ln(p) = g(p) > g(1) = 0. Hence −3e2 (1 − p) < ln(p),
which implies exp(−3e2 (1 − p)) < p. Combining this with (32), we get
                                                              

                                          ^               n̂
                                P                  b̂t <       < p,
                                                          2
                                             t∈{0,1,...,T −1}

which concludes the proof by (29).



                                                                    30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.5    P ROOF OF L EMMA 4

Lemma 4. Suppose we have 0 < nb < 21 and consider the sampling threshold n̂opt defined as follows
                        &      (                     )             '
                                       1          3          4T
                n̂opt := max                  2,        ln           +2 .                     (10)
                                 (1/2 − b/n) b/n            1−p

If n̂ ≥ n̂opt , then, the solution b̂⋆ to (8) exists and satisfies b̂⋆/n̂ ∈ O (b/n) .

Proof. Let β := b/n, and let η := 1/2 − β > 0. We begin by showing that the value of b̂⋆ exists. We
will then show that we have b̂⋆/n̂ ∈ O (b/n).
(i) Proof of existence of b̂⋆ . Note that

                                         1      1     1          1
                             D (1/2, β) = ln        + ln
                                         2     2β     2      2(1 − β)

                                         1         1
                                        = ln               .
                                         2     4β(1 − β)
Recall that η = 1/2 − β. Then, we have
                                                                 !
                                         1              1
                             D (1/2, β) = ln
                                                   4 14 − η 2

                                         2

                                             1         1
                                           = ln
                                             2     (1 − 4η 2 )
                                               1
                                           = − ln 1 − 4η 2 .

                                               2
Using − ln (1 − x) ≥ x, we get
                                             1 2
                             D (1/2, β) ≥      4η
                                             2
                                           ≥ 2η 2 .
From (10) and the fact that η = 1/2 − β, we have

                                    1        4T
                         n̂opt ≥       ln           +2
                                   η2       1−p

                                    1         4T
                               ≥        ln           +2
                                   2η 2      1−p

                                              −1      4T
                               ≥ D (1/2, β) ln              + 2 = n̂th .
                                                     1−p

Hence, the value of b̂⋆ exists by Lemma 2.
(ii) Proof of b̂⋆/n̂ ∈ O (b/n)
In the rest of the proof, consider two cases.
(ii.1) Case of β ≥ 1/8.
Since b̂⋆ exists and is upper bounded by 1/2, we have

                                              b̂⋆  1
                                                  ≤ ∈ O (β) ,
                                               n̂  2
where last transition follows by β ≥ 1/8. This concludes the proof of this case.
(ii.2) Case of β < 1/8.


                                                       31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Define G(β) = D (2β, β). Then, we have

                                                                           1 − 2β
                             G(β) = 2β ln(2) + (1 − 2β) ln                                          .
                                                                           1−β

After taking the derivative, we get

                            ∂                                     1 − 2β                 1
                              G(β) = 2 ln(2) − 2 ln                                 −       .
                           ∂β                                      1−β                  1−β

Differentiating once again, we have

                                  ∂2                 1
                                      G(β) =                   > 0,
                                 ∂β 2        (1 − β)2 (1 − 2β)
                      ∂
since β < 1/8. Then, ∂β G(β) is an increasing function. Hence, for any β ≥ 0, we have

                                  ∂         ∂
                                    G(β) ≥    G(0) = 2 ln(2) − 1.
                                 ∂β        ∂β

Then, since G(0) = 0, we have

                                                                                                        β
                      G(β) ≥ (2 ln(2) − 1)β + G(0) = (2 ln(2) − 1)β >                                     .
                                                                                                        3
Hence, using the definition of G, we get
                                               β
                                D (2β, β) >      .
                                               3
Since n̂opt ≥ 3/β ln (T/1−p), we get

                                                         T                      T
                                               ln       1−p           ln       1−p
                                D (2β, β) ≥                       ≥                         .                 (33)
                                                     n̂opt                     n̂

Let b̂ := ⌈2β n̂⌉. Then b̂/n̂ ≥ 2β. Using Property 2, we have

                                                 !           T
                                            b̂        ln   1−p
                                       D       ,β ≥              .
                                           n̂              n̂

Hence, b̂ satisfies condition (5). Then, by minimality of b̂⋆ , we have

                                      b̂⋆ ≤ b̂ = ⌈2β n̂⌉ ≤ 2β n̂ + 1.                                         (34)

From (10) and using T ≥ 1, p ≥ 0, we have n̂ ≥ n̂opt ≥ 3/β ln(4) ≥ 3/β . Hence, from (34), we have

                                      b̂⋆       1  7
                                          ≤ 2β + ≤ β ∈ O(β),
                                       n̂       n̂ 3
which concludes the proof.


C    E XPERIMENTS

In this section we present the full experimental setup of the experiments in Figure 1, 2, 3 and 4.
Machines used for all the experiments: 2 NVIDIA A10-24GB GPUs and 8 NVIDIA Titan X
Maxwell 16GB GPUs.


                                                        32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.1                  A DDITIONAL RESULTS ON THE CIFAR-10 DATASET

We evaluate the performance of FedRo on the CIFAR-10 dataset and we highlight the influence
of local steps on model accuracy. We consider 150 clients, 15 of which are Byzantine. We use
NNM and the Trimmed Mean aggregation rule and run FedRo over 1500 rounds using the Sign
Flipping attack and the Fall of Empire attack. The number of subsampled clients n̂ and the number
of Byzantine clients tolerated per round b̂ are determined as in Figure 3, first using Equation (9) to
set n̂ = n̂th = 29, then applying Equation (8) and setting b̂ = 13. Figure 5 shows the performance
of FedRo over 1500 learning rounds. As with the FEMNIST dataset, we see in Figure 6 that the
accuracy of the model on the CIFAR-10 dataset increases with the number of local steps performed
by clients.

                                                                                            85
                        SF                                                                                                                          SF
            80          FOE                                                                                                                         FOE
                                                                                            80

            60                                                                              75
 Accuracy


                                                                                 Accuracy
            40                                                                              70

            20                                                                              65

             0                                                                              60
                 0     200    400    600 800 1000 1200 1400                                          2        4     6       8        10        12   14
                                    Number of steps                                                                Number of local steps

Figure 5: Accuracy of FedRo with NNM and                                        Figure 6: Accuracy of FedRo with respect to
Trimmed Mean on the CIFAR-10 dataset.                                           the number of local steps on CIFAR-10.

C.2                  F IGURE 1

In this first experiment, we show the variation of n̂th and n̂opt with respect to the fraction of Byzantine
workers such that

                                                     "   &                 −1                              '           #
                                                                    1 b                       4T
                                        n̂th := min n, D             ,          ln                                +2       ,
                                                                    2 n                      1−p
and
                                             "   &       (                                       )                      '           #
                                                                     1        3                                4T
                              n̂opt := min n, max                        2 , b/n                     ln                        +2          .
                                                              (1/2 − b/n)                                     1−p

We choose n = 1000, we set T = 500, p = 0.99 and make f/n vary in 0, 12 .



C.3                  F IGURE 2

In the second experiment, we show that there exists an empirical threshold on the number of
subsampled clients below which learning is not possible. We use the LEAF Library (Caldas et al.,
2018) and download 5% of the FEMNIST dataset distributed in a non-iid way. The exact command
line to generate our dataset using the LEAF library is:
                     p r e p r o c e s s . s h − s n i i d −− s f 0 . 0 5 −k 0 − t s a m p l e
                                               −− s m p l s e e d 1549786595 −− s p l t s e e d 1549786796

We summarize the learning hyperparameters in Table 1.
The attack used by Byzantine clients is the sign flipping attack (Allen-Zhu et al., 2020) when the
number of sampled Byzantine clients is less than the number of tolerated Byzantines per round b̂,
otherwise, when the number of sampled Byzantine clients exceeds b̂, we consider that they can take
control of the learning and set the server parameter to (0, . . . , 0) ∈ Rd .


                                                                         33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Total number of clients                      n = 150 (first 150 clients of the downloaded dataset)

           Number of Byzantine clients                                            b = 30

     Number of subsampled clients per round                  n̂ ∈ {1, 6, 11, 16, 21, 26, 31, 36, 41, 46, 51, 56}

                                                                               b̂ = n̂2 − 1

  Number of tolerated Byzantine clients per round

                      Model                                      CNN (architecture presented in Table 2)

                    Algorithm                                                      FedRo

                 Number of steps                                                  T = 500

                 Server step-size                                                 γs = 1
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                         0.1     if      0    ≤   T   <    300
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                         0.02     if     300   ≤   T   <    400
                                                                   
                                                                   
               Clients learning rate                        γc =
                                                                                               ≤
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                        0.004    if     400       T   <    460
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                       0.0008    if     400   ≤   T   <    500

                  Loss function                                        Negative Log Likelihood (NLL)

              ℓ2 -regularization term                                                  10−4

                 Aggregation rule                               NNM (Allouah et al., 2023) coupled with

                                                                   CW Trimmed Mean (Yin et al., 2018a)


                                Table 1: Setup of Figure 2’s experiment


               First Layer          Convolution : in = 1, out = 64, kernel_size = 5, stride = 1

                                                               ReLU

                                                           MaxPool(2,2)

              Second Layer        Convolution : in = 64, out = 128, kernel_size = 5, stride = 1

                                                               ReLU

                                                           MaxPool(2,2)

               Third Layer                   Linear : in = 128 × 4 × 4, out = 1024

                                                               ReLU

              Fourth Layer                         Linear : in = 1024, out = 62

                                                            Log Softmax


                                        Table 2: CNN Architecture


                                                      34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.4    F IGURE 3

In this experiments, we show the performance of FedRousing appropriate values for n̂ and b̂. We use
the same portion of the FEMNIST dataset downloaded for the previous experiment (see Section C.3).
We list all the hyperparameters used for this experiment in Table 3.

C.5    F IGURE 4

In this experiments, we show the performance of FedRofor different number of local steps. We use
the same portion of the FEMNIST dataset downloaded for the previous experiments (see Section C.3).
We list all the hyperparameters used for this experiment in Table 4.

              Total number of clients              n = 150 (first 150 clients of the downloaded dataset)

           Number of Byzantine clients                                      b = 15

      Number of subsampled clients per round                                n̂ = 26

                      Model                               CNN (architecture presented in Table 2)

                    Algorithm                                               FedRo

                 Number of steps                                           T = 500

               Server learning rate                                         γs = 1
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                                  0.1     if      0    ≤   T    <    300
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                                  0.02     if     300   ≤   T    <    400
                                                           
                                                           
               Clients learning rate                γc =
                                                                                        ≤
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                                0.004     if     400       T    <    460
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                                0.0008    if     400   ≤   T    <    500

                   Loss function                               Negative Log Likelihood (NLL)

              ℓ2 -regularization term                                           10−4

                 Aggregation rule                         NNM (Allouah et al., 2023) coupled with

                                                           CW Trimmed Mean (Yin et al., 2018a)

                                                           sign flipping (Allen-Zhu et al., 2020),

                                                               fall of empires (Xie et al., 2019),
                Byzantine attacks
                                                           a little is enough (Baruch et al., 2019)

                                                            and mimic (Karimireddy et al., 2022)


                                   Table 3: Setup of Figure 3’s experiment


                                                     35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Total number of clients             n = 150 (first 150 clients of the downloaded dataset)

         Number of Byzantine clients                                     b = 30

    Number of subsampled clients per round                               n̂ = 26

                    Model                              CNN (architecture presented in Table 2)

                  Algorithm                                              FedRo

               Number of steps                                          T = 500

             Server learning rate                                        γs = 1
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                               0.1     if      0    ≤   T    <    300
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                               0.02     if     300   ≤   T    <    400
                                                        
                                                        
             Clients learning rate               γc =
                                                                                     ≤
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                             0.004     if     400       T    <    460
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        
                                                             0.0008    if     400   ≤   T    <    500

                Loss function                               Negative Log Likelihood (NLL)

            ℓ2 -regularization term                                          10−4

               Aggregation rule                        NNM (Allouah et al., 2023) coupled with

                                                        CW Trimmed Mean (Yin et al., 2018a)

                                                        sign flipping (Allen-Zhu et al., 2020),

                                                            fall of empires (Xie et al., 2019),
              Byzantine attacks
                                                        a little is enough (Baruch et al., 2019)

                                                         and mimic (Karimireddy et al., 2022)


                                Table 4: Setup of Figure 4’s experiment


                                                  36
