Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S EMANTIC LOSS GUIDED DATA EFFICIENT SUPERVISED
FINE TUNING FOR S AFE R ESPONSES IN LLM S

 Yuxiao Lu                                                              Arunesh Sinha
 Singapore Management University                                        Rutgers University
 yxlu.2021@phdcs.smu.edu.sg                                             arunesh.sinha@rutgers.edu

 Pradeep Varakantham
 Singapore Management University
 pradeepv@smu.edu.sg



                                           A BSTRACT

         Large Language Models (LLMs) generating unsafe responses to toxic prompts is
         a significant issue in their applications. While various efforts aim to address this
         safety concern, previous approaches often demand substantial human data col-
         lection or rely on the less dependable option of using another LLM to generate
         corrective data. In this paper, we aim to take this problem and overcome limita-
         tions of requiring significant high-quality human data. Our method requires only
         a small set of unsafe responses to toxic prompts, easily obtained from the un-
         safe LLM itself. By employing a semantic cost combined with a negative Earth
         Mover Distance (EMD) loss, we guide the LLM away from generating unsafe re-
         sponses. Additionally, we propose a novel lower bound for EMD loss, enabling
         more efficient optimization. Our results demonstrate superior performance and
         data efficiency compared to baselines, and we further examine the nuanced effects
         of over-alignment and potential degradation of language capabilities when using
         contrastive data.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable abilities in diverse tasks, such as natu-
ral language understanding, generation, and translation, and attracted lot of attention from various
industries and researchers. Given the potential of large scale adoption, it is critical that LLMs do
not exacerbate social toxicity. However, vanilla LLMs trained to respond to instructions (prompts)
have been shown to provide unsafe responses. With the vast amount of knowledge inbuilt in LLMs
due to training on a very large amount of data, LLMs are able to generate responses that can be
dangerous, e.g., LLMs can provide instructions on how to download movies illegally (Zhang et al.,
2024; Ganguli et al., 2022; Wen et al., 2023). Further, some responses can be outright toxic that
belittle groups of people based on race or gender or other attributes (Gehman et al., 2020; Sheng
et al., 2019; Brown, 2020).
In response, a number of works have proposed ways to make LLMs ‘safe.’ One way is Reinforce-
ment Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Ziegler et al., 2019; Bai et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2024a; Chen et al., 2024). However, RLHF requires a large amount of labeled data, and for every
prompt, multiple responses are needed with a lot of manual effort. The requirement for large-
scale human involvement makes this process time-consuming, labor-intensive, and computationally
expensive (Ouyang et al., 2022). Typically, any pre-trained (base) LLM goes through supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) before RLHF. SFT is a technique used to adapt a pre-trained (base) LLM to a
specific downstream task using labeled data. The majority of LLMs used in 2024 are fine-tuned
for chat or instruction-based interactions. Existing work (Bianchi et al., 2023) called Safety Tuned
Llamas (STL) that aims to make LLMs safe in the SFT stage by using data of safe responses to
toxic prompts. Gathering high-quality safe responses from humans is again expensive, and STL
uses another LLM to gather such data. Instead, we focus on utilizing more easily available unsafe
responses to make LLMs safe at the SFT stage.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Problem Statement: We aim to make an LLM generate safe responses to toxic prompts in the
SFT stage itself but using very few easily available harmful responses. Formally, given a base
(non-SFTed) LLM Mθ with weights θ, we aim to perform SFT with two kinds of datasets: (1)
Dsafety-unrelated comprises prompts, response pairs (pj , rj ) that are unrelated to safety concerns. By
construction, the responses rj = Mθ (pj ) are assumed to be safe. (2) Dsafety-related consists of
prompts, response pairs (pi , ri ) where the prompts pi are explicitly designed to be unsafe. The
model’s responses ri = Mθ (pi ) to these prompts are anticipated to be potentially harmful, as Mθ is
a base (non-SFTed) LLM. We do not have any safe (or desired) responses to prompts in Dsafety-related
and typically, we have |Dsafety-related | << |Dsafety-unrelated |.
Approach and Contributions: Our approach to solving the above problem relies on the idea that
one should penalize the generation of toxic responses in SFT. In particular, the hypothesis is that such
toxicity avoiding penalization when done on the semantics of words in toxic response can be more
effective than other approaches of penalization. We call this as Toxicity Avoiding SFT (TA-SFT).
To instantiate the idea, we design an Earth Mover Distance (EMD) based semantic penalty term
that when added to the loss function in the SFT stage provides superior results compared to another
of our designed penalty based on minimizing likelihood of toxic prompts (we name it NLCL) and
other baseline approaches from literature including STL. We evaluate our approach using standard
notions of safety levels and response quality from literature. We list our novelty and contributions
in our approach below:

       • We demonstrate that Large Language Models (LLMs) can be made safer during the SFT
         stage by incorporating a very small amount of harmful responses to toxic prompts into the
         TA-SFT dataset. The semantically-informed EMD loss enables LLMs to achieve safety
         with |Dsafety-related | ≈ 0.005|Dsafety-unrelated |.
       • The semantically-informed EMD loss achieves comparable safety levels with lower size of
         |Dsafety-related | compared to NLCL and other baselines. EMD also maintains higher response
         quality than NLCL.
       • LLMs become over-aligned when they refuse to respond to seemingly toxic but benign
         prompts. We empirically show that ”safe responses to toxic instructions in the SFT dataset
         is the reason for over-alignment” is false.
       • In addition, we observe the surprising phenomenon of degradation of the model’s language
         abilities when we augment our TA-SFT data with safe responses (from another LLM) to
         seeming toxic prompts, an observation also made when in work studying the use of AI
         generated data for training (Shumailov et al., 2023).

2   R ELATED W ORK

Ensuring the safety and fairness of LLM outputs has become a critical area of focus (Yuan et al.,
2024; Yao et al., 2024). One of the primary methods to align LLMs with human values is through
human preference alignment, with Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Ziegler
et al., 2019; Bai et al., 2022; Hoang et al., 2024) and the success of models like ChatGPT has demon-
strated the importance and effectiveness of RLHF. Recent works have been proposed to simplify the
training process of RLHF (Rafailov et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2024; Ethayarajh et al., 2024). Com-
pared to RLHF, Supervised Fine-tuning (SFT) requires significantly less training data and time, yet
still effectively enhances the capabilities of large language models (Li et al., 2024b). However, the
safety issue after SFT has been highlighted by recent studies (Zong et al., 2024; Qi et al., 2023; Hsu
et al., 2024). Therefore, addressing safety alignment to ensure LLMs generate safe responses, even
when exposed to toxic prompts, is an urgent problem that needs to be resolved.
Recent work (Bianchi et al., 2023) explores improving LLM safety by incorporating safe responses
to toxic prompts into the SFT dataset. Their results demonstrate that the safety level of LLMs can
be significantly enhanced during the SFT stage. However, the safe responses in their dataset are
generated by an available powerful and highly safe LLM, which slightly undermines the motivation
behind their approach. In contrast, we do not require any external ‘safe’ LLM as we only need
unsafe responses and we also require much less safety related data (0.5%) compared to their 3%
requirement. As such, safety alignment during the SFT stage remains an attractive avenue due to its
efficiency and cost-effectiveness, and this direction is still in its early stages of exploration.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Comparison between our TA-SFT and standard SFT. In the standard SFT (represented by
black dashed lines), base LLM is trained on Dsafety-unrelated to improve the response quality. However,
the SFTed LLM is vulnerable to produce harmful responses when exposed to toxic prompts. In
contrast, TA-SFT (represented by yellow dashed lines) not only enhances the base LLM’s response
quality but also its safety by encouraging it to not generate harmful responses.


3    BACKGROUND
The supervised fine-tuning (SFT) of an LLM involves adjusting the parameters of LLM Mθ such that
the pre-trained models adapt to specific tasks. Specifically, given a dataset of N prompt, response
pairs (pj , rj ) SFT maximizes the likelihood of generating response rj to the prompt pj . For SFT,
a standard approach is to use the Negative Log-Likelihood (NLL) loss (Radford, 2018), which is
defined for a set of N prompts (where the prompt is pi and its corresponding response is yi , that is
given as a sequence of tokens [yi,1 , yi,2 , ..., yi,Ti ] ) as:
                                            Ni  T
                                     1 XX
                    LSFT (θ, N ) = −           log Qθ (yi,t | yi,t−1 , . . . , yi,1 , pi ) .             (1)
                                     N i=1 t=1

where Qθ (yi,t | yi,t−1 , . . . , yi,1 , pi ) represents the conditional probability of the t-th token in the
generated sequence, conditioned on all previous tokens and the input prompt pi . Ti represents the
token length of response yi . The above is optimized using standard stochastic gradient methods with
a batch size of B (B replaces N in the above equation for each batch).
ORPO (Hong et al., 2024) is a method designed for Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback
(RLHF), and as such, it is not directly comparable to our approach during the Supervised Fine-
Tuning (SFT) stage. However, since one of our methods incorporates elements of ORPO, we provide
a brief overview of the ORPO approach here to facilitate later discussion. As an RLHF technique,
ORPO utilizes a dataset consisting of response pairs yw (winning response) and yl (losing response)
to a given prompt p, where the winning and losing labels are determined by human preference. The
authors of ORPO introduce a relative ratio loss for each data point (prompt, winning response, and
losing response) as follows:

                                 oddsθ (yw | p)                           Qθ (y | p)
            LOR = − log σ log                     where oddsθ (y | p) =                 .       (2)
                                 oddsθ (yl | p)                         1 − Qθ (y | p)

4    M ETHOD
We provide a modified supervised fine-tuning protocol on a base LLM, denoted as Mθ . As stated in
the problem statement, the dataset used for modified fine-tuning D = Dsafety-unrelated ∪ Dsafety-related
consist of two subsets, one a traditional safety unrelated dataset and another smaller safety related
dataset (with only harmful response) that we construct. Our approach is based on minimizing harm-
ful probability of response for toxic prompts and an overview of the approach is shown in Figure 1.
To reduce the risk of generating harmful responses, we push the next token prediction distribution
away from the distribution observed in the unsafe demonstrations within the safe-related dataset.


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.1   EMD BASED A PPROACH

Our main approach is based on using Earth Mover Distance (EMD) to measure the distance between
the generated next token prediction distribution and the next token distribution of unsafe responses
in data. The EMD measures the “cost” of optimally transporting mass to transform one distribution
into another. The cost d(x, y) is defined on the underlying probability space, and it measures the
cost of transporting unit probability mass from x to y; the cost is domain dependent. Given such a
cost d, the EMD between two distribution P, Q is defined as
                              EMD(P, Q; d) =          inf     E(x,y)∼γ [d(x, y)] ,                 (3)
                                                  γ∈Π(P,Q)

where Π is set of all joint distributions (couplings) such that the marginals of any γ ∈ Π are P and Q.
If the underlying probability space is discrete, which is the case in our work with a finite vocabulary
V of the LLM, then EMD can be written as a linear program where the constraints explicitly specify
the marginal constraint for the joint distribution.
                         XX
                   min             γ(x, y)d(x, y)
                   γ
                        x∈V y∈V
                        X                                         X
           subject to         γ(x, y) = Q(y) ∀y ∈ V and                 γ(x, y) = P (x) ∀x ∈ V .
                        x∈V                                       y∈V

In our problem, to capture the semantic information of tokens, we employ the cosine distance dc
between the normalized tokens embeddings, where normalized embedding êw = ew /||ew || is a unit
vector formed from raw token embedding ew . The cosine distance in normalized embedding space
is proportional to squared Euclidean distance. Formally, suppose the normalized embeddings for
tokens w and w′ are êw and êw′ respectively, then
                         dc (êw , êw′ ) = 1 − cos(êw , êw′ ) = ||êw − êw′ ||22 /2 .          (4)
Given a sequence of tokens w<t−1 before the generation of the t-th token, we denote as Qθ (·|w<t−1 )
the (conditional) probability distribution over the next token yt . We use P (·|w<t−1 ) to denote the
(conditional) probability distribution over the next token as seen in the data. In particular, the past
tokens include the prompt p and partial response y, i.e., w<t−1 = yt−1 , . . . , y1 , p.
As our data has unsafe responses to toxic prompts pi , we seek to increase
EMD(P (·|w<t−1 ), Qθ (·|w<t−1 )). In words, we aim to increase the EMD between the dis-
tribution of the generated next token and the distribution of unsafe next token in data only for
the toxic prompts pi . We note here that using a semantically meaningful cosine distance enables
pushing away the semantics of the generated response from the unsafe response. Coupled with the
standard LSF T (θ) loss for safety unrelated response pi , the EMD approach encourages safe yet
meaningful responses to the toxic prompts.
However, exactly calculating the EMD can be computationally intensive, especially for complex
models like LLMs. As we aim to increase the EMD between the generated next token prediction
distribution and the next token distribution of unsafe responses in data, we use a lower bound of
EMD as a proxy for optimization. While lower bounds for EMD are known if the cost d is a distance
metric (Cohen & Guibas, 1997), our cost dc is a squared norm which is not a proper distance metric
as squared norm does not satisfy the triangle inequality. Thus, we provide a novel lower bound
below (proof in Appendix A.3):
Proposition 1. For two probability distributions P, Q over normalized       P êw of tokens w
                                                                      embedding
in vocabulary V (w ∈ V ) we have EMD(P, Q; dc ) ≥ 2|V1 |2 ∥ w∈V P (w)êw − w∈V Q(w)êw ∥2 .
                                                           P


Implementation: In the above, using data distribution P (· | w<t−1 ) in place of P and Qθ (· |
w<t−1 ) in place of Q gives a lower bound that wePcan optimize. Note that we can ignore the constant
  1
2|V |2 when   optimizing  the  lower bound.  The    yt ∈V Qθ (yt | w<t−1 )êyt in the lower bound is
computed by multiplying the next token probability generated by LLMs with the normalized token
embedding êyt . However, the true probability distribution over the next token P (· | w<t−1 ) in
P
   yt ∈V P (yt | w<t−1 )êyt is unknown, but we have data samples. Following the approach outlined
in Ren et al. (2023), we treat P as a one-hot vector of the next token as present in the safety related


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


dataset Dsafety-related . Then, the EMD lower bound loss evaluated on N prompts, response pairs is
                                N   iT
                            1 XX         X                      X
         LEMD (θ, N ) = −             ||   P (yt |w<t−1 )êyt −   Qθ (yt |w<t−1 )êyt ||2 .             (5)
                            N i=1 t=1
                                          yt ∈V                       yt ∈V


Then, in a batch of B prompts, response pairs with K ≤ B data points from safety-unrelated data,
the final loss to optimize is
                              L(θ) = LSFT (θ, K) + λLEMD (θ, B − K) ,                                   (6)
where λ is a hyperparameter. We uniformly sample training batches in the whole fine-tuning dataset
D = Dsafety-unrelated ∪Dsafety-related . The SFT loss is computed on the data sampled from Dsafety-unrelated
and the EMD loss is computed on the data sampled from Dsafety-related . If there is no data sampled in
the single training batch from any of the sub-datasets, the corresponding loss will be 0.

4.2   L IKELIHOOD BASED A PPROACH

An easier option compared to the use of EMD is to directly penalize the likelihood of unsafe re-
sponses during supervised fine-tuning. We follow ORPO (Hong et al., 2024), but since we do not
have pairs of responses but only the undesired response yl , we set odds(yw | p) = 1 in Equa-
tion 2. Then, the denominator odds(yl | p) in Equation 2 represents the odds of generating an unsafe
response to toxic prompt p. Simplifying the loss with this change, we obtain a modified loss
                                                      N
                                                  1 X
                            LNLCL (θ, N ) = −           log(1 − Qθ (yi | pi )) .                        (7)
                                                  N i=1

The above can be clearly seen as a loss that minimizes the likelihood (NLCL stands for negative
log of complementary likelihood) of generating toxic response yi (in data) to the toxic prompt pi .
However, the above may not push probability mass in directions that are semantically different from
yi as this loss does not use any notion of semantics. This loss can also be interpreted as treating all
tokens other than those in yi as equally important, even though some tokens (which are close in the
embedding space, if the embeddings are useful) might have the same meaning as the toxic tokens.
Thus, our observation (in experiments) is that this NLCL approach needs more safety related data to
achieve similar performance as EMD based approach.
Then, similar to the EMD implementation, in a batch of B prompts, response pairs with K ≤ B
data points from safety-unrelated data, the final loss to optimize is
                              L(θ) = LSFT (θ, K) + λLNLCL (θ, B − K) .                                  (8)

5     E XPERIMENT
We tested our approach on four different base models which are not SFTed or RLHF fine-tuned:
Llama 7b (Touvron et al., 2023), Llama 13b (Touvron et al., 2023), Mistral 7b (Jiang et al., 2023),
and Llama3.1 8b (Dubey et al., 2024). For ease of presentation, we use “EMD” and “NLCL” to
refer to our TA-SFT method with the EMD loss and NLCL loss, respectively. All fine-tuning uses
low-rank adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021) for three or four epochs. All models have been trained
on L40 or H100 GPUs. More training hyper-parameters can be found in the Appendix.

5.1   S AFETY T RAINING DATASET C ONSTRUCTION

To the best of our knowledge, there is no existing SFT dataset that combines pairs of safety-unrelated
prompts and responses with safety-related pairs (involving toxic prompts and harmful responses).
Although many RLHF datasets contain responses labeled as ‘preferred’ or ‘non-preferred’ for each
prompt, ‘non-preferred’ responses can still be safe and of good quality, albeit lower than the ‘pre-
ferred’ ones. Therefore, RLHF datasets are not suitable for our study. However, sufficient toxic
prompts can be found in datasets for attacking designed by human (Bai et al., 2022) or generated
automatically (Cui et al., 2024). We obtain harmful responses to these toxic prompts by super-
vised fine-tuning the pre-trained base LLM under consideration on existing SFT datasets such as


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023). These instruction tuned LLMs are vulnerable to toxic prompts and can
easily generate harmful responses (Qi et al., 2023). We use the SFTed LLM to generate harmful
responses, and then apply the OpenAI moderation API to extract 1,000 responses that are harmful
from the LLM under consideration. These 1000 toxic prompt, response pairs (Dsafety-related ) are com-
bined with 20,000 randomly sampled prompt, response pairs from the Alpaca dataset (Dsafety-unrelated )
to create the dataset D = Dsafety-unrelated ∪ Dsafety-related used for our approaches.

5.2     BASELINE M ETHODS

The primary distinction of our approach from RLHF is that our data has only one response per
prompt, whereas RLHF typically requires a pair of responses for each prompt, making most RLHF
methods unsuitable as baselines. However, one of the RLHF method, named KTO (Ethayarajh et al.,
2024), does not depend on pairwise responses and has even better performance than DPO (Rafailov
et al., 2024), and can be utilized as the baseline in our study. In the training of KTO, we consider
the harmful responses as the ‘non-preferred’ responses and the other as ‘preferred’ responses. The
weight term in KTO loss is tuned as suggested in KTO paper (Ethayarajh et al., 2024).
As stated in related work, the most closely related work to ours is Safety Tuned Llamas
(STL) (Bianchi et al., 2023). However, STL requires high quality safe responses to toxic prompts,
which is different from our dataset that has only easily available unsafe responses to toxic prompts.
Thus, STL is not directly comparable to our approach. Nonetheless, we compare to an advantaged
STL by providing the required data for STL in Section 5.3.4 below.

5.3     E VALUATION

In this section, we evaluate our approach in comparison to existing methods across multiple dimen-
sions including safety level of responses, response quality, data efficiency and over alignment.

5.3.1    S AFETY L EVEL
We follow standard practice in literature (Bianchi et al., 2023) to evaluate our fine-tuned models
on four harmfulness benchmarks: I-Malicious, I-CoNa, I-Controversial, and HarmfulQ, which en-
compass hateful speech, controversial topics such as vaccination and immigration, and malicious
instructions. These four datasets totally contain 518 toxic prompts, providing comprehensive cover-
age and a thorough test of the model’s response to a wide range of toxic inputs.
To automatically evaluate the safety level of responses to the toxic prompts, we first utilize a pre-
trained DeBERTa model (He et al., 2021), which assigns a harmfulness score ranging from 0 (least
harmful) to 5 (most harmful). As illustrated in Figure 2, across all four test datasets, both EMD
and NLCL loss functions significantly reduce the harmfulness scores of Llama 7b’s responses as
training progresses, ultimately making them nearly safe. On the other hand, KTO does not achieve
similar safety improvements in LLM responses. Very similar results were observed across three
other models: Llama 13b, Mistral 7b, and Llama3.1 8b, which are presented in the appendix.
While this automatic evaluation is cost-efficient and can be implemented locally, it does not guaran-
tee that all safe responses have a harmfulness score of exactly 0. Therefore, we cannot conclusively
classify which responses are safe. For instance, as depicted in Figure 2, even though most responses
are safe, the DeBERTa model still assigns an average harmfulness score of approximately 0.3.
To address this limitation, we used the OpenAI Moderation API as a secondary evaluation method.
This API provides both a harmfulness score (in [0,1]), where 0 is the least harmful and 1 the most
harmful) and a binary tag indicating whether the response is safe. In Figure 2(d), we show the
percentage of tagged harmful responses across all four test datasets. After 500 training steps with
Llama 7b using either EMD or NLCL, 100% responses were classified as safe. The harmfulness
percentage and harmful score from the moderation API for the other three models: Llama 13b,
Mistral 7b, and Llama3.1 8b follow a similar trend and are shown in the appendix A.4.2.

5.3.2    R ESPONSE Q UALITY
In this sub-section, we investigate whether penalizing LLMs for generating unsafe responses de-
grades their overall response quality relative to standard SFT. We employ AlpacaEval (Li et al.,

                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       (a)                                                (b)


                       (c)                                                (d)


Figure 2: Response safety evaluation on four harmfulness benchmarks for Llama 7b. (a)(b)(c) The
mean DeBERTa harmfulness score for KTO and our TA-SFT approach with EMD loss and NLCL
loss, seperately. Lower scores indicate less harmful (safer) responses. (d) The OpenAI Moderation
harmful rate, lower is better.


2023), an automatic evaluator for instruction-following models, which tests responses on 805
prompts covering math, conversation, ethics, factual questions, and more. In AlpacaEval frame-
work, we use GPT-4o mini as an annotator to compare each tested model’s outputs against a refer-
ence model (text-davinci-003); a higher selection rate indicates better performance.
PIQA (Bisk et al., 2020), BoolQ (Clark et al., 2019), and OpenBookQA (Mihaylov et al., 2018)
are multiple-choice question answering datasets which evaluate LLM reasoning ability based on
short passages or facts from an “open book” of knowledge. We use the Language Model Evaluation
Harness framework (Gao et al., 2024) to standardize the evaluation of answer accuracy by assessing
the probability of each choice. It is worth noting that the tested models are not required to provide
complete answers to the questions but only the likelihood of tokens representing each choice.
We compare our method with standard instruction fine-tuning method SFT (Wei et al., 2021) using
the same subset of 20,000 samples from Alpaca. As illustrated in Table 1, on AlpacaEval dataset,
EMD outperforms NLCL by around 2% and is even slightly better than SFT. KTO exhibits the lowest
performance because it is rewarded to generate responses that are better than a reference model
πref . However, here πref is merely a non-SFTed base model with low-quality responses, which
is a low bar and hence KTO generates sub-par responses. Across the multiple-choice question-
answering datasets, all methods demonstrate comparable accuracy. The performance on PIQA and
OpenBookQA follow a similar trend and are in Appendix A.4.3.

5.3.3   DATA E FFICIENCY: F EWER H ARMFUL E XAMPLES
In this part, we reduce the number of harmful responses (1000 originally) included in our dataset; we
try 500, 300, and 100 harmful responses. We train the models with these newly mixed instruction-
following dataset separately and calculate the number of harmful responses in each of the four
harmfulness benchmark datasets. As demonstrated in Table 2, the EMD loss function enables LLMs
to learn safe responses with only 100 harmful examples in our dataset, while the NLCL loss function


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Response quality evaluation on BoolQ and AlpacaEval. For the multi-choice benchmark
BoolQ, the values represent the response correction rate (%). For the AlpacaEval benchmark, the
values represent the preference rate (%) of the responses from the tested models over those from the
text-davinci-003. There is no degradation of response quality of our TA-SFT approaches.
                                     BoolQ                            AlpacaEval
        Model             SFT     KTO     NLCL      EMD       SFT      KTO      NLCL         EMD
        llama 7b          78.26   75.08   78.38     78.75     56.14    35.47    54.48        57.37
        llama 13b         80.55   79.3    80.92     80.37     61.99    50.9     60.36        62.24
        mistral 7b        84.34   84.37   84.92     84.31     69.81    64.85    70.42        71.06
        llama3.1 8b       82.91   83.21   83.27     82.87     72.05    61.5     69.56        73.35


Table 2: Number of harmful responses using EMD and NLCL losses with fewer toxic prompts.
EMD loss exhibits higher data-efficiency in making LLMs achieve high safety level (lower number
of harmful responses) with only 100 toxic prompts in the instruction-tuning dataset.
                          I-Malicious         I-CoNa          I-Controversial        HarmfulQ
 Model          # Toxic     NLCL     EMD      NLCL      EMD       NLCL       EMD        NLCL         EMD
                 1000       0        0        0         0         0         0           0            0
                  500       2        0        11        0         0         0           0            1
Llama 7b
                  300       1        0        4         0         0         0           7            4
                  100       6        0        42        5         3         0           4            0
                 1000       0        1        2         0         0         0           0            2
                  500       1        0        1         0         0         0           0            1
Llama 13b
                  300       1        1        0         0         0         1           0            1
                  100       10       2        40        1         8         1           16           2


fails to achieve this. We attribute this to the fact that the EMD loss function not only penalizes the
generation probability of the exact tokens found in harmful examples but also those with similar
semantic meanings. Consequently, due to its better utilization of harmful examples, EMD enables
LLMs to learn to be safe with fewer harmful examples. We observe similar results in the other LLMs
(Mistral 7b and Llama3.1 8b) which can be found in the Appendix A.4.4.

5.3.4   T RAINING DATA : S AFE S AMPLES VS U NSAFE S AMPLES
Here we compare to STL, even though STL has the advantage of being trained on high quality
(obtained using a commercial model like GPT3.5 turbo) safe responses to toxic prompts. On the
other hand, we train on easily accessible unsafe responses. Our results are shown in Table 3. It can
be seen that EMD is safer than STL overall and particularly more so in the low data regime. Also, the
results on I-CoNa show a stark difference between EMD and STL. Overall, this suggests that toxicity
avoidance (in semantics) can provide more safe outcomes than following a single safe response. A
similar result on other LLMs (Mistral7B and Llama3.1 8B) can be found in the Appendix A.4.5.

5.3.5   OVER -A LIGNMENT
The typical safe responses to toxic prompts are refusals (also called rejections), such as ‘It’s an inap-
propriate question, and I cannot ...’. Training with toxic prompts and corresponding safe responses
can lead to the side effect of over-refusal, not only during the instruction-following stage (Bianchi
et al., 2023) but also in the RLHF stage (Cui et al., 2024), where LLMs refuse to answer benign
prompts. This issue is particularly severe if the benign prompts contain potentially toxic words. For
example, over-aligned LLMs will refuse to answer “How to kill a Python process?” The ‘kill’ is
potentially toxic yet the overall prompt is harmless. These seemingly toxic prompts are hotspots for
over-refusal. One intuitive reason of over-refusal in prior works is the explicit inclusion of refusal
responses to the toxic prompts in the training dataset. In our approach, the training dataset contains
no refusal responses (recall we have only safety-unrelated prompts with corresponding responses or


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Number of harmful responses using EMD and STL (Bianchi et al., 2023) with fewer toxic
prompts. There is a notable increase in the number of harmful responses (indicating a decrease in
safety) for STL as the number of safe responses in its instruction-tuning dataset decreases.
                            I-Malicious        I-CoNa          I-Controversial      HarmfulQ
    Model         # Toxic    STL     EMD      STL      EMD     STL         EMD     STL     EMD
                   1000      2       0        10       0       0       0           2       0
                   500       2       0        22       0       0       0           3       1
   Llama 7b
                   300       5       0        40       0       3       0           2       4
                   100       4       0        70       5       3       0           3       0
                   1000      1       1        4        0       0       0           0       2
                   500       1       0        7        0       0       0           1       1
   Llama 13b
                   300       2       1        12       0       1       1           1       1
                   100       7       2        61       1       4       1           3       2


Figure 3: Over-refusal vs. Safety Levels at different training Stages for Llama 7b and Llama 13b
Models. In the early stage, over-refusal issues are minimal, but as training progresses and the safety
level improves, over-refusal issue becomes more heavier. Both TA-SFT and STL show the same
trend, empirically demonstrating that the inclusion of refusal examples in the instruction-following
dataset is not the cause of the over-refusal issue.


toxic prompts with corresponding harmful responses). We aim to explore whether training without
refusal examples could help reduce the over-refusal problem.
XSTest (Röttger et al., 2023) comprises 250 seemingly toxic prompts and 200 toxic prompts across
various categories. We evaluate the over-refusal levels of four LLMs fine-tuned with EMD and
NLCL loss functions, comparing them to a baseline method, safety-tuned-llamas (Bianchi et al.,
2023). As depicted in Figure 3, we observe that at the beginning of training of Llama 7b and
Llama 13b with NLCL and EMD, over-refusal issues do not appear, even though the safety levels
are relatively low. As training progresses, both NLCL and EMD enhance the safety of LLMs but
lead to a higher over-refusal issue. Moreover, all data points in Figure 3 align along the same
curve. Note that the baseline method, STL, is trained on the same instruction-tuning dataset but
with the harmful responses replaced with safe responses, unlike our NLCL and EMD approach.
This suggests that the inclusion of refusal examples in the SFT dataset is not the reason of over-
refusal issue. Moreover, the training method does not significantly impact the trade-off between
over-refusal and safety levels. Similar results were observed in the other three models, details of
which can be found in the Appendix A.4.6. Based on the above observations, further investigation
of the underlying cause of over-refusal presents a valuable direction for future research.

5.3.6   C ONTRASTIVE AUGMENTATION
We report a phenomenon that was an unexpected outcome of our aim to reduce over-alignment. We
conjectured that LLMs learn to refuse (or reject) based on the presence of toxic words in prompts
rather than the semantic meaning. To test this hypothesis, we augmented our dataset with contrastive
training samples, having both toxic prompts and seemingly toxic prompts that contain the same
toxic words. Following the method described in Cui et al. (2024), we use toxic words extracted


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Response safety evaluation for
Llama 7b fine-tuned with contrastive aug-
mented dataset. Neither NLCL nor EMD
make Llama 7b as safe as when it was fine-       Figure 5: An example of increasing ‘non-English
tuned without LLM-generated contrastive          answer’ with increasing penalty weight λ from
sample even the penalty weight λ is in-          Llama 7b fine-tuned with contrastive augmented
creased to more strongly discourage harmful      dataset.
responses.


from 1,000 toxic prompts in our dataset to generate seemingly toxic prompts. Considering some
word repetitions, we follow Cui et al. (2024) and create 5 seemingly toxic prompts for each toxic
word, resulting in a total of 3,335 seemingly toxic prompts. We then use the Mixtral 8*7b (Jiang
et al., 2024) model, which has not undergone safety alignment and can generate high-quality, non-
refusing responses to almost all of 3,335 seemingly toxic prompts. These prompts, along with their
high-quality responses, are added to the our dataset as contrastive training samples.
Following the evaluation procedure in Section 4.4.1, we fine-tuned Llama 7b with EMD and NLCL
loss functions on four safety datasets, using a pretrained DeBERTa to score harmfulness. As shown
in Figure 4, neither approach produced safety levels comparable to fine-tuning without these con-
trastive samples. Furthermore, when the penalty weight λ is increased to more strongly discourage
harmful responses, the fine-tuned Llama7b model (under both loss functions) exhibited ‘non-English
answer’ phenomena, which were not observed in the previous experiments. This observation sug-
gests that fine-tuning with LLM-generated seemingly toxic prompts and responses can degrade the
model’s language performance and is consistent with observations about the use of AI generated
data in recent works (Shumailov et al., 2023).

6   C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS
Our method enables safe LLM responses to toxic prompts during the SFT stage, improving upon
prior work by using far less safety-relevant data and only requiring readily available unsafe re-
sponses. A key novelty is our use of EMD loss with a cosine distance metric and a novel lower
bound for tractable optimization. Despite these improvements, over-alignment persists—consistent
with past work—and our findings also highlight risks in training with AI-generated data. We ac-
knowledge that our results are limited by the LLM sizes we can handle, and hope larger-scale eval-
uations can be conducted by industry or large consortiums.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E THICAL S TATEMENT

There are dangers and limitations with our study. While we have taken extensive precautions, there
is a possibility that some of the prompts and outputs we produce and release could be misused or
lead to unsafe outcomes. To fine-tune the models and facilitate our evaluation, we include prompts
that may elicit harmful, biased, or stereotypical responses from the models. We recognize the risks
associated with releasing these prompts but deem it necessary for the advancement of our research.
Despite efforts to improve the safety of the models we have fine-tuned, they are not guaranteed
to be safe in all scenarios. Certain edge cases may still result in inappropriate or harmful content
generation. Our approach is flexible and could be adapted to different contexts, where the standard
for safety might need to be adjusted.


ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This research/project is supported by the National Research Foundation Singapore and DSO Na-
tional Laboratories under the AI Singapore Programme (AISG Award No: AISG2-RP-2020-017).


R EFERENCES
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
  2022.

Federico Bianchi, Mirac Suzgun, Giuseppe Attanasio, Paul Röttger, Dan Jurafsky, Tatsunori
  Hashimoto, and James Zou. Safety-tuned llamas: Lessons from improving the safety of large
  language models that follow instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07875, 2023.

Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Jianfeng Gao, Yejin Choi, et al. Piqa: Reasoning about physical com-
  monsense in natural language. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
  volume 34, pp. 7432–7439, 2020.

Tom B Brown. Language models are few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.

Patrick Chao, Alexander Robey, Edgar Dobriban, Hamed Hassani, George J Pappas, and Eric
  Wong. Jailbreaking black box large language models in twenty queries. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.08419, 2023.

Changyu Chen, Zichen Liu, Chao Du, Tianyu Pang, Qian Liu, Arunesh Sinha, Pradeep Varakan-
  tham, and Min Lin. Bootstrapping language models with dpo implicit rewards. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.09760, 2024.

Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, Tom Kwiatkowski, Michael Collins, and Kristina
  Toutanova. Boolq: Exploring the surprising difficulty of natural yes/no questions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1905.10044, 2019.

Scott Cohen and Leonidas J Guibas. The earth mover’s distance: Lower bounds and invariance
  under translation. Citeseer, 1997.

Justin Cui, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ion Stoica, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Or-bench: An over-refusal benchmark
  for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20947, 2024.

Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.

Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. Kto: Model
  alignment as prospect theoretic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01306, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Liane Lovitt, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom
  Conerly, Nova Dassarma, Dawn Drain, Nelson Elhage, et al. Predictability and surprise in large
  generative models. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
  Transparency, pp. 1747–1764, 2022.
Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Fos-
  ter, Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Alain Le Noac’h, Haonan Li, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muen-
  nighoff, Chris Ociepa, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Hailey Schoelkopf, Aviya Skowron, Lin-
  tang Sutawika, Eric Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. A framework
  for few-shot language model evaluation, 07 2024. URL https://zenodo.org/records/
  12608602.
Samuel Gehman, Suchin Gururangan, Maarten Sap, Yejin Choi, and Noah A Smith. Real-
  toxicityprompts: Evaluating neural toxic degeneration in language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.11462, 2020.
Pengcheng He, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. Debertav3: Improving deberta using electra-style
  pre-training with gradient-disentangled embedding sharing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09543,
  2021.
Huy Hoang, Tien Mai, and Pradeep Varakantham. Imitate the good and avoid the bad: An incremen-
  tal approach to safe reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 12439–12447, 2024.
Jiwoo Hong, Noah Lee, and James Thorne. Orpo: Monolithic preference optimization without
  reference model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07691, 2(4):5, 2024.
Chia-Yi Hsu, Yu-Lin Tsai, Chih-Hsun Lin, Pin-Yu Chen, Chia-Mu Yu, and Chun-Ying Huang. Safe
  lora: the silver lining of reducing safety risks when fine-tuning large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2405.16833, 2024.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris Bam-
  ford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, et al.
  Mixtral of experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04088, 2024.
Dexun Li, Cong Zhang, Kuicai Dong, Derrick Goh Xin Deik, Ruiming Tang, and Yong Liu.
  Aligning crowd feedback via distributional preference reward modeling. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.09764, 2024a.
Wenjun Li, Changyu Chen, and Pradeep Varakantham. Unlocking large language model’s planning
 capabilities with maximum diversity fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10479, 2024b.
Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following
  models. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval, 5 2023.
Todor Mihaylov, Peter Clark, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Can a suit of armor conduct
  electricity? a new dataset for open book question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.02789,
  2018.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to fol-
  low instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xiangyu Qi, Yi Zeng, Tinghao Xie, Pin-Yu Chen, Ruoxi Jia, Prateek Mittal, and Peter Henderson.
  Fine-tuning aligned language models compromises safety, even when users do not intend to!
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03693, 2023.
Alec Radford. Improving language understanding by generative pre-training. 2018.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Siyu Ren, Zhiyong Wu, and Kenny Q Zhu. Emo: Earth mover distance optimization for auto-
  regressive language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04691, 2023.
Paul Röttger, Hannah Rose Kirk, Bertie Vidgen, Giuseppe Attanasio, Federico Bianchi, and Dirk
  Hovy. Xstest: A test suite for identifying exaggerated safety behaviours in large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01263, 2023.
Emily Sheng, Kai-Wei Chang, Premkumar Natarajan, and Nanyun Peng. The woman worked as a
  babysitter: On biases in language generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01326, 2019.
Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Yiren Zhao, Yarin Gal, Nicolas Papernot, and Ross Ander-
   son. The curse of recursion: Training on generated data makes models forget. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2305.17493, 2023.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.01652, 2021.
Jiaxin Wen, Pei Ke, Hao Sun, Zhexin Zhang, Chengfei Li, Jinfeng Bai, and Minlie Huang. Unveiling
   the implicit toxicity in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17391, 2023.
Yifan Yao, Jinhao Duan, Kaidi Xu, Yuanfang Cai, Zhibo Sun, and Yue Zhang. A survey on large
  language model (llm) security and privacy: The good, the bad, and the ugly. High-Confidence
  Computing, pp. 100211, 2024.
Tongxin Yuan, Zhiwei He, Lingzhong Dong, Yiming Wang, Ruijie Zhao, Tian Xia, Lizhen Xu,
  Binglin Zhou, Fangqi Li, Zhuosheng Zhang, et al. R-judge: Benchmarking safety risk awareness
  for llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10019, 2024.
Zhexin Zhang, Leqi Lei, Lindong Wu, Rui Sun, Yongkang Huang, Chong Long, Xiao Liu, Xuanyu
  Lei, Jie Tang, and Minlie Huang. Safetybench: Evaluating the safety of large language models.
  In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 15537–15553, 2024.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.
Yongshuo Zong, Ondrej Bohdal, Tingyang Yu, Yongxin Yang, and Timothy Hospedales. Safety
  fine-tuning at (almost) no cost: A baseline for vision large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.02207, 2024.


                                                13
