Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C A P O : C OOPERATIVE P LAN O PTIMIZATION FOR E FFI -
CIENT E MBODIED M ULTI -AGENT C OOPERATION

  Jie Liu1 Pan Zhou2∗ Yingjun Du1 Ah-Hwee Tan2 Cees G.M. Snoek1
 Jan-Jakob Sonke3 Efstratios Gavves1,4
 1
   University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands 2 Singapore Management University, Singapore
 3
   The Netherlands Cancer Institute , The Netherlands 4 Archimedes/Athena RC, Greece
 j.liu5@uva.nl panzhou3@gmail.com E.Gavves@uva.nl



                                               A BSTRACT

             In this work, we address the cooperation problem among large language model
             (LLM) based embodied agents, where agents must cooperate to achieve a common
             goal. Previous methods often execute actions extemporaneously and incoherently,
             without long-term strategic and cooperative planning, leading to redundant steps,
             failures, and even serious repercussions in complex tasks like search-and-rescue
             missions where discussion and cooperative plan are crucial. To solve this issue, we
             propose Cooperative Plan Optimization (CaPo) to enhance the cooperation effi-
             ciency of LLM-based embodied agents. Inspired by human cooperation schemes,
             CaPo improves cooperation efficiency with two phases: 1) meta-plan generation,
             and 2) progress-adaptive meta-plan and execution. In the first phase, all agents
             analyze the task, discuss, and cooperatively create a meta-plan that decomposes
             the task into subtasks with detailed steps, ensuring a long-term strategic and co-
             herent plan for efficient coordination. In the second phase, agents execute tasks
             according to the meta-plan and dynamically adjust it based on their latest progress
             (e.g., discovering a target object) through multi-turn discussions. This progress-
             based adaptation eliminates redundant actions, improving the overall cooperation
             efficiency of agents. Experimental results on the ThreeDworld Multi-Agent Trans-
             port and Communicative Watch-And-Help tasks demonstrate CaPo’s much higher
             task completion rate and efficiency compared with state-of-the-arts. The code is
             released at https://github.com/jliu4ai/CaPo.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in understanding and
generating human language, complex reasoning, and planning, achieving impressive advance-
ment (OpenAI, 2024; Touvron et al., 2023). These advancements empower LLM-based embodied
agents to autonomously make plans (Li et al., 2023a; Padmakumar et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2023a; Wu et al., 2023b; Huang et al., 2022b) and perform reasoning (Du et al., 2023;
Hao et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2022a) by using human language to assist people in
daily activities, such as housework and daily chores. The next milestone for agents is to cooperate
with others to achieve joint tasks. This is crucial not only for efficiently performing simple tasks but
also for tackling complex ones that cannot be completed in isolation due to their inherent complexity
or the dynamic nature of the environment (Zhang et al., 2023b; Guo et al., 2024; Mandi et al., 2023).
Notably, the cooperation among LLM-based embodied agents is rarely investigated despite being
highly desired. Conventional works often focus on adopting reinforcement learning (RL) (Jiang &
Lu, 2018; Liu et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021) to explore the dynamics of cooperative behavior among
non-LLM-based agents. In spite of their promising performance in certain scenarios, RL-based
cooperation methods exhibit limited adaptability across different tasks (Dittadi et al., 2021; Cobbe
et al., 2019), since they are often not trained on large-scale data and lack sufficient generalization
ability. To solve this issue, in this work, we are particularly interested in the problem of “how to
    ∗
        Corresponding author


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Task Description: Transport 1 mouses, 1 pen, 1 iPhone, and 1 purse to the bed.
 Existing Agent Information: Alice knows the location of mouse, pen; Bob knows the location of purse. They don’t know the location of iPhone.
                                                                                                                                             Ours (CaPo)
             CoELA                                                                                                                       Meta Plan Generation
                                                                                                 Step 1: Alice grasps mouse, pen, and put them into the wood basket.
                                                                                      Bob
    Communication & Execution                                                                    Bob grasps purse. Step 2: Alice transports mouse and pen using
 Alice grasps purse; Bob grasps mouse.                                                           wood basket to the bed; Bob transports purse to the bed; and try to
                                                                                                 find iPhone and transport it to the bed.

                                                               Alice                                                                      Progress-adaptive Meta Plan 1
    Communication & Execution                                                                                               Step 1: Alice grasps mouse, pen, and put them into the wood


                                                                                              Progress-adaptive Meta Plan
                                                 wood_basket                          purse
                                         mouse                                                                              basket. Bob grasps purse. Step 2: Alice transports mouse and
   Alice transports purse to the bed;
   Bob transports mouse to the bed.                                                                                         pen using wood basket to the bed; Bob transports purse to the
                                                                                                                            bed; and try to find iPhone and transport it to the bed.


                                                                                                     & Execution
                                                                       pen
                                                                                                                              New Alice found iPhone when
    Communication & Execution                                                                                                                                         update
                                                                                                                            Progress    grasping pen
  Alice grasps pen; Bob grasps pen.                                          iPhone                                                       Progress-adaptive Meta Plan 2
                                                                                                                            Step 1: Alice grasps iPhone and puts it into wood basket,
                  ..                                                                                                        Bob transports purse to the bed. Step 2: Alice transports
                  .                                                                                                         wood basket (containing pen, mouse, iPhone) to the bed.
                                                                                                                            (The task is completed.)

Figure 1: Examples of task accomplishment of CoELA (Zhang et al., 2023b) and our CaPo. In
CoELA, after each action execution, Alice and Bob communicate to decide next action which is a
greedy single-step plan and suboptimal. For example, they do not use wood basket which can contain
multiple objects, and both extemporaneously move a single item to the target bed without a long-
term and collaborative plan. In contrast, in CaPo, Alice and Bob first discuss to make a long-term
meta-plan for strategical cooperation in which Alice is arranged to move several target items into
a wood basket, and Bob moves the remaining target items and also searches the unknown objects.
Then during execution phase, both follow the meta-plan to accomplish task, and dynamically adapt
the meta-plan to latest task progress, ensuring its effectiveness and efficiency in coordinating agents.


develop an effective collaboration framework for LLM-based agents”, since LLMs have revealed
strong reasoning and planning capability as good agents’ brain across different tasks.
Among the limited related works, CoELA (Zhang et al., 2023b) proposes an LLM-based multi-
agent cooperation framework in which after each action execution, agents communicate to devise
a single-step plan for the next action. Despite its significant advancements, CoELA’s short-term,
single-step planning, which lacks consideration for long-term strategic collaboration, often results
in extemporaneous and incoherent actions among agents, leading to several potential issues. ①
Without a long-term coherent collaboration plan, agents are prone to executing numerous redundant
actions, resulting in increased costs. This issue is particularly critical in the physical world, where
agents’ movements are inherently challenging and resource-intensive. For instance, as shown in
Fig. 1, for the object transport task, agent Alice and Bob do not use the wood basket which can
contain several objects, and extemporaneously move their nearest target objects one by one, leading
to inferior efficiency. ② Complex tasks are challenging to accomplish without thorough discussion
and long-term collaboration, particularly in embodied environments where agents operate with only
partial observations. ③ Without a long-term cooperative plan, agents’ uncoordinated actions can
lead to severe consequences. For example, in search-and-rescue missions, poor coordination may
endanger lives due to the complexity of such operations.
Contributions. This work introduces Cooperative Plan Optimization (CaPo), a novel framework
designed to enhance the cooperation efficiency of LLM-based embodied agents by leveraging their
advanced reasoning and planning capabilities. Inspired by human cooperation schemes (Tuomela,
1998; Thürmer et al., 2017), CaPo enables agents to collaboratively create and refine long-term,
strategic, and coherent meta-plans through multi-turn discussions. These meta-plans serve as ac-
tionable guides that facilitate efficient task coordination and completion.
Specifically, CaPo addresses key challenges in multi-agent cooperation through two main phases.
The first phase is Meta-Plan Generation, where agents collaboratively analyze the task and ex-
change information to generate a meta-plan that decomposes the overall task into detailed subtasks,
including agent assignments and execution steps. A designated agent initiates the meta-plan, while
others evaluate and refine it through iterative feedback, ensuring alignment and optimal planning.
The discussion process continues until consensus is reached or the communication budget is ex-
hausted. This phase ensures thorough deliberation and creates a coherent roadmap for task exe-
cution. For example, in the object transport task, agents Alice and Bob are strategically assigned
complementary subtasks to optimize their coordination (see Fig. 1).


                                                                             2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The second phase is Progress-Adaptive Meta-Plan and Execution, where agents dynamically
adapt the meta-plan based on real-time progress and discoveries during task execution. For instance,
if Alice identifies the location of an object that was initially unknown (e.g., an “iPhone”), the agents
collaboratively update the meta-plan to incorporate this new information, ensuring timely and ef-
ficient task completion. This adaptive mechanism maintains the meta-plan’s effectiveness, even in
dynamic environments, and prevents inefficiencies or redundant actions.
The proposed approach has been rigorously evaluated on benchmark tasks, including the
ThreeDworld Multi-Agent Transport (TDW-MAT) and Communicative Watch-And-Help (C-WAH)
tasks (Zhang et al., 2023b). Experimental results demonstrate that CaPo significantly improves task
completion rates and cooperation efficiency compared to state-of-the-art methods. Notably, on the
TDW-MAT task, CaPo achieves a completion rate improvement of 16.7% and 4.7% over the SoTA
CoELA method with GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 agents, respectively.

2   R ELATED W ORK
LLM-based Agents. LLM-based agents (Hong et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024; Shen et al., 2024;
Liu et al., 2023a) are designed to autonomously perceive environments, execute actions, and accu-
mulate knowledge, with rich real world knowledge and complex reasoning capability inherited from
LLMs. Notable agents like AutoGPT (Richards & et al, 2021), BabyAGI (Nakajima, 2023), and
AgentGPT (Reworkd, 2023) showcase remarkable proficiency in decision-making and complex rea-
soning. In the embodied environment, LLM-based agents have shown superior capacity in strategic
planning (Li et al., 2023a; Padmakumar et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023b; Huang et al., 2022b). Specifi-
cally, LLM-planner (Song et al., 2023) harness LLMs to do few-shot planning for embodied agents.
PET (Wu et al., 2023a) translates a task description with LLMs into a list of high-level sub-tasks.
TaPA wu2023embodied enables the agent to generate executable plans by aligning LLMs with vi-
sual perception models. Another research line focuses on harnessing LLMs’s reasoning capabilities
in embodied tasks (Zhou et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2022a). ELLM (Du et al., 2023) utilizes LLMs
to set pretraining goals in RL, guiding agents towards the goal without human involvement.
Multi-Agent Cooperation. Multi-agent cooperation and communication have been studied for
decades to improve communication efficiency (Jiang & Lu, 2018; Li et al., 2023b) and plan-
ning (Torreno et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2023a). Within the domain of embodied intelligence,
ProAgent (Zhang et al., 2023a) harnesses LLMs to develop proactive agents that dynamically adjust
their behavior to foster better cooperation with teammates. RoCo (Mandi et al., 2023) introduce
a multi-robot collaboration framework that employs LLMs for both high-level communication and
low-level path planning. (Guo et al., 2024) proposed a prompt-based organizational framework for
LLM agents to reduce communication costs and boost team efficiency. CoELA (Zhang et al., 2023b)
enables agents to plan, communicate, and collaborate effectively, but its plan is one-step plan and
is short-term. Despite these advancements, these methods focus on short-term planning and do not
involve sufficient agent discussion, while ours seeks to a long-term strategical and coherent plan via
agent’s thoughtful discussions for efficient multi-agent cooperation.
Optimization with LLMs. With the advancement of prompting techniques, LLMs have shown re-
markable performance across various domains (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2022; Zhou et al., 2022; Madaan et al., 2024). Their ability to understand natural language lays out
a new possibility for optimization. (Yang et al., 2023) first proposed to leverage LLMs as optimizer,
where the optimization task is described in natural language. OPT2I (Mañas et al., 2024) aims to en-
hance prompt-image consistency in text-to-image models by iteratively generating revised prompts
with LLMs to maximize the consistency score. VislingInstruct (Zhu et al., 2024) proposes optimiz-
ing multi-modal instruction for multi-modal language models in a zero-shot manner. DyLAN (Liu
et al., 2023b) is particularly relevant to our work. DyLAN (Liu et al., 2023b) enables agents to
interact for multiple rounds in a dynamic architecture to optimize the selection of agent. In contrast,
our work investigates cooperative plan optimization via multi-turn discussion between agents.

3   P RELIMINARIES
Task Formulation. We formulate the embodied multi-agent cooperation task as an decentralized
partially observable Markov decision process (DEC-POMDP) (Bernstein et al., 2002; Spaan et al.,


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Memory Module             Task Description       Semantic Map       Meta-plan History    Dialogue History        Agent Progress   Teammate Progress     Action History


       Meta-Plan Generation Phase
                                                                                                                                                  Environment
                      Communication Module                                             Communication Module
                                                             Message
            Hi, Bob. Thanks for your advice, I will update                     Hi, Alice. I should explore the kitchen, please
    Alice   the meta plan accordingly.                                         update the meta-plan.


                                     ..
                                      .
                                                                        Bob                                                                               Observation


                                                                                                    ..
                                                                                                     .
              Feedback               Meta-plan                                  Meta-plan               Feedback
                                                                                                                                               Perception Module
                    Cooperative Planning Module                                        Cooperative Planning Module
              Step 1: Alice explores <living_room>.                             Step 1: Alice explores <living_room>.
                                                                                  ..
    Meta       ..
                      Bob explores <kitchen>.                           Meta            Bob explores <office>.
                .                                                                  .                                                            Memory Module
    Plan      Step N: Alice [sub-plan] . Bob [sub-plan] .               Plan    Step N: Alice [sub-plan] . Bob [sub-plan] .

                                                                                                                                        No
                                                                                                                                              New Progress?
    Progress-adaptive Meta Plan & Execution Phase                              Previous Meta-plan
                                                                                                                                                          Yes
                                                                                                                         Progress-adaptive Planning Module
      Environment                 Execution Module                     Plan Parsing             Progress- Step 1: Alice goes grasp <basket> in <office>, put <pen>
                                                                         Module                 -adaptive
                                                                                                                ..into it; Bob continues exploring <kitchen>.
                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                Meta Plan Step N: Alice [sub-plan] . Bob [sub-plan] .



Figure 2: Overview of the CooperAtive Plan Optimization (CaPo) framework for embodied
multi-agent cooperation. CaPo consists of two key phases: 1) meta-plan Generation: All agents
collaboratively formulate a meta-plan before taking any actions through multi-turn discussions. One
agent serves as meta-plan designer, responsible for creating the meta-plan, while all other agents
serve as meta-plan evaluators, providing critical feedback about meta-plan. 2) Progressive-adaptive
meta-plan and Execution: As new progress is made, agents adopt a progress-adaptive planning
module to adapt the meta-plan to the latest task progress, ensuring the effectiveness of meta-plan.
2006), which is defined as < n, S, O, A, P, r, γ >. Here, n represents the number of agents; S
is the finite state space; O denotes the observation space; A is a finite joint action space of all
agents; P : S × A × S → [0, 1] denotes the transition probability function; r = S × A → R
denotes the reward function; γ ∈ [0, 1] denotes the discount factor. In this framework, at time step
t ∈ N, each agent i observes the environment’s state st ∈ S, and receives an observation set Oi . Oi
consists of a world observation Oiw , which the agent gathers through its sensors, or a communication
message observation Oic from other teammate agents. Agent i takes actions from its action space
Ai , which includes a finite set of world action Awi , e.g., grasping a target object, or a finite set of
messaging action Aci . Then agents receive a shared reward rt = r(st , at ), where at ∈ A denotes the
joint actions of agents, and observe a new state st+1 with probability P (st+1 |st , at ). We formulate
the problem with two decentralized intelligent embodied agents working together to complete a
long-horizon rearrangement task (Zhang et al., 2023b; Batra et al., 2020) in a multi-room indoor
environment. During the task, agents can execute multiple kinds of actions, such as navigation,
interaction, and communication by sending messages.
CoELA Framework. CoELA Zhang et al. (2023b) is a pioneering modular framework for embod-
ied multi-agent cooperation, which consists of five key modules: (a) Perception, (b) Memory, (c)
Communication, (d) Planning, and (e) Execution. For each agent, the (a) Perception Module gathers
observations from environment, including messages from other agents and relevant scene informa-
tion from the RGB-D image. The (b) Memory Module dynamically stores the shared task, dialogue
history between agents, agent progress, team- mate progress, and action history, all formatted as
text descriptions. (c) The Communication Module retrieves relevant information from the memory
module and uses an LLM to generate messages that are sent to other agents. (d) The Planning Mod-
ule driven by LLM decides which plan to take given related information retrieved from the memory
module and available actions proposed regarding the current state. Finally, the (e) Execution Mod-
ule convert high-level plan into primitive actions executable in the environment. CoELA exhibits
great performances in the embodied multi-agent cooperation tasks, making it a strong baseline for
validating the effectiveness of our model in improving multi-agent cooperation efficiency.

4     C OOPERATIVE P LAN O PTIMIZATION
We first introduce the overall framework of CooperAtive Plan Optimization (CaPo) for LLM-based
embodied agents in Sec. 4.1. We then respectively elaborate on the two key phases of CaPo, i.e.,
meta-plan generation and progress-adaptive meta-plan and execution, in Sec. 4.2 and Sec. 4.3.


                                                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.1    OVERALL F RAMEWORK OF C A P O

CaPo addresses the challenge of enabling two centralized embodied agents to effectively cooperate
in a shared environment. In this setup, each agent has partial observations and must rely on com-
munication and coordination to accomplish complex tasks. The key objective is to achieve strategic
and step-by-step collaboration, where both agents contribute to the task’s completion through effi-
cient planning and adaptive decision-making. As shown in Fig. 2, each agent is equipped with five
foundational modules from CoELA: perception, memory, communication, plan-phrasing, and exe-
cution. These modules enable the agents to perceive their environment, store and retrieve relevant
information, exchange messages for coordination, generate plans, and execute actions accordingly.
To complete a task cooperatively and efficiently, inspired by humans collaboration (Tuomela, 1998;
Thürmer et al., 2017), CaPo first analyzes the task at hand to create a long-term meta-plan before
agents take any actions. All agents participate in this plan-making process, either generating meta-
plan or providing feedback. The meta-plan is then dynamically refined based on the latest agent
progress to ensure its effectiveness in coordinating agents. To this end, it contains two key phases,
including 1) meta-plan generation, and 2) progress-adaptive meta-plan and execution. In the meta-
plan generation phase, given a task, multiple embodied agents first gather relevant information such
as object locations. Then, they discuss together to create a meta-plan that decomposes the task into
subtasks and consider agent situation (e.g., agent and object locations) to assign agents to differ-
ent subtasks with accomplishment steps. In the progress-adaptive meta-plan and execution phase,
agents dynamically align the meta-plan with their latest progress. This is achieved through multi-
turn discussion triggered by clear task progress, such as discovering target objects or successfully
completing subtasks. In the following, we will elaborate on these two phases in turn.

4.2    META - PLAN G ENERATION

To generate the long-term meta-plan which coordinates all agents to accomplish tasks efficiently,
CaPo introduces two key steps, including 1) meta-plan initialization where one agent initializes a
meta-plan according to the task description and existing information, and 2) meta-plan evaluation
and optimization where all agents evaluate the meta-plan and provide feedback to improve the plan.
Meta-plan Initialization. At the beginning of a task, the task description is provided to all
agents, e.g, Transport 2 apples and 3 bananas to the bed. One agent, e.g., Al-
ice in Fig. 2, is randomly selected as the meta-plan designer, and creates the meta-plan through a
cooperative planning module. Note that the meta-plan here, as illustrated in Fig. 3, differs from the
short-term or unorganized plans used in previous work (Zhang et al., 2023b;a; Mandi et al., 2023).
Specifically, the cooperative planning module is equipped with a pre-trained LLM, and leverage the
LLM to generate the meta-plan. The prompting for the LLM is organized as follows:

      Prompt: <Task Desc> + <Instruct Head> \n.                         LLM: <Meta-plan> .

Here, <Task Desc> , <Instruct Head> , and <Meta-plan> are three placeholders for
the task description, instruction head, and generated meta-plan. The task description provides back-
ground descriptions about the task, while the instruction head introduces additional constraints into
the generation of meta-plan, such as the format of meta-plan and available actions to generate a clear
and executable plan. Detailed prompt design is shown in Fig. 9 of Appendix.
Meta-plan Evaluation and Optimization. The meta-plan generated by a single agent is often
biased by that agent’s partial observations, resulting in a suboptimal plan that fails to coordinate
all agents effectively. To address this issue, CaPo involves all agents in a multi-turn discussion
to optimize the meta-plan. Specifically, the meta-plan designer (e.g., Alice in Fig. 3) broadcasts
the meta-plan to all teammate agents, while teammate agents (e.g., Bob in Fig. 3) serve as meta-
plan evaluators, providing feedback about the meta-plan. Since teammate agents have different
partial observations of the environment, they provide the meta-plan designer with better situational
awareness to help generate a more efficient and effective meta-plan. This optimization process
continues until all agents reach a consensus, i.e., the evaluator agents are satisfied with the meta-
plan, or the communication budget (e.g., maximum discussion round) is exhausted. Indeed, Fig. 8
in Sec. 5.2 analyzes the convergence analysis of the meta-plan optimization process, and shows that
typically agents would reach a consensus within three rounds of discussion.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                 Meta Plan Generation
                              Step 1: Alice go grasp <purse> (931981), put <purse> (931981) into container; Bob explore living room. Step 2: Alice put <pen>


Discussion Round 1
                              (14280289), <mouse> (3660150) into a container; Bob go grasp found objects and transport them to the bed.
                                                                                     Message to Bob
                     Alice     Hi Bob, I have explored the Office and found a purse. I am currently holding a pen. I will continue exploring the Office to
                               gather the remaining target objects efficiently. Do you have any suggestions for our next steps in the meta plan?
                                                                                     Message to Alice
                             Hi Alice, considering that you are currently holding one object and have found a container, you can start putting the objects into
                             the container. I will grasp the mouse in living room. Please update the action plan accordingly. Satisfied with the meta plan : No
                                                                                                                                                                     Bob
                                                                                 Meta Plan Generation
Discussion Round 2


                              Step 1: Alice go grasp a container, put holding <pen>(1480289) into container; Bob go grasp <iPhone> (11176165). Step 2: Alice
                              go grasp <purse> (931981 , <mouse> (3660150), and put into container; Bob put <iPhone> (11176165) into a container.
                                                                                    Message to Bob
                     Alice     Hi Bob, I have updated the meta plan according to your suggestions. I think you could grasp the iPhone in the living room as you
                               are already there. Do you have any other suggestions to improve our meta plan?
                                                                                        Message to Alice
                              Hi Alice, current plan looks good. But I recommend you grasp the <basket>(601123) and then put object into it to transport more
                              objects efficiently. I will grasp the iPhone in the living room. . Satisfied with the meta plan : No                                   Bob

                                                                                Meta Plan Generation
                              Step 1: Alice go grasp the <basket>(601123), put holding <pen>(1480289) into <basket>(601123); Bob go grasp <iPhone>
Discussion Round 3


                              (11176165). Step 2: Alice go grasp <purse> (931981) , <mouse> (3660150), and put them into <basket>(601123); Bob continue
                              exploring living room.
                                                                                   Message to Bob
                     Alice
                               Hi Bob, I have updated the meta plan according to your suggestions. I am satisfied with this meta plan; how do you think about it?
                                                                                        Message to Alice
                              Hi Alice, I think the meta plan is on the right track, let’s work together to transport as many objects as possible to the bed. Good
                              progress so far! . Satisfied with the meta plan : Yes                                                                                  Bob


Figure 3: Examples of the evaluation and optimization process of meta-plan via multi-turn dis-
cussion between agents. The discussion is triggered by new progress, i.e., Alice founds new object
’purse’. Here, Alice acts as the meta-plan designer, while Bob serves as the meta-plan evaluator.
The example is derived from the transporting task of TDW-MAT.

As shown in Fig. 2, each agent is equipped with a communication module powered by a pretrained
LLM to facilitate multi-turn discussions. Specifically, the communication module first retrieves
relevant information from the memory, e.g., meta-plan, agent state, and previous dialogue history
among agents, then prompts the LLM to generate the message to send via the following prompt:

                     Prompt: <Task Desc> + <Instruct Head> + <Meta-plan> + <Agent State> +
                      <Dialog History> \n.                                                   LLM:          <Messages> .

The tags <Meta-plan> , <Agent State> , and <Dialog History> act as placeholders
for inserting the meta-plan, the agent’s state, and the dialogue history between agents. The tag
 <Instruct Head> differs for the meta-plan designer and evaluator: the former instructs the
LLM to generate messages asking teammates for their opinions, while the latter focuses on providing
feedback on the meta-plan. After receiving feedback from the teammate agents, the meta-plan
creator reinitiates the process to generate a new meta-plan. Fig. 3 illustrates the evaluation and
optimization process of a meta-plan through multi-turn discussions among agents. It is evident
that the optimized meta-plan effectively integrates partially observed information from all agents,
resulting in improved coordination and efficiency. Detailed prompt designs for the communication
module can be found in Fig. 10 and 11 in the Appendix.

4.3                      P ROGRESS -A DAPTIVE META - PLAN & E XECUTION

The optimized meta-plan acts as a high-level guide, assigning subtasks to each agent and coordinat-
ing them for efficient task completion. However, due to dynamic environmental changes and task
progress updates, the meta-plan can become outdated during execution. As illustrated in Fig. 4,
agents may encounter significant progress, such as discovering target objects or completing sub-
tasks, necessitating adjustments to the meta-plan. In such cases, the previous plan becomes less
effective or invalid for coordinating the agents.
To address this, we design a progress-adaptive planning module for CaPo for adapting the meta-plan
to the agents’ latest progress. This module follows a similar process as described in Sec. 4.2—meta-
plan initialization, evaluation, and optimization—but with modified prompting strategies for the


                                                                                               6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LLMs. Whenever an agent makes new progress, the meta-plan designer promptly generates an
updated meta-plan, followed by a multi-turn discussion among all agents to further optimize it. The
LLM prompting strategies for the progress-adaptive planning module are structured as follows:

    Prompt: <Task Desc> + <Instruct Head> + <Meta-plan> + <Agent Progress>
    + <Teammate Progress> + <Dialog History> \n.
    LLM:     <meta-plan> or <Messages> .

Here we introduce two placeholders, <Agent Progress> and <Teammate Progress> ,
to capture the task progress of agents and enable the LLM to generate progress-aware responses,
such as meta-plans or communication messages. Agents engage in discussions to optimize the meta-
plan until a consensus is reached or communication resources are exhausted (e.g., after three discus-
sion rounds). Detailed prompt designs for the LLMs—responsible for generating the meta-plan and
facilitating messages for both the meta-plan designer and evaluator—are provided in Fig. 11∼12.
Once the meta-plan or progress-adaptive meta-plan                Subtask: Put poundcake in fridge.
is established, each agent autonomously transforms
the plan into executable actions via a plan pars-
ing module and an execution module. The plan
parsing module generates the latest sub-plan by
retrieving relevant information from the memory
module and converting it into text descriptions,
and then compiles an Action List of all avail-
able high-level sub-plans. We implement the plan (a) Discover a target object       (b) Complete a subtask
parsing module as a pretrained LLM, and prompt
it with a concatenation of Instruct Head, Figure 4: Two types of new progress dur-
Task Description, meta-plan, Action ing task execution. (a) Discover a new ob-
History, Agent Progress, and Action ject poundcake. (b) complete a subtask.
List to choose the most suitable sub-plan. See
Fig. 13 in Appendix for more prompt details. Given the sub-plan, we adopt a similar execution
module as in (Zhang et al., 2023b) to generate primitive actions for executing the sub-plan.

5    E XPERIMENTS
Benchmarks. We follow CoELA, and adopt the ThreeDworld Multi-Agent Transport (TDW-MAT)
task (Zhang et al., 2023b), and the Communicative Watch-And-Help (C-WAH) task (Zhang et al.,
2023b) to test our CaPo. TDW-MAT is built on the general purpose virtual world simulation plat-
form TDW platform (Gan et al., 2020), and requires agents to move objects by their hands or con-
tainers which can contain several objects for efficient moving to the destination. Moreover, agents
can receive ego-centric 512×512 RGB-D images as observation and can communicate with others.
The test set of TDW-MAT consists 24 episodes, which evenly divided into food and stuff tasks. In
C-WAH, agents are requested to complete five types of household activities, represented as various
predicates with specific counts that must be satisfied. The test set contains 10 episodes, including
both symbolic and visual observation settings. More details about TDW-MAT and C-WAH environ-
ments are provided in Appendix B.1 and B.2, respectively.
Metrics. On TDW-MAT, we adopt Transport Rate, i.e., the fraction of subtasks completed within
3000 time steps (a.k.a. frames), as performance metric. Note, one action step may last multiple time
steps, e.g., resetting arms. On C-WAH, Average Steps to complete all tasks is used as the metric to
evaluate cooperation efficiency. Following CoELA (Zhang et al., 2023b), we also report Efficiency
Improvement (EI) of cooperating with other agents as ∆M/M0 , where ∆M is the main efficiency
metric difference, and M0 denotes the larger on of the main efficiency metric for numerical stability.
Implementation. We test two settings on TDW-MAT task: 1) a real-world setting where the per-
ception module is instantiated as Mask-RCNN (He et al., 2017) that is trained using collected scene
images (Zhang et al., 2023b), and 2) an oracle setting with segmentation ground-truth. We use GPT-
3.5-turbo and GPT-4 from the OpenAI API (OpenAI, 2024), and LLAMA-2-13B-CHAT (Touvron
et al., 2023), as LLMs in embodied agents. We set default parameters for LLMs: temperature of 0.7,
a maximum of 256 output tokens, and top-1 sampling. Our code will be made publicly available.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Classic Agents    GPT-3.5 Agents   LLAMA-2 Agents               GPT-4 Agents
             RHP∗† RHP†       CoELA CaPo(ours) CoELA† CaPo(ours) CoELA† ProAgent RoCo CaPo(ours)
 w/o Oracle Perception
 Food (↑)     49   67 +25% 67 +23% 70 +31% 57 +9% 66 +17% 82 +38% 82 +27% 83 34% 85 +43%
 Stuff (↑)    36   54 +34% 39 +18% 45 +27% 48 +11% 56 +22% 61 +41% 57 +35% 60 +39% 64 +40%
 Avg. (↑)     43   61 +29% 52 +20% 57 +29% 53 +10% 61 +19% 71 +39% 69 +31% 71 +36% 74 +41%
 w/ Oracle Perception
 Food (↑)     52   76 +33% 72 +29% 85 +38% 60 +3% 66 +14% 87 +41% 84 +37% 88 +42% 90 +40%
 Stuff (↑)    49   74 +34% 73 +32% 84 +39% 63 +19% 76 +23% 83 +41% 85 +34% 82 +35% 87 +38%
 Avg. (↑)     50   75 +34% 72 +30% 84 +38% 62 +8% 71 +18% 85 +41% 84 +35% 85 +38% 89 +39%

Table 1: Comparison of average Transport Rate(%) of all baselines on the TDW-MAT w/o and
w/ Oracle Perception task. Each task requires agents to move two kinds of items, including Food
and Stuff. RHP∗ uses a single agent while all others adopt two agents. † denotes results quoted from
CoELA. The subscript value like +25% in 67 +25% denotes the Efficiency Improvement.
                      Classic Agents       Heterogeneous Agents              GPT-4 Agents
                         ∗†          †               †                   †
                    MHP        MHP       MHP+CoELA MHP+CaPo CoELA ProAgent RoCo CaPo(ours)
 Symbolic Obs (↓)     111      75 +33%     59 +45%       57 +47%   57 +49% 62 +37% 57 +43% 51 +46%
 Visual Obs (↓)       141     103 +26%     94 +34%       90 +38%   92 +34% 90 +37% 89 +32% 83 +37%

Table 2: Comparison of Average Steps of all methods on the C-WAH task. ”Symbolic Obs” and
”Visual Obs” denote symbolic and visual observation settings, respectively. MHP∗ uses a single
agent while all others adopt two agents. † indicates results quoted from CoELA. The subscript value
like +33% in 75 +33% denotes the Efficiency Improvement.

Baselines. We adopt three types of methods as our baseline: 1) classical agents, including
MCTS-based Hierarchical Planner (MHP) (Puig et al., 2020) and Rule-based Hierarchical Plan-
ner (RHP) (Gan et al., 2022). 2) LLM-driven agents, including CoELA Zhang et al. (2023b),
ProAgent (Zhang et al., 2023a), and RoCo (Mandi et al., 2023). CoELA Zhang et al. (2023b) fea-
tures a modular framework for multi-agent planning, communication, and complete long-horizon
tasks, but generate independent short-term plan for each agent. ProAgent (Zhang et al., 2023a),
and RoCo (Mandi et al., 2023) generate joint plans for cooperative agents, and introduce a reflec-
tion loop or environment feedback for plan validation. 3) Heterogeneous agents, where agents with
different planning and communication mechanisms collaborate within the same environment. See
more details in Appendix A.1 and A.2.

5.1   M AIN RESULTS

Performance comparison. We follow CoELA to test two-agent cooperation setting, and compare
with classical methods like MHP and RHP, and LLM-driven methods CoELA, ProAgent, and RoCo.
Table 1 summarizes the performance of all compared methods under the two settings of the TDW-
MAT task, and shows several observations. 1) Compared with the single-agent baseline RHP, CaPo
and all two-agent baselines consistently make significant improvements, showing the effectiveness
of multi-agent cooperation in embodied tasks. 2) In multi-agent comparisons, our CaPo outperforms
LLM-driven methods by a clear margin, e.g., respectively making 4.7% and 5.9% improvement over
CoELA and RoCo under the oracle perception setting. 3) CaPo demonstrates consistently superior
performance across all settings when paired with different LLMs as the agent brain. Notably, even
with a less advanced LLM like GPT-3.5-turbo, CaPo achieves a significantly higher performance
compared to the baseline CoELA. For example, under the oracle perception setting, CaPo achieves
a transport rate of 84, outperforming CoELA’s 72. The improvement of CaPo is derived from its
meta-plan and progress-adaptive meta-plan, which both provide strategical and coherent guidance
for agent cooperation, thereby improving cooperation performance.
Table 2 reports the performance of all methods on the C-WAH task. Specifically, with GPT-4 agents,
our CaPo respectively makes 9.8%, 7.6% and 6.6% relative improvement on CoELA, ProAgent and
RoCo. Interestingly, CaPo, when paired with MHP, where the CaPo agent independently creates
and updates the meta-plan, outperforms both a team of two MHP agents and a combination of MHP


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         CoELA-SoTA                                                 Previous Meta Plan: Step 1: Alice explores living room; Bob explore office.
         CaPo-Ours                    ×1.2         84                                        Step 2: Alice and Bob grasp found objects and put them into fridge.
                                                                   Current progress:                  Next action for Alice:             Next action for Bob:
                                              72                   Alice found 1 wine and 2 cupcakes. Grasp 1 cupcake and 1 wine.        Grasp 1 cupcake.

                                59
                     ×1.9

                           31
            23
  ×2.3
     10
                                                                    Progress-adaptive       Step 1: Alice grasps 1 wine and 1 cupcake; Bob grasps 1 cupcake.
  1000 time steps 2000 times steps 3000 time steps                  Meta Plan:              Step 2: Alice puts wine and cupcake into fridge; Bob puts cupcake into fridge.


Figure 5: Comparison of Transport                                Figure 6: Example of progress-adaptive meta-plan
Rate (%) of CoELA and CaPo using                                 adaptation. New progress: Alice found target objects,
GPT-3.5 under different time steps.                              1 wine and 2 cupcakes.

         Meta Plan     Step 1: Alice goes grasp pudding and wine; Bob goes grasp cupcake.           Step 3. Alice and Bob put holding objects on the table.
                       Step 2: Alice and Bob transport holding objects to the table.


                                                                                                  ..
                                                                                                   .
                                              ..
                                               .


                                                                                                            ..
                                                                                                             .
 Alice                   Bob                            Alice                    Bob                                   Alice                          Bob
Go grasp pudding and                           Sub Transport pudding and                                     Sub Put pudding and wine Put cupcake on dinner-
                         Go grasp cupcake.                                        Transport cupcake.
wine.                                          Plan wine.                                                    Plan on table.           -table.

Figure 7: Examples of cooperative behaviors introduced by meta-plan. Guided by meta-plan,
agents show clear work and task allocation, thereby improving cooperative efficiency.

and CoELA agents. These results consistently highlight the superiority of CaPo in enhancing multi-
agent cooperation. We provide more analysis on heterogeneous agents in Appendix A.2.
Efficiency comparison. To demonstrate the cooperation efficiency, we compare the transport rates
of CaPo and CoELA with different time steps on TDW-MAT. As shown in Fig. 5, with the same time
step budget and GPT-3.5 agents, CaPo consistently outperforms CoELA across various time steps,
indicating its superiority to coordinate agents effectively. The improvement is particularly clear in
scenarios of small time steps. For example, given 1,000 time steps, CaPo doubles the transport rate
of CoELA by improving 10% to 23%. This shows that with limited time or resources, a cooperative
meta-plan can significantly improve cooperation efficiency.
Qualitative Analysis. Here we investigate the agents’ behavior in CaPo with GPT-4 on the C-
WAH task. In the meta-plan generation phase, as shown in Fig. 3, agents ask questions, provide
feedback, and collaboratively refine the initial meta-plan. Moreover, in this phase, Fig. 7 shows
that with meta-plan as guidance, two agents, Alice and Bob, have clear work/labor allocation to
complete tasks, thereby avoiding redundant steps and improving cooperation efficiency. For the
progress-adaptive meta-plan and execution phase, Fig. 6 also shows that when agent Alice achieves
progress, e.g., discovering three target objects, both agents will accordingly discuss to adapt the
meta-plan, e.g., grasping 1 wine and 1 cupcake by Alice. This ongoing adaptation of the meta-plan
provides strategic, coherent, and timely guidance, facilitating efficient coordination among agents
and ultimately enhancing multi-agent cooperation.

5.2      A BLATION S TUDY

Effects of each component in CaPo. Here we examine the effects of two key components: 1)
meta-plan generation, which includes meta-plan initialization, evaluation, and optimization, and 2)
the progress-adaptive meta-plan. To evaluate their impact, we first remove both components from
CaPo, resulting in CaPo1 . As shown in Table 3, CaPo2 , which includes meta-plan initialization
but freezes the meta-plan during subsequent procedures, improves upon CaPo1 by approximately
1% across three metrics, demonstrating the value of meta-plan initialization. Similarly, CaPo3 ,
which incorporates the full meta-plan generation process, outperforms CaPo2 by a significant mar-
gin, highlighting the benefits of meta-plan evaluation and optimization. Finally, CaPo achieves a 7%
improvement over CaPo3 , showcasing the effectiveness of the progress-adaptive meta-plan. These
results underscore the importance of each component in the CaPo framework.


                                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Method                                   Food (↑) Stuff (↑) Avg. (↑)   Method Symbolic Obs (↓) Visual Obs (↓)
CaPo1 (No MP + No Pro. MP)                  72       75        73      CaPo×1       93              106
CaPo2 (MP Initialization + No Pro. MP)      73       76        74      CaPo×2       51               83
CaPo3 (MP Generation + No Pro. MP)          74       80        77      CaPo×3       46               72
CaPo (MP Generation + Pro. MP)              85       84        84      CaPo×4       45               74
                                                                       Table 4: Benefits of increasing
Table 3: Effects of the components in CaPo using                       agent numbers in our CaPo using
GPT-3.5 on TDW-MAT task. We report the transport                       GPT-4 on the C-WAH task. Aver-
Rate (TR, %). MP” denote ‘Meta Plan” and Progress-                     age steps required to complete task
Adaptive Meta Plan”, respectively.                                     are reported.

Effects of agent number. Table 4 investigates the effects of agent number in CaPo using GPT-
4 on the C-WAH task, where “CaPo × C” denotes using C GPT-4 agents. We can observe that
increasing agent number to 3 significantly reduces the overall time step number required to complete
tasks. This improvement also shows the effectiveness of our CaPo on multiple agent cooperation.
However, increasing the number of agents to four results in only minor or degraded improvements.
This is because for simple tasks, agents are too much and suffer from highly-frequent agent dispatch,
leading to inferior collaboration efficiency. For instance, setting up a dining table does not require
four waiters, as a maximum of two agents is sufficient.
Progress in meta-plan adaptation. Fig. 4 in Sec. 4.3
                                                                       Discussion
shows two clear task progress examples: 1) discovering a                Rounds
                                                                                              1      2          3           >3
target object and 2) completing a subtask, both of which
can trigger agents to adapt the meta-plan to their latest
                                                                                36.4
task progress. Such progress is crucial, as agents need                                                             32.4
                                                                                              31.2
to continually refine the meta-plan to complete tasks ef-
ficiently and maximize cooperation. Conversely, actions                                                     25.6
without significant progress, such as entering a new room,                             20.1          20.9                  21.1
do not prompt agents to adjust the current (progress-
                                                                         12.3
adaptive) meta-plan. This is because it would be unnec-
essary, and updating the meta-plan involves communica-
tion, which incurs additional time overhead.                                    Food tasks                  Stuff tasks

Convergence analysis of agent discussion. Here we in- Figure 8: Percentage (%) of dis-
vestigate the convergence of agent discussions, focusing cussion rounds needed for agents
on how many rounds are required for agents to reach con- to reach consensus on a meta-plan,
sensus on the meta-plan. In the TDW-MAT environment, based on results from TDW-MAT.
we limit the maximum number of discussion rounds—referred to as the discussion budget—to three
(details in Appendix A.6). As shown in Fig. 8, agents reach consensus within three rounds in most
cases, with 78.9% achieving consensus in the ”Stuff” tasks. By capping the discussion rounds, CaPo
achieves a balance between discussion effectiveness and the budget, avoiding unnecessary or pro-
longed deliberations. Additionally, we provided an communication analysis in Appendix A.7, which
demonstrate CaPo achieves a good balance between cooperation efficiency and communication cost.


6   C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS

In this work, we introduce Cooperative Plan Optimization (CaPo) to improve the cooperation effi-
ciency of LLM-driven embodied agents. CaPo creates a strategic and coherent meta-plan through
multi-turn agent discussions before any actions are executed. This meta-plan acts as an action guide
to effectively coordinate multiple agents in task completion. During execution, agents dynamically
adapt the meta-plan based on task progress, ensuring its continued effectiveness in coordination.
Experimental results on TDW-MAT and C-WAH demonstrate that CaPo achieves higher task com-
pletion rates and efficiency compared to state-of-the-art methods.
Potential Limitation: While CaPo significantly improves multi-agent cooperation efficiency, it
has certain limitations. Specifically, it relies heavily on LLMs for reasoning and planning during
meta-plan generation and adaptation. Additionally, CaPo employs a pre-defined communication
protocol for creating and updating the meta-plan, which may restrict its flexibility in dynamic or
heterogeneous environments. Addressing these limitations will be a focus of our future work.


                                                          10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partially funded by Elekta Oncology Systems AB and a RVO public-private Partner-
ship grant (PPS2102).

R EFERENCES
Dhruv Batra, Angel X. Chang, Sonia Chernova, Andrew J. Davison, Jia Deng, Vladlen Koltun,
  Sergey Levine, Jitendra Malik, Igor Mordatch, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Manolis Savva, and Hao
  Su. Rearrangement: A challenge for embodied ai, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2011.01975.

Daniel S Bernstein, Robert Givan, Neil Immerman, and Shlomo Zilberstein. The complexity of
  decentralized control of markov decision processes. Mathematics of operations research, 27(4):
  819–840, 2002.

Shaofei Cai, Bowei Zhang, Zihao Wang, Xiaojian Ma, Anji Liu, and Yitao Liang. Groot: Learning
  to follow instructions by watching gameplay videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08235, 2023.

Karl Cobbe, Oleg Klimov, Chris Hesse, Taehoon Kim, and John Schulman. Quantifying generaliza-
  tion in reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1282–1289.
  PMLR, 2019.

Andrea Dittadi, Frederik Träuble, Manuel Wüthrich, Felix Widmaier, Peter Gehler, Ole Winther,
  Francesco Locatello, Olivier Bachem, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Stefan Bauer. The role of pre-
  trained representations for the ood generalization of reinforcement learning agents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2107.05686, 2021.

Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Zihan Wang, Cédric Colas, Trevor Darrell, Pieter Abbeel, Abhishek
  Gupta, and Jacob Andreas. Guiding pretraining in reinforcement learning with large language
  models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8657–8677. PMLR, 2023.

Chuang Gan, Jeremy Schwartz, Seth Alter, Damian Mrowca, Martin Schrimpf, James Traer, Julian
  De Freitas, Jonas Kubilius, Abhishek Bhandwaldar, Nick Haber, et al. Threedworld: A platform
  for interactive multi-modal physical simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.04954, 2020.

Chuang Gan, Siyuan Zhou, Jeremy Schwartz, Seth Alter, Abhishek Bhandwaldar, Dan Gutfreund,
  Daniel LK Yamins, James J DiCarlo, Josh McDermott, Antonio Torralba, et al. The threedworld
  transport challenge: A visually guided task-and-motion planning benchmark towards physically
  realistic embodied ai. In 2022 International conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pp.
  8847–8854. IEEE, 2022.

Xudong Guo, Kaixuan Huang, Jiale Liu, Wenhui Fan, Natalia Vélez, Qingyun Wu, Huazheng Wang,
  Thomas L Griffiths, and Mengdi Wang. Embodied llm agents learn to cooperate in organized
  teams. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12482, 2024.

Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Jiahua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Zhe Wang, and Zhiting Hu.
  Reasoning with language model is planning with world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14992,
  2023.

Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Mask r-cnn. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 2961–2969, 2017.

Sirui Hong, Xiawu Zheng, Jonathan Chen, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang,
  Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, et al. Metagpt: Meta programming for multi-
  agent collaborative framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00352, 2023.

Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022a.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through
 planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022b.
Jiechuan Jiang and Zongqing Lu. Learning attentional communication for multi-agent cooperation.
   Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  35:22199–22213, 2022.
Chengshu Li, Ruohan Zhang, Josiah Wong, Cem Gokmen, Sanjana Srivastava, Roberto Martı́n-
  Martı́n, Chen Wang, Gabrael Levine, Michael Lingelbach, Jiankai Sun, et al. Behavior-1k: A
  benchmark for embodied ai with 1,000 everyday activities and realistic simulation. In Conference
  on Robot Learning, pp. 80–93. PMLR, 2023a.
Huao Li, Yu Quan Chong, Simon Stepputtis, Joseph Campbell, Dana Hughes, Michael Lewis, and
  Katia Sycara. Theory of mind for multi-agent collaboration via large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.10701, 2023b.
Iou-Jen Liu, Unnat Jain, Raymond A Yeh, and Alexander Schwing. Cooperative exploration for
  multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  6826–6836. PMLR, 2021.
Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding,
  Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, et al. Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.03688, 2023a.
Zijun Liu, Yanzhe Zhang, Peng Li, Yang Liu, and Diyi Yang. Dynamic llm-agent network: An llm-
  agent collaboration framework with agent team optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02170,
  2023b.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
 with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Oscar Mañas, Pietro Astolfi, Melissa Hall, Candace Ross, Jack Urbanek, Adina Williams, Aish-
  warya Agrawal, Adriana Romero-Soriano, and Michal Drozdzal. Improving text-to-image con-
  sistency via automatic prompt optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17804, 2024.
Zhao Mandi, Shreeya Jain, and Shuran Song. Roco: Dialectic multi-robot collaboration with large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04738, 2023.
Yohei Nakajima. Babyaig. https://github.com/yoheinakajima/babyagi, 2023.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024.
Aishwarya Padmakumar, Jesse Thomason, Ayush Shrivastava, Patrick Lange, Anjali Narayan-Chen,
  Spandana Gella, Robinson Piramuthu, Gokhan Tur, and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. Teach: Task-driven
  embodied agents that chat. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 36, pp. 2017–2025, 2022.
Xavier Puig, Tianmin Shu, Shuang Li, Zilin Wang, Yuan-Hong Liao, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Sanja
  Fidler, and Antonio Torralba. Watch-and-help: A challenge for social perception and human-ai
  collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09890, 2020.
Xavier Puig, Tianmin Shu, Shuang Li, Zilin Wang, Yuan-Hong Liao, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Sanja
  Fidler, and Antonio Torralba. Watch-and-help: A challenge for social perception and human-ai
  collaboration. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Reworkd. Agentgpt. https://github.com/reworkd/AgentGPT, 2023.
Toran Bruce Richards and et al. Auto-gpt: An autonomous gpt-4 experiment. https://github.
  com/Significant-Gravitas/AutoGPT, 2021.

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. Hugging-
  gpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon, Yonatan Bisk, Winson Han, Roozbeh Mottaghi,
 Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter Fox. Alfred: A benchmark for interpreting grounded instructions
 for everyday tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
 recognition, pp. 10740–10749, 2020.
Chan Hee Song, Jiaman Wu, Clayton Washington, Brian M Sadler, Wei-Lun Chao, and Yu Su.
  Llm-planner: Few-shot grounded planning for embodied agents with large language models. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2998–3009,
  2023.
Matthijs TJ Spaan, Geoffrey J Gordon, and Nikos Vlassis. Decentralized planning under uncertainty
 for teams of communicating agents. In Proceedings of the fifth international joint conference on
 Autonomous agents and multiagent systems, pp. 249–256, 2006.
J Lukas Thürmer, Frank Wieber, and Peter M Gollwitzer. Planning and performance in small groups:
   Collective implementation intentions enhance group goal striving. Frontiers in Psychology, 8:603,
   2017.
Alejandro Torreno, Eva Onaindia, Antonı́n Komenda, and Michal Štolba. Cooperative multi-agent
  planning: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 50(6):1–32, 2017.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
R Tuomela. Collective goals and cooperation. In Discourse, Interaction and Communication: Pro-
  ceedings of the Fourth International Colloquium on Cognitive Science (ICCS-95), pp. 121–139.
  Springer, 1998.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models,
  2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16291.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
  Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents.
  Frontiers of Computer Science, 18(6):1–26, 2024.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-
  ery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
Yuanfei Wang, Fangwei Zhong, Jing Xu, and Yizhou Wang. Tom2c: Target-oriented multi-agent
  communication and cooperation with theory of mind. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09189, 2021.
Zhenhailong Wang, Shaoguang Mao, Wenshan Wu, Tao Ge, Furu Wei, and Heng Ji. Unleashing the
  emergent cognitive synergy in large language models: A task-solving agent through multi-persona
  self-collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05300, 2023c.
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Guanzhou Chen, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe,
  explain, plan and select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world
  multi-task agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01560, 2023d.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yue Wu, So Yeon Min, Yonatan Bisk, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Amos Azaria, Yuanzhi Li, Tom
  Mitchell, and Shrimai Prabhumoye. Plan, eliminate, and track–language models are good teachers
  for embodied agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02412, 2023a.
Zhenyu Wu, Ziwei Wang, Xiuwei Xu, Jiwen Lu, and Haibin Yan. Embodied task planning with
  large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01848, 2023b.
Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun
  Chen. Large language models as optimizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.03409, 2023.
Ceyao Zhang, Kaijie Yang, Siyi Hu, Zihao Wang, Guanghe Li, Yihang Sun, Cheng Zhang, Zhaowei
  Zhang, Anji Liu, Song-Chun Zhu, et al. Proagent: Building proactive cooperative ai with large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11339, 2023a.
Hongxin Zhang, Weihua Du, Jiaming Shan, Qinhong Zhou, Yilun Du, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Tian-
  min Shu, and Chuang Gan. Building cooperative embodied agents modularly with large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02485, 2023b.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuur-
  mans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, et al. Least-to-most prompting enables complex
  reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625, 2022.
Gengze Zhou, Yicong Hong, and Qi Wu. Navgpt: Explicit reasoning in vision-and-language naviga-
  tion with large language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 38, pp. 7641–7649, 2024.
Dongsheng Zhu, Xunzhu Tang, Weidong Han, Jinghui Lu, Yukun Zhao, Guoliang Xing, Junfeng
  Wang, and Dawei Yin. Vislinginstruct: Elevating zero-shot learning in multi-modal language
  models with autonomous instruction optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07398, 2024.
Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang, Gao Huang, Bin Li,
  Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, et al. Ghost in the minecraft: Generally capable agents for open-world
  enviroments via large language models with text-based knowledge and memory. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.17144, 2023.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          Appendix

A     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS AND D ISCUSSION

A.1   BASELINE MODELS AND OTHER ENVIRONMENTS

We adopt two types of methods as our baseline, including classical agents and LLM-driven multi-
agents. (1) The classical agents include MCTS-based Hierarchical Planner (MHP) (Puig et al.,
2020) which is a hierarchical planner originating from the original Watch-And-Help Challeng, and
Rule-based Hierarchical Planner (RHP) (Gan et al., 2022) derived from a strong baseline in the
ThreeDWorld Transport Challenge. (2) LLM-driven agents consist of CoELA Zhang et al. (2023b),
ProAgent (Zhang et al., 2023a), and RoCo (Mandi et al., 2023). Cooperative Embodied Language
Agent (CoELA) (Zhang et al., 2023b) can plan, communicate, and collaborate with other agents to
complete long-horizon tasks, but generate independent short-term plan for each agent. In addition,
we also introduce two more baselines – ProAgent (Zhang et al., 2023a) and RoCo (Mandi et al.,
2023), and implement them on TDW-MAT and C-WAH using source codes. These two baselines
generate joint plans for cooperative agents, and introduce a reflection loop or environment feedback
for plan validation.
We conducted experiments on TDW-MAT and C-WAH, which are widely recognized benchmarks
for embodied multi-agent cooperation. While other environments, such as ALFRED (Shridhar et al.,
2020) and BEHAVIOR-1K (Li et al., 2023a), are notable in this domain, they do not support multi-
agent cooperation simulation, and therefore, we did not include them in our experiments. Similarly,
works based on Minecraft (Wang et al., 2023b; Cai et al., 2023), such as (Wang et al., 2023c;d),
focus on settings that differ from ours, as our framework emphasizes decentralized cooperation
with partial observation. Consequently, Minecraft-based environments were also excluded from our
experiments.

A.2   E XPERIMENTS ON HETEROGENEOUS AGENTS ’ COOPERATION

CaPo introduces a pre-defined communication protocol to create and update the meta-plan, which
facilitate the multi-cooperation efficiency. However, it is also very interesting to explore whether
CaPo could improve cooperation efficiency when cooperating with other decentralized agents, e.g,
RHP and CoELA. Specifically, when cooperating with other agents, the CaPo agent independently
creates and update the meta-plan due to the lack of multi-round discussion. We conduct experiments
on the TDW-MAT tasks using oracle perception, and the results are shown in Table 5.

                  Runs                Food (↑)         Stuff (↑)      Avg. (↑)
                       †
                  RHP                   0.52              0.49          0.50
                  RHP+RHP†          0.76 (+33%)       0.74(+34%)    0.75(+33%)
                  RHP+CoELA†        0.85 (+40%)       0.77 (+35%)   0.81 (+37%)
                  RHP+CaPo          0.85 (+38%)       0.80 (+37%)   0.82 (+37%)
                  CaPo+CoELA        0.86 (+36%)       0.83 (+35%)   0.84 (+35%)

Table 5: Results on heterogeneous agents’ cooperation. Here we report transport rate (efficiency
improvement) on TDW-MAT tasks using oracle perception and GPT-4. † denotes results from the
CoELA paper. The reported EI may fluctuate even for same transport rate, due to slight variations
of the performance of baseline agent.

As shown in the above table, when CaPo cooperates with RHP agents, it achieves a higher transport
rate compared to both a team of two MHP agents and a combination of MHP and CoELA agents.
We attribute this improvement to the independently developed meta-plan, which guides the CaPo
agent to complete tasks more efficiently and implicitly enhances multi-agent cooperation efficiency.
Interestingly, when our CaPo cooperates with the more advanced agent CoELA, it further improves
the transport rate. This highlights the potential of deploying CaPo to collaborate with other decen-
tralized agents.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3    R EPRODUCIBILITY OF RESULTS

LLM-driven reasoning and planning tend to be stochastic, requiring multiple runs to assess stability.
To verify the stability and reproducibility of our method, we conducted three runs on TDW-MAT
with oracle perception and GPT-3.5 agents. As shown in Table 6, the results exhibit minor variance
across runs, demonstrating the stability and reproducibility of our method.

                       Runs          Food (↑)             Stuff (↑)          Avg. (↑)
                       1                 0.85               0.84                 0.84
                       2                 0.84               0.81                 0.82
                       3                 0.85               0.83                 0.84
                       Average      0.84 (0.006)        0.82 (0.015)       0.83 (0.012)

Table 6: Transport Rate (TR) comparison on the TDW-MAT task using GPT-3.5 and oracle
perception. We perform 3 runs with random seeds and report mean and variance.


A.4    R ESULTS ON A DDITIONAL E NVIRONMENTS

To test the generalization and effectiveness of our model on new environments, we add one more
experiments on RoCoBench (Mandi et al., 2023), which is a multi-robot collaboration environment.
We choose three tasks exhibiting asymmetric observation, which are more relevant to decentralized,
partia-observation settings, and the results are shown in the Table 7. Our CaPo framework achieves
a higher success rate with fixed steps and requires few steps to complete the task. This further
highlights the effectiveness and generalization of our model on embodied multi-agent cooperation.

                             Sweep Floor                 Pack Grocery                   Move Rope
                        Success rate      Step     Success rate         Step       Success rate     Step
        RoCo               0.95 ± 0.05     7.1      0.44 ± 0.06            9.9        0.65 ± 0.11   2.5
        CaPo (ours)        0.98 ± 0.13     6.5      0.63 ± 0.11            7.6        0.74 ± 0.17   2.2

Table 7: Efficiency comparison on RocoBench (Mandi et al., 2023). We report two metrics, success
rate of the task, and average steps required to complete the task.


A.5    N UMBER OF DISCUSSION ROUND

To generate or update the meta plan, all agents are involved in multi-round discussion. We set the
discussion budget to 3 rounds to balance the consensus rate and overall efficiency. As shown in the
Table A.5, with a 3-round limit, the failure rate decreases to 21.1%, and overall efficiency improves
to 84%. Extending the discussion budget beyond 3 rounds offers only marginal benefits in reducing
failed cases (e.g., a reduction to 17.8% with 4 rounds) while providing no additional efficiency
gains, as efficiency stabilizes at 84%. These results demonstrate that a 3-round discussion budget is
a reasonable choice, effectively balancing communication costs and task performance.

                    Maximal Round                   1         2        3          4        5
                    Rate of failed cases (%)       79.1     53.5      21.1       17.8    15.5
                    Transport rate (%)              79       82        84         84      83

      Table 8: Failed case rate and transport rate under different maximal rounds of discussion.


A.6    C OMMUNICATION COST

For communication cost and efficiency, we want to discuss them from several aspects. Firstly, the
task cost mainly includes agent moving cost and communication cost. By comparison, moving cost


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is often much higher than communication cost, since current robots lack the ability of humans, and
their movement is costly especially in complex and large-scale environments like urban areas; while
the latter only needs LLM’s inference, and massage sending and receiving, and is indeed much
easier and efficient. For example, moving from one room to another can often require much more
time than LLM’s inference.
Moreover, to reduce communication cost, our CaPo adopts two strategies. a) agent’s progress-
adaptive planning module will evaluate whether meta plan is suitable for current task progress: if
yes, then all agents will continue their subtasks, and will not communicate, reducing uncommunica-
tion costs; b) with the meta plan as a reference, a few round communication is sufficient to arrive at
a new plan, since task progress is often smoothly achieved and thus adaptation the meta plan need
slightly small changes. Indeed, we set the maximum round of communication as 3 for each discus-
sion. So these strategies differ from CoELA which needs communication at each iteration, while
ours does not.

Method          # Rounds of    Character      Frames Cost        # Rounds of      Time Cost       Time Cost
                 Meta-plan      Cost per         from             Discussion    per Meta-plan      per Task
                  Updates      Meta-plan     Communication      per Meta-plan      Update
Food tasks          14         1,757 chars     56 frames          2.4 rounds       20.4 sec       26.2 min
Stuff tasks         17         1,462 chars     51 frames          2.1 rounds       22.7 sec       25.6 min

      Table 9: Communication cost analysis on the TDW-MAT dataset with oracle perception.

For average rounds of meta-plan updates and average steps for each meta plan discussion, we report
the statistics Table 9. Regarding Food tasks on TDW, agents update the meta-plan for an average of
14 times per task, with each discussion requiring 2.4 steps and a total 1,757 characters for sending
(i.e., 4 frames since 1 frame can send 500 characters as in CoELA). While this incurs some time
cost, the long-term coherent meta-plan results in a substantial transport rate gain. This demonstrates
that creating a coherent meta-plan through communication is significantly more time-efficient than
relying solely on embodied actions.

A.7    C OLLABORATING WITH HUMAN

To evaluate human-agent cooperation, we follow the methodology of CoELA and conduct experi-
ments on the C-WAH tasks, where the agent Bob (meta-plan evaluator) is controlled by real human
participants. We adopt average steps as an efficiency metric and also ask three participants to rate
their teammate agent (i.e., CaPo or CoELA) on a 7-point Likert Scale based on three criteria: com-
munication effectiveness, helpfulness, and trust. The results are detailed in Table A.7.

      Method             Average Steps       Comm Effectiveness        Helpfulness        Trust
      CoELA                   47 ± 2            5.8 ± 0.3 / 7          5.5 ± 0.4 / 7   6.0 ± 0.1 / 7
      CaPo (ours)             44 ± 1            6.3 ± 0.1 / 7          6.1 ± 0.3 / 7   6.3 ± 0.2 / 7

              Table 10: Comparison of CoELA and CaPo on Human Collaboration Metrics.

Efficiency (Average steps). Humans collaborating with CaPo generally achieve higher efficiency,
completing tasks with fewer steps, i.e., 44 steps. This is because both agents and humans can avoid
redundant actions through the guidance of the proposed meta-plan.
Human Preferences. (1) Communication effectiveness represents the effectiveness of communi-
cation between agent and human participants, e.g., whether the agent understands the message and
provides useful information. In general, CaPo demonstrates clearer and more reliable communi-
cation than CoELA (6.3 vs. 5.8).This improvement is attributed to CaPo’s multi-round discussion
mechanism, which creates a long-term, coherent meta-plan, reducing the need for frequent commu-
nication. In contrast, in CoELA, agents and humans have to exchange information more frequently,
due to the lack of a coherent plan. Finally, agents didn’t show verbose behavior when making
plans (as shown in Figure 3), as we constrained the LLM to generate concise plans and messages in
prompting. (2) Helpfulness indicates whether the agent helps human participants complete the task
faster. By multi-round discussion and creating coherent meta-plans, CaPo could help both agent


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and human participants to reduce redundant actions in the embodied environments, e.g., aimless
exploration. (3) Trust measures how human participants trust their agent teammate. Humans show
a stronger preference for trusting CaPo (6.3 vs. 6.0) during the cooperation. This is because CaPo
involves humans in the planning process, seeking their input during multi-round discussions to col-
laboratively create the meta-plan. In contrast, CoELA agents act more independently and sometimes
fail to respond to human messages, which weakens trust.
Through human-agent cooperation experiments, we demonstrate that CaPo enhances communica-
tion clarity, actively supports human decision-making, and fosters trust by engaging humans in the
planning process. These advantages position CaPo as a more favorable teammate for human collab-
orators, underscoring its potential for real-world cooperative applications.

B     A DDITIONAL E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS
We evaluate our method and all baseline methods in two simulated environments: ThreeDWorld
Multi-Agent Transport (TDW-MAT) and Communicative Watch-And-Help (C-WAH). We follow
CoELA Zhang et al. (2023b) and list detailed introductions to these environments below.

B.1   T HREE DW ORLD M ULTI -AGENT T RANSPORT

Tasks.     TDW-MAT consists of two types of tasks, food-transporting task and stuff-transporting
task. The food-transporting task has 6 types of targets (apple, banana, orange, bread, loaf bread,
and burger) and 3 containers (bowl, plate, and tea tray). In contrast, the stuff-transporting task
has 6 different types of targets(calculator, mouse, pen, lighter, purse, and iPhone) and 3 containers
(plastic basket, wood basket, and wicker basket). In each task, there are 10 target objects and 2
to 5 containers in total. Additionally, there are 4 types of rooms: living room, office, kitchen, and
bedroom, and objects are placed in these rooms consistent with common sense. The agents are
tasked with transporting as many target objects as possible to the goal position using containers as
tools. Each container can carry up to three objects, while without a container, an agent can transport
only two objects at a time. The agents must transport as many target objects as possible within 3000
frames.

Observation Space The embodied agent receives a variety of observations, with the primary ones
being an egocentric RGB image and a depth image. Additionally, there are several auxiliary obser-
vations. The observation space includes:

       • RGB image: This is an egocentric image captured by a forward-facing camera, with a
         resolution of 512 × 512 and a field of view of 90 degrees.
       • Depth image: This image shares the same camera intrinsic parameters as the RGB image.
       • Oracle Perception (optional): An image where each object ID is represented by a distinct
         color, using the same camera intrinsic parameters as the RGB image.
       • Agent position and rotation: The position and rotation of the agent within the simulation
         environment.
       • Messages: Communications sent by all agents.
       • Held objects: Information about the objects currently held by the agent.
       • Opponent held objects: Information about objects held by another agent, if the agent is
         within view.

Action Space In TDW-MAT, agents can perform 7 distinct types of actions to interact with the
environment or communicate with each other. Each action spans multiple frames, and the detailed
action space is outlined below:

       • Move forward: The agent advances by 0.5m.
       • Turn left: The agent rotates left by 15 degrees.
       • Turn right: The agent rotates right by 15 degrees.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      • Grasp: The agent grasps an object, successfully performing this action only when in close
        proximity to the object. The object can be either a target or a container.
      • Put In: The agent places a target into a container, an action that is possible only when the
        agent is holding a target in one hand and a container in the other.
      • Drop: The agent releases the objects held in hand.
      • Send message: The agent sends a message to other agents, with a limit of 500 characters
        per frame.

B.2   C OMMUNICATIVE WATCH -A ND -H ELP

Communicative Watch-And-Help (C-WAH) builds upon the Watch-And-Help challenge Puig et al.
(2021) by incorporating the ability for agents to send messages to one another. Sending messages,
like other actions, consumes one timestep and is subject to a maximum length constraint.

             Task Name                                Predicate Set
         Prepare afternoon tea   ON(cupcake,coffeetable), ON(pudding,coffeetable),
                                 ON(apple,coffeetable), ON(juice,coffeetable),
                                 ON(wine,coffeetable)
                 Wash dishes     IN(plate,dishwasher), IN(fork,dishwasher)
               Prepare a meal    ON(coffeepot,dinnertable),ON(cupcake,dinnertable),
                                 ON(pancake,dinnertable), ON(poundcake,dinnertable),
                                 ON(pudding,dinnertable), ON(apple,dinnertable),
                                 ON(juice,dinnertable), ON(wine,dinnertable)
                 Put groceries   IN(cupcake,fridge), IN(pancake,fridge),
                                 IN(poundcake,fridge), IN(pudding,fridge),
                                 IN(apple,fridge), IN(juice,fridge),
                                 IN(wine,fridge)
         Set up a dinner table   ON(plate,dinnertable), ON(fork,dinnertable)

Table 11: Task description in C-WAH. The tasks are divided into five types, each containing several
predicates.


Tasks The Communicative Watch-And-Help (C-WAH) framework includes five types of tasks:
Prepare afternoon tea, Wash dishes, Prepare a meal, Put groceries, and Set up a dinner table.
These tasks encompass various household activities, each consisting of several subtasks described
by predicates in the ”ON/IN(x, y)” format, such as ”Put x ON/IN y”. Detailed descriptions of the
tasks are provided in Table 11.
The primary objective is to complete all given subtasks within 250 timesteps, with each task con-
taining between 3 to 5 subtasks.

Observation Space     C-WAH offers two modes of observation: Symbolic Observation and Visual
Observation.
In Symbolic Observation, following the original Watch-And-Help challenge, an agent can access
comprehensive object information within the same room, including location, status, name, and rela-
tionships.
In Visual Observation, agents receive egocentric RGB and depth images along with auxiliary obser-
vations. The detailed observation space includes:

      • RGB image: An egocentric image from a forward-facing camera, with a resolution of
        256 × 512 and a field of view of 60 degrees.
      • Depth image: An image with the same camera intrinsic parameters as the RGB image.


                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      • Oracle Perception: An image where each object ID is mapped to a color, sharing the same
        camera intrinsic parameters as the RGB image.
      • Agent position: The agent’s position within the simulation world.
      • Messages: Communications sent by all agents.
      • Held objects: Information about the objects currently held by the agent.
      • Opponent held objects: Information about objects held by another agent, if visible.

Action Space The action space in C-WAH closely resembles that of the original Watch-And-Help
Challenge, with the addition of the send message action. The detailed action space includes:

      • Walk towards: Move towards an object in the same room or towards a specific room.
      • Turn left: Rotate left by 30 degrees.
      • Turn right: Rotate right by 30 degrees.
      • Grasp: Grasp an object, which can be successfully performed only when the agent is close
        to the object.
      • Open: Open a closed container, performable only when the agent is near the container.
      • Close: Close an open container, performable only when the agent is near the container.
      • Put: Place held objects into an open container or onto a surface, performable only when
        the agent is near the target position.
      • Send message: Communicate with other agents, with a limit of 500 characters per message.


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    P ROMPT T EMPLATE
We list the prompts template for meta plan initialization, communication module of Alice, commu-
nication module of Bob, cooperative planning module, and the plan parsing module as follows.


        I am Alice. My teammate Bob and I want to transport as many target objects as
        possible to the bed with the help of containers within 3000 steps. I can hold two things
        at a time, and they can be objects or containers. I can grasp containers and put
        objects into them to hold more objects at a time.

        Assume that you are an expert plan outline designer. Given our shared goal, please help me
        generate a global meta plan for me and Bob during task execution, guiding me and Bob to
        achieve the goal collaboratively as soon as possible. Note that a container can contain three
        objects, and will be lost once transported to the bed. I can only put objects into the container I
        hold after grasping it. All objects are denoted as <name> (id), such as <table> (712). Actions
        take several steps to finish. It may be costly to go to another room or transport to the bed, use
        these actions sparingly.

        The generated meta plan must meet following requirements:

        1.There are 5 allowed actions you can use to construct the meta plan. 1) ‘go to’: move to a
        specified room. 2) ’explore’: explore a room for underlying target objects. 3) ‘go grasp’: go to
        grasp a specified target object. 4) ‘put’: Place an object into a specified container. 5)
        ’transport’: Transport holding objects or containers to the bed and drop them on the bed.

        2.The meta plan should be concise, brief, and reliable.

        3.The meta plan must be structured strictly in the three-step format: {Action Plan: Step 1:
        Alice xxx, Bob xxx; Step 2: Alice xxx, Bob xxx; Step 3: Alice xxx, Bob xxx}. Here, 'xxx'
        represents one or multiple allowed actions. The actions in Step 1 are of the highest execution
        priority, while those in Step 2 and Step 3 are of medium and lowest execution priority.

        4.The meta plan should reasonably arrange the division of action between Alice and Bob in
        order to achieve the goal as soon as possible.

        Here is an example for you:

        {Goal: [Transport 3 pens, 1 lighter, and 3 iPods to the bed.]
        Meta plan: [Step 1: Alice explores the current room. Bob explores the current room.
        Step 2: If any target objects are found, Alice and Bob go grasp objects, put them into
        containers, and transport them to the bed.
        Step 3: Alice goes to one of the remaining rooms and explores it. Bob goes to one of the
        remaining rooms and explores it]}

        Goal: $GOAL$

        Given the above goal, think step by step, and generate the meta plan:



                         Figure 9: Prompts for LLM in generating meta plan.


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        I am Alice. My teammate Bob and I want to transport as many target objects as possible to
        the bed with the help of containers within 3000 steps. I can hold two things at a time, and they
        can be objects or containers. I can grasp containers and put objects into them to hold more
        objects at a time.

        Assume that you are an excellent leader for coordinating the task. Given our shared goal,
        meta plan, dialogue history, latest progress, and my previous actions,, please help me
        generate a message sent to Bob, in order to share my progress and inquire the opinion of Bob
        about the meta plan. Note that a container can contain three objects, and will be lost once
        transported to the bed. I can only put objects into the container I hold after grasping it. All
        objects are denoted as <name> (id), such as <table> (712). Actions take several steps to
        finish. It may be costly to go to another room or transport to the bed, use these actions
        sparingly.

        The generated message should strictly meet following requirements:

        The message has to be concise, reliable, and helpful for assisting Bob and me to make an
        efficient and consistent action plan, and transport as many objects to the bed as possible.
        Don't generate repetitive messages.

        Here is an example of generated massage for you:

        Example:
        {Message: Hi Bob, I am exploring the <living room> (2000) and I found <apple> (1242543)
        there. I made an action plan to guide us to complete the task efficiently. Do you have any
        suggestions for the action plan according to your latest progress?}

        Following are provided information for you:

        Goal: \$GOAL\$

        Previous meta plan: \$PREVIOUS\_PLAN\$

        Dialogue history: \$DIALOGUE\_HISTORY\$

        Progress: \$PROGRESS\$

        Teammate progress: \$OPP\_PROGRESS\$


   Figure 10: Prompts for LLM in the communication module of the mentor agent, e.g., Alice.


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        I am Bob. My teammate Alice and I want to transport as many target objects as possible to
        the bed with the help of containers within 3000 steps. I can hold two things at a time, and they
        can be objects or containers. I can grasp containers and put objects into them to hold more
        objects at a time.
        Assume that you are an excellent leader for coordinating the task. Given our shared goal,
        action plan, dialogue history, progress, and my previous actions, please help me analyze the
        feasibility of the action plan proposed by Alice and generate a message to send to Alice. Note
        that a container can contain three objects, and will be lost once transported to the bed. I can
        only put objects into the container I hold after grasping it. All objects are denoted as <name>
        (id), such as <table> (712). Actions take several steps to finish. It may be costly to go to
        another room or transport to the bed, use these actions sparingly.
        The generated meta plan should strictly meet following requirements:

        1.The message has to be concise, reliable, and helpful for assisting Bob and me to make an
        efficient and consistent action plan, and transport as many objects to the bed as possible.
        Don't generate repetitive messages.

        2.The message must strictly be in the following format: {Main message: a detailed opinion
        and suggestions of Bob about the action plan. Satisfaction level: Yes or No, decide whether
        you are satisfied with the current action plan.} You should consider the progress of both Alice
        and Bob in determining the satisfaction level and providing suggestions for the action plan.
        3.If you are not satisfied with the current action plan, please point out the reason and your
        suggestion on how to modify the action plan in the message. You can suggest the next action
        for Alice in the message to achieve the goal as soon as possible.

        Here is an example of generated massage for you:
        Example:
        Message: { Main message: Hi Alice, your proposed action plan looks great. However,
        considering that I found an <wood\_basket> (1870213) and <plastic\_basket>(1843721) in
        the <office>(2000), I think I should grasp <wood\_basket> (1870213), I suggest you to go to
        <office>(2000) to grasp <plastic\_basket>(1843721). Please update the meta plan.
        Satisfaction level: No}

        Following are provided information for you:

        Goal: \$GOAL\$

        Previous meta plan: \$PREVIOUS\_PLAN\$

        Dialogue history: \$DIALOGUE\_HISTORY\$

        Progress: \$PROGRESS\$

        Teammate progress: \$OPP\_PROGRESS\$



   Figure 11: Prompts for LLM in the communication module of the teammate agent, e.g., Bob.


                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        I am Alice. My teammate Bob and I want to transport as many target objects as possible to
        the bed with the help of containers within 3000 steps. I can hold two things at a time, and they
        can be objects or containers. I can grasp containers and put objects into them to hold more
        objects at a time.

        Assume that you are an expert plan outline designer. Given our shared goal, previous meta
        plan, dialogue history, latest progress, please help me refine the meta plan into a more
        comprehensive and efficient plan for Bob and me, in order to achieve the goal collaboratively
        as soon as possible. Note that a container can contain three objects, and will be lost once
        transported to the bed. I can only put objects into the container I hold after grasping it. All
        objects are denoted as <name> (id), such as <table> (712). Actions take several steps to
        finish. It may be costly to go to another room or transport to the bed, use these actions
        sparingly.

        The generated meta plan should strictly meet following requirements:

        1.The meta plan should be brief, reliable, authentic, and consistent with the latest progress of
        Alice and Bob. Don’t make random and meaningless plans.

        2.There are 5 allowed actions you can use to construct the meta plan. 1) ‘go to’: move to a
        specified room. 2) ’explore’: explore a room for underlying target objects. 3) ‘ go grasp’: go
        to grasp a specified target object. 4) ‘put’: Place an object into a specified container. 5)
        ’transport’: Transport holding objects or containers to the bed and drop them on the bed.

        3.The meta plan must be structured strictly in a three-step format: {Action Plan: Step 1: Alice
        xxx, Bob xxx; Step 2: Alice xxx, Bob xxx; Step 3: Alice xxx, Bob xxx}. Here, 'xxx'
        represents one or multiple allowed actions. The actions in Step 1 are of the highest priority,
        while those in Step 2 and Step 3 are of medium and lowest priority, respectively.

        4.The meta plan should reasonably arrange the division of action between Alice and Bob in
        order to achieve the goal as soon as possible.


        Following are provided information for you:

        Goal: \$GOAL\$

        Previous meta plan: \$PREVIOUS\_PLAN\$

        Dialogue history: \$DIALOGUE\_HISTORY\$

        Progress: \$PROGRESS\$

        Teammate progress: \$OPP\_PROGRESS\$



Figure 12: Prompts for LLM in cooperative planning module to generate progress-adaptive meta
plan.


                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        I am \$AGENT\_NAME\$. My teammate \$OPP\_NAME\$ and I want to transport as many
        target objects as possible to the bed with the help of containers within 3000 steps. I can hold
        two things at a time, and they can be objects or containers. I can grasp containers and put
        objects into them to hold more objects at a time.

        Assume that you are an expert decision maker. Given our shared goal, action plan, my
        progress, and previous actions, please help me choose the best available action to achieve the
        goal as soon as possible. Note that a container can contain three objects, and will be lost once
        transported to the bed. I can only put objects into the container I hold after grasping it. All
        objects are denoted as <name> (id), such as <table> (712). Actions take several steps to
        finish. It may be costly to go to another room or transport to the bed, use these actions
        sparingly.

        Goal: \$GOAL\$

        Meta plan: \$META\_PLAN\$

        Dialogue history: \$DIALOGUE\_HISTORY\$

        Progress: \$PROGRESS\$

        Previous action: \$PREVIOUS\_ACTIONS\$

        Action list: \$ACTION\_LIST\$



                      Figure 13: Prompts for LLM in the plan praising module.


                                                       25
