Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


SMITE: S EGMENT M E I N T IM E
 Amirhossein Alimohammadi1 , Sauradip Nag1 , Saeid Asgari Taghanaki1,2 ,
 Andrea Tagliasacchi1,3,4 , Ghassan Hamarneh1 , Ali Mahdavi Amiri1
 1
   Simon Fraser University 2 Autodesk Research 3 University of Toronto 4 Google DeepMind

                                                                           Generalize to In-The-Wild Videos
         Annotate Few Exemplars


                                       Segmentation Video Frames
             Few RGB Images


              Annotate Segments


          Few Annotated Images



Figure 1: SMITE. Using only one or few segmentation references with fine granularity (left), our
method learns to segment different unseen videos respecting the segmentation references.

                                                                   A BSTRACT
         Segmenting an object in a video presents significant challenges. Each pixel must
         be accurately labeled, and these labels must remain consistent across frames. The
         difficulty increases when the segmentation is with arbitrary granularity, meaning
         the number of segments can vary arbitrarily, and masks are defined based on only
         one or a few sample images. In this paper, we address this issue by employing a
         pre-trained text to image diffusion model supplemented with an additional tracking
         mechanism. We demonstrate that our approach can effectively manage various
         segmentation scenarios and outperforms state-of-the-art alternatives. The project
         page is available at https://segment-me-in-time.github.io/.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Segmenting an object in a video poses a significant challenge in computer vision and graphics,
frequently employed in applications such as visual effects, surveillance, and autonomous driving.
However, segmentation is inherently complex due to variations in a single object (scale, deformations,
etc.), within the object class (shape, appearance), as well as imaging (lighting, viewpoint). In
addition, difficulty arises due to the segmentation requirements, such as its granularity (i.e., number
of segments), as demanded by the downstream tasks. For example, in face segmentation, one VFX
application might need to isolate the forehead for wrinkle removal, while another, such as head
tracking, might treat it as part of the whole face. Creating a comprehensive dataset for every possible
segmentation scenario to develop a supervised segmentation technique is extremely time-consuming
and labor-intensive. Therefore, there is a need to segment images or videos based on a reference
image. We call this type of segmentation flexible granularity.
When flexible granularity segmentation is applied on a large scale, it significantly improves down-
stream tasks such as VFX production, which involves managing numerous shots and videos. By


                                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


segmenting one or a few reference images only once and then using those images to segment any
video that features a target object of the same class, we can eliminate the need for separate segmen-
tation of each video, thereby making the process far more efficient. In this paper, we tackle the
challenge of video segmentation using one or few reference images that are not derived from the
video frames themselves. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, a few annotated images are provided as
references to our model, and our method, SMITE, successfully segments videos, exhibiting an object
from the same class, in the same level of granularity. Importantly, none of the frames from these
videos are included in the reference images, yet SMITE is capable of segmenting the videos with
objects that exhibit different colors, poses, and even occlusions. This is an important feature when
working with large-scale videos requiring consistent segmentation (such as VFX videos needing the
same enhancements), since there is no need for manual intervention to segment each video’s frames.
While recent work has explored flexible granularity segmentation for objects in images by leveraging
the semantic knowledge of pretrained text-to-image diffusion models Khani et al. (2024), the com-
plexity increases in videos. Ensuring label consistency across frames and managing instances where
image segmentation may fail to produce accurate results require additional considerations.
To tackle these challenges and achieve consistent segmentation across frames, we utilize the semantic
knowledge of pretrained text-to-image diffusion models, equipped with additional temporal attentions
to promote temporal consistency. We also propose a temporal voting mechanism by tracking and
projecting pixels over attention maps to maintain label consistency for each pixel. This approach
results in segmentations with significantly reduced flickering and noise compared to per-frame
segmentation methods while segments still follow the reference images thanks to our low-pass
regularization technique that ensure preserving the structure of segments provided by attention maps
and optimized according to the reference images.
Moreover, rather than simply optimizing a token for each segment Khani et al. (2024), we also
fine-tune cross-attentions to enhance segmentation accuracy and better align with the reference
images. Consequently, our method not only supports videos with temporal consistency but also
outperforms flexible granularity image segmentation techniques in segmenting a single image.
We validate our design choices and methodology through comprehensive experiments detailed in
the paper. As existing datasets with arbitrary semantic granularity are lacking, we introduce a small
dataset, SMITE-50, to demonstrate the superior performance of our method against baselines. Addi-
tionally, we conduct user studies that highlight our method’s effectiveness in terms of segmentation
accuracy and temporal consistency.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Part-based semantic segmentation. In computer vision, semantic segmentation, wherein a class
label is assigned to each pixel in an image, is an important task with several applications such as
scene parsing, autonomous systems, medical imaging, image editing, environmental monitoring,
and video analysis (Sohail et al., 2022; He et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2017a; Zhao et al., 2017; He
et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017b; Sandler et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018; Ravi et al., 2024). A more
fine-grained derivative of semantic segmentation is semantic part segmentation, which endeavors to
delineate individual components of objects rather than segmenting the entirety of objects. Despite
notable advancements in this domain (Li et al., 2023; 2022), a limitation of such methodologies is
their reliance on manually curated information specific to the object whose parts they aim to segment.
To solve the annotation problem, some works(Pan et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2024) proposed open-set
part segmentation frameworks, achieving category-agnostic part segmentation by disregarding part
category labels during training. Building on this, further works such as SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023),
Grounding-SAM (Ren et al., 2024) explored utilizing foundation models to assist in open-vocabulary
part segmentation. However, most of these methods can only segment the parts that are semantically
described by text. With the influx of Stable Diffusion (SD) based generative segmentation approaches
(Khani et al., 2024; Namekata et al., 2024), such issues have been partly solved by allowing SD
features to segment semantic parts at any level of detail, even if they cannot be described by text.
Despite such progress, applying such fine-grained segmentations on videos is challenging and
unexplored. Our proposed SMITE presents the first part-segmentations in videos wherein it segments
utilizing the part features from a pre-trained SD and generalizes it to any-in-the wild videos.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Video segmentation. Video segmentation methods can be categorized as video semantic segmentation
(VSS) (Zhu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023a;b; Li et al., 2024; Ke et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024),
video instance segmentation (VIS) (Yang et al., 2019) and video object segmentation (VOS) (Xie et al.,
2021a; Wang et al., 2021b; Cheng et al., 2021c;d; Bekuzarov et al., 2023). VSS and VIS extends
image segmentation to videos, assigning pixel labels across frames while maintaining temporal
consistency despite object deformations and camera motion. VOS, in contrast, focuses on tracking
and isolating specific objects throughout the video. Both tasks leverage temporal correlations through
techniques like temporal attention (Mao et al., 2021a; Wang et al., 2021a), optical flow (Xie et al.,
2021a; Zhu et al., 2017), and spatio-temporal memory (Wang et al., 2021b; Cheng & Schwing, 2022).
Recent efforts, such as UniVS (Li et al., 2024), proposes unified models for various segmentation
tasks, utilizing prior frame features as visual prompts. However, these methods struggle with fine-
grained part segmentation and generalization to unseen datasets (Zhang et al., 2023b). Bekuzarov et al.
(2023) leverage a spatio-temporal memory module and a frame selection mechanism to achieve high-
quality video part segmentation with partial annotations. However, it requires frame annotations from
the same video complicating video segmentation at scale. In contrast, we only need segmentation
references for a few arbitrary selected images and we can segment an unseen given video respecting
the segementation references. Therefore, per video manual annotation is not needed in our method.
Video diffusion models. Recently, diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020a;b) have
gained popularity due to their training stability and have been used in various text-to-image (T2I)
methods (Ramesh et al., 2021; 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Balaji et al., 2022), achieving impressive
results. Video generation (Le Moing et al., 2021; Ge et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023b; Cong et al.,
2023; Yu et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023) can be viewed as an extension of image generation with an
additional temporal dimension. Recent video generation models (Singer et al., 2022; Zhou et al.,
2022; Ge et al., 2023; Nag et al., 2023; Cong et al., 2024) attempt to extend successful text-to-image
generation models into the spatio-temporal domain by inflating the T2I UNet. VDM (Ho et al.,
2022) adopted this inflated UNet for denoising while LDM (Blattmann et al., 2023) implement video
diffusion models in the latent space. Video diffusion models can be categorized into inversion-based
and inversion-free methods. Inversion-based approaches (Cong et al., 2024; Jeong & Ye, 2023) use
DDIM inversion to control attention features ensuring temporal consistency, while inversion-free
methods (Zhang et al., 2023c) focus on more flexible conditioning, wider compatibility and better
generation quality. However, inversion-free methods can suffer from flickering due to a lack of DDIM
inversion guidance. Recent works (Wang et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2024) explored inversion-free T2V
diffusion models to segment objects in videos, but they fail to generate fine-grained segments and often
produce flickering segmentation results. Building on this, our method solves the seminal problem
of video part-segmentation which combines an inversion-free model coupled with point-tracking
algorithms (Karaev et al., 2023) to generate consistent, generalizable, flicker-free segmentations.

3     P RELIMINARIES
Latent diffusion models and WAS maps. Latent Diffusion Models perform the denoising operation
on the latent space of a pretrained image autoencoder. Each latent pixel corresponds to a patch
in the generated image. Starting from pure random noise  z_T  , at each timestep  t , the current noisy
latent  z_t  is passed through a denoising UNet \left (\epsilon _\theta \right ) , which is trained to predict the current noise
 \epsilon _\theta (z_t, y, t)  using text prompt  y . In each block, the UNet employs residual convolution layers to
generate intermediate features, which are then fed into attention layers. These attention layers
average various values based on pixel-specific weights. The cross-attention layers (denoted by Aca )
incorporate semantic contexts from the prompt encoding, whereas the self-attention layers (denoted
by Asa ) leverage global information from the latent representation itself. SLiMe (Khani et al., 2024)
demonstrated that text embeddings can be learned from a few images to segment other unseen images
by leveraging both cross attention and self-attention layers. In fact, each segment of an image is
linked with a text token that is optimized to align its associated cross-attention and self-attention maps
with the corresponding segment in the provided training image. For segmentations with multiple
levels of granularity, multiple tokens are optimized, with each token representing a distinct segment.
The optimization process of attention maps is captured in a novel representation called Weighted
Accumulated Self-Attention (WAS) map,  S_\text {WAS}  . This is defined as follows:
                                          \label {eq:1} S_\text {WAS} = \text {Sum}(\text {Flatten}(R_{ca}) \odot A_{sa}),    (1)
where Rca is the downsampled latent of Aca .


                                                                                3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Input Video
                                                                                        Text Embedding                                                                            SMITE Output


                                         Noise Addition
                                                                                       Noisy                        Inflated-Unet                          Inflated-Unet       ...
                                                                                    Video Latent

                                                                                                                     Mask Extractor                         Mask Extractor
                                                                  Noisy Video
                                                                                                                                                                        Argmax ( WAS )
                                                                                (b) DDIM Denoising                                    Segments (WAS Map)

                                                       Guidance
                                       Mask Tracking                            (c) Segment Tracking

                  Mask Extractor
                                                                                                                Segment Tracking and Voting
                                        UNet Denoiser
                                                                                                                                                                             Temporal Consistency
                                                                                   Untracked Segments                                              Tracked Segments

                                                           Noisy Latent         (d) Low Frequency Regularizer
Segmented Video                           Text Embedding
                                                                                                          DCT                       DCT

                                                                                                         Low Pass                 Low Pass
                                                                                                           Filter
                                   (a) SMITE Pipeline                            Reference Segment
                                                                                                                                    Filter
                                                                                                                                              Predicted Segment
                                                                                                                                                                             Spatial Consistency


Figure 2: SMITE pipeline. During inference (a), we invert a given video into a noisy latent by
iteratively adding noise. We then use an inflated U-Net denoiser (b) along with the trained text
embedding as input to denoise the segments. A tracking module ensures that the generated segments
are spatially and temporally consistent via spatio-temporal guidance. The video latent zt is updated by
a tracking energy Etrack (c) that makes the segments temporally consistent and also a low-frequency
regularizer (d) Ereg which guides the model towards better spatial consistency.


Inflated UNet. A T2I diffusion model, such as LDM (Rombach et al., 2022), usually utilizes
a U-Net(Ronneberger et al., 2015) architecture, which involves a downsampling phase, followed
by an upsampling with skip connections. The architecture consists of layered 2D convolutional
residual blocks, spatial attention blocks, and cross-attention blocks that incorporate textual prompt
embeddings. To extend the T2I model for T2V tasks, the convolutional residual blocks and spatial
attention blocks are inflated. Following earlier approaches (Cong et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2022), the
3 × 3 convolution kernels in the residual blocks are adjusted to 1 × 3 × 3 by introducing a pseudo
temporal channel. To enhance the temporal coherence, we further extend the spatial self-attention
mechanism to the spatio-temporal domain. The original spatial self-attention method focused on
patches within a single frame. However, in inflated UNet, we use all patch embeddings from the
entire video as the queries, keys, and values. This allows for a full understanding of the video’s
context. Additionally, we reuse the parameters from the original spatial attention blocks in the new
dense spatio-temporal attention blocks.


4      M ETHOD

Here, we first introduce and formalize our method (SMITE) designed for achieving temporally
consistent video segmentation with varying levels of granularity, guided by one or more reference
images (Sec. 4.1). To achieve this and capture fine-grained segments, we first propose a new training
strategy applied on the inflated UNet (Sec. 4.2). The segmentation obtained from the inflated UNet
may lack temporal consistency. To address this, we employ a voting mechanism guided by a tracking
method that is projected onto the attention maps. However, relying solely on tracking to adjust the
segments might lead to deviations from the provided samples. To mitigate this, we incorporate a
frequency-based regularization technique to maintain detailed segmentations across frames (Sec. 4.3).
Since tracking and frequency-based regularization may pull the segmentation in different directions,
we use a energy based guidance optimization technique to balance both approaches (Sec. 4.4).

4.1      P ROBLEM S ETTING

Problem statement. Given one or few images, In ∈ RH×W ×3 , of a subject, along with its segment
annotations Yn = {Yni |i = 1 : K} where Y i denotes binary segment mask i, and n and K are
respectively the number of images and segments. Our objective is to learn temporally consistent
                                                M
segments of the subject for a given video V = {vj=1 } where vj represents video frames.
Our framework. We use Stable Diffusion’s (SD) semantic knowledge to learn the segments defined
by few images and then generalize them to the video of the subject in any pose, color or size. This


                                                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


implies that the model needs to share information across frames to enforce temporal consistency.
Differently from the UNet structure used in Khani et al. (2024), we apply an inflation to the T2I
models across the temporal dimension (Wu et al., 2022) to enable temporal attention across all video
frames. Also, we incorporate a tracking module combined with low-frequency regularization to
enhance spatio-temporal consistency across frames. The overall inference pipeline of our model,
SMITE, is illustrated in Fig 2.

4.2    L EARNING GENERALIZABLE SEGMENTS

We first learn segments provided by the reference images of the subject by optimizing a text embedding
for each segment of the reference images that can be used for segmenting the given videos. We
also fine tune the cross attentions of the SD to better match the provided segments since the text
embeddings alone may not be able to fully capture the masks’ details.
Learning text embeddings. We begin by passing the reference images I and text embeddings T into
into SMITE (denoted by ψ(.)) . Similar to SLiMe (Khani et al., 2024), we obtain image resolution
WAS maps (denoted by S) from our inflated UNet as follows:
                                       \mathcal {S} = \psi _{\theta }(\mathcal {I},\mathcal {T}) \hspace {0.1in} \text {,} \hspace {0.1in} \hat {Y} = argmax(\mathcal {S}),    (2)
where θ represents the learnable parameters of the model and S is defined the same as Eq. 1. Text
embeddings T , which are initialized randomly or with the names of segments, correspond to segment
               1      2           K
masks S = [SWAS    , SWAS , ..., SWAS ], and Ŷ is the segmentation output. Since the inflated UNet is
designed for videos, we pass reference images in I to ψ(.) as videos with a single frame. Together
with the ground-truth mask Y, we find the optimized text embeddings, T ∗ , that are correlated with
the segments in S.
                                                                 w/ Text Optimization w/ Text + CrossAttn. Optimization
Network fine-tuning. Only learning text embeddings
fails to capture complex granularities. To extract more cus-
tomizable fine-grained segments from the video, we need
to fine-tune the existing SD weights (denoted by θ) using
the available provided segment annotations. As shown
in the inset figure, optimizing solely the text embeddings
struggles with asymmetrical segmentation (e.g., segment-
ing only one eye). We hypothesize that such issues arises
because the model may get stuck in local minima when relying exclusively on text embeddings for
optimization. To mitigate this, we update the cross-attention layers Aca in the UNet along with
the text-embedding but do so in two phases. First, the model is frozen, while the text embeddings
corresponding to the segments denoted by T are optimized using a high learning rate. Thus, an initial
embedding (T ∗ ) is achieved quickly without detracting from the generality of the model, which
then serves as a good starting point for the next phase. Second, we unfreeze the cross-attention
weights and optimize them along with the text embeddings, using a significantly lower learning
rate. This gentle fine-tuning of the cross-attention and the embeddings enables faithful generation of
segmentation masks with varied granularity. For both training phases, we use the same combination
of losses (LCE , LMSE and LLDM ) used in SLiMe (Khani et al., 2024). This results in an optimized
SMITE model (denoted by Ψ∗θ ) generating generalizable segment across different videos.

4.3    T EMPORAL C ONSISTENCY

To enhance temporal consistency, we use temporal attention in SMITE’s Inflated UNet denoiser.
While it improves temporal consistency compared to independent frame processing (Fig 3(a)),
inconsistencies remain due to the need for segmenting at different granularities, often with imprecise
boundaries. These inconsistencies can cause flickering or unnatural transitions (Fig 3(b)).
Segment tracking and voting. The first step to ensure segment consistency is tracking the segments
across time. Point tracking methods like CoTracker (Karaev et al., 2023) are well-suited for our
approach because they use point correspondences to minimize pixel drift over time. However, since
our segments come from attention maps, tracking needs to occur directly on these maps. Since
CoTracker is trained on spatial domains, we first apply CoTracker (denoted by P) on the frames
of video V bidirectionally as {X, Y } = P(V) where X, Y are set of tracked pixel coordinates. To
project these tracking onto the the attention maps, we use a sclaing operator ϕ(.) and linearly scale the


                                                                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Before Refinement
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Tracking Nose Part
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Wrong Class


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Co-Tracker

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          F
                                                                                                                                                              Face Prob.                 0.2             0.7           0.4    0.1             Pixel Logits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                              Nose Prob.                 0.8              0.3          0.6        0.9
                                  Segment Tracking and Voting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Majority Voting

                                                                                                                                                              Face Prob. 0.2                             0.2           0.4    0.1
                                                                                                                                                              Nose Prob.                 0.8              0.8          0.6        0.9          Replaced
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Logits
     After Refinement


                                                                                                                                                                                                     Corrected Class


Figure 4: Segment tracking module ensures that segments are consistent across time. It uses co-
tracker to track each point of the object’s segment (here it is nose) and then finds point correspondence
of this segment (denoted by blue dots) across timesteps. When the tracked point is of a different class
(e.g,. face) then it is recovered by using temporal voting. The misclassified pixel is then replaced
by the average of the neighbouring pixels of adjacent frames. This results are temporally consistent
segments without visible flickers.

pixel trajectories onto the attention space. We process the entire video in a temporal sliding window
fashion having window length w. For each of such temporal window, we then leverage the projected
trajectories and update the attention pixel’s label based on the most frequent label it receives across
the visible frames in the window. Formally, for a pixel with coordinates (xt , yt ) on the attention map
latent at timestep t, its coordinates on all subsequent latents in the window can be derived from the
tracker. The coordinates are linked, and the trajectory sequence can be presented as:
                                        \{(x_{t-\frac {w}{2}},y_{t-\frac {w}{2}}), ...,(x_{t},y_{t}),...,(x_{t+\frac {w}{2}},y_{t+\frac {w}{2}})\} = \phi (\mathcal {P}(\mathcal {V})), \hspace {0.1in}                                                      (3)
We choose the point corresponding to the center frame of the window (xt , yt ) as the first point and
leverage bidirectional correspondences within the window. Each of these trajectory points (x, y) is
assigned a segment label Ŷ . However, certain pixels in the window may disappear and reappear over
time as shown in Fig 4. To handle such scenarios, we discard labels for which the tracking pixel is
invisible and then use temporal voting to update its segment labels. Therefore, we update the WAS
maps (denoted by SWAS ) corresponding to the tracking pixel (xt , yt ) and use the following formula
to assign the labels:
                           \mathcal {S}_{\text {Tracked}}(x_{t},y_{t}) = \text {Avg}(\mathcal {S}(x_{l},y_{l}) \mid \hat {Y}(x_{l},y_{l}) = F) \hspace {0.1in} \forall l \in (t-\frac {w}{2},t+\frac {w}{2}),                                                (4)
where F denotes the most frequent label in the window.
After correcting the unstable pixel tracking over
multiple-step denoising, we obtain a consistent set of
segments (Stracked ). Note that the window size w is
small (e.g, seven), hence to track the segments for the
entire video, we need to slide the windows and track
in an iterative fashion. More details are provided in
the supplementary material.
Intuitively, if we would have relied only on cross-
attention for segmentation, we could have adjusted it
directly to align with the tracking output. However,
since segments S are derived from the combination
of cross and self-attention, direct manipulation is
challenging. To tackle this, we propose an energy
function to measure how well the segments before
tracking (denoted by S) align with the segments after
correcting (denoted by Stracked ) it using temporal                                                                                                                      Figure 3: Video best viewed in Acrobat.
voting. This energy is defined as:
                                                                                        \label {eq:track} \mathcal {E}_{\text {Tracking}} = \textit {CE}(\text {S}, \text {S}_{\text {tracked}}),                                                            (5)
where CE(.) represents cross-entropy objective. This optimization ensures that the segment drift is
corrected throughout the video to make it temporally consistent with low flicker.
Low-pass regularization. When tracking is applied, label modifications should be repeated through
several denoising steps to ensure full temporal label propagation and achieve better consistency.


                                                                                                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This process may cause deviations (Fig 3) from the original segmentation provided by the reference
images that is captured in the segments (S) in the initial denoising step. Our goal is to preserve the
overall structure of the segments S from the WAS maps while smoothing boundary transitions for
temporal consistency via tracking (refer to Fig 8). Low Pass Filters (LPF) have been effective in
video generation to maintain temporal correlations and spatial frame structure (Wu et al., 2023; Si
et al., 2024). Therefore, we use an LPF on the finally denoised segments S ensuring the structure of
the LPF on the segments S predicted in the initial denoising step (denoted by Sref ) is respected by
the following function:
                                       \mathcal {E}_{\text {Reg}} = \left \| \omega (\mathcal {S}) - \omega (\mathcal {S}_{ref}) \right \|_1  (6)
where ω(S) = Hl ⊙ DCT3D (S), DCT3D refers to Discrete Cosine Transform and Hl refers to an
LPF. This ensures that the segments structure is progressively corrected across the video frames at
the end of the denoising phase as illustrated in Fig 3.

4.4     S PATIO -T EMPORAL G UIDANCE

Our overall energy function is minimized at test time by backpropagating through the diffusion pro-
cess, as described in Chen et al. (2023a); Safaee et al. (2023), which updates the latent representation
to achieve more consistent segmentation over time:
                                             \mathcal {E}_{\text {Total}} = \lambda _{\text {Tracking}} \cdot \mathcal {E}_{\text {Tracking}} + \lambda _{\text {Reg}} \cdot \mathcal {E}_{\text {Reg}},    (7)
where λTracking and λReg are the coefficients for the tracking and reference loss functions, respectively.
We have two different energy functions: ETracking which reduces flicker and ensures segment consis-
tency over time, while EReg which maintains correct semantics while preventing segment drift. Thus,
optimizing ETotal encourages better spatial and temporal consistency in the WAS attention maps (S).
Specifically, we update the latent zt using gradient descent on ETotal :
                                                                       z_t' \leftarrow z_t - \alpha _t \cdot \nabla _{z_t} \mathcal {E}_{Total},                                                            (8)
where αt is the learning rate. Results indicate that this strategy leads to superior performance
compared to when we either omit the voting mechanism or do not apply low-pass regularization.

5     R ESULTS AND E XPERIMENTS
Dataset and benchmark. To evaluate our method, we introduce a benchmark dataset called SMITE-
50, primarily sourced from Pexels. SMITE-50 features multi-granularity annotations and includes
visually challenging scenarios such as pose changes and occlusions. To our knowledge, no existing
datasets focus exclusively on multi-granular and multi-segment annotations. While the PumaVOS
dataset Bekuzarov et al. (2023) contains a limited number of multi-part annotated videos across a
diverse range, it does not offer multiple videos for specific granularities and categories.
We focus on three main categories: (a) Horses, (b) Human
Faces, and (c) Cars, encompassing 41 videos. Each sub-
set includes ten segmented reference images for training
and densely annotated videos for testing. The granularity
varies from human eyes to animal heads, etc. relevant for
various applications such as VFX (see Fig. 5). All seg-
ments are labeled consistently with the part names used in
existing datasets. Additionally, we provide nine challeng-
ing videos featuring faces with segments that cannot be
described textually, as shown in Fig. 3 (Non-Text). Over-
all, our dataset comprises 50 video clips, each at least five
seconds long. For dense annotations, we followed a simi-
lar approach to (Ding et al., 2023; Bekuzarov et al., 2023),
creating masks for every fifth frame with an average of six   Figure 5: SMITE-50 Dataset sample.
parts per frame across three granularity types (more info in Appendix). While PumaVOS dataset
Bekuzarov et al. (2023) has 8% annotations, our SMITE-50 dataset has 20% dense annotations.
Evaluation protocol. In our setting, few reference images per class are used to train SMITE and
then it is evaluated on videos from the same categories but not the same objects in the training data.


                                                                                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     RGB Video
     Baseline-I
     GSAM2
     Ours


Figure 6: Visual comparisons with other methods demonstrate that SMITE maintains better motion
consistency of segments and delivers cleaner, more accurate segmentations. Both GSAM2 and
Baseline-I struggle to accurately capture the horse’s mane, and GSAM2 misses one leg (Left),
whereas our method yields more precise results. Additionally, both alternative techniques create
artifacts around the chin (Right), while SMITE produces a cleaner segmentation.


For all the cases, we report the standard metrics (higher is better): Mean Intersection Over Union
(mIOU), and Contour Accuracy Fmeasure respectively.
Quantitative comparison. Since there are no available few-shot video part segmentation methods
that can be applied to our setting, we build the multiple baselines for quantitative comparison. First,
a few-shot image segmentation based approach, in which SLiMe (Khani et al., 2024) is applied to
the video frame-by-frame. We term this as Baseline-I. Second, Grounded SAM2 (Ren et al., 2024;
Ravi et al., 2024), a recently introduced zero-shot foundation model for video segmentation approach
which is applied directly on the video. For Baseline-I, we applied the same training procedure and
used SMITE-50 dataset. Another baseline, Baseline-II is to use SLiMe and CoTracker simultaneously.
However, directly applying tracking in the pixel space does not produce improved results, as it can
lead to drift in segmentation. In contrast, SMITE leverages tracking on the attention maps, focusing
on where the object and its parts are located, which minimizes the impact of pixel color shifts.
Additionally, we have incorporated a regularization mechanism into our tracking process to further
mitigate such drifts, ensuring alignment with the true semantic segmentations. We have also provided
another baseline, Baseline-III, which is the modification of SLiMe by only changing its UNet to the
Inflated UNet. As shown in Tab. 1, our method produces the most accurate results compared to other
baselines across all categories and metrics.
Generally, XMem++ (Bekuzarov et al., 2023) cannot be utilized in our setting since we do not want
to use any frames from the provided video. However, in the Appendix, we included a comparison
with XMem++ on a subset of their proposed dataset PUMaVOS with flexible granularity to provide a
contrast and show that our method is effective on datasets beyond SMITE-50. Although XMem++
is a semi-supervised technique, our method performs comparably and even outperforms it with
fewer frames (e.g., a single shot). When XMem++ is given more frames per video (e.g., 10), its
performance slightly surpasses ours, which is expected since SMITE does not require any substantial
video pre-training. However, with a smaller number of frames (e.g., one or five), our method either
outperforms or matches the performance of XMem++. Additionally, we report our performance
on the image segmentation task in the Appendix, showing that we outperform SLiME (Baseline-I),
highlighting the effectiveness of our design choices, including the cross attention optimization.
Qualitative comparisons. Qualitative comparisons are presented in Fig. 6. GSAM2 struggles to
locate the boundaries accurately and produces coarse segments. SLiMe can usually segment the
first frame accurately but struggles to preserve temporal consistency. Our method produces the best
segmentation maps in terms of segmentation quality and temporal consistency. The maps have sharper
boundaries and clean clusters compared to other methods. Our SMITE performs better than its SLiMe
counterpart. In Fig. 7, we present results from other categories, demonstrating the versatility of


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Quantitative evaluation on SMITE-50 dataset. The results are presented for each category
(Face, Horse, Car, Non-Text) having 10 reference image during training.
                        Faces         Horses             Cars          Non-Text           Mean
     Methods
                    Fmeas. mIOU    Fmeas. mIOU      Fmeas. mIOU      Fmeas. mIOU      Fmeas. mIOU
     Baseline-I     0.81 72.95     0.64 65.48       0.57 61.38       0.67 66.69       0.67 66.62
     Baseline-II    0.78 71.08     0.62 64.01       0.65 61.95       0.65 64.96       0.67 65.50
     Baseline-III   0.82 73.25     0.64 67.48       0.70 68.49       0.66 68.22       0.70 69.36
     GSAM2          0.73 63.28     0.76 72.76       0.64 63.56         -      -       0.71 66.53
     Ours           0.89 77.28     0.79 75.09       0.82 75.10       0.77 73.08       0.82 75.14


Table 2: Network Ablation on SMITE-50 dataset. Ablations on the entire SMITE-50 dataset. We
respectively show the impact of inflated UNet (IUNet), cross attention tuning (CA Tuning), Tracking,
and Low-pass (LP) regularization.
    Method   Baseline I (SLiMe)   +IUNet (Baseline III)   +CA Tuning     +Tracking   +LP Reg (SMITE)
    mIOU           66.22                 69.36              71.70          72.64          75.14


our model in handling various object categories. As shown, despite significant differences in pose,
expression, gender, and other properties between the video and the annotated images, our method
still delivers high-quality results. This is particularly evident in the pineapple example, where the
object is cut in half, yet the method successfully tracks it and produces accurate segmentation. More
qualitative results are provided in Appendix 7.4.
Ablation study. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our design choices, we conducted a comprehen-
sive ablation study showing the impact of each component of our method one by one on the entire
SMITE-50 dataset. Tab. 2 shows that our final setting provides the highest accuracy while the impact
of each component is noticeable. Note that the low-frequency regularization (LP Reg) helps maintain
spatial structure and prevents segment drift when tracking is applied to SW AS . Without tracking, LP
Reg has minimal effect since no segment drift occurs in WAS maps (thus change of energy in EReg is
almost zero), so we do not ablate LP Reg separately without tracking. We have also performed an
ablation on the number of training images illustrated in Tab. 3. As expected the accuracy improves
when the number of training samples increases.
User study. We conduct a user study because human judgment is best for assessing perception
when both temporal consistency and faithfulness to segmentations are important. We collected 16
segmented videos (4 from Non-Text category) and asked 25 participants to rank the methods (i.e.,
1 best and 5 worst) based on segmentation quality (i.e., fidelity to the segmentation reference) and
motion consistency (i.e., reduced flicker), encouraging them to prioritize segmentation quality in
their evaluations in terms of a tie in motion consistency. We do not report the scores of GSAM2 on
Non-Text segments as the segments in the videos are not describable by texts. Tab. 4 demonstrates
that SMITE achieves higher preference both for textual and non-textual segmentation.


Table 3: Few shot ablation on SMITE-50. The Table 4: User study. We are ranked the best for
performance increases with more training images both textual and Non-Text classes.
but still performs well in one shot setting.                        Motion Consistency
                                                    Methods
                                                                         Horse, Car, Face   Non-Text
                                                          Baseline-I          3.59            2.41
       Training sample #             mIOU                 Baseline-II         3.42            3.24
             1-shot                  58.55                Baseline-III        2.98            3.32
             5-shot                  73.88                GSAM2               3.37              -
            10-shot                  75.14                Ours                1.46            1.03



6    C ONCLUSION , L IMITATIONS , F UTURE W ORK
In this work, we introduce SMITE, a video segmentation technique that supports flexible granularity
segmentation of objects within a video. SMITE leverages the semantic knowledge of a pre-trained


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                        Video Segment Generalization
                Reference Annotation


    Faces


                         =
    Penguin
    Cars


                         =
    Pineapple


Figure 7: Additional results. We visualize the generalization capability of SMITE model (trained on
the reference images) in various challenging poses, shape, and even in cut-shapes.


text-to-image diffusion model to segment a video with minimal additional training (i.e., only a few
images), while utilizing the temporal consistency of the video to maintain motion consistency within
the segments. Notably, SMITE can be trained with a few images that are not necessarily from the
video, yet it effectively segments objects within an unseen video. To better show the capabilities of
our method, we also collected a flexible granularity dataset called SMITE-50 that will be publicly
available along with our code. Through various quantitative and qualitative experiments, as well
as user studies, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our method and its components. However, our
method still faces limitations that motivate future work. Firstly, although, our regularization ensures
that tracking does not dominate the segmentation process or deviate from the anticipated semantic
segmentations, since SMITE utilizes an off-the-shelf tracking technique, its tracking mechanism
and voting system are still limited by the performance of the underlying tracking system to some
extent. Secondly, the generation of WAS maps involves the use of low-resolution cross-attention
mechanisms, which may result in reduced accuracy when segmenting fine details or small segments,
such as tiny strings or minor components. Thirdly, it cannot offer an interactive segmentation since
it involves the diffusion and optimization processes. In this work, we did not particularly focus on
optimizing training and inference time but this can be an interesting future work.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada (NSERC) Discovery Grant. We sincerely thank Pouria Laghaee for his invalu-
able contributions and assistance in dataset annotation. We also appreciate the support of Helena
Dehkharghanian, Ali Mohammadzade Shabestari, Soniya Almasi, and Fatemeh Kamani in the
annotation process.

R EFERENCES
Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Karsten Kreis, Miika Aittala,
  Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, et al. ediffi: Text-to-image diffusion models with an
  ensemble of expert denoisers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01324, 2022.
Dmitry Baranchuk, Ivan Rubachev, Andrey Voynov, Valentin Khrulkov, and Artem Babenko. Label-
 efficient semantic segmentation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.03126, 2021.
Maksym Bekuzarov, Ariana Bermudez, Joon-Young Lee, and Hao Li. Xmem++: Production-level
 video segmentation from few annotated frames. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
 Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 635–644, 2023.
Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler, and
  Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion models.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  22563–22575, 2023.
Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Iasonas Kokkinos, Kevin Murphy, and Alan L Yuille.
  Deeplab: Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully
  connected crfs. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 40(4):834–848,
  2017a.
Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Florian Schroff, and Hartwig Adam. Rethinking atrous
  convolution for semantic image segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05587, 2017b.
Liang-Chieh Chen, Yukun Zhu, George Papandreou, Florian Schroff, and Hartwig Adam. Encoder-
  decoder with atrous separable convolution for semantic image segmentation. In Proceedings of the
  European conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 801–818, 2018.
Minghao Chen, Iro Laina, and Andrea Vedaldi. Training-free layout control with cross-attention
 guidance. 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.03373.
Shoufa Chen, Mengmeng Xu, Jiawei Ren, Yuren Cong, Sen He, Yanping Xie, Animesh Sinha, Ping
  Luo, Tao Xiang, and Juan-Manuel Perez-Rua. Gentron: Delving deep into diffusion transformers
  for image and video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.04557, 2023b.
Xianjie Chen, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Xiaobai Liu, Sanja Fidler, Raquel Urtasun, and Alan Yuille.
  Detect what you can: Detecting and representing objects using holistic models and body parts. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1971–1978,
  2014.
Yi-Wen Chen, Xiaojie Jin, Xiaohui Shen, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Video salient object detection via
  contrastive features and attention modules. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on
  Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 2022.
Hao-Kang Cheng, Yu-Wing Tai, and Chi-Keung Tang. Modular interactive video object segmentation:
  Interaction-to-mask, propagation, and difference-aware fusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021a.
Hao-Kang Cheng, Yu-Wing Tai, and Chi-Keung Tang. Rethinking space-time networks with improved
  memory coverage for efficient video object segmentation. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021b.
Ho Kei Cheng and Alexander G Schwing. Xmem: Long-term video object segmentation with an
  atkinson-shiffrin memory model. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 640–658.
  Springer, 2022.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ho Kei Cheng, Yu-Wing Tai, and Chi-Keung Tang. Modular interactive video object segmentation:
  Interaction-to-mask, propagation and difference-aware fusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5559–5568, 2021c.
Ho Kei Cheng, Yu-Wing Tai, and Chi-Keung Tang. Rethinking space-time networks with improved
  memory coverage for efficient video object segmentation. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 34:11781–11794, 2021d.
Suhwan Cho, Minhyeok Lee, Seunghoon Lee, Chaewon Park, Donghyeong Kim, and Sangyoun Lee.
  Treating motion as option to reduce motion dependency in unsupervised video object segmentation.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV),
  2023.
Yuren Cong, Jinhui Yi, Bodo Rosenhahn, and Michael Ying Yang. Ssgvs: Semantic scene graph-to-
  video synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR) Workshops, pp. 2554–2564, June 2023.
Yuren Cong, Mengmeng Xu, Christian Simon, Shoufa Chen, Jiawei Ren, Yanping Xie, Juan-Manuel
  Perez-Rua, Bodo Rosenhahn, Tao Xiang, and Sen He. Flatten: optical flow-guided attention for
  consistent text-to-video editing. 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.05922.
Zhenqi Dai, Ting Liu, Xingxing Zhang, Yunchao Wei, and Yanning Zhang. One-shot in-context part
  segmentation. In ACM Multimedia 2024, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=0mxBMxL9iM.
Henghui Ding, Chang Liu, Shuting He, Xudong Jiang, Philip HS Torr, and Song Bai. Mose: A
  new dataset for video object segmentation in complex scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 20224–20234, 2023.
Jiaqing Fan, Tiankang Su, Kaihua Zhang, and Qingshan Liu. Bidirectionally learning dense spatio-
   temporal feature propagation network for unsupervised video object segmentation. In Proceedings
   of the ACM International Conference on Multimedia (ACM MM), 2022.
Songwei Ge, Thomas Hayes, Harry Yang, Xi Yin, Guan Pang, David Jacobs, Jia-Bin Huang, and
  Devi Parikh. Long video generation with time-agnostic vqgan and time-sensitive transformer. In
  European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 102–118. Springer, 2022.
Songwei Ge, Seungjun Nah, Guilin Liu, Tyler Poon, Andrew Tao, Bryan Catanzaro, David Jacobs,
  Jia-Bin Huang, Ming-Yu Liu, and Yogesh Balaji. Preserve your own correlation: A noise prior for
  video diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10474, 2023.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Mask r-cnn. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 2961–2969, 2017.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J.
  Fleet. Video diffusion models, 2022.
Hyeonho Jeong and Jong Chul Ye. Ground-a-video: Zero-shot grounded video editing using text-to-
  image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01107, 2023.
Ge-Peng Ji, Keren Fu, Zhe Wu, Deng-Ping Fan, Jianbing Shen, and Ling Shao. Full-duplex strategy
  for video object segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Nikita Karaev, Ignacio Rocco, Benjamin Graham, Natalia Neverova, Andrea Vedaldi, and Christian
  Rupprecht. Cotracker: It is better to track together. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07635, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lei Ke, Martin Danelljan, Henghui Ding, Yu-Wing Tai, Chi-Keung Tang, and Fisher Yu. Mask-free
  video instance segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22857–22866, 2023.

Aliasghar Khani, Saeid Asgari Taghanaki, Aditya Sanghi, Ali Mahdavi Amiri, and Ghassan Hamarneh.
  Slime: Segment like me. ICLR 2024, 2024.

Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.

Guillaume Le Moing, Jean Ponce, and Cordelia Schmid. Ccvs: context-aware controllable video
  synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:14042–14055, 2021.

Youngjo Lee, Hongje Seong, and Euntai Kim. Iteratively selecting an easy reference frame makes
  unsupervised video object segmentation easier. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence (AAAI), 2022.

Boyi Li, Kilian Q Weinberger, Serge Belongie, Vladlen Koltun, and Rene Ranftl. Language-driven
  semantic segmentation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=RriDjddCLN.

Minghan Li, Shuai Li, Xindong Zhang, and Lei Zhang. Univs: Unified and universal video segmenta-
 tion with prompts as queries. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3227–3238, 2024.

Xiangtai Li, Shilin Xu, Yibo Yang, Haobo Yuan, Guangliang Cheng, Yunhai Tong, Zhouchen Lin, and
  Dacheng Tao. Panopticpartformer++: A unified and decoupled view for panoptic part segmentation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00954, 2023.

Yunchao Liang, Xia Li, Nima Jafari, and Jianbing Chen. Video object segmentation with adaptive
  feature bank and uncertain-region refinement. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.

Daizong Liu, Dongdong Yu, Changhu Wang, and Pan Zhou. F2net: Learning to focus on the
  foreground for unsupervised video object segmentation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2021.

Zhengxiong Luo, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Yan Huang, Liang Wang, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao,
  Jingren Zhou, and Tieniu Tan. Videofusion: Decomposed diffusion models for high-quality
  video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 10209–10218, 2023.

Yunyao Mao, Ning Wang, Wengang Zhou, and Houqiang Li. Joint inductive and transductive learning
  for video object segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
  computer vision, pp. 9670–9679, 2021a.

Yuxin Mao, Ning Wang, Wengang Zhou, and Houqiang Li. Joint inductive and transductive learning
  for video object segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021b.

Sauradip Nag, Xiatian Zhu, Jiankang Deng, Yi-Zhe Song, and Tao Xiang. Difftad: Temporal action
  detection with proposal denoising diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10362–10374, 2023.

Koichi Namekata, Amirmojtaba Sabour, Sanja Fidler, and Seung Wook Kim. Emerdiff: Emerging
  pixel-level semantic knowledge in diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.11739, 2024.

Seoung Wug Oh, Joon-Young Lee, Ning Xu, and Seon Joo Kim. Video object segmentation using
  space-time memory networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tai-Yu Pan, Qing Liu, Wei-Lun Chao, and Brian Price. Towards open-world segmentation of parts.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  15392–15401, 2023.

Gensheng Pei, Fumin Shen, Yazhou Yao, Guo-Sen Xie, Zhenmin Tang, and Jinhui Tang. Hierarchical
  feature alignment network for unsupervised video object segmentation. In Proceedings of the
  European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022.

Federico Perazzi, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Brian McWilliams, Luc Van Gool, Markus Gross, and Alexander
  Sorkine-Hornung. A benchmark dataset and evaluation methodology for video object segmentation.
  In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.

Jordi Pont-Tuset, Federico Perazzi, Sergi Caelles, Pablo Arbeláez, Alexander Sorkine-Hornung, and
  Luc Van Gool. The 2017 davis challenge on video object segmentation. arXiv: Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, 2017.

Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.

Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham
  Khedr, Roman Rädle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Eric Mintun, Junting Pan, Kalyan Vasudev
  Alwala, Nicolas Carion, Chao-Yuan Wu, Ross Girshick, Piotr Dollár, and Christoph Feichtenhofer.
  Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2408.00714.

Sucheng Ren, Wenxi Liu, Yongtuo Liu, Haoxin Chen, Guoqiang Han, and Shengfeng He. Reciprocal
  transformations for unsupervised video object segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.

Tianhe Ren, Shilong Liu, Ailing Zeng, Jing Lin, Kunchang Li, He Cao, Jiayu Chen, Xinyu Huang,
  Yukang Chen, Feng Yan, et al. Grounded sam: Assembling open-world models for diverse visual
  tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14159, 2024.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.

Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention–MICCAI
  2015: 18th international conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceedings, part III
  18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.

Mehdi Safaee, Aryan Mikaeili, Or Patashnik, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Ali Mahdavi-Amiri. Clic:
 Concept learning in context. 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.17083.

Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.

Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, Menglong Zhu, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Liang-Chieh Chen. Mo-
 bilenetv2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
 computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4510–4520, 2018.

Christian Schmidt, Ali Athar, Sabarinath Mahadevan, and Bastian Leibe. D2conv3d: Dynamic
  dilated convolutions for object segmentation in videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter
  Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 2022.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hyeonseob Seong, Seoung Wug Oh, Joon-Young Lee, Seoung Wug Lee, Seokju Lee, and Euntai
  Kim. Hierarchical memory matching network for video object segmentation. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Chenyang Si, Ziqi Huang, Yuming Jiang, and Ziwei Liu. Freeu: Free lunch in diffusion u-net.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  4733–4743, 2024.
Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
  Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video
  data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792, 2022.
Ali Sohail, Naeem A Nawaz, Asghar Ali Shah, Saim Rasheed, Sheeba Ilyas, and Muhammad Khurram
  Ehsan. A systematic literature review on machine learning and deep learning methods for semantic
  segmentation. IEEE Access, 2022.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020a.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020b.
Tiankang Su, Huihui Song, Dong Liu, Bo Liu, and Qingshan Liu. Unsupervised video object
  segmentation with online adversarial self-tuning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 688–698, 2023.
Nontawat Tritrong, Pitchaporn Rewatbowornwong, and Supasorn Suwajanakorn. Repurposing gans
  for one-shot semantic part segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4475–4485, 2021.
Hao Wang, Weining Wang, and Jing Liu. Temporal memory attention for video semantic segmentation.
  In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 2254–2258. IEEE, 2021a.
Haochen Wang, Xiaolong Jiang, Haibing Ren, Yao Hu, and Song Bai. Swiftnet: Real-time video
  object segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 1296–1305, 2021b.
Qian Wang, Abdelrahman Eldesokey, Mohit Mendiratta, Fangneng Zhan, Adam Kortylewski, Chris-
  tian Theobalt, and Peter Wonka. Zero-shot video semantic segmentation based on pre-trained
  diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16947, 2024.
Xinlong Wang, Xiaosong Zhang, Yue Cao, Wen Wang, Chunhua Shen, and Tiejun Huang. Seggpt:
  Segmenting everything in context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03284, 2023.
Meng Wei, Xiaoyu Yue, Wenwei Zhang, Shu Kong, Xihui Liu, and Jiangmiao Pang. Ov-parts:
 Towards open-vocabulary part segmentation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 36, 2024.
Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Stan Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Wynne Hsu, Ying Shan,
  Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-a-video: One-shot tuning of image diffusion models for
  text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.11565, 2022.
Tianxing Wu, Chenyang Si, Yuming Jiang, Ziqi Huang, and Ziwei Liu. Freeinit: Bridging initializa-
  tion gap in video diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07537, 2023.
Haozhe Xie, Hongxun Yao, Shangchen Zhou, Shengping Zhang, and Wenxiu Sun. Efficient regional
  memory network for video object segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1286–1295, 2021a.
Hongwei Xie, Hongxun Yao, Shun Zhou, Shengping Zhang, and Wenxiu Sun. Efficient regional
  memory network for video object segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
 Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021b.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ning Xu, Linjie Yang, Yuchen Fan, Jianchao Yang, Dingcheng Yue, Yuchen Liang, Brian Price,
  Scott Cohen, and Thomas Huang. Youtube-vos: Sequence-to-sequence video object segmentation,
  2018a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.00461.
Ning Xu, Linjie Yang, Yuchen Fan, Dingcheng Yue, Yuchen Liang, Jianchao Yang, and Thomas
  Huang. Youtube-vos: A large-scale video object segmentation benchmark. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1809.03327, 2018b.
Linjie Yang, Yuchen Fan, and Ning Xu. Video instance segmentation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 5188–5197, 2019.
Shu Yang, Lu Zhang, Jinqing Qi, Huchuan Lu, Shuo Wang, and Xiaoxing Zhang. Learning motion-
  appearance co-attention for zero-shot video object segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021a.
Zehao Yang, Yunchao Wei, and Yi Yang. Collaborative video object segmentation by foreground-
  background integration. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
  2020.
Zehao Yang, Yunchao Wei, and Yi Yang. Associating objects with transformers for video object
  segmentation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021b.
Lijun Yu, Yong Cheng, Kihyuk Sohn, José Lezama, Han Zhang, Huiwen Chang, Alexander G
  Hauptmann, Ming-Hsuan Yang, Yuan Hao, Irfan Essa, et al. Magvit: Masked generative video
  transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 10459–10469, 2023.
Kaihua Zhang, Zicheng Zhao, Dong Liu, Qingshan Liu, and Bo Liu. Deep transport network for
  unsupervised video object segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
  on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Tao Zhang, Xingye Tian, Yu Wu, Shunping Ji, Xuebo Wang, Yuan Zhang, and Pengfei Wan. Dvis:
  Decoupled video instance segmentation framework. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1282–1291, 2023a.
Tao Zhang, Xingye Tian, Yikang Zhou, Shunping Ji, Xuebo Wang, Xin Tao, Yuan Zhang, Pengfei
  Wan, Zhongyuan Wang, and Yu Wu. Dvis++: Improved decoupled framework for universal video
  segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.13305, 2023b.
Yabo Zhang, Yuxiang Wei, Dongsheng Jiang, Xiaopeng Zhang, Wangmeng Zuo, and Qi Tian. Con-
  trolvideo: Training-free controllable text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13077,
  2023c.
Hengshuang Zhao, Jianping Shi, Xiaojuan Qi, Xiaogang Wang, and Jiaya Jia. Pyramid scene parsing
  network. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  2881–2890, 2017.
Daquan Zhou, Weimin Wang, Hanshu Yan, Weiwei Lv, Yizhe Zhu, and Jiashi Feng. Magicvideo:
  Efficient video generation with latent diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11018, 2022.
Xizhou Zhu, Yuwen Xiong, Jifeng Dai, Lu Yuan, and Yichen Wei. Deep feature flow for video
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 2349–2358, 2017.
Zixin Zhu, Xuelu Feng, Dongdong Chen, Junsong Yuan, Chunming Qiao, and Gang Hua. Exploring
  pre-trained text-to-video diffusion models for referring video object segmentation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.12042, 2024.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7     A PPENDIX

7.1   SMITE-50 DATASET

SMITE-50 is a video dataset that covers challenging segmentation with multiple parts of the object
is being segmented in difficult scenarios like occlusion. It consists of 50 videos, up to 20 seconds
long, from 24 frames to 400 frames with different aspect ratios (both vertical and horizontal). Frame
samples of the dataset are provided in Fig5 in the main paper. Primarily our dataset consists of 4
different classes ”Horses”, ”Faces”, ”Cars” and ”Non-Text”. Out of these sequences, ”Horses” and
”Cars” have videos which have been captured outdoors hence it has challenging scenarios including
occlusion, view-point changes and fast-moving objects with dynamic background scenes. ”Faces”
sequence on the other hand have videos with occlusion, scale changes and more fine-grained parts
which are difficult to track and segment across time. The ”Non-Text” category has videos which
have parts that cannot be described by natural language cues. Hence, these videos are difficult for
zero-shot video segmentation (Ren et al., 2024) approaches as most of the models are reliant on textual
vocabularies for the segmentations. As compared to existing VOS datasets (refer to Table 5 like
DAVIS-2016 Perazzi et al. (2016), PUMAVOS Bekuzarov et al. (2023) and Youtube-VOS Xu et al.
(2018a), SMITE-50 has more parts per video and many multi-part videos. Although Youtube-VOS
(YT-VOS) has more videos but all of the videos lack multi-part annotations. SMITE-50 is a working
progress and we intend to expand it beyond what it currently includes and make it publicly available.


                      Table 5: Comparison of various VOS datasets with SMITE-50.
                    Dataset               DAVIS-2016     PUMAVOS       YT-VOS      SMITE-50
           # training/testing videos        30/20          0/24        3945/508      0/50
              Avg parts per video             1            1.08           1          6.39
          Number of multi-part videos         0             1             0           50


7.2   E XTRA A BLATIONS

Performance on PUMaVOS and comparison with XMem++. Here, we provide a comparison
with XMem++ on their proposed dataset PUMaVOS to show that our method is effective on other
datasets than our proposed SMITE-50. For this evaluation, we considered the following seven video
splits namely :Chair, Full face 1, Full face 2, Half face 1, Half face 2, Long Scene scale and Vlog
repectively. We chose the following categories as the object parts in these videos are not too small and
also have flexible granularity. Note that XMem++ is a semi-supervised video segmentation technique
meaning that it has been trained on largescale video segmentation datasets such as DAVIS (Pont-Tuset
et al., 2017) or YoutubeVOS (Xu et al., 2018b). Nevertheless, SMITE performs comparably and even
outperforms it in case of working with fewer frames (e.g., a single shot; see Tab. 6). Predictably,
when XMem++ is provided with more frames per video (e.g., 10), its performance slightly exceeds
ours since SMITE is not trained on a large segmentation dataset. However, with a smaller number of
frames (e.g., one or five), our method either outperforms or matches the performance of XMem++.
See Tables 6 and 7, for the quantitative comparisons.

Table 6: Comparison on a subset of PUMaVOS dataset (Bekuzarov et al. (2023)) when only one
frame is used for training.
                             Chair           Full face 1        Full Face 2       Half Face 1
         Method         Fmeas. mIOU       Fmeas. mIOU        Fmeas. mIOU        Fmeas. mIOU
         GSAM2           0.49     58.82    0.99      97.47    0.94      94.78    0.29     57.66
         Baseline-I      0.46     73.15    0.61      85.23     0.7      86.9     0.02     82.83
         XMem++          0.99     95.72    0.71      90.75    0.80      89.92    0.82     90.52
         Ours            0.32     63.32    0.98      96.46    0.85      90.38    0.55     79.75
                          Half Face 2     Long Scene Scale         Vlog              Mean
         Method         Fmeas. mIOU       Fmeas. mIOU        Fmeas. mIOU        Fmeas. mIOU
         GSAM2           0.54     74.78    0.99      97.39    0.16      42.99    0.63     74.84
         Baseline-I      0.18     55.78    0.74      87.74    0.73      78.90    0.5      74.91
         XMem++          0.48     71.03    0.87      95.48    0.16      31.11    0.69     80.65
         Ours            0.37     69.91    0.98      96.27    0.75      78.91    0.69     82.14



                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Quantitative results on a subset of PUMaVOS dataset (Bekuzarov et al. (2023)). At k=1,
we achieve higher quality in terms of Fmeasure and mIoU, outperforming XMem++. For other
settings, we experience a small margin of loss, which is acceptable given that XMem++ is a fully
supervised method, whereas our approach is a few-shot method.
          Methods                             1 frame           5 frames          10 frames
                                          Fmeas. mIoU        Fmeas. mIoU       Fmeas. mIoU
          Full Face 1 (XMem++)             0.71     90.75     1.0     98.78      1.0     99.01
          Full Face 1 (Ours)               0.98     96.46     0.99    96.76      1.0     96.73
          Full Face 2 (XMem++)             0.80     89.92     0.96    96.64     0.97     97.35
          Full Face 2 (Ours)               0.85     90.38     0.91    93.10     0.93     93.78
          Chair (XMem++)                   0.99     95.72     1.0     96.57      1.0     96.65
          Chair (Ours)                     0.32     63.32     0.98    90.62     0.99     89.82
          Half Face 1 (XMem++)             0.82     90.52     0.94    94.54     0.96     95.49
          Half Face 1 (Ours)               0.55     79.75     0.92    90.69     0.93     91.37
          Half Face 2 (XMem++)             0.48     71.03     0.77    87.87     0.85     91.41
          Half Face 2 (Ours)               0.37     69.91     0.66    81.06     0.83     87.17
          Long Scene Scale (XMem++)        0.87     95.48     0.99    98.36      1.0     98.91
          Long Scene Scale (Ours)          0.98     96.27     1.0     96.87      1.0     96.79
          Vlog (XMem++)                    0.16     31.11     0.55    62.84     0.82     82.52
          Vlog (Ours)                      0.75     78.91     0.86    84.01     0.90     85.29
          Mean (XMem++)                    0.69     80.65     0.89    90.80     0.94     94.48
          Mean (Ours)                      0.69     82.14     0.90    90.44     0.94     91.56


Joint training vs two-phases training. We employ two-phase training instead of joint training due
to its increased stability and general improved performance. We have ablated our training recipe on
SMITE-50 dataset in this experiment. Based on the results in Tab. 8, it is evident that two phase
training gives us better performance quantitatively. In addition to this, we performed Levene’s test on
the training strategies to asses the training stability of both. We observed a significant difference (p =
0.0036) between the variance of losses in joint training and two-phase training. This ensures that
two-phase training is more stable which can also be reflected visually in Fig 9 which confirms our
findings. In both the cases, the number of epochs and the training time is same.


                   Table 8: Ablation of joint vs two-phase training on SMITE-50.
                            Training Strategy mIOU Training Time
                                  Joint           62.17       20 mins
                               Two-Phase          75.14       20 mins

Cross-category generalization. SMITE is capable of of segmenting objects that differ from the train-
ing samples. For example, when trained on horses, it is able to perform an acceptable segmentation
on camels and giraffes as shown in Fig 10(a). For intra-class categories like in car category, even if
we train SMITE with reference images of Sedan car, our model can still segment SUV car which is
structurally varying.
Multi-Object Flexible Granularity. SMITE supports multi-object flexible granularity. For instance,
when presented with a training image containing both a horse and a car, the model learns distinct
representations for each object simultaneously as shown in Fig 11. This enables the model to
generalize effectively, handling multiple objects with varying levels of detail in a cohesive manner.

7.3   E XTRA Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

Performance on PUMaVOS and comparison with XMem++. Here, we provide a comparison
with XMem++ on their proposed dataset PUMaVOS to show that our method is effective on other
datasets than our proposed SMITE-50. For this evaluation, we considered the following seven video
splits namely :Chair, Full face 1, Full face 2, Half face 1, Half face 2, Long Scene scale and Vlog
respectively. We chose the following categories as the object parts in these videos are not too small
and also have flexible granularity. Note that XMem++ is a semi-supervised video segmentation
technique meaning that it has been trained on large scale video segmentation datasets such as DAVIS
or YoutubeVOS (Xu et al., 2018b). Nevertheless, SMITE performs comparably and even outperforms


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Importance of using LPF While applying tracking it leads to segments which has jagged
edges and pixel drifts. Using LPF on the segments, treats it as a guide which corrects the inconsistent
segments after tracking into more spatially consistent segments which preserves the original structure.


Figure 9: Two phase training highlighted as blue shows significant less oscillation in training and
provides more stability.


it in case of working with fewer frames (e.g., a single shot; see Tab. 6). Predictably, when XMem++
is provided with more frames per video (e.g., 10), its performance slightly exceeds ours since SMITE
is not trained on a large segmentation dataset. However, with a smaller number of frames (e.g., one
or five), our method either outperforms or matches the performance of XMem++. See Tables 6 and 7,
for the quantitative comparisons.
Performance on DAVIS Dataset. Note that the strength of our method is to perform arbitrary
granularity and multi-granular segmentation and DAVIS only contains single objects rather than
different granularity levels. To further contrast our method to SOTA for single object segmentation, we
evaluate our dataset on DAVIS-2016 for the video object segmentation (VOS) task using two different
settings : a) Zero-Shot VOS in Table 9 and b) Semi-Supervised VOS in Table 10 respectively. The first
setting follows a zero-shot approach, where we train our model on one randomly selected image per
video from the training set and report the results. However, our method has a limitation—it struggles
with small objects. This is a common limitation for most existing diffusion based segmentation


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 9: Quantitative evaluation on DAVIS-2016 in a zero-shot setting. Our method excels in
multi-granular segmentation, but DAVIS-2016 only contains single objects. To compare with SOTA
methods, we evaluate DAVIS-2016 in a zero-shot setting, training on one image per video from the
training set. The results are reported as SMITE on the entire dataset and as SMITE+ on the dataset
excluding two samples (2/20) that are small and unsuitable for our method.
                  Methods                                    J↑             F↑
                  FSNet (Ji et al., 2021)                   83.4           83.1
                  F2Net (Liu et al., 2021)                  83.1           84.4
                  TransportNet (Zhang et al., 2021)         84.5           85.0
                  AMCNet (Yang et al., 2021a)               84.5           84.6
                  RTNet (Ren et al., 2021)                  85.6           84.7
                  CFANet (Chen et al., 2022)                83.5           82.0
                  D2Conv3D (Schmidt et al., 2022)           85.5           86.5
                  IMPNet (Lee et al., 2022)                 84.5           86.7
                  DBSNet (Fan et al., 2022)                 85.9           84.7
                  HFAN (Pei et al., 2022)                   86.2           87.1
                  TMO (Cho et al., 2023)                    85.6           86.6
                  OAST (Su et al., 2023)                    86.6           87.4
                  SMITE                                     80.8           82.9
                  SMITE+                                   82.39           87.6


Table 10: Quantitative evaluation on DAVIS-2016 in a semi-supervised setting. Our method is
designed for multi-granular segmentation, but DAVIS-2016 only contains single objects. To compare
with SOTA methods, we evaluate DAVIS-2016 in a semi-supervised setting, training on one image
per video from the validation set. The results are reported as SMITE on the entire dataset and as
SMITE+ on the dataset excluding two samples (2/20) that are small and unsuitable for our method.
                  Method                                     J↑             F↑
                  STM (Oh et al., 2019)                     88.7           89.9
                  AFB-URR (Liang et al., 2020)              88.3           90.5
                  CFBI (Yang et al., 2020)                  88.9           88.7
                  RMNet (Xie et al., 2021b)                 89.6           92.0
                  HMMN (Seong et al., 2021)                 89.6           92.4
                  MiVOS (Cheng et al., 2021a)               90.8           92.5
                  STCN (Cheng et al., 2021b)                90.1           92.1
                  JOINT (Mao et al., 2021b)                 90.4           92.7
                  AOT (Yang et al., 2021b)                  91.1           92.1
                  XMem (Cheng & Schwing, 2022)              91.5           92.7
                  SMITE                                     83.4           80.7
                  SMITE+                                    92.0           88.7


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Cross-Category Generalization SMITE supports cross-category generalization where
dispite of training with reference images of (a) horse category, our model can successfully generalize
to giraffe,camel which has large topological changes and training with reference images of (b) sedan
car, our model can successfully generalize to SUV car which has intra-category variations.


approaches Namekata et al. (2024); Khani et al. (2024). Additionally, two out of the 20 videos contain
thin lines to be segmented (Fig 13), making them unsuitable for segmentation using our method.
Therefore, in addition to reporting numbers on the entire test-set, we also exclude these two videos
and report the average performance (SMITE+) on the remaining DAVIS-2016 videos.
Secondly, we evaluate our method in a semi-supervised segmentation setting, where only a single
frame is used for each test video.While many models, both in zero-shot and semi-supervised settings,
are specifically trained for video segmentation using videos from datasets like YouTubeVOS or
DAVIS, our approach requires only a few frames for training. Despite this minimal requirement, we
achieve competitive performance on most examples, except in cases involving small objects, where
our method faces limitations.


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Figure 11: Multi-Object Segmentation. Our method is capable of multi-object segmentation.


Figure 12: Importance of applying Tracker. We ablated the usage of tracking algorithm in two
scenarios : (a) During postprocessing (second row) and (b) During inference optimization (last row).
From the figure, it can be observed that applying tracker on the segments Swas during postprocessing
(Baseline-II) leads to segment drifts thus resulting in jagged edges. Such problems can be mitigated
if we use tracking during inference optimization (Eq. 5) stage since the optimization process slowly
propagates the corrections across the entire video during the denoising stage, thus resulting in lesser
segment drift and temporally consistent predictions.


7.4   E XTRA Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS


For more challenging cases, we include more results in Fig 14. In one instance, the ice cream cone is
occluded by a paper napkin, and the ice cream itself is obscured and blended by a face, yet SMITE is
still able to generate correct results. Furthermore, the turtle nearly blends with the background in
terms of color and visual patterns, but our method successfully tracks the segments.
We have included qualitative comparison videos in the supplementary file to provide more examples
in video format. The actual videos are in higher resolution, we have compressed the video to upload
it on the website easily.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: DAVIS Test Set Visualization SMITE segments poorly in scenes which has thin structures
like strings in both the scenes.


Figure 14: Segmentation results in challenging scenarios . SMITE accurately segments out the
objects under occlusion (”ice-cream”) or camouflage (”turtle”) highlighting the robustness of our
segmentation technique.


7.5   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS AND D ESIGN C HOICES E XPLANATION

All experiments were conducted on a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU. During the learning phase, we
initially optimized only the text embeddings for the first 100 iterations. For the subsequent iterations,
we optimized the cross-attention to k and to v parameters.
For the categories of horses, cars, faces and non-text, we used 10 reference images from our SMITE-
50 benchmark for both our method and the baseline comparisons.
Regarding the window size in our tracking module, we found that fast-moving objects benefit from a
smaller window size to mitigate potential bias. Consequently, we set the window size to 7 for horses


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and 15 for other categories. To better work on smaller objects, we employ a two-step approach. First,
our model generates an initial segmentation estimate. We then crop the image around this initial
estimate and reapply our methods to obtain a more fine-grained segmentation.
During inference, we added noise corresponding to 100 timesteps and performed a single denoising
pass when segment tracking and voting were not employed. When using segment tracking and
voting, we applied spatio-temporal guidance at each denoising step and conducted backpropagation
15 times per denoising timestep. For the regularization parameters, we set λReg across all experiments.
The tracking parameter λTracking was set to 1 for horses, 0.5 for faces, and either 0.2 or 1 for cars.
Additionally, we applied a Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) low-pass filter with a threshold of 0.4.
Pseudo Code of Temporal Voting

Algorithm 1 Temporal Voting
 1: Input: X: a pixel at frame t, W : window size
 2: Xs ← Correspondence of X at frame s (obtained by CoTracker(X, s))
 3: Vis(Xs , s): visibility of Xs (obtained
                                            by CoTracker)
 4: Visible Set ← {i ∈ range − W    2 , W
                                        2   if Vis(Xsi ) == 1}
 5: P ← Most Occurrence (S(Xi ).argmax(dim = 0)) where i ∈ Visible Set
 6: total ← 0, count ← 0
 7: for all p ∈ Visible Set do
 8:      if S(Xi ).argmax(dim=0) == P then
 9:           total ← total + S(Xi )
10:           count ← count + 1
11:      end if
12: end for
                      total
13: Stracked (X) ←
                     count

Bidirectional Tracking and Resolution Reduction in CoTracker Note that points queried at
different frames are tracked incorrectly before the query frame. This is because CoTracker is an
online algorithm and only tracks points in one direction. However, we can also run it backward from
the queried point to track in both directions. So by setting backward tracking to True we are able
to track points in both directions which is crucial for our voting mechanism.
Time and Memory Analysis. Using 10 training images with a batch size of 1 on 15 GB of GPU
VRAM, training takes 20 minutes. By increasing the batch size and utilizing more GPU VRAM,
training time can be reduced to 7 minutes. Although we use 300 epochs, the best accuracy is often
reached before epoch 200, so training time can be further decreased. Training time is unaffected by
whether we learn the text embedding or U-Net weights. For inference, each frame takes 26 seconds
and requires 60 GB of GPU VRAM to process the entire video. However, it is possible to adjust
settings to use only 15 GB, though this increases the inference time.
Long video processing. A key goal for us is to adapt our method to work efficiently on smaller GPUs.
Unlike most video editing techniques that require high-end hardware like an A100 GPU and typically
handle up to 24 frames, our approach aims for broader applicability. We identified that gradient
computation during inference optimization is particularly demanding on resources. To address this,
we segment the latent space into smaller windows—for example, (1 to k), (k+1 to 2k), (2k+1 to 3k),
and so on—across different timesteps and optimize each window independently. This segmentation
has proven not to compromise the final results. Additionally, for tasks such as segmenting 1,000
frames (PUMAVOS samples) consistently, our method processes batches of 2×T frames at a time
(you can set T based on your GPU’s capacity). We then save the states of the last (T+1) frames
and replace them with the reference state in the next iteration. These strategies enable our model to
process longer videos effectively on GPUs with as little as 24 GB of VRAM.
Enhanced Convergence. The strategy to accelerate convergence and simplify parameter tuning in
the code involves the use of an Adam-like optimization approach that dynamically adapts the learning
rate and gradient updates for the latent variables. Specifically, the code implements the first and
second moment estimates, denoted as  M1  and  M2 , which accumulate the gradients and squared
gradients, respectively.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In each iteration, the first moment estimate  M1  captures the exponentially weighted average of
the gradients, while the second moment estimate  M2  tracks the squared gradients. These moment
estimates are then bias-corrected by dividing them by  1 - \beta _1^{t+1}  and  1 - \beta _2^{t+1}  , where  \beta _1  and  \beta _2  are
the momentum parameters typically set to 0.9 and 0.999, respectively. This bias correction ensures
that the estimates are unbiased, particularly in the initial steps of optimization.
The learning rate  \alpha _t  is dynamically scaled based on these corrected moment estimates, where the
update step for the latent variables is computed as:


                                                     z_t' \leftarrow z_t - \alpha _t \cdot \frac {M1_{\text {corrected}}}{\sqrt {M2_{\text {corrected}}} + \epsilon }

This adaptive approach allows the optimizer to adjust the learning rate on a per-parameter basis,
depending on the variance of the gradients, leading to faster convergence. By using this method, the
optimizer can take larger steps when the gradients are consistent and smaller steps when they are
noisy, which helps in avoiding overshooting or getting stuck in local minima. The combination of
momentum-based updates and dynamic learning rate scaling makes the optimization process more
robust, reducing the need for extensive manual tuning of hyperparameters such as the learning rate,
and enabling more efficient convergence.
Bidirectional tracking. We use bidirectional tracking instead of unidirectional tracking for two main
reasons. First, to manage longer videos, we implement a slicing approach where the last frames of
the first slice are retained in the second slice to ensure continuity. Bidirectional tracking speeds up
consistency between slices by allowing new frames in the second slice to directly reference frames
from the first slice, while unidirectional tracking delays this process due to the need for updates to
propagate. Second, tracking methods often struggle with fast-moving objects, as accuracy decreases
with distance from the query pixel, risking loss of track. Bidirectional tracking enhances robustness in
these situations. Additionally, in cases of occlusion, unidirectional tracking may fail without visible
pixels to propagate information. Bidirectional tracking mitigates this by leveraging data from both
past and future frames, maintaining accuracy even during occlusions.

7.6     H OW DOES WAS ATTENTION WORK ?

SLiMe refines latent diffusion models by learning special text embeddings that guide segmentation
using the Weighted Accumulated Self-Attention (WAS) map. In each denoising step, a latent diffusion
U-Net uses cross-attention to link latent features with text tokens, and self-attention to capture global
spatial information. SLiMe combines these two forms of attention through WAS, enabling it to
identify clear boundaries and consistent object regions, even in unseen images.

                                                    ℓ                                 ℓ
Weighted Accumulated Self-Attention. Let Sca          be the cross-attention map and Ssa be the self-
attention map at layer ℓ. We first average resized cross-attention maps:

                                             \bm {A}_{ca} \;=\; \mathrm {Average}_\ell \!\Bigl (\mathrm {Resize}\bigl (\{\bm {S}_{ca}^\ell \}\bigr )\Bigr ),

and do the same for self-attention maps:

                                                             \bm {A}_{sa} \;=\; \mathrm {Average}_\ell \!\bigl (\{\bm {S}_{sa}^\ell \}\bigr ).

Next, we resize Akca (the map for the k-th text embedding) to match the shape of Asa :

                                                                     \bm {R}_{ca}^k \;=\; \mathrm {Resize}\bigl (\bm {A}_{ca}^k\bigr ),
              k
then flatten Rca and multiply it element-wise by Asa . Summing the result across channels gives the
WAS map:
                                           \bm {S}_{\text {WAS}}^k \;=\; \sum \Bigl (\mathrm {flatten}\bigl (\bm {R}_{ca}^k\bigr ) \,\odot \, \bm {A}_{sa}\Bigr ).

This step combines the text-based localization (from cross-attention) with the detailed spatial infor-
mation (from self-attention), leading to sharper and more meaningful segmentations.


                                                                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Loss Functions. The text embeddings are optimized using three loss functions. The cross-entropy
loss encourages the cross-attention maps to align with the ground truth mask M :
                                                               L_{\text {CE}} \;=\; \text {CE}\bigl (\bm {S}_{ca},\, M\bigr ).
The MSE loss on the WAS map aligns self-attention with the ground truth:

                                 L_{\text {MSE}} \;=\; \sum _{k} \bigl \| \mathrm {Resize}\bigl (\bm {S}_{\text {WAS}}^k\bigr ) - M_k \bigr \|^2_2.

Finally, the diffusion-based regularization term keeps the learned embeddings within the pretrained
latent diffusion distribution:
                                 L_{\text {LDM}} \;=\; \mathbb {E}_{\bm {x},\,\epsilon ,\,t}\!\Bigl [\bigl \|\epsilon - \epsilon _\theta (\bm {z}_t,\,t,\,y)\bigr \|^2_2\Bigr ].

The total loss is:
                                             L \;=\; L_{\text {CE}} + \alpha \,L_{\text {MSE}} + \beta \,L_{\text {LDM}},
where α and β control how strongly we emphasize spatial accuracy versus staying consistent with
the original diffusion model. Once trained, SLiMe’s embeddings can segment new images at similar
granularity without extra fine-tuning.

7.7    I MAGE S EGMENTATION R ESULTS

We tested our method on an image dataset (e.g PASCAL-Part(Chen et al., 2014)) to demonstrate
the enhancements achieved through modifications to our architecture and optimization. As shown
in Tables 11 and 12, our approach shows significant improvement over SLiMe even for image
segmentation for car and horse split of PASCAL-Part dataset. This highlights the effectiveness of our
design choices in SMITE, particularly the cross-attention tuning.


Table 11: Image segmentation results for class car SMITE consistently outperforms SLiMe. The
first two rows show the supervised methods, for which we use the reported numbers in ReGAN.
The second two rows show the methods with 1-sample setting and the last three rows refer to the
10-sample setting methods. ⋆ indicates the supervised methods.
                                            Body                        Light                       Plate                      Wheel                           Window               Background   Average
              CNN⋆                          73.4                        42.2                        41.7                       66.3                             61.0                   67.4        58.7
           CNN+CRF⋆                         75.4                        36.1                        35.8                       64.3                             61.8                   68.7        57.0
   SegGPT (Wang et al., 2023)⋆              62.7                        18.5                        25.8                       65.8                             69.5                   77.7        53.3
     OIParts (Dai et al., 2024)             77.7                        59.1                        57.2                       66.9                             59.2                   71.1        65.2
   ReGAN (Tritrong et al., 2021)            75.5                        29.3                        17.8                       57.2                             62.4                   70.7       52.15
    SLiMe (Khani et al., 2024)              81.5                        56.8                        54.8                       68.3                             70.3                   78.4        68.3
               Ours                         82.3                        57.5                        55.9                       70.1                             72.6                   80.1        69.8



Table 12: Image segmentation results for class horse. SMITE outperforms ReGAN, OPParts,
SegDDPM, SegGPT and SLiMe on average and most of the parts. The first two rows show the
supervised methods, for which we use the reported numbers in ReGAN. The middle two rows show
the 1-sample setting, and the last four rows are the results of the 10-sample settings. ⋆ indicates the
supervised methods.
                                                                 Head                        Leg                     Neck+Torso                                          Tail       Background   Average
             Shape+Appereance⋆                                   47.2                        38.2                       66.7                                              -              -          -
                 CNN+CRF⋆                                        55.0                        46.8                        -                                               37.2           76          -
         SegGPT (Wang et al., 2023)⋆                             41.1                        49.8                       58.6                                             15.5          36.4       40.3
           OIParts (Dai et al., 2024)                            73.0                        50.7                       72.6                                             60.3          77.7       66.9
        ReGAN (Tritrong et al., 2021)                            50.1                        49.6                       70.5                                             19.9          81.6       54.3
      SegDDPM (Baranchuk et al., 2021)                           41.0                        59.1                       69.9                                             39.3          84.3       58.7
          SLiMe (Khani et al., 2024)                             63.8                        59.5                       68.1                                             45.4          79.6       63.3
                     Ours                                        64.5                        61.9                       73.2                                             48.1          83.5       66.2


                                                                                                   26
