Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Navigating the Digital World as Humans Do:
U NIVERSAL V ISUAL G ROUNDING FOR GUI AGENTS
    Boyu Gou1 Ruohan Wang1 Boyuan Zheng1 Yanan Xie2 Cheng Chang2 Yiheng Shu1
    Huan Sun1 Yu Su1
    1
      The Ohio State University 2 Orby AI
    {gou.43, sun.397, su.809}@osu.edu, yanan@orby.ai
    https://osu-nlp-group.github.io/UGround/



                                                                 A BSTRACT

              Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) are transforming the capabilities of
              graphical user interface (GUI) agents, facilitating their transition from controlled
              simulations to complex, real-world applications across various platforms. However,
              the effectiveness of these agents hinges on the robustness of their grounding
              capability. Current GUI agents predominantly utilize text-based representations
              such as HTML or accessibility trees, which, despite their utility, often introduce
              noise, incompleteness, and increased computational overhead. In this paper, we
              advocate a human-like embodiment for GUI agents that perceive the environment
              entirely visually and directly perform pixel-level operations on the GUI. The key
              is visual grounding models that can accurately map diverse referring expressions
              of GUI elements to their coordinates on the GUI across different platforms. We
              show that a simple recipe, which includes web-based synthetic data and slight
              adaptation of the LLaVA architecture, is surprisingly effective for training such
              visual grounding models. We collect the largest dataset for GUI visual grounding
              so far, containing 10M GUI elements and their referring expressions over 1.3M
              screenshots, and use it to train UGround, a strong universal visual grounding model
              for GUI agents. Empirical results on six benchmarks spanning three categories
              (grounding, offline agent, and online agent) show that 1) UGround substantially
              outperforms existing visual grounding models for GUI agents, by up to 20%
              absolute, and 2) agents with UGround outperform state-of-the-art agents, despite
              the fact that existing agents use additional text-based input while ours only uses
              visual perception. These results provide strong support for the feasibility and
              promise of GUI agents that navigate the digital world as humans do.


                 Web                    Mobile                 Desktop
    Find the trade-in value for PS4   Turn on Wi-Fi   Install the Township application


Figure 1: Examples of agent tasks across platforms and performance on GUI grounding (♣:
ScreenSpot), offline agent (♠: Multimodal-Mind2Web, AndroidControl, and OmniACT), and online
agent benchmarks (♥: Mind2Web-Live and AndroidWorld) when using GPT-4 as the planner.


1       I NTRODUCTION
GUI (graphical user interface) agents, which are autonomous agents acting in the digital world via
operating on GUIs, have been rapidly co-evolving with large language models (LLMs). On the


                                                                           1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


one hand, the general multimedia understanding and generation capabilities of (multimodal) LLMs
empower GUI agents to generalize beyond simple simulated settings (Shi et al., 2017; Humphreys
et al., 2022) to diverse and complex real-world environments, including the web (Deng et al., 2023;
Zhou et al., 2024; Yao et al., 2022), desktop (Xie et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024) and mobile operating
systems (Rawles et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2023; Rawles et al., 2024). On the other hand, GUI agents
have become an important testbed for LLMs, providing both the necessary breadth and depth for
driving continued development as well as a pathway to many commercially viable automation
applications.
Most humans perceive the digital world visually and act via keyboards, mice, or touchscreens. In
principle, the embodiment of a GUI agent should already be complete if it can 1) visually perceive
the GUI renderings, and 2) have effectors equivalent to a keyboard for typing and equivalent to a
mouse or touchscreen for pixel-level operations like clicking and hovering.1 However, current GUI
agents assume more than that. For perception, most current agents rely on reading the underlying
text-based representations such as HTML or accessibility (a11y) trees (Deng et al., 2023; Gur et al.,
2024; Zhou et al., 2024).2 Only with the recent advances in multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) does visual
perception become broadly viable, but text-based representations are still used jointly (Zheng et al.,
2024; Koh et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a). For effectors, most current agents act via selecting from
a list of options, e.g., HTML elements (Deng et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2024) or labeled bounding
boxes (He et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a), instead of pixel-level operations directly on the GUI.
Obtaining those options in turn often requires access to text-based representations and/or separate
models for detecting objects and text (Wang et al., 2024a; Kapoor et al., 2024).
However, there is no free lunch, and those additional requirements come with their limitations. On
the one hand, text-based representations are noisy and incomplete. Full HTML documents contain
a considerable amount of irrelevant information. A11y trees are more compact and mainly contain
semantic information, but similar to other semantic annotations that rely on voluntary participation,
they widely suffer from incomplete and incorrect annotations.3 In contrast, visual renderings, by
design, are information-complete and only contain information relevant to users. On the other hand,
the additional input increases latency and inference costs. Zheng et al. (2024) found that HTML
can consume up to 10 times more tokens to encode than the corresponding visual. Meanwhile,
obtaining an a11y tree can be time-consuming in itself, especially in desktop or mobile environments.
The added latency and cost at every step are further compounded in the long-horizon agent tasks,
compromising user experience and practicality.
In this work, we are interested in how far GUI agents with a human-like embodiment, i.e., only visual
observation of environments and pixel-level operations, can go. There have been a few attempts (Shaw
et al., 2023; Hong et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2024), but they are rarely adopted in state-of-the-art
solutions. We find that a major bottleneck is grounding, i.e., mapping textual plans generated by an
(M)LLM to the precise locations on the GUI. There are three desiderata for a GUI agent grounding
model: 1) High accuracy. A single grounding error can get an agent stuck and fail the whole task.
2) Strong generalization. It should work on different GUIs: desktop (Windows, Linux, macOS),
mobile (Android, iOS), different websites, etc. 3) Flexibility. It should plug and play in different
MLLMs instead of being tightly coupled with a certain model. Existing visual grounding methods
for GUI agents (Shaw et al., 2023; Hong et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2024) fail to meet these desiderata,
hindering the advances towards GUI agents with human-like embodiment.
The main contributions of this work are three-fold:
1. We make careful arguments and a strong case for GUI agents with human-like embodiment that
perceive the digital world entirely visually and take pixel-level operations on GUIs, and propose
a generic framework, SeeAct-V, for building such agents by adapting from the popular SeeAct
framework (Zheng et al., 2024).


   1
     Except for auditory perception, which is beyond the scope of this study.
   2
     The a11y tree is a compact yet informative representation intended for assistive technologies to facilitate
people with disabilities, e.g., visual impairment.
   3
     A 2024 survey over the top one million websites found that 95.9% of the home pages had accessibility
conformance errors such as missing alternative text for images or missing form input labels, with an average of
56.8 errors per page (WebAIM, 2024).


                                                       2
                                    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    2. We show that a simple recipe, which includes web-based synthetic data and slight adaptation of
                                    the LLaVA architecture (Liu et al., 2024c), is surprisingly effective for GUI visual grounding. Using
                                    this recipe, we construct and release the largest GUI visual grounding dataset to date, covering
                                    10M GUI elements and their referring expressions over 1.3M GUI screenshots. We also train and
                                    release a universal visual grounding model, UGround, on the dataset.
                                    3. We conduct the most comprehensive evaluation for GUI agents to date, covering six benchmarks
                                    spanning three categories (Figure 1): grounding (desktop, mobile, and web), offline agent evaluation
                                    (desktop, mobile, and web), and online agent evaluation (mobile and web). The results demonstrate:
                                    1) UGround substantially outperforms existing visual grounding models for GUI agents across the
                                    board, by up to 20% absolute. 2) SeeAct-V agents with UGround can achieve at least comparable
                                    and often much better performance than state-of-the-art agents that use additional text-based input.
                                    These results provide strong support for the feasibility and promises of GUI agents that navigate the
                                    digital world as humans do.


                                    2      M ETHOD


                                                Vision-Only Observation                                                  Planning                          Human-Like Operation
                                          TASK: Find the cheapest 4k monitor                                 User: Decide the next action for the task.
                                                                                                                                                               Click (556, 26)
                                                                                                             Element Description: The search bar at
                                                                                                             the top of the page.                              Type (“4k monitor”)
                                                                                                             Action: Type
                                                                                                             Value: 4k monitor

                                                                                                                        Grounding
                                                                                                             User: What are the pixel coordinates of
                                                                                                             the element corresponding to “The
                                                                                                             search bar at the top of the page” ?
                                                                                                                       (556, 26)


                                    Figure 2: SeeAct-V, which uses screenshots as the only environmental observation (task instructions
                                    are input as text), without relying on HTML or a11y trees. It includes an MLLM that generates
                                    textual plans and a visual grounding model to map textual plans into coordinates on the screenshot.
                                    Note: “Click” is always automatically inserted before “Type.”

                         Vision-Only Observation                                     Planning                                       Human-Like Operation
                 TASK: Find the cheapest 4k monitor
                                    2.1      OVERVIEW             User: Decide the next action for the task.
                                                                                                                                         Click (556, 26)
                                                                  Element Description: The search bar
                                                                                                                                         Type (“4k monitor”)
                                                                  at the top of the page.
                                                                  Action: Type
                                    We adapt the popular SeeAct framework (Zheng et al., 2024) to one in which agents only take visual
                                                                  Value: 4k monitor
                                    observation of the environmentGrounding         and directly conduct pixel-level operations, denoted as SeeAct-V
                                    (Figure 2). The original    User: What are the pixeltwo
                                                                      SeeAct      has           stages: planning and grounding, both handled by an MLLM.
                                                                                          coordinates
                                    At each step, the MLLM             first
                                                                of the elementgenerates
                                                                               correspondinga  to textual
                                                                                                  “The
                                                                search bar at the top of the page” ?
                                                                                                          plan, then selects grounding candidates from a short
                                    list. The grounding (556,  candidates
                                                                     26)           are either filtered HTML elements or labels of Set-of-Mark (SoM;
                                    Yang et al. (2023)) annotations
                                                                 Planning          on the screenshot, both of which require HTMLs or a11y trees as
Vision-Only Observation
                                    additionalUser:
                                                input.     In   contrast,      SeeAct-V
                                                    Decide the next action to complete the task.
                                                                                                 only uses screenshots for environmental observation. For
                                    grounding,Element
                                                 SeeAct-V
                                                       Description:uses    a separate
                                                                     The search bar at      model specialized for visual grounding that directly produces
                                              the top of the page.
             Execution              the coordinates     on the current screen where the agent should act. We provide our philosophy behind
                                              Action: Type
                                              Value: 4k monitor
                                    the modular    design of SeeAct-V in Appendix B.
                                                                   Grounding
  Mouse &
                                    A strong visual      grounding model therefore becomes the key for making SeeAct-V a compelling
                                               User: What are the pixel coordinates
  Keyboard                          framework.of   Ideally,
                                                  the            it shouldto “The
                                                      element corresponding      generalize across platforms (e.g., web, desktop, and mobile) and
                                               search bar at the top of the page” ?
                                    handle diverse
                                               (556, 26)ways of referring to GUI elements. Considering the rapid evolution of MLLMs,

                                    this grounding model should be easily pluggable into different MLLMs to help ground their plans
                                    into different GUI environments. Finally, GUI screenshots can vary drastically in resolution and
                                    orientation, therefore the grounding model should handle a wide range of input resolutions. The
                                    main technical contribution of this work is a surprisingly simple recipe (incl. data and modeling) for
                                    training such universal visual grounding models. We introduce our simple data synthesis strategy in
                                    §2.2, followed by modeling considerations in §2.3. With this simple recipe, we construct the largest
                                    training data for GUI grounding to date and train UGround, a strong universal visual grounding
                                    model for GUI agents.                    Input: Where are the pixel coordinates of ”the search
                                                                                bar at the
                                                                                         … top of the page”
                                                                                         Action: Type
                                                                                             Value: 4k monitor
                                                                                             Element Description:

                                                                               MLLM                                    3
                                                                                             The search bar at the top of the
                                                                                             page
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.2      DATA C ONSTRUCTION

We synthesize a large, high-quality, and diverse set of ⟨screenshot, referring expression, coordinates⟩
triplets as training data for visual grounding, where we use the center point coordinates of an element
as the expected output. Our data synthesis is fully based on webpages. Webpages are ideal for
grounding data synthesis because of their dual representation––we can easily get the full HTML, the
visual rendering, and fine-grained correspondences between the two (e.g., HTML elements to precise
bounding boxes). HTML elements also contain rich metadata such as CSS or accessibility attributes,
opening numerous opportunities for synthesizing diverse referring expressions (REs). Finally, since
GUI designs share many similarities across platforms, we hypothesize that visual grounding models
trained only on web data will generalize to other platforms like desktop and mobile UIs.
Common RE Types for GUIs. People use diverse ways to            1. Red icon labeled “UNIQLO”
refer to GUI elements (Figure 3). Previous visual ground- 2. Button at the top left corner
ing works (Hong et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2024) have          3. Navigate back to the homepage
not sufficiently considered this dimension of diversity. We
categorize common REs for GUI elements into three types:
1) Visual REs, i.e., salient visual features like text or im-
age content, element types (e.g., buttons or input fields),
shapes, colors, etc. 2) Positional REs, including both
absolute (e.g., “at the top left of the page”) and relative po-
sitions (e.g., “to the right of element X”) to other elements.
Besides straightforward positional information, contex-
tual references (e.g., “for Item A,” “under the section X”)
are more challenging for grounding because they require
understanding both positional relationships and semantic
relationships between elements (e.g., a like button is asso-
ciated with a product). 3) Functional REs, i.e., referring
to elements by their main functions (e.g., “Navigate to         1. Hollow heart button
Home,” “Go to My Cart”). Composite types that combine           2. Button below the Pokémon shirt
two or more of these types are also common, especially          3. Favor the Pokémon shirt
when stronger disambiguation is needed, e.g., “click the Figure 3: Examples of visual, positional,
heart button under the Pokémon shirt to add to favorite.” and functional REs.
Hybrid RE Synthesis from Web. We propose a novel
hybrid synthesis pipeline, orchestrating both carefully curated rules as well as LLMs to generate
diverse REs for HTML elements: 1) Primary Descriptors: We extract abundant visual and functional
information that are embedded in the attributes of HTML elements. For example, HTML attributes
like inner-text and alt provide visual clues (including text content), while accessibility attributes
like aria-label reveal more functional aspects of an HTML element. However, HTML attributes
are often incomplete. To harvest visual and functional signals beyond HTML attributes, we use an
open MLLM, LLaVA-NeXT-13B (Liu et al., 2024b). We input the visual rendering of an HTML
element along with its available attributes to the MLLM and prompt it to generate diverse REs. This
process often yields composite REs that combine some HTML attributes with visual features (e.g.,
“hollow heart”) or new knowledge from the MLLM (e.g., a blue bird icon represents Twitter). Similar
to Lai et al. (2023), we also employ an LLM (Llama-3-8B-Instruct; AI@Meta (2024)) to make these
generated REs more concise. We randomly select an HTML attribute (that may contain functional or
visual information) or the synthesized description by LLMs as the primary descriptor of an element.
2) Positional Expressions: We curate rules to generate positional REs according to the absolute
position of an element in the screenshot as well as its spatial relationship to neighboring elements
(e.g., “at the top of the page,” “between element A and B”). We also create multiple rules to generate
contextual references. For example, we identify elements of certain types in the screenshot (e.g., radio
buttons, checkboxes, input fields), and generate REs for them based on their spatial and structural
relationship (e.g., hierarchical structure of the DOM tree) to others (e.g., “the input field labeled
Birthday”).
We collect screenshots (mix of portrait and landscape views in various resolutions) and metadata of
web elements (salient HTML attributes, bounding box coordinates) from Common Crawl,4 and then

   4
       https://commoncrawl.org/


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Table 1: Overview of training datasets used for UGround.

       Dataset                             Annotation    # of Elements   # of Screenshots     Platform
       Web-Hybrid (Ours)                   Rule + LLM        9M               773K              Web
       Web-Direct (Ours)                      GPT            408K             408K              Web
       GUIAct (Chen et al., 2024)          GPT + Human       140K              13K              Web
       AndroidControl (Li et al., 2024b)     Human            47K              47K             Android
       Widget Caption (Li et al., 2020b)     Human            41K              15K             Android
       UIBert (Bai et al., 2021)             Human            16K              5K              Android
       AITZ (Zhang et al., 2024c)          GPT + Human         8K              8K              Android
       Total                                                 10M              1.3M          Web + Android

apply our data synthesis pipeline to get our main training dataset (Web-Hybrid). We leave more
details to Appendix E.1.
Supplementary Data. There have been multiple prior efforts on constructing grounding data for
Android, so we incorporate the existing datasets as well. We also use GPT-4o to directly synthesize
a small set of REs for web elements, with a focus on more open-ended REs (no constraints on the
type) and functional REs (Web-Direct). These additions help provide more diverse REs and cover
elements in Android, especially those not commonly found on the web (e.g., toggle buttons).
In total, we compile a dataset totaling 10M UI elements, with the majority (90%) from our hybrid
synthesis pipeline (Table 1). Elements on the same screenshot are batched to accelerate training.

2.3   M ODEL D ESIGN

We adopt a widely used open-source model architecture, 7B LLaVA-NeXT (Liu et al., 2024b), as our
backbone model for visual grounding. We make a few adaptations to tailor it for GUI grounding.
Input-Output Formulation. We always instruct the model to answer “In the screenshot, what are
the pixel element coordinates corresponding to {Description}?” Following recent work in visual
grounding (Cheng et al., 2024), we represent the answer in natural language so we can directly use
autoregressive decoding. Specifically, we opt for coordinates in the numerical form (e.g., “(1344,
1344)”) to precisely point to an element without any normalization.
Image Resolution. GUI screenshots are much larger than typical natural images, often requiring
a resolution above 1,000px for legibility. LLaVA (Liu et al., 2024c;a) was initially built for 336px
images, and was later scaled up to at most 772px via the AnyRes technique (Cheng et al., 2023;
Gao et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024b; Guo et al., 2024; Dong et al., 2024). It resizes and splits a large
image into small slices, encodes each slice independently with the vision encoder, and adds a special
token at the end of each row to help the language model keep track of the image shape. AnyRes
allows easy scaling up of input resolution. However, it is always a trade-off between the diversity
of supported resolutions and the speed of training and inference. To strike a balance and avoid
meaningless excessive resolutions, we enlarge the allowed input sizes to 36 ViT (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2021) slices, and use CLIP@224px (Radford et al., 2021) as the image encoder for more flexible
splitting, pushing the maximum supported resolution to 1,344 × 1,344 (landscape) and 896 × 2,016
(portrait). Additionally, we use Vicuna-1.5-7b-16k (Zheng et al., 2023) with 16K context length
to handle long visual contexts. Finally, there is a low-resolution image fusion module commonly
used in AnyRes. However, we find it ineffective for GUI grounding, as 224px is too small to provide
informative global context, so we leave it out from our model. More details are in Appendix F.


3     E XPERIMENTS

Most existing studies on GUI agents typically evaluate on one or two benchmarks. In contrast,
we conduct a much more comprehensive evaluation on GUI agents to show the universality of our
method. Our evaluation employs six benchmarks that span all three major platforms (i.e., web,
desktop, and mobile) and cover three settings: visual grounding (§3.1), offline agent evaluation on
cached environment states (§3.2), and online agent evaluation in live environments (§3.3). The visual
grounding setting focuses on the grounding performance of UGround, while the agent settings test
the end-to-end effectiveness of the SeeAct-V framework with UGround integrated. On the agent


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 2: Grounding accuracy on ScreenSpot (Standard Setting). Results for GPT-4, CogAgent, and
SeeClick are from Cheng et al. (2024).

                                              Mobile                 Desktop               Web
       Grounding Model                                                                                    Average
                                       Text    Icon/Widget    Text    Icon/Widget   Text   Icon/Widget
       GPT-4                           22.6        24.5       20.2        11.8       9.2         8.8       16.2
       GPT-4o                          20.2        24.9       21.1        23.6      12.2         7.8       18.3
       CogAgent (Hong et al., 2024)    67.0        24.0       74.2       20.0       70.4      28.6         47.4
       SeeClick (Cheng et al., 2024)   78.0        52.0       72.2       30.0       55.7      32.5         53.4
       UGround (Ours)                  82.8        60.3       82.5       63.6       80.4      70.4         73.3


      Table 3: Grounding accuracy on ScreenSpot (Agent Setting) with planner-generated REs.

                                          Mobile                    Desktop                Web
       Planner     Grounding                                                                                Avg.
                                   Text    Icon/Widget       Text    Icon/Widget    Text    Icon/Widget
                   SeeClick        76.6        55.5          68.0        28.6       40.9         23.3       48.8
       GPT-4
                   UGround         90.1        70.3          87.1        55.7       85.7         64.6       75.6
                   SeeClick       81.0         59.8          69.6        33.6       43.9         26.2       52.3
       GPT-4o
                   UGround        93.4         76.9          92.8        67.9       88.7         68.9       81.4


benchmarks, we compare the vision-only SeeAct-V framework with prior SOTA methods that usually
require additional text-based representations (HTML or a11y tree) as input. Within SeeAct-V, we
also compare UGround with existing visual grounding models whenever possible.


3.1    GUI V ISUAL G ROUNDING

We first evaluate UGround on the ScreenSpot benchmark (Cheng et al., 2024), which is specifically
designed for visual grounding on GUIs. The benchmark consists of 1,272 single-step instructions
and the corresponding bounding boxes of the target elements across mobile (e.g., iOS and Android),
desktop (e.g., macOS and Windows), and web environments. These elements vary between text-based
elements, icons (e.g., the trash can icon) and widgets (e.g., to-do lists), representing diverse GUI
element types.
We evaluate under two settings: 1) Standard Setting. In the standard setting of ScreenSpot, the
instructions are written by human annotators with a primary focus on functional description of the
target elements, e.g., simply “close” to refer to the ‘X’ button that closes a window or “set an alarm
for 7:40” when the input image shows the iPhone clock app with a list of inactive alarms. 2) Agent
Setting. For GUI agents, a grounding model needs to work with a planning model (e.g., an MLLM)
and ground the REs it generates, which includes not only functional REs but also visual and positional
REs (see §2.2). To provide a more comprehensive evaluation on visual grounding for GUI agents,
we input each ScreenSpot example to an MLLM, which acts as a planning model, and asks it to
generate diverse REs for the target element. This setting is therefore more representative of the
grounding challenges in GUI agents. We mainly compare UGround with SeeClick (Cheng et al.,
2024), the state-of-the-art visual grounding model on ScreenSpot, and another visual grounding
model CogAgent (Hong et al., 2024). To show the challenge of visual grounding for general-purpose
models, we also compare with GPT-4 and GPT-4o.
Results. As shown in Table 2 and Table 3, UGround outperforms all existing models across all
the settings and platforms by a substantial margin, about an absolute improvement of 20% on
average under the standard setting and 29% under the agent setting. Interestingly, UGround performs
remarkably well on desktop UIs, despite the fact that it is never trained on desktop screenshots
(Table 1). Compared with existing models, UGround performs especially well on icons and widgets,
which are generally more challenging for grounding because that requires deeper understanding of
the contextual (e.g., positional) and semantic (e.g., functional) information. Overall, the strong results
on ScreenSpot clearly demonstrates UGround’s universal grounding capability across platforms and
planners as well as the remarkable effectiveness of our simple data synthesis and modeling recipe.


                                                             6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Element accuracy on Multimodal-Mind2Web. Results by Choice and SoM are from Zheng
et al. (2024). The SoM results are on subsets of 30 tasks for each split.

            Input       Planner   Grounding   Cross-Task   Cross-Website   Cross-Domain    Avg.
                                  Choice         46.4           38.0            42.4       42.3
         Image + Text   GPT-4
                                  SoM            29.6           20.1            27.0       25.6
                                  SeeClick       29.7           28.5            30.7       29.6
                        GPT-4
            Image                 UGround        45.1           44.7            44.6       44.8
          (SeeAct-V)
                                  SeeClick       32.1          33.1            33.5        32.9
                        GPT-4o
                                  UGround        47.7          46.0            46.6        46.8

3.2   O FFLINE AGENT E VALUATION

We discuss the experimental setup for three offline agent evaluation benchmarks followed by result
discussion. Concrete examples from each benchmark are given in Appendix D.
Web: Multimodal-Mind2Web. We use Multimodal-Mind2Web (Zheng et al., 2024), the multimodal
extension of Mind2Web (Deng et al., 2023), for our evaluation on realistic web tasks. The test
split consists of 1,013 tasks spanning over 100 different websites. Each task contains a high-level
task instruction and a sequence of actions, with a screenshot of the webpage before each action, as
the golden trajectory. All the webpages along the golden trajectory are cached to support offline
evaluation. The tasks are crowdsourced with a focus on ensuring real-world meaningfulness (i.e.,
what real users would need on those websites).
Zheng et al. (2024) have clearly demonstrated the necessity of visual perception for web agents,
so we mainly compare with zero-shot methods that use MLLMs as planners and omit text-only
LLMs. Zheng et al. (2024) have also identified grounding as the main challenge and proposed several
grounding strategies, including 1) Choice, where the planner is asked to choose from a short list
of filtered HTML elements, and 2) SoM, where the input screenshot is superposed with Set-of-
Mark (Yang et al., 2023) labels and the planner is asked to select from the labels. Both strategies
require additional text-based representations (i.e., HTML) to obtain the candidates and/or locate the
elements in the screenshot to label. We report element accuracy, i.e., accuracy of selecting the correct
element, and omit operation scores because they are orthogonal to grounding comparisons.
Mobile: AndroidControl. We use AndroidControl (Li et al., 2024b), a large-scale Android dataset
comprising 15K unique tasks over 833 Apps. Screenshots, action sequences, and a11y trees are
cached from human demonstrations as golden trajectories for training and evaluation purposes. Each
action is also labeled by a corresponding low-level instruction (e.g., “set the hours to 6”). Following Li
et al. (2024b), we use 500 random steps from the test set. We compare with the SOTA zero-shot
method, the text-only version of M3A (Rawles et al., 2024), which instructs GPT-4 to generate
textual actions as well as select elements from the a11y tree (Choice). We adopt the two task settings
in Li et al. (2024b): high-level tasks, where only the high-level intent is provided, and low-level
tasks, where both the high-level intent and the corresponding low-level instruction for each step are
available. We use the standard metric, step-wise accuracy, where a step is considered successful only
if all the predicted actions, elements, and arguments (if applicable) are correct.
Desktop: OmniACT. We use OmniACT (Kapoor et al., 2024) to evaluate the accuracy of UGround
on desktop tasks. The dataset consists of 9,802 tasks covering 38 desktop applications and 27 websites
across different desktop platforms (macOS, Windows, and Linux). Each task requires the generation
of a PyAutoGUI script, which is a sequence of actions to complete the task on a single screenshot.
The SOTA method, DetACT (Kapoor et al., 2024), extracts UI elements and their coordinates through
a combination of OCR (optical character recognition), icon matching, and color detection modules.
These elements are filtered by task relevance and then passed to LLMs or MLLMs to generate the
PyAutoGUI script with the appropriate coordinates for interaction.
For SeeAct-V, we replace the input of the DetACT pipeline with only screenshots and instruct
MLLMs to generate element descriptions rather than directly generate coordinates. We then employ
UGround to obtain the coordinates of the elements, which are subsequently integrated into the
PyAutoGUI scripts. To ensure a fair comparison, we strictly follow the approach in Kapoor et al.
(2024), including the same prompt and retrieval strategy that selects five in-context examples from
the training set based on task similarity. We report the action score, which measures the accuracy of
the action sequences while penalizing errors in generated arguments.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Table 5: Step accuracy on AndroidControl                          Table 6: Action scores (AS) on OmniACT.
   over 500 random actions from the test split.                      Baseline results are from Kapoor et al. (2024).
   Baseline results are from Li et al. (2024b).
                                                                          Inputs       Planner   Grounding    AS
                                          Step Accuracy
        Input      Planner    Grounding                                    Text                  DetACT       11.6
                                          High     Low                                 GPT-4
                                                                        Image + Text             DetACT       17.0
         Text      GPT-4      Choice      42.1     55.0
                                                                                                 SeeClick     28.9
                              SeeClick    39.4     47.2                                GPT-4
                   GPT-4                                                  Image                  UGround      31.1
        Image                 UGround     46.2     58.0
                                                                        (SeeAct-V)
      (SeeAct-V)
                              SeeClick    41.8     52.8
                                                                                                 SeeClick     29.6
                   GPT-4o                                                              GPT-4o
                              UGround     48.4     62.4                                          UGround      32.8



  Table 7: Completion rate (CR) and task success                       Table 8: Task success rate (SR) on Android-
  rate (SR) on Mind2Web-Live. Baseline results                         World. Baseline results are from Rawles
  are from Pan et al. (2024).                                          et al. (2024).

       Inputs       Planner     Grounding        CR       SR                Input      Planner    Grounding     SR
                    GPT-4                        44.3     21.1             Text                   Choice       30.6
         Text                   Choice                                                 GPT-4
                    GPT-4o                       47.6     22.1          Image + Text              SoM          25.4
        Image       GPT-4                        50.7     23.1             Image       GPT-4                   31.0
                                UGround                                                           UGround
      (SeeAct-V)    GPT-4o                       50.8     19.2           (SeeAct-V)    GPT-4o                  32.8


Results. As shown in Table 4, Table 5, and Table 6, SeeAct-V with UGround outperforms all the
baselines across the board, despite only using raw screenshots as input while baselines use additional
input. UGround also consistently outperforms a strong GUI grounding model, SeeClick. These
results provide solid support for human-like vision-only embodiment for GUI agents, a position this
work aims to make a case for. The results also further validate UGround’s efficacy as a universal
grounding model for GUI agents.


3.3    O NLINE AGENT E VALUATION

We further evaluate our approach in an end-to-end manner on two online agent benchmarks that
closely resemble the offline web and Android benchmarks in §3.2, but involve interactions with live
websites and mobile applications. Due to the high cost of online evaluation, we only use UGround
for grounding.
Web: Mind2Web-Live. We use the test set from Mind2Web-Live (Pan et al., 2024). The benchmark
is built on Mind2Web (Deng et al., 2023) by adding functional evaluation to the tasks that makes
automated evaluation possible on live websites. Specifically, it defines and annotates key nodes for
each task, which are critical steps that must be completed for a task to be considered successful,
regardless of which trajectory an agent takes. The baseline agent from Pan et al. (2024) is text-only,
perceives and interacts with webpages by hundreds of HTML elements at a time. For SeeAct-V, we
change the observation to be screenshots only, and make necessary changes to the original action
space to fully eliminate the dependency on HTML during planning, grounding, and execution (details
in Appendix G.5). We use standard metrics: micro completion rate, which measures the proportion
of completed key nodes across all the tasks, and task success rate, which measures the proportion of
fully completed tasks.
Mobile: AndroidWorld. We use AndroidWorld (Rawles et al., 2024), an online mobile agent
benchmark running in Android emulators. It includes 116 tasks across 20 Apps, with evaluation
based on the final states of the device. We compare with the SOTA agent M3A and its text-only
variant from Rawles et al. (2024). They receives both raw and SoM images, together with textual UI
elements, or only the textual UI elements as the observation respectively. Both variants employ a
ReAct-style reasoning process (Yao et al., 2023) to select the next target element from a list of UI
elements. Additionally, they integrate self-reflection (Shinn et al., 2024) for the agent to summarize
its current action and improve decision-making in subsequent steps. We report task success rate,
which measures the percentage of fully completed tasks.


                                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                80


                                                                                                  Performance
                                                                                                                70         Mobile
                                         UGround Error                   Planner Error
                                                                                                                           Web
          ScreenSpot-Web                  18.2                                                                             Desktop
      Multimodal-Mind2Web         8.7                                                                           60         Average
        ScreenSpot-Mobile                        27.7                                                                      SeeClick (Avg.)
       AndroidControl-High       5.3
        AndroidControl-Low         9.3
                                                                                                                50
                                                                                                        50     100 200 400 773
       ScreenSpot-Desktop                                    46.5
                                                                                                # Web Synthetic Training Data (K) (# Screenshots)
                             0           20             40          60        80         100
                                                        Percentage (%)

                                                                                               Figure 5: Scaling curve of UGround on
  Figure 4: Error distribution from manual analysis.                                           ScreenSpot w.r.t. Web-Hybrid data size.


Results. SeeAct-V with UGround gets comparable or higher performance in online agent evaluation,
as shown in Table 7 and Table 8. Particularly, it achieves a much higher success rate compared
with the SoM variant of M3A, even though Android environments have less dense UI layouts and
are generally more suitable for SoM (i.e., less obstruction by the SoM labels). These results again
provide solid support for the feasibility and promises of human-like vision-only embodiment for GUI
agents and the effectiveness of UGround.

3.4       E RROR A NALYSIS

We conduct a manual error analysis of the best performing method, SeeAct-V with UGround, to
understand the bottleneck for further improvement. We randomly sample 60 failure cases from
each split of ScreenSpot (agent setting with GPT-4o), AndroidControl, and Multimodal-Mind2Web.
Except for data annotation errors, errors from the models can be categorized into planning errors, i.e.,
generating plans with incorrect element descriptions, and grounding errors, i.e., predicting incorrect
coordinates for a correct element description from the planner.
As shown in Figure 4, planning errors are the dominant cause of failures across all benchmarks,
further confirming the strong grounding capability of UGround. The most frequent error is that the
planner generates (otherwise correct) description of an incorrect element on the screen, indicating a
lack of correct understanding of either the task and/or the elements. Other common planning errors
include hallucinating non-existent elements or producing overly generic descriptions that are too
vague to uniquely locate the target element, even for human evaluators.
On the other hand, on ScreenSpot-Mobile and ScreenSpot-Desktop, a considerable portion of the
failures do stem from grounding errors. Both desktop and mobile UIs feature a pervasive use of icons
with idiosyncratic meaning. For example, a stylized dollar sign represents the Zelle App, or an icon
with two cartoon people represents one’s contact list in Microsoft Outlook. We find that pretrained
MLLMs and our web-centric grounding training are effective in capturing the semantics of popular
icons (e.g., icons representing Google) or commonsense meaning (e.g., clock icons usually represent
time-related functions like alarms). However, it is challenging to capture the idiosyncratic semantics
of icons in the long tail, which arguably requires either additional documentation or more targeted
exploration to learn. This is a major cause of the grounding errors. Interestingly, when tested on
more realistic agent tasks, e.g., in AndroidControl, AndroidWorld, and OmniACT, UGround still
proves to be relatively robust. This is because most of the agent tasks concern things in the head
of the distribution; things in the long tail are naturally rare (though still important). This explains
the strong performance of UGround on mobile and desktop agent benchmarks. Nonetheless, how to
capture idiosyncratic semantics in the long tail is still an open challenge for grounding.

3.5       T RAINING DATA A NALYSIS : S CALING AND A BLATIONS

We conduct scaling analysis and ablation studies on our training data to better understand the
contribution of different data for UGround’s strong performance, and use the agent setting of
ScreenSpot for the evaluation (with GPT-4o as the planner). Further ablations around data, model
design, and RE types are provided in Appendix C.


                                                                                           9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Table 9: Training data ablations for UGround on ScreenSpot (Agent Setting).

                                Mobile                Desktop               Web
         Training Data                                                                    Average
                         Text    Icon/Widget   Text    Icon/Widget   Text   Icon/Widget
         Web-Hybrid      89.0       73.4       88.1        61.4      84.8      64.6        76.9
         Others          92.3       71.2       84.5        46.4      87.0      59.2        73.4
         All             93.4       76.9       92.8        67.9      88.7      68.9        81.4


Scaling Curve on Web-Hybrid. We investigate the scaling of our primary synthetic dataset, Web-
Hybrid, which consists of 9M data instances over 773K web screenshots in total. The scaling results
in Figure 5 show that the average performance consistently improves as the data scales up, though
the return starts diminishing after 100K screenshots. Notably, with just 50K screenshots (about 600K
elements) as training data, UGround surpasses SeeClick by more than 10%, which is trained on about
3M web and Android elements from about 400K screenshots. The results clearly show the high data
quality and the effectiveness for grounding training of our data synthesis pipeline. Upon manual
inspection, we observe that additional data after 100K screenshots primarily enhances understanding
of less frequent elements such as radio buttons, checkboxes, or very small text elements. As data
increases, the model can point to the center of element bounding boxes more accurately and better
handle tiny hyperlinks.
Training Data Ablations. To further investigate the impact of training data sources, we compare
the performance of UGround trained on only Web-Hybrid, only the supplementary data, or both
(see Table 1). Results in Table 9 further validate the necessity of Web-Hybrid. Training on other data
without Web-Hybrid often underperforms training on Web-Hybrid alone. This is most evident on
icons and widgets, which require understanding more diverse aspects, such as visual features and
functions, than text-based elements. Finally, these two data sources are complementary and their
combination yield the best performance across the board.

4    C ONCLUSIONS AND L IMITATIONS
We introduce UGround, a universal GUI visual grounding model developed with large-scale web-
based synthetic data. UGround shows strong cross-platform generalization and substantially out-
performs the prior models. We propose a vision-only framework SeeAct-V that allows pixel-level
interactions based solely on visual input. Comprehensive evaluation on both offline and online agent
benchmarks demonstrates that SeeAct-V agents with UGround can achieve comparable and often
better performance than prior SOTA agents that rely on additional textual inputs like HTML or a11y
trees for observation or grounding.
Nevertheless, there are still some limitations that could be addressed in future work to advance visual
grounding in GUI applications and visually grounded GUI agents. First, UGround is trained on very
large-scale synthetic data. Considering the similarity and repetition of elements between web pages,
there is room to improve on data efficiency during training, for example by better data grouping and
deduplication. On the other hand, despite the cross-platform generalization shown in our experiment
results, the issue of long-tail elements remains under-addressed in this work. Mobile UIs and desktop
UIs often feature specific icons with idiosyncratic semantics, and it can be impractical to account
for every long-tail element in a training set. Additionally, no desktop UI data is incorporated in the
training of this work, which limits the performance on desktop UIs. Given the scarcity of training
datasets for desktop UIs, we anticipate the development of more comprehensive datasets in this
domain. Lastly, UGround depends on an external planner; it is not meant to function independently
as a GUI agent. Nonetheless, we hope that our datasets, model, and framework can contribute to
future studies of vision-only agents, as well as contribute to advancing the grounding capabilities of
end-to-end models, as strong grounding data has been shown to improve end-to-end models (Cheng
et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024).

E THICS S TATEMENT
This work employs web-based data synthesis to develop visual grounding models for GUIs. The
synthesis pipeline and data collection presented in this paper are intended solely for research purposes


                                                      10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


related to GUI grounding and GUI agents, in line with prior works in the field (Hong et al., 2024;
Cheng et al., 2024).
The webpages utilized in our work are sourced from the Common Crawl dataset5 , which is a publicly
available Internet archive for research and non-commercial use. We use only a small subset of it and
strictly adhere to Common Crawl’s terms of use6 throughout our study.
Our use and dissemination of the data are exclusively for academic research and fully comply with
Section 107 of the U.S. Copyright Law regarding Fair Use. Prior to release, the data undergoes
rigorous content moderation. We acknowledge full responsibility for any legal issues arising from our
data collection and accept all associated risks. Furthermore, the distribution of the data is managed
in strict accordance with applicable regulations and guidelines to ensure compliance with AI ethics
standards and non-commercial usage.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful for the collaboration with the Orby AI team (particularly Sanjari Srivastava, Peng Qi,
Gang Li, and Will Lu) for their contribution on data collection and analysis, as well as for providing
computing resources. We would also like to extend our appreciation to colleagues from the OSU
NLP group and Kanzhi Cheng, Yulu Guo, Lizi Yang for their insightful comments. Special thanks to
Yichen Pan, Christopher Rawles, Dehan Kong, Alice Li, and Raghav Kapoor for their assistance with
evaluation. This work is supported in part by Orby AI, ARL W911NF2220144, and NSF CAREER
#1942980. The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the U.S. government.
The U.S. government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for government purposes
notwithstanding any copyright notice herein.

R EFERENCES
AI@Meta. Llama 3 model card, 2024. URL https://github.com/meta-llama/llama3/blob/
  main/MODEL CARD.md.

Chongyang Bai, Xiaoxue Zang, Ying Xu, Srinivas Sunkara, Abhinav Rastogi, Jindong Chen, and
  Blaise Agüera y Arcas. UIBert: Learning generic multimodal representations for ui understanding.
  In Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-21,
  pp. 1705–1712, 2021.

Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang, Sinan Tan, Peng Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang Zhou,
   and Jingren Zhou. Qwen-VL: A versatile vision-language model for understanding, localization,
   text reading, and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12966, 2023.

Pratyay Banerjee, Shweti Mahajan, Kushal Arora, Chitta Baral, and Oriana Riva. Lexi: Self-
  supervised learning of the ui language. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics: EMNLP 2022, 2022.

Ruisheng Cao, Fangyu Lei, Haoyuan Wu, Jixuan Chen, Yeqiao Fu, Hongcheng Gao, Xinzhuang
  Xiong, Hanchong Zhang, Yuchen Mao, Wenjing Hu, et al. Spider2-V: How far are multimodal
  agents from automating data science and engineering workflows? In The Thirty-eight Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2024.

Jun Chen, Deyao Zhu, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, Zechun Liu, Pengchuan Zhang, Raghuraman
  Krishnamoorthi, Vikas Chandra, Yunyang Xiong, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. MiniGPT-v2: large
  language model as a unified interface for vision-language multi-task learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.09478, 2023a.

Keqin Chen, Zhao Zhang, Weili Zeng, Richong Zhang, Feng Zhu, and Rui Zhao. Shikra: Unleashing
  multimodal llm’s referential dialogue magic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15195, 2023b.
   5
       https://commoncrawl.org/
   6
       https://commoncrawl.org/terms-of-use


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wentong Chen, Junbo Cui, Jinyi Hu, Yujia Qin, Junjie Fang, Yue Zhao, Chongyi Wang, Jun Liu,
 Guirong Chen, Yupeng Huo, et al. GUICourse: From general vision language models to versatile
 gui agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11317, 2024.
Kanzhi Cheng, Qiushi Sun, Yougang Chu, Fangzhi Xu, Yantao Li, Jianbing Zhang, and Zhiyong Wu.
  SeeClick: Harnessing GUI grounding for advanced visual GUI agents. In Proceedings of the 62nd
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2024.
Siyuan Cheng, Bozhong Tian, Qingbin Liu, Xi Chen, Yongheng Wang, Huajun Chen, and Ningyu
  Zhang. Can we edit multimodal large language models? In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 13877–13888, 2023.
Biplab Deka, Zifeng Huang, Chad Franzen, Joshua Hibschman, Daniel Afergan, Yang Li, Jeffrey
  Nichols, and Ranjitha Kumar. Rico: A mobile app dataset for building data-driven design
  applications. In Proceedings of the 30th annual ACM symposium on user interface software and
  technology, pp. 845–854, 2017.
Xiang Deng, Yu Gu, Boyuan Zheng, Shijie Chen, Sam Stevens, Boshi Wang, Huan Sun, and Yu Su.
  Mind2Web: Towards a generalist agent for the web. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 36, pp. 28091–28114, 2023.
Xiaoyi Dong, Pan Zhang, Yuhang Zang, Yuhang Cao, Bin Wang, Linke Ouyang, Songyang Zhang,
  Haodong Duan, Wenwei Zhang, Yining Li, Hang Yan, Yang Gao, Zhe Chen, xinyue zhang, Wei
  Li, Li Jingwen, Wenhai Wang, Kai Chen, Conghui He, Xingcheng ZHANG, Jifeng Dai, Yu Qiao,
  Dahua Lin, and Jiaqi Wang. InternLM-XComposer2-4KHD: A pioneering large vision-language
  model handling resolutions from 336 pixels to 4K HD. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 37, pp. 42566–42592, 2024.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image
  is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2021.
Peng Gao, Renrui Zhang, Chris Liu, Longtian Qiu, Siyuan Huang, Weifeng Lin, Shitian Zhao,
  Shijie Geng, Ziyi Lin, Peng Jin, et al. SPHINX-X: Scaling data and parameters for a family of
  multi-modal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05935, 2024.
Zonghao Guo, Ruyi Xu, Yuan Yao, Junbo Cui, Zanlin Ni, Chunjiang Ge, Tat-Seng Chua, Zhiyuan
  Liu, and Gao Huang. LLaVA-UHD: An LMM perceiving any aspect ratio and high-resolution
  images. In Computer Vision - ECCV 2024 - 18th European Conference, Milan, Italy, September
  29-October 4, 2024, Proceedings, Part LXXXIII, volume 15141, pp. 390–406, 2024.
Izzeddin Gur, Hiroki Furuta, Austin V Huang, Mustafa Safdari, Yutaka Matsuo, Douglas Eck, and
  Aleksandra Faust. A real-world webagent with planning, long context understanding, and program
  synthesis. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Hongliang He, Wenlin Yao, Kaixin Ma, Wenhao Yu, Yong Dai, Hongming Zhang, Zhenzhong Lan,
  and Dong Yu. WebVoyager: Building an end-to-end web agent with large multimodal models. In
 Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
 1: Long Papers), 2024.
Wenyi Hong, Weihan Wang, Qingsong Lv, Jiazheng Xu, Wenmeng Yu, Junhui Ji, Yan Wang, Zihan
 Wang, Yuxiao Dong, Ming Ding, et al. CogAgent: A visual language model for GUI agents.
 In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
 14281–14290, 2024.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Peter C Humphreys, David Raposo, Tobias Pohlen, Gregory Thornton, Rachita Chhaparia, Alistair
  Muldal, Josh Abramson, Petko Georgiev, Adam Santoro, and Timothy Lillicrap. A data-driven
  approach for learning to control computers. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  9466–9482. PMLR, 2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Raghav Kapoor, Yash Parag Butala, Melisa Russak, Jing Yu Koh, Kiran Kamble, Waseem Alshikh,
  and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. OmniACT: A dataset and benchmark for enabling multimodal generalist
  autonomous agents for desktop and web. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17553, 2024.
Andrej Karpathy, Armand Joulin, and Li F Fei-Fei. Deep fragment embeddings for bidirectional
  image sentence mapping. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 27,
  2014.
Geunwoo Kim, Pierre Baldi, and Stephen McAleer. Language models can solve computer tasks. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 39648–39677, 2023.
Jing Yu Koh, Robert Lo, Lawrence Jang, Vikram Duvvur, Ming Chong Lim, Po-Yu Huang, Graham
   Neubig, Shuyan Zhou, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Daniel Fried. VisualWebArena: Evaluating
   multimodal agents on realistic visual web tasks. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the
   Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 881–905, 2024.
Zhengfeng Lai, Haotian Zhang, Wentao Wu, Haoping Bai, Aleksei Timofeev, Xianzhi Du, Zhe Gan,
  Jiulong Shan, Chen-Nee Chuah, Yinfei Yang, et al. From scarcity to efficiency: Improving clip
  training via visual-enriched captions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07699, 2023.
Bo Li, Hao Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Dong Guo, Yuanhan Zhang, Renrui Zhang, Feng Li, Ziwei Liu,
  and Chunyuan Li. LLaVA-NeXT: What else influences visual instruction tuning beyond data?, May
  2024a. URL https://llava-vl.github.io/blog/2024-05-25-llava-next-ablations/.
Gang Li and Yang Li. Spotlight: Mobile ui understanding using vision-language models with a focus.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Wei Li, William Bishop, Alice Li, Chris Rawles, Folawiyo Campbell-Ajala, Divya Tyamagundlu,
 and Oriana Riva. On the effects of data scale on computer control agents. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2406.03679, 2024b.
Yang Li, Jiacong He, Xin Zhou, Yuan Zhang, and Jason Baldridge. Mapping natural language
  instructions to mobile ui action sequences. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 8198–8210, 2020a.
Yang Li, Gang Li, Luheng He, Jingjie Zheng, Hong Li, and Zhiwei Guan. Widget captioning:
  Generating natural language description for mobile user interface elements. In Proceedings
  of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp.
  5495–5510, 2020b.
Zhangheng Li, Keen You, Haotian Zhang, Di Feng, Harsh Agrawal, Xiujun Li, Mohana Prasad Sathya
  Moorthy, Jeff Nichols, Yinfei Yang, and Zhe Gan. Ferret-UI 2: Mastering universal user interface
  understanding across platforms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18967, 2024c.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, and Yong Jae Lee. Improved baselines with visual instruction
  tuning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 26296–26306, 2024a.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Sheng Shen, and Yong Jae Lee.
  LLaVA-NeXT: Improved reasoning, OCR, and world knowledge, January 2024b. URL https:
 //llava-vl.github.io/blog/2024-01-30-llava-next/.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 36, 2024c.
Chuofan Ma, Yi Jiang, Jiannan Wu, Zehuan Yuan, and Xiaojuan Qi. Groma: Localized visual
  tokenization for grounding multimodal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13013,
  2024.
Junhua Mao, Jonathan Huang, Alexander Toshev, Oana Camburu, Alan L Yuille, and Kevin Murphy.
  Generation and comprehension of unambiguous object descriptions. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 11–20, 2016.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Runliang Niu, Jindong Li, Shiqi Wang, Yali Fu, Xiyu Hu, Xueyuan Leng, He Kong, Yi Chang, and
  Qi Wang. ScreenAgent: A vision language model-driven computer control agent. In Proceedings
  of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-24, 2024.
Yichen Pan, Dehan Kong, Sida Zhou, Cheng Cui, Yifei Leng, Bing Jiang, Hangyu Liu, Yanyi
  Shang, Shuyan Zhou, Tongshuang Wu, et al. WebCanvas: Benchmarking web agents in online
  environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12373, 2024.
Zhiliang Peng, Wenhui Wang, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Shaohan Huang, Shuming Ma, and Furu
  Wei. Kosmos-2: Grounding multimodal large language models to the world. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.14824, 2023.
Yijun Qian, Yujie Lu, Alexander G Hauptmann, and Oriana Riva. Visual grounding for user interfaces.
  In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 6: Industry Track), pp.
  97–107, 2024.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Christopher Rawles, Alice Li, Daniel Rodriguez, Oriana Riva, and Timothy Lillicrap. Android in
  the wild: A large-scale dataset for android device control. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 59708–59728, 2023.
Christopher Rawles, Sarah Clinckemaillie, Yifan Chang, Jonathan Waltz, Gabrielle Lau, Marybeth
  Fair, Alice Li, William Bishop, Wei Li, Folawiyo Campbell-Ajala, et al. AndroidWorld: A dynamic
  benchmarking environment for autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14573, 2024.
Peter Shaw, Mandar Joshi, James Cohan, Jonathan Berant, Panupong Pasupat, Hexiang Hu, Urvashi
  Khandelwal, Kenton Lee, and Kristina N Toutanova. From pixels to UI actions: Learning to follow
  instructions via graphical user interfaces. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 36, pp. 34354–34370, 2023.
Tianlin Shi, Andrej Karpathy, Linxi Fan, Jonathan Hernandez, and Percy Liang. World of bits: An
  open-domain platform for web-based agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 3135–3144. PMLR, 2017.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
  Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.
Junyang Wang, Haiyang Xu, Jiabo Ye, Ming Yan, Weizhou Shen, Ji Zhang, Fei Huang, and Jitao
  Sang. Mobile-Agent: Autonomous multi-modal mobile device agent with visual perception. In
  ICLR 2024 Workshop on Large Language Model (LLM) Agents, 2024a.
Weiyun Wang, Min Shi, Qingyun Li, Wenhai Wang, Zhenhang Huang, Linjie Xing, Zhe Chen, Hao
 Li, Xizhou Zhu, Zhiguo Cao, et al. The all-seeing project: Towards panoptic visual recognition
 and understanding of the open world. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2024b.
Wenhai Wang, Zhe Chen, Xiaokang Chen, Jiannan Wu, Xizhou Zhu, Gang Zeng, Ping Luo, Tong
 Lu, Jie Zhou, Yu Qiao, and Jifeng Dai. VisionLLM: Large language model is also an open-ended
 decoder for vision-centric tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36,
 pp. 61501–61513, 2023.
WebAIM. The WebAIM Million. https://webaim.org/projects/million/, 2024. Accessed:
 2024-08-04.
Zhiyong Wu, Chengcheng Han, Zichen Ding, Zhenmin Weng, Zhoumianze Liu, Shunyu Yao, Tao Yu,
  and Lingpeng Kong. OS-Copilot: Towards generalist computer agents with self-improvement. In
  ICLR 2024 Workshop on Large Language Model (LLM) Agents, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Jing Hua
  Toh, Zhoujun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, Yitao Liu, Yiheng Xu, Shuyan Zhou, Silvio
  Savarese, Caiming Xiong, Victor Zhong, and Tao Yu. Osworld: Benchmarking multimodal agents
  for open-ended tasks in real computer environments. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 37, pp. 52040–52094, 2024.
An Yan, Zhengyuan Yang, Wanrong Zhu, Kevin Lin, Linjie Li, Jianfeng Wang, Jianwei Yang, Yiwu
  Zhong, Julian McAuley, Jianfeng Gao, et al. GPT-4V in wonderland: Large multimodal models
  for zero-shot smartphone gui navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07562, 2023.
Jianwei Yang, Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Xueyan Zou, Chunyuan Li, and Jianfeng Gao. Set-of-Mark
   prompting unleashes extraordinary visual grounding in GPT-4v. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11441,
   2023.
Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable
  real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:20744–20757, 2022.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Keen You, Haotian Zhang, Eldon Schoop, Floris Weers, Amanda Swearngin, Jeffrey Nichols, Yinfei
  Yang, and Zhe Gan. Ferret-UI: Grounded mobile ui understanding with multimodal llms. ArXiv,
  abs/2404.05719, 2024.
Licheng Yu, Patrick Poirson, Shan Yang, Alexander C Berg, and Tamara L Berg. Modeling context
  in referring expressions. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European Conference, Amsterdam,
  The Netherlands, October 11-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part II 14, pp. 69–85. Springer, 2016.
Zhuosheng Zhan and Aston Zhang. You only look at screens: Multimodal chain-of-action agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11436, 2023.
Chaoyun Zhang, Liqun Li, Shilin He, Xu Zhang, Bo Qiao, Si Qin, Minghua Ma, Yu Kang, Qingwei
  Lin, Saravan Rajmohan, et al. UFO: A UI-focused agent for windows os interaction. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.07939, 2024a.
Haotian Zhang, Mingfei Gao, Zhe Gan, Philipp Dufter, Nina Wenzel, Forrest Huang, Dhruti Shah,
  Xianzhi Du, Bowen Zhang, Yanghao Li, et al. MM1.5: Methods, analysis & insights from
  multimodal llm fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.20566, 2024b.
Jiwen Zhang, Jihao Wu, Yihua Teng, Minghui Liao, Nuo Xu, Xiao Xiao, Zhongyu Wei, and Duyu
  Tang. Android in the zoo: Chain-of-action-thought for GUI agents. In Findings of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, 2024c.
Boyuan Zheng, Boyu Gou, Jihyung Kil, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. GPT-4V(ision) is a generalist web
  agent, if grounded. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 46595–46623, 2023.
Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng,
  Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, et al. WebArena: A realistic web environment for building
  autonomous agents. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table of Contents in Appendix

A Related Work                                                                                      17

B Philosophy Behind SeeAct-V and UGround                                                            18

C Further Ablation Studies                                                                          18
   C.1 Controlled Comparison to Baseline Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           18
   C.2 Model Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19
   C.3 RE Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19

D Examples                                                                                          20
   D.1 Multimodal-Mind2Web . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          20
   D.2 AndroidControl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   D.3 OmniACT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   D.4 Training Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      22

E Data Construction                                                                                 23
   E.1 Web-Hybrid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       23
   E.2 Web-Direct . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       24
   E.3 Open-Source Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       25

F Model and Training Details                                                                        25
   F.1   Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     25
   F.2   AnyRes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     26
   F.3   Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26

G Evaluation Details                                                                                26
   G.1 Model Endpoints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        26
   G.2 Multimodal-Mind2Web . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          26
   G.3 AndroidControl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       26
   G.4 OmniACT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        27
   G.5 Mind2Web-Live . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        27
   G.6 AndroidWorld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       27

H Prompts                                                                                           28


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    R ELATED W ORK
GUI Agents. LLMs and MLLMs have demonstrated great capabilities and potentials in GUI
automation, working as digital agents in various GUI environments (Yan et al., 2023; Kim et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2024a; Zheng et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024). Despite the growing number of studies
focused on building multimodal agents (Koh et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024; Cao et al., 2024), most
work still relies on HTML or a11y trees for grounding, even when they are not used for observation.
In this work, we advance an alternative line of research: pixel-level visually grounded GUI agents
(Shaw et al., 2023; Zhan & Zhang, 2023; Hong et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2024; Niu et al., 2024).
Unlike nearly all previous work of this line, we propose a generic two-stage approach that separates
planning and visual grounding to build vision-only GUI agents, which perform remarkably well on
realistic agent benchmarks with vision-only input, and offers the flexibility to the choices of planning
and grounding models.
Visual Grounding. Visual grounding has been long studied on natural images (Karpathy et al.,
2014; Mao et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2016). More recently, with the advancements of MLLMs, their
visual grounding capabilities on natural images have attracted significant attention (Bai et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2023a;b; Peng et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024b; 2023; Ma et al., 2024). However, due to
significant gaps in image resolution and GUI understanding, these models trained on natural contexts
work poorly on GUI visual grounding (Cheng et al., 2024). One of the most popular approaches,
SoM (Yang et al., 2023), proposes a visual prompting method that adds marks such as boxes and
numbers to images and instructs MLLMs to identify the referred objects by the labels. It is widely
adopted in GUI scenarios (Yan et al., 2023; He et al., 2024; Koh et al., 2024), but still suffers from
problems including reliance on complete object information or object segmentation. Only few studies
have been conducted for visual grounding on GUI screenshots. Based on Rico (Deka et al., 2017),
Bai et al. (2021) annotates referring expressions by humans; RicoSCA (Li et al., 2020a) generates a
larger synthetic referring expression dataset; and Li et al. (2020b) collect human-labeled captions of
UI elements. They have been primary resources for GUI grounding for a long time (Li & Li, 2022;
Banerjee et al., 2022). Later on, Qian et al. (2024) synthesize referring expressions from Rico by
heuristic rules and train a vision language model by a new layout-aware contrastive learning technique.
CogAgent (Hong et al., 2024) compiles HTML documents and screenshots from real websites to GUI
grounding data for the pretraining stage, and finetunes on open-source and in-house human-labeled
data, to build a 18B MLLM with strong pixel-level GUI grounding capabilities. Ferret-UI (You et al.,
2024) develops a UI generalist MLLM trained on a series of UI-related tasks including grounding.
The most similar effort to ours is SeeClick (Cheng et al., 2024), which enhances Qwen-VL (Bai et al.,
2023) by finetuning on GUI grounding data, including simplistic synthetic data compiled from real
websites. It still falls short of the small image resolution of Qwen-VL, as well as the simplistic nature
of the training data. Cheng et al. (2024) also create a new grounding benchmark for GUIs, which
benefits our evaluation and analysis.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     P HILOSOPHY B EHIND S EE ACT-V AND UG ROUND

When it comes to agent designs, the current wisdom, by and large, is to train a monolithic LLM (e.g.,
CogAgent (Hong et al., 2024), SeeClick (Cheng et al., 2024), along with several recent supervised
fine-tuning endeavors aimed at enhancing “agentic behaviors”). At a philosophical level, part of the
goal of SeeAct-V is to challenge that status quo and advocate a modular design for language agents
instead.
A fundamental challenge of language agents arises from the complexity, dynamism, and inherent
idiosyncrasies of the environments in which they operate. For instance, consider web agents: the
internet comprises over one billion websites, each of which can exhibit an extremely large and
dynamic number of states, and each can be constantly changing (for example, due to frequent updates
in backend databases). Furthermore, there is a considerable amount of highly idiosyncratic semantics
in each environment, e.g., uncommon icons, jargon, and counter-intuitive designs.
As a result, although we are still at the early stage of agent research, we posit that a monolithic
model, regardless of its future scale and capabilities, is unlikely to fully encapsulate the diverse
complexities and idiosyncrasies across all environments. Therefore, developing a generalist agent
that reliably generalizes across various contexts necessitates a modular system design. This involves
synergistically orchestrating a foundation model (e.g., GPT-4o) with multiple specialized modules,
each tailored to specific functionalities.
Grounding, in particular, is a capability for which a dedicated module is highly advantageous.
Fundamentally, grounding involves interpreting domain-specific semantics and creating a map
between that and natural language representations understood by a generic LLM. A specialized
grounding module simplifies the capture of idiosyncratic semantics and facilitates easier adaptation
across different domains (for example, by fine-tuning the grounding model rather than the entire
foundation model). Consequently, the grounding module provides domain-specific semantic input to
the foundation model. This constitutes a central motivation for the design of SeeAct-V and the work
presented herein.
Our design also offers several practical advantages:
Modularity: It permits the independent study and enhancement of UGround as a standalone ground-
ing model, decoupled from specific planning modules.
Flexibility: It is compatible with diverse multimodal LLMs and grounding models without requiring
specialized fine-tuning on downstream benchmarks.
Comparative Consistency: By standardizing the planning stage, the design minimizes confounding
variables, thereby facilitating a clearer assessment of how various grounding models and methods
influence agent performance.
Empirical results demonstrate that SeeAct-V, when integrated with UGround, outperforms end-to-end
MLLMs (whether employing textual or SoM grounding). This is particularly noteworthy considering
that training end-to-end models demands extensive high-quality data on agent trajectories (which
combine both planning and grounding), which is both challenging and costly.



C     F URTHER A BLATION S TUDIES

In addition to the studies in §3.5, we present further ablation experiments to investigate both model
design choices and the effectiveness of our web-based synthetic dataset. We report grounding
accuracy on ScreenSpot (Agent Setting), with GPT-4o as the planner.


C.1   C ONTROLLED C OMPARISON TO BASELINE M ODELS

Both model design and training data contribute critically to the strong performance of UGround. To
isolate their individual contributions, we introduce a new variant, UGround-Qwen, which is fine-tuned


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Table C.1: Ablations of data and base models for UGround on ScreenSpot (Agent Setting).

                                                                Mobile                     Desktop                     Web
 Model             Model Design   Continual SFT Data                                                                                  Avg
                                                        Text     Icon/Widget        Text    Icon/Widget         Text    Icon/Widget
 Qwen-VL-Chat        Qwen-VL             None           21.3          21.4          18.6          10.7           9.1        5.8       14.5
 SeeClick            Qwen-VL         Full SeeClick      81.0          59.8          69.6          33.6          43.9       26.2       52.3
 UGround-Qwen        Qwen-VL         Web-Hybrid         80.2          57.2          76.3          39.3          74.4       47.1       62.4
 UGround              Ours           Web-Hybrid         89.0          73.4          88.1          61.4          84.8       64.6       76.9

         Table C.2: Ablations of image resolution for UGround on ScreenSpot (Agent Setting).

                                                        Mobile                      Desktop                       Web
      Continual SFT Data   Image Resolution                                                                                       Avg.
                                                 Text    Icon/Widget         Text     Icon/Widget        Text      Icon/Widget
                           Fixed 448 x 448       89.4          65.1          83.5          56.4          77.0          61.7       72.2
                           Fixed 896 x 896       86.8          69.0          85.1          62.9          81.4          57.8       73.8
      Web-Hybrid
                           Fixed 1,344 x 1,344   79.9          68.6          86.1          62.1          79.1          63.6       73.2
                           Dynamic (Ours)        89.0          73.4          88.1          61.4          84.8          64.6       76.9



from Qwen-VL-Chat (the same backbone used in SeeClick), using only our main web-based synthetic
dataset, Web-Hybrid7 . The results are presented in Table C.1.
Training Data: When using the same backbone (Qwen-VL-Chat), UGround-Qwen trained solely
on Web-Hybrid achieves an average absolute improvement of 10.1% over SeeClick, even though
SeeClick incorporates additional open-source mobile UI data. This result underscores both the high
quality of our synthetic web data and its capability to generalize across platforms.
Model Design: UGround demonstrates a 14.5% absolute improvement over UGround-Qwen, thereby
highlighting the effectiveness of our model design.
We omit comparisons with CogAgent due to its inferior performance relative to SeeClick, despite its
substantially larger model size (18B parameters) and dataset (140M grounding samples).

C.2      M ODEL D ESIGN

We analyze the effect of image resolution on performance, focusing on two key aspects: (1) the
impact of increasing image resolution using scaled-up AnyRes grid settings, and (2) the benefits of
dynamic resolution and aspect ratio adjustments compared to fixed square configurations.
Scaling of Image Resolution. We scale up image resolution with fixed square sizes for convenience
(448 x 448 → 896 x 896→ 1,344 x 1,344).
As shown in Table C.2, larger image resolution generally improves the model performance, particu-
larly on web and desktop UIs that often contain small links and icons. However, mobile UIs, as being
less dense, do not benefit as significantly from increased resolution.
Dynamic Image Resolution and Aspect Ratio. As shown in Table C.2, UGround benefits from
dynamic image resolution supported by AnyRes, effectively adapting to varied resolutions and aspect
ratios (for example, to mobile UIs or desktop UIs). This flexibility results in improved performance
across platforms. For example, on desktop and web UIs, UGround achieves comparable or superior
results using approximately 2/3 of the tokens required by the fixed 1,344 x 1,344 model in 16:9
scenarios.
Similar findings around these two aspects are also discussed in general domains (Li et al., 2024a;
Zhang et al., 2024b), as well as some concurrent GUI works (Chen et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024c).

C.3      RE T YPES

The taxonomy for REs introduced in this work represents a novel contribution and has not been
addressed in prior studies (Li et al., 2020b; Hong et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2024). In this section,
we present ablation studies focused on the role of positional REs. We omit detailed studies on
    7
      The data is converted to the format used in SeeClick. Given the maximum sequence length used in the
training of Qwen-VL and SeeClick, we reduce the elements to a maximum of 30 for each page.


                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Table C.3: RE ablations for UGround on ScreenSpot (Agent Setting).

                                                Mobile                    Desktop                   Web
           Training Data                                                                                                 Average
                                         Text      Icon/Widget     Text      Icon/Widget   Text     Icon/Widget
           Web-Hybrid (w/o Pos REs)     86.5          73.4        87.1           61.4      82.2          65.5              76.0
           Web-Hybrid                   89.0          73.4        88.1           61.4      84.8          64.6              76.9


                 Table C.4: RE ablations for UGround on ScreenSpot (Standard Setting).

                                                Mobile                    Desktop                   Web
           Training Data                                                                                                 Average
                                         Text      Icon/Widget     Text     Icon/Widget    Text      Icon/Widget
           Web-Hybrid (w/o Pos REs)     72.2          52.0        72.7          55.0       76.5          61.2              64.9
           Web-Hybrid                   75.5          54.2        79.9          58.6       77.0          68.0              68.8


visual and functional REs because (1) they are interleaved in HTML DOMs and are challenging to
fully disentangle, and (2) they have been extensively studied in prior work. For example, an HTML
attribute (e.g., aria-label) may convey both visual and functional cues, and the MLLM can exploit
different aspects of the input.
We train a new checkpoint with Web-Hybrid, omitting all positional REs while maintaining the
overall number of web elements. As shown in Table C.3 and Table C.4, the inclusion of positional
REs generally enhances model performance.
We hypothesize that the integration of positional and contextual data enables the model to more
effectively capture and attend to the spatial relationships among UI elements. This enhanced contex-
tual understanding is crucial for grounding tasks that cannot rely solely on visual or functional cues,
especially in challenging cases where those cues alone are insufficient.



D      E XAMPLES

D.1     M ULTIMODAL -M IND 2W EB


                             Task: Find the page with instructions on how to return orders online.


      Dividing into blocks                            Planning                                              Grounding

                                         Block 1                                            User: In the screenshot, what are the pixel
                                                                                            coordinates (x, y) of the element corresponding
                                                             GPT-4o:                        to "Link labeled 'Returns / Exchanges' in
                                                             ACTION: SCROLL DOWN            the footer of the webpage" ?
                                                             ELEMENT: None
                                                             VALUE: None


                                         Block 2

                                                             GPT-4o:
                                                             ACTION: CLICK                               UGround: (326, 604)
                                                             ELEMENT: Link labeled
                                                             'Returns / Exchanges' in
                                                             the footer of the webpage
                                                             VALUE: None                       Next Action: CLICK (326, 604)


                 Figure D.1: Example of the Multimodal-Mind2Web evaluation pipeline.


                                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2   A NDROID C ONTROL


                                         Task: I am feeling hungry and want to try something new.
                                         Search for a margherita pizza recipe in the SideChef app.

                              Planning                                                                       Grounding

                                             High-Level                                           High-Level

                                User: High-Level Goal: {Task Above}                User: In the screenshot, what are the pixel
                                Previous Actions: [ "Open the                      coordinates (x, y) of the element
                                sideChef app", "Enter the margherita               corresponding to "the first search result
                                pizza in the search bar"]                          labeled 'margherita pizza' " ?


                               GPT-4o: {"action_type": "click",                               UGround: (540, 399)
                               "element": "the first search result
                               labeled 'margherita pizza'"}
                                                                                                  Low-Level
                                              Low-Level                             User: In the screenshot, what are the pixel coordinates (x, y)
                                                                                    of the element corresponding to "first search result for
                                User: High-Level Goal: {Task Above}
                                                                                    'margherita pizza' " ?
                                Low-Level Instruction: Click on the
                                first result.
                                                                                              UGround: (540, 399)
                               GPT-4o: {"action_type": "click",
                               "element": "first search result for                       Next Action (High & Low) :
                               'margherita pizza'"}                                      {"action_type": "click", "x": 540, "y": 399}


                      Figure D.2: Example of the AndroidControl evaluation pipeline.


D.3   O MNI ACT


                         Task: Fill "Singapore" as the travel destination on the search bar.


                      Planning                                                                        Grounding


       User: Based on the screenshot, generate the                     User: In the screenshot, what are the pixel coordinates (x, y) of the
       PyAutoGUI script for the task.                                  element corresponding to "Input field labeled 'Flying to' " ?


                                                                                                 UGround: (1440, 306)


           GPT-4o:
           pyautogui.click("Input field labeled                                        Final Script:
           'Flying to' ")                                                              pyautogui.click(1440, 306)
           pyautogui.write("Singapore")
                                                                                       pyautogui.write("Singapore")
           pyautogui.press("enter")
                                                                                       pyautogui.press("enter")


                          Figure D.3: Example of the OmniACT evaluation pipeline.


                                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.4        T RAINING DATA

 Mobile

             AndroidControl                                                   AITZ                                     WidgetCaption                                                    UIBert


                Click on the add                                Click on the "Snoozed" label located at                                                            Select the down arrow       Select the setting icon
                                                                                                                         Go to options.
                   icon again.                                       the middle left part of screen.                                                              button beside "Lifestyle."   from top right corner.


  Web


    Instruction: Navigate to the         Instruction: Access the             Instruction: Sign up
                                                                                                                                                                           Click on button labeled "Womens",
    Products section.                    documentation.                      for a new account.                          Polished Prints on TikTok, at the top
                                                                                                                                                                          between "New Arrivals" and "Home +
    Action: Click the "Products"         Action: Click the "Docs" link       Action: Click the "Sign                         left corner of the screenshot
                                                                                                                                                                           Gifts", at the top of the screenshot.
    dropdown menu.                       in the header.                      up" button.


                                             GUIAct                                                                                                          Web-Hybrid


  Instruction: Learn more about PostgreSQL hosting.      Instruction: Agree to the site's use of cookies.
  Action: Click the "Get Started" button under the       Action: Click the "AGREE & PROCEED"
                                                                                                                           Click here to read the full article.               the image of "United States”
  PostgreSQL hosting section.                            button in the cookie notification bar.


                                                                                                          Web-Direct


                      The clickable word "TAAL" located in the navigation                                                      Navigate to "Freud’s Unconscious – The Psychoanalysis of a
                         menu between "HOME" and "SCHRIJVEN"                                                                              Dream, and its Dreamer" article page.


                                       Figure D.4: Examples of training data from different sources.


                                                                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E       DATA C ONSTRUCTION
We describe the details of our data construction in this section. Illustrative examples of all our training
data are provided in Figure D.4.

E.1      W EB -H YBRID

Following prior work (Hong et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2024), we download and randomly sample
from the latest Common Crawl8 . We apply several filtering methods to exclude non-webpage files
based on URL patterns and to remove non-English pages as indicated by the language labels provided
by Common Crawl. We employ Playwright to load and render webpages, capture screenshots, and
collect metadata for web elements. To ensure a diverse set of data, we simulate vertical scrolling
to capture screenshots and elements at various positions on each webpage. The metadata for each
element includes bounding box coordinates and relevant HTML attributes, such as the element’s tag,
inner text (inner text), and alternative text (e.g., alt).
During rendering, we randomly select image sizes to cover a diverse range of resolutions and
aspect ratios. Approximately one-third of the data is rendered in mobile-friendly aspect ratios,
thereby triggering the mobile version of certain websites and enhancing the coverage of mobile UI
environments. For each long webpage, up to three blocks of content within a viewport-sized area are
randomly sampled to ensure content diversity. In total, the dataset comprises approximately 773K
screenshots from around 700K URLs.
As detailed in §2.2, we employ a hybrid strategy to generate REs for webpage elements. Below, we
first describe how we leverage MLLMs (LLaVA-NeXT-13B) and LLMs (Llama-3-8B) to generate
concise, element-level descriptions without positional or contextual information.
We extract the bounding box regions from the webpage screenshots corresponding to the elements
and pass these smaller cropped element images along with their salient HTML attributes to LLaVA.
Using the prompts outlined below, we prompt LLaVA to generate an element description based on its
internal knowledge, the element’s image, and relevant HTML attributes:

    Based on the attached image of a web element, please provide a short description of the web element
    displayed. The goal is to capture the intuitive and visual appearance of the element. Use the accompanying
    HTML information as context but focus more on describing what is visually observable. Avoid directly
    referencing HTML attributes; instead, interpret their possible visual implications if they can be inferred
    from the image. Be cautious of potential inaccuracies in the HTML attributes and use them to enhance
    understanding only when they align reasonably with what can be inferred visually.
    HTML: {A list of salient HTML attributes}


We observe that since the input to LLaVA is a small cropped image, the model tends to have less hallucinations
compared to directly caption an element with a bounding box overlaid in the image. However, due to the limited
language capabilities of the 13B LLaVA model, the generated interpretations tend to be lengthy. To address this,
the lengthy output is subsequently processed by Llama-3-8B with the prompt below that instructs it to condense
the description into a brief referring expression:

    Here is a description of an element in a webpage. Using the detailed description provided, create a concise
    phrase that captures the essential visual and functional characteristics of the web element. The rephrased
    description should be straightforward, simple and precise enough to allow humans quickly spot this element
    in a webpage screenshot. Focus on the most prominent visual features and any critical function indicated
    by the text.
    Description: {}
    Leave only your final description in the answer, without any explanation.


Next, the generation process for each crawled element is as follows.
We begin by categorizing the webpage elements based on their tags into two groups: interactive elements (e.g.,
a, input, select, etc.) and pure text elements (e.g., p, h1, h2, etc.). Referring expressions are generated only
    8
        CC-MAIN-2023-50


                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Table E.1: Statistics of element types (by HTML tags) in Web-Hybrid (%).

                       a        img     button    input        svg     select   textarea     video
                     68.99     15.41     6.81      5.32        2.25    0.99      0.18        0.04


Table E.2: Statistics of element HTML attributes and MLLM-based synthetic REs used in Web-
Hybrid (%). Calculated as the number of elements using an attribute/RE divided by the total number
of elements.

  MLLM-based RE            inner-text   title     alt     aria-label      aria-describedby     placeholder   value
           11.19             43.58      20.01    12.25         11.32            0.21                 0.06    0.02



for interactive elements, as these constitute the primary targets in GUI grounding tasks. In addition, pure text
elements are utilized as potential sources for referring expression generation.
For each interactive element, we first apply an OCR model (EasyOCR9 ) to extract text from the element’s
bounding box. If the similarity between the OCR-extracted text and the element’s inner text exceeds a
threshold of 0.7, the element is considered textual, and the MLLM-based synthesis pipeline is bypassed. This
procedure prevents the generation of trivial data (e.g., “Gray links labeled by link text”). Moreover, for textual
elements, those sharing identical text with other elements on the same page are filtered out to avoid grounding
ambiguities.
Based on manually crafted rules, we label each element’s neighboring elements in various directions (multiple
neighbors are allowed), mark the nearest upper h1, h2, or h3 elements (titles), and determine its absolute position
(e.g., center of the screenshot, top, top-left corner) to generate position-based referring expressions. We randomly
select up to neighboring elements in different directions and randomly pick elements whose distance from the
target is within 500 pixels (empirically, always selecting the closest element does not yield the best performance).
These are used to generate relative position descriptions. Some of the relative descriptions are further randomly
modified to common terms such as “next to” or “between”. For contextual references, if an element is identified
as a checkbox or radio button based on its HTML properties, it is assumed to have an associated label (e.g.,
“radio button for Yes”). If such labels are provided in the HTML attributes, they are used directly; otherwise,
the nearest element on the same row (or column, if necessary) is selected as the label. Similar procedures are
followed for input fields and select boxes. Additional expressions such as “under,” “in,” or “under section A”
are generated based on the hierarchical structure of titles (primarily h1, h2, and h3). Attributes like title, alt,
or aria-label are always considered as potential descriptors, typically contributing functional information.
Finally, for each element, descriptors from accessibility labels, the element’s own text, or MLLM-based
descriptions are randomly combined with absolute positional information (included on a random basis) and
supplemented by between zero and two relative or contextual descriptions. For interactive elements such as radio
buttons, the label is always included. In each webpage, up to 100 elements are selected, prioritizing those with
accessibility labels or MLLM annotations. The number of pure text elements is limited to no more than three
times the sum of elements with accessibility labels and those annotated via MLLMs (with a minimum of 10, or
the total available elements, whichever is lower) to reduce the number of pure text elements. Additionally, unique
accessibility labels and their frequencies are counted; labels occurring more than 1,000 times are downsampled
to a maximum of 1,000 occurrences. For example, the label “Next” appears 13K times, and is downsampled to
1K occurrences in our training data.
To illustrate the primary data distribution, we provide statistics about HTML element types, as well as attributes
and positional RE types used in the final REs within Web-Hybrid. The statistics are shown in Table E.1, Table E.2,
and Table E.3. We omit exact percentages of visual and functional REs because they are often interleaved in
HTML DOMs and MLLM-based synthetic REs, and generally are hard to distinguish.


E.2       W EB -D IRECT

For the Web-Direct dataset, we directly employ GPT-4o to generate referring expressions. We observed that, due
to its limited grounded understanding capabilities, simply enclosing an element in the image with a bounding
box often leads to notable hallucinations, particularly when it provides descriptions of nearby elements. To
mitigate these hallucinations without incurring the high cost of manual post-verification, we find that annotating
an element with both a red bounding box and a red arrow pointing to it substantially reduces hallucinations.

    9
        https://github.com/JaidedAI/EasyOCR/


                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table E.3: Statistics of relative positional REs, absolute Positional REs, and contextual REs used in
Web-Hybrid (%). Contextual References are also counted as relative positional REs. Calculated as
the number of elements using an RE divided by the total number of elements.

                     Relative Positional RE      Contextual RE       Absolute Positional RE
                               23.49                   8.43                     3.05



In addition, we explicitly query GPT-4o regarding the identification of the element, which further minimizes
potential hallucinations and filters out a small number of crawling errors or occluded elements.
Two separate prompts are used in Web-Direct: one to generate free-form referring expressions and another to
generate functionally oriented referring expressions:

    Here is supposed to be an interactive element (button, link, dropdown, text box, etc.) in the red box pointed
    by an arrow in the screenshot. Can you find it? Is it visible from the screenshot? Can you write a concise
    description that is sufficient for humans to locate it from the screenshot? Your response should be a
    JSON. For example, “visible”: true, “description”: “your description here”.



    Here is supposed to be an interactive element (button, link, dropdown, text box, etc.) in the red box pointed
    by an arrow in the screenshot. Can you find it? Is it visible from the screenshot? What unique function
    does this element enable? Your response should be a JSON. For example, “visible”: true, “action”:
    “subscribe the latest updates”.



E.3     O PEN -S OURCE DATA

We leverage several high-quality open-source referring expression datasets in Android, as well as the GUIAct
dataset, as supplementary sources of web data. Specifically:
1. GUIAct: We use the annotated data from GUIAct (web-single). Steps that do not involve coordinates or
that are marked as multi-step operations (for example, “click ... then type”) are filtered out. We use both the
Instruction and Action annotations for grounding (i.e., each element is seen in training twice with different
expressions).
2. AndroidControl: Similarly, we use the human-annotated actions from the training set. We filter out any
actions that do not have associated coordinate data, ensuring that only steps with specific visual grounding
targets are included in the dataset.
3. Widget Caption: For each element in the training set, multiple functional captions are provided. To enhance
diversity, two captions per element are randomly selected from the available set of functional captions during
data construction.
4. UIBert: We use the training set elements from UIBert without any additional special processing, directly
utilizing the referring expressions provided by this dataset.
5. AITZ: We incorporate the annotated actions (Thought) from AITZ, using each step’s action annotation for
grounding in the dataset. These annotations contribute to a more diverse set of referring expressions, particularly
for action-oriented grounding tasks.


F      M ODEL AND T RAINING D ETAILS

F.1     OVERVIEW

For flexible investigation of the model architecture, we build the architecture based on LLaVA-NeXT (Liu et al.,
2024b), and train from scratch using open-source data from Liu et al. (2024a). We use CLIP-ViT-L-14 (224px)
as our base image encoder for more flexible splitting of AnyRes, and keep it frozen during training. We use
Vicuna-1.5-7b-16k (Zheng et al., 2023) as the language backbone as a long-context LM backbone for handling
long visual contexts.


                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2   A NY R ES
As described in §2.3, AnyRes allows convenient scaling up of image resolutions, although it’s not always
beneficial to enlarge image resolutions (Li et al., 2024a). We keep the main pipeline of AnyRes, splitting images
into 224px grids. However, to keep the original image aspect ratios, we resize only by width and pad to the
bottoms if needed, and use pixel-level coordinates in numbers that are compatible with this design. We allow at
most 36 grids, for a maximum resolution of 1,344 x 1,344 and 896 x 2,016. We empirically find AnyRes does
not generalize to unseen image resolutions for visual grounding. Therefore, we resize images by width to keep
them within the training resolution ranges when needed. We remove the low-resolution image for providing
global context, because it intuitively does not provide informative contexts when images are larger than 1,000px,
and we empirically find it slightly hurt the performance.

F.3   T RAINING
Our training primarily consists of two stages:
1. LLaVA-1.5 Pretraining and Finetuning: We follow the exact pretraining in Liu et al. (2024a). Then, in the
instruction finetuning stage, we change the grounding data from normalized coordinates to absolute coordinates
as we wish, and start to use our modified AnyRes setting.
2. GUI Visual Grounding: Then we train UGround on our training datasets.
Due to the huge computation cost of handling high-resolution images, we use LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) for
instruction finetuning in the two stages, with a device batch size of 4.
The first stage takes about 50 hours on a single 4x NVIDIA A100 machine (global batch size 128 with gradient
accumulation). For the large-scale GUI data training, we use 112 NVIDIA H100 GPUs and finish the training in
about 6 hours (global batch size 448).


G     E VALUATION D ETAILS
G.1    M ODEL E NDPOINTS
As studied in (Pan et al., 2024), different GPT endpoints could lead to slight differences in the performance of
GUI tasks. Hence, we provide the specific endpoint names we use in our evaluation, as well as those of the
baselines we use (if available).

       • Ours (across every benchmark): gpt-4-turbo-2024-04-09 and gpt-4o-2024-05-13
       • Multimodal-Mind2Web: gpt-4-1106-vision-preview
       • OmniACT: gpt-4-0613 and gpt-4-1106-vision-preview
       • Mind2Web-Live: gpt-4-0125-preview and gpt-4o-2024-05-13
       • AndroidWorld: gpt-4-turbo-2024-04-09

G.2    M ULTIMODAL -M IND 2W EB
Many screenshots in Multimodal-Mind2Web have giant vertical heights (e.g., 1,280 × 10,000 pixels). Similar to
Zheng et al. (2024), to avoid overly long screenshots, we divide whole webpage screenshots into viewport-sized
blocks, and simulate scrolling down to the next block whenever agents determine that no valid action can be
taken or explicitly choose to scroll. Specifically, we divide each full-page screenshot into 1,280 × 1,000 pixel
blocks, except for the final block, which may be shorter depending on the page’s total height. Most of the target
elements are within the first block (about 80%). See Figure D.1 for an illustrative example of the pipeline.
We report element accuracy on the benchmark, and the grounding is considered to be correct if the output
coordinates fall in the box coordinates of the ground truth element.

G.3    A NDROID C ONTROL
We adopt the M3A (Multimodal Autonomous Agent for Android) prompt (Rawles et al., 2024), the state-of-
the-art zero-shot method in Li et al. (2024b). We only make minor modifications to integrate UGround into
M3A.
We follow the standard data processing steps outlined in Li et al. (2024b). During evaluation, coordinates
generated by grounding models are translated to the smallest visible element that includes the coordinates.



                                                       26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.4    O MNI ACT
We follow the method in Kapoor et al. (2024) for prompt design and the selection of five in-context examples.
The prompt is slightly modified to generate element descriptions as function parameters for PyAutoGUI scripts,
instead of directly outputting coordinates. After generating the PyAutoGUI script with element descriptions, we
use grounding models to predict the corresponding coordinates and substitute them back into the original script.
See Figure D.3 for an illustrative example of the pipeline.
We compare our method with DetACT (Kapoor et al., 2024), the state-of-the-art method in Kapoor et al. (2024),
which extracts UI elements and their coordinates through a combination of OCR, icon matching, and color
detection. These elements are filtered by task relevance and passed to LLMs or MLLMs to generate the
PyAutoGUI script. In contrast, our method does not use a pre-generated elements list. The planner model
focuses on generating precise element descriptions based solely on the screenshot. Additionally, we corrected
basic errors in the public evaluation scripts (for example, wrong file paths and wrong calculation of distances).

G.5    M IND 2W EB -L IVE
The baseline agent in Pan et al. (2024) is text-only, perceives and interacts with webpages by hundreds of textual
HTML elements at a time. To study vision-only agents, we change the observation to pure screenshots. We also
make necessary changes to the standard action space to entirely isolate HTML from the planning, grounding, and
execution: 1) We add Scroll Up and Scroll Down to the action space to better support vision-only agents with
viewport-sized observation. 2) We remove Fill Form and Fill Search from the action space, which use an
additional judgment model to determine whether to press enter after typing through HTML information. Instead,
we use Type and Press Enter to let the agent make its own decisions autonomously. 3) We disable API-based
Select, and force agents to select options merely through clicking and make the action more challenging. We
admit some select buttons cannot be easily operated with only Click. We compromise this point to fulfill the
motivation of this vision-only study.

G.6    A NDROIDW ORLD
We build SeeAct-V agents based on the M3A agent in Rawles et al. (2024), which receives both raw and SoM
images, and reason about the next action in a ReAct style (Yao et al., 2023) and choose the next target element
from the element list. It also adopts self-reflection (Shinn et al., 2024) in the agent pipeline to instruct agents to
summarize the current move and facilitate the following steps.
We mainly remove SoM images and textual list of elements from the a11y tree in the observation (in both
planning and reflection phases), and change element-based actions to pixel-level actions.


                                                         27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H    P ROMPTS

Table H.1: Prompt used for the planning model in Multimodal-Mind2Web, modified from the
prompt in (Zheng et al., 2024)

    System Role
    You are imitating humans doing web navigation for a task step by step.
    At each stage, you can see the webpage like humans by a screenshot and know the previous actions
    before the current step through recorded history.
    You need to decide on the first following action to take.
    You can click an element with the mouse, select an option, type text with the keyboard, or scroll
    down.

    Task Description
    You are asked to complete the following task: {Task description}
    Previous Actions: {List of previous actions, if any}
    The screenshot below shows the webpage you see.

    Useful Guidelines
    First, observe the current webpage and think through your next step based on the task and previous
    actions.

    To be successful, it is important to follow the following rules:
    1. Make sure you understand the task goal to avoid wrong actions.
    2. Ensure you carefully examine the current screenshot and issue a valid action based on the
    observation.
    3. You should only issue one action at a time.
    4. The element you want to operate with must be fully visible in the screenshot. If it is only partially
    visible, you need to SCROLL DOWN to see the entire element.
    5. The necessary element to achieve the task goal may be located further down the page. If you don’t
    want to interact with any elements, simply select SCROLL DOWN to move to the section below.

    Reasoning
    Explain the action you want to perform and the element you want to operate with (if applicable).
    Describe your thought process and reason in 3 sentences.

    Output Format
    Finally, conclude your answer using the format below.
    Ensure your answer strictly follows the format and requirements provided below, and is clear and
    precise.
    The action, element, and value should each be on three separate lines.

    ACTION: Choose an action from CLICK, TYPE, SELECT, SCROLL DOWN. You must choose one
    of these four, instead of choosing None.

    ELEMENT: Provide a description of the element you want to operate. (If ACTION == SCROLL
    DOWN, this field should be none.)
    It should include the element’s identity, type (button, input field, dropdown menu, tab, etc.), and text
    on it (if applicable).
    Ensure your description is both concise and complete, covering all the necessary information and less
    than 30 words.
    If you find identical elements, specify its location and details to differentiate it from others.

    VALUE: Provide additional input based on ACTION.
    The VALUE means:
    If ACTION == TYPE, specify the text to be typed.
    If ACTION == SELECT, specify the option to be chosen.
    Otherwise, write ‘None’.


                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table H.2: Prompts used for the planning model in AndroidControl, modified from the prompt in
(Li et al., 2024b) and (Rawles et al., 2024)

    General Instruction
    You are an agent who can operate an Android phone on behalf of a user.
    Based on user’s goal/request, you may complete some tasks described in the requests/goals by
    performing actions (step by step) on the phone.

     When given a user request, you will try to complete it step by step. At each step, you will be given the
     current screenshot and a history of what you have done (in text). Based on these pieces of information
     and the goal, you must choose to perform one of the action in the following list (action description
     followed by the JSON format) by outputting the action in the correct JSON format.
     - If you think the task has been completed, finish the task by using the status action with complete as
     goal status: {''action type'':''status'',''goal status'':''successful''}
     - If you think the task is not feasible (including cases like you don’t have enough information or cannot
     perform some necessary actions), finish by using the 'status'action with infeasible as goal status:
     {''action type'': ''status'', ''goal status'': ''infeasible''}
     - Click/tap on an element on the screen, describe the element you want to operate with: {''action type'':
    ''click'', ''element'': ⟨target element description⟩}
     - Long press on an element on the screen, similar with the click action above: {''action type'':
    ''long press'', ''description'': ⟨target element description⟩}
     - Type text into a text field: {''action type'': ''type text'', ''text'': ⟨text input⟩, ''element'':
     ⟨target element description⟩}
     - Scroll the screen in one of the four directions: {''action type'': ''scroll'', ''direction'': ⟨up, down, left,
     right⟩}
     - Navigate to the home screen: {''action type'': ''navigate home''}
     - Navigate back: {''action type'': ''navigate back''}
     - Open an app (nothing will happen if the app is not installed): {''action type'': ''open app'',
    ''app name'': ⟨name⟩}
     - Wait for the screen to update: {''action type'': ''wait''}

    Useful Guidelines
    Here are some useful guidelines you need to follow:
    General:
    - Usually there will be multiple ways to complete a task, pick the easiest one. Also when something
    does not work as expected (due to various reasons), sometimes a simple retry can solve the problem,
    but if it doesn’t (you can see that from the history), SWITCH to other solutions.
    - If the desired state is already achieved (e.g., enabling Wi-Fi when it’s already on), you can just
    complete the task.

     Action Related:
     - Use the 'open app' action whenever you want to open an app (nothing will happen if the app is not
     installed), do not use the app drawer to open an app unless all other ways have failed.
     - Use the 'type text' action whenever you want to type something (including password) instead of
     clicking characters on the keyboard one by one. Sometimes there is some default text in the text field
    you want to type in, remember to delete them before typing.
     - For 'click', 'long press' and 'type text', the element you pick must be VISIBLE in the screenshot to
     interact with it.
     - The 'element' field requires a concise yet comprehensive description of the target element in a single
     sentence, not exceeding 30 words. Include all essential information to uniquely identify the element.
     If you find identical elements, specify their location and details to differentiate them from others.
     - Consider exploring the screen by using the 'scroll' action with different directions to reveal additional
     content.
     - The direction parameter for the 'scroll' action specifies the direction in which the content moves and
     opposites to swipe; for example, to view content at the bottom, the 'scroll' direction should be set to
    'down'.

    Text Related Operations:
                                                                                     Continued on the next page


                                                          29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                Table H.2 – Continued from the previous page

    - Normally to select certain text on the screen: ⟨i⟩ Enter text selection mode by long pressing the area
    where the text is, then some of the words near the long press point will be selected (highlighted with
    two pointers indicating the range) and usually a text selection bar will also appear with options like
    'copy', 'paste', 'select all', etc. ⟨ii⟩ Select the exact text you need. Usually the text selected from the
    previous step is NOT the one you want, you need to adjust the range by dragging the two pointers. If
    you want to select all text in the text field, simply click the 'select all' button in the bar.
    - At this point, you don’t have the ability to drag something around the screen, so in general you
    cannot select arbitrary text.
    - To delete some text: the most traditional way is to place the cursor at the right place and use the
    backspace button in the keyboard to delete the characters one by one (can long press the backspace to
    accelerate if there are many to delete). Another approach is to first select the text you want to delete,
    then click the backspace button in the keyboard.
    - To copy some text: first select the exact text you want to copy, which usually also brings up the text
    selection bar, then click the 'copy' button in bar.
    - To paste text into a text box, first long press the text box, then usually the text selection bar will
    appear with a 'paste' button in it.
    - When typing into a text field, sometimes an auto-complete dropdown list will appear. This usually
    indicates this is a enum field and you should try to select the best match by clicking the corresponding
    one in the list.

    High-Level Prompt
    {General Instruction}
    The current user goal/request is: {High-level goal}
    Here is a history of what you have done so far: {History}

    The current raw screenshot is given to you.
    {Useful Guidelines}

    Now output an action from the above list in the correct JSON format, following the reason why you
    do that. Your answer should look like:
    Reason: ...
    Action: {''action type'': ...}

    Your Answer:

    Low-Level Prompt
    {General Instruction}
    The user’s high-level goal/request is: {High-level goal}
    The current next step’s low-level goal is: {Low-level goal}

    The current raw screenshot is given to you.
    {Useful Guidelines}

    Now output an action from the above list in the correct JSON format, following the reason why you
    do that. Your answer should look like:
    Reason: ...
    Action: {''action type'': ...}

    Your Answer:


                                                       30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table H.3: Prompt used for the planning model in OmniACT, modified from the prompt in (Kapoor
et al., 2024)

    General Instruction
    You are an excellent robotic process automation agent who needs to generate a PyAutoGUI script for
    the tasks given to you.
    You will receive some examples to help with the format of the script that needs to be generated.

    There are some actions that require you to provide an element description for the elements you want
    to operate on. For the description, follow the requirements below:
    Element Description Requirements:
    Provide a concise description of the element you want to operate.
    It should include the element’s identity, type (button, input field, dropdown menu, tab, etc.), and text
    on it (if have).
    If you find identical elements, specify their location and details to differentiate them from others.
    Ensure your description is both concise and complete, covering all the necessary information and less
    than 30 words, and organize it into one sentence.

    [IMPORTANT!!] Stick to the format of the output scripts in the example.
    [IMPORTANT!!] Use only the functions from the API docs.
    [IMPORTANT!!] Follow the output format strictly. Only write the script and nothing else.

    API Reference
    Here is the API reference for generating the script:
    def click(element=description):
    '''Moves the mouse to the element corresponding to the description and performs a left click.
    Example:
    High Level Goal: Click at the rectangular red button labeled ''Next''.
    Python script:
    import pyautogui
    pyautogui.click(''Rectangular red button labeled ''Next'' '')
    '''
    pass

    def rightClick(element=description):
    '''Moves the mouse to the element corresponding to the description and performs a right click.
    Example:
    High Level Goal: Right-click at link labeled ''vacation rentals''under the ''housing''section.
    Python script:
    import pyautogui
    pyautogui.rightClick(''Link labeled ''vacation rentals''under the ''housing''section'')
    '''
    pass

    def doubleClick(element=description):
    '''Moves the mouse to the element corresponding to the description and performs a double click.
    Example:
    High Level Goal: Double-click at folder named ''courses''.
    Python script:
    import pyautogui
    pyautogui.doubleClick(''Folder named ''courses'' '')
    '''
    pass

    def scroll(clicks=amount to scroll):
    '''Scrolls the window that has the mouse pointer by float value (amount to scroll).
    Example:
    High Level Goal: Scroll screen by 30.
    Python script:
    import pyautogui
    pyautogui.scroll(30)
    '''
    pass
                                                                               Continued on the next page


                                                      31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Table H.3 – Continued from the previous page


    def hscroll(clicks=amount to scroll):
    '''Scrolls the window that has the mouse pointer horizontally by float value (amount to scroll).
    Example:
    High Level Goal: Scroll screen horizontally by 30.
    Python script:
    import pyautogui
    pyautogui.hscroll(30)
    '''
    pass

    def dragTo(element=description, button=holdButton):
    '''Drags the mouse to the element corresponding to the description with (holdButton) pressed. hold-
    Button can be 'left', 'middle', or 'right'.
    Example:
    High Level Goal: Drag the screen from the current position to recycle bin with the left click of the
    mouse.
    Python script:
    import pyautogui
    pyautogui.dragTo(''Recycle bin with trash can shape'', ''left'')
    '''
    pass

    def moveTo(element = description):
    '''Takes the mouse pointer to the element corresponding to the description.
    Example:
    High Level Goal: Hover the mouse pointer to search button.
    Python script:
    import pyautogui
    pyautogui.moveTo(''Request appointment button'')
    '''
    pass

    def write(str=stringType, interval=secs between keys):
    '''Writes the string wherever the keyboard cursor is at the function calling time with
    (secs between keys) seconds between characters.
    Example:
    High Level Goal: Write ''Hello world''with 0.1 seconds rate.
    Python script:
    import pyautogui
    pyautogui.write(''Hello world'', 0.1)
    '''
    pass

    def press(str=string to type):
    '''Simulates pressing a key down and then releasing it up. Sample keys include 'enter', 'shift', arrow
    keys, 'f1'.
    Example:
    High Level Goal: Press the enter key now.
    Python script:
    import pyautogui
    pyautogui.press(''enter'')
    '''
    pass

    def hotkey(*args = list of hotkey):
    '''Keyboard hotkeys like Ctrl-S or Ctrl-Shift-1 can be done by passing a list of key names to hotkey().
    Multiple keys can be pressed together with a hotkey.
    Example:
    High Level Goal: Use Ctrl and V to paste from clipboard.
    Python script:
    import pyautogui
                                                                              Continued on the next page


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Table H.3 – Continued from the previous page

    pyautogui.hotkey(''ctrl'', ''v'')
    '''
    pass

    Examples
    Here are some examples similar to the tasks you need to complete.
    However, these examples use coordinate format for actions like click, rightClick, doubleClick,
    moveTo, dragTo, instead of element description.
    You should only refer to the actions in these examples, and for the output format, stick to the content
    in the API reference.
    For example, do not output ''pyautogui.click(100,200)'', instead output ''pyautogui.click(''Gray Tools
    menu button with a downward arrow in the top right corner'') ''.
    Omit ''import pyautogui'', do not include any comments or thoughts. Your output should only contain
    the script itself.
    {Example list}

    Task Description
    Based on the screenshot, generate the PyAutoGUI script for the following task: {Task description}
    You should list all the necessary steps to finish the task, which could involve multiple steps. Also,
    ensure simplifying your steps as much as possible, avoid dividing a single task into multiple steps if
    it can be completed in one.



          Table H.4: Prompt used for the planning model in ScreenSpot (Agent Setting).

    Task Description
    You are an excellent agent for mobile, web, and desktop navigation tasks.
    Describe the target element for this task based on the provided screenshot:
    Task: {Task description}

    Element Description Requirements
    Provide a concise description of the element you want to operate.
    Ensure your description is both concise and complete, covering all the necessary information in less
    than 30 words, and organized into one sentence.
    If you find identical elements, specify their location and details to differentiate them from others.

    Output Format
    Your output should only include the element description itself and follow the requirements.
    Do not start with “the target element” or “the element”.


                                                      33
