Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S ELECTIVE U NLEARNING VIA R EPRESENTATION E RA -
SURE U SING D OMAIN A DVERSARIAL T RAINING

  Nazanin Mohammadi Sepahvand1∗ Eleni Triantafillou2 Hugo Larochelle2 Doina Precup1,2
           James J. Clark1 Daniel M. Roy 3 Gintare Karolina Dziugaite1,2
 1
   McGill University, Mila, Canada 2 Google DeepMind 3 University of Toronto, Canada



                                                A BSTRACT

            When deploying machine learning models in the real world, we often face the
            challenge of “unlearning” specific data points or subsets after training. Inspired
            by Domain-Adversarial Training of Neural Networks (DANN), we propose a novel
            algorithm, SURE, for targeted unlearning. SURE treats the process as a domain
            adaptation problem, where the “forget set” (data to be removed) and a validation
            set from the same distribution form two distinct domains. We train a domain clas-
            sifier to discriminate between representations from the forget and validation sets.
            Using a gradient reversal strategy similar to DANN, we perform gradient updates
            to the representations to “fool” the domain classifier and thus obfuscate represen-
            tations belonging to the forget set. Simultaneously, gradient descent is applied to
            the retain set (original training data minus the forget set) to preserve its classifica-
            tion performance. Unlike other unlearning approaches whose training objectives
            are built based on model outputs, SURE directly manipulates the representations.
            This is key to ensure robustness against a set of more powerful attacks than cur-
            rently considered in the literature, that aim to detect which examples were un-
            learned through access to learned embeddings. Our thorough experiments reveal
            that SURE has a better unlearning quality to utility trade-off compared to other
            standard unlearning techniques for deep neural networks.


1       I NTRODUCTION

In machine learning, the principle of unlearning is essential for selectively removing the influence
of specific data points from a trained model. The gold standard is exact unlearning, which demands
that the model behaves as if it never encountered the data to be forgotten (the “forget set”). Exact
unlearning, however, presents significant challenges in deep learning models due to their non-linear
learning dynamics. A naive implementation of exact unlearning may require retraining the model
on a subset of the data that excludes the forget set, which is often prohibitively costly. As a result,
the focus has shifted towards approximate unlearning methods, which aim to mimic the behavior of
an oracle model - a model retrained from scratch without the forget set.
Traditional approximate unlearning methods primarily focus on aligning the model’s output after
unlearning with that of the oracle model. However, we hypothesize, and show empirically, that
it may be possible for an unlearning algorithm to appear to have forgotten, if considering only
information in the output space, while information about the forget set may in fact remain hidden
in intermediate layers and may be recoverable. This is an important setting to consider in case
an attacker gains white-box access to the model weights. Motivated by this observation, we study
algorithms and metrics that operate directly in the representation space. Interestingly, by visualizing
the embedding space (where the model represents data internally), we in fact observe that successful
unlearning is often correlated with representations closely resembling the oracle’s, suggesting that
directly manipulating representations during unlearning is also a promising approach for designing
improved algorithms. Conversely, a mismatch in representations can potentially expose the model
to a type of membership inference attacks (MIAs), which aim to identify whether a specific data
point was part of the training data.
    ∗
        Correspondence to: sepahvan@mila.quebec, gkdz@google.com


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Motivated by these findings, we introduce SURE (Selective Unlearning via Representation Erasure),
a novel unlearning method that shifts the focus from the output space to the representation space.
SURE aims to adjust the model’s representations to closely match those of the oracle, effectively
erasing the influence of the forget set.
Through extensive empirical evaluation, we demonstrate that SURE not only achieves a superior
trade-off between unlearning effectiveness and model utility but also exhibits reduced vulnerability
to representation-space MIAs.

Contributions.

       • Enhanced Unlearning Quality: SURE demonstrates superior unlearning quality as as-
         sessed by standard Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs) and the accuracy difference be-
         tween the unlearned model and the oracle model. This is further corroborated by comparing
         the accuracy of unlearned and oracle models on retain, forget, and test sets across various
         unlearning scenarios, including random, partial class, and class unlearning, as well as sce-
         narios with a forget set containing outliers from different distributions.
       • Improved Stability in Unlearning: Addressing a significant limitation of existing un-
         learning methods, SURE offers enhanced stability. Unlike methods where minor changes
         in hyperparameters or forget set size can lead to substantial variations in results, SURE
         demonstrates consistent performance across different forget set sizes, and when averaging
         results over multiple epochs, ensuring reliability in real-world scenarios.
       • Reduced Vulnerability to Representation Space Attacks: SURE effectively mitigates
         vulnerabilities to MIAs targeting the representation space, a weakness exhibited by some
         existing methods. This is achieved through the proposed representation erasure technique
         and is visualized using t-SNE plots, showcasing the distinct advantage of SURE in enhanc-
         ing privacy.

2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   DANN: D OMAIN -A DVERSARIAL N EURAL N ETWORK

We start by describing the key framework that we adopt, DANN, as introduced by Ganin et al. (2016).
The authors proposed a simple yet powerful idea for unsupervised domain adaptation with the goal
of improved performance under domain shifts. The main insight incorporated into DANN is to force
the neural network to learn features (representations) that are: (1) discriminative for the task; and
(2) domain-invariant, meaning that the features should not reveal whether the input data came from
the source domain or the target domain.
Figure 1 provides a schematic overview of the DANN framework. DANN comprises three key com-
ponents, each with their own parameterizations:

       • Feature extractor module Gf (·; θf ): In this work, the backbone of a ResNet-18 is used for
         this module.
       • Label classification module Gy (·; θy ): This module takes feature extractor outputs, and
         maps them to labels. Here, this is a simple fully-connected classification layer with K
         neurons, where K is the number of classes.
       • Domain regressor module Gd (·; θd ): This is a binary classification component modelling
         the probability that a given input is from the source vs target domain. In this work we use
         a two-layer fully connected neural networks for this module.

Take a feature extractor module trained on some source data, parameterized by θf . Informally,
the training process for DANN simultaneously optimizes the following: domain regressor module
parameters θd are trained to distinguish between the source and target features (discrimination task);
the feature extractor θf is fine-tuned to fool the domain regressor; the label classification module
θy is trained to maximize performance on the source data (classification task). To fine-tune the
feature extractor, a Gradient Reversal Layer (GRL) is inserted between the feature extractor and the
domain regressor module. GRL reverses the sign of the gradients flowing from the domain regressor


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: A schematic representation of SURE. The feature extractor is illustrated in blue, classifica-
tion module in yellow, and domain regressor in red, with the gradient reversal layer in between the
feature extractor and domain regressor. Note that a similar schematic representation also captures
DANN but with different input distributions.


back to the feature extractor while, during forward propagation, the GRL functions as an identity
transformation. This forces the feature extractor to learn features that make it difficult for the domain
regressor to distinguish between the source and target domains.

2.2   U NLEARNING SETTING

Let X denote the input space, and Y = {0, . . . , K − 1} the set of K possible labels. The source
                                N
training dataset, D = (xi , yi )i=1 , comprises N i.i.d. samples drawn from the data distribution.
During unlearning, D is partitioned into two mutually exclusive subsets: a forget set Df , containing
samples for which the model must “unlearn” information; and retain set Dr = D \ Df .
In addition, we assume access to a validation set Dval . For simplicity of presentation, this validation
set is assumed to be of the same size as the forget set. Samples in the validation set were not seen
during the original training, may be unlabeled, and are drawn from a target distribution of interest
(which could be the same as the source distribution). The set to which each sample x belongs is
discerned through the domain labels d ∈ {0, 1} (the class label here is irrelevant or may not be
given). This label is set to one for the forget set and zero for the validation set.
          x
We use Dval   and Dfx to denote only the input space samples without the labels from the validation
and forget sets respectively; Dtest refers to the test set.

3     U NLEARNING DEFINITIONS AND ASSOCIATED METRICS
3.1   F ROM CLASSICAL NOTIONS TO REPRESENTATION - FOCUSED UNLEARNING DEFINITION

A perfect unlearning algorithm would ensure a model behaves exactly as if the removed data never
existed. This notion can be formalized by drawing parallels to differential privacy (Dwork, 2006).
We begin by defining a measure of closeness between distributions: two distributions µ, ν are said
to be ( , δ)-close if µ(B) ≤ e  ν(B) + δ and ν(B) ≤ e  µ(B) + δ for all measurable events B. With
this notion of closeness, we can formally define an unlearning algorithm:
Definition 3.1. An unlearning algorithm U is an ( , δ)-unlearner for a learning algorithm A, and
training set D if, for all subsets Df ⊆ D of fixed size, the distribution of A(D\Df ) and U(A(D), Df )
are ( , δ)-close.

This definition captures the essence of unlearning by quantifying the difference between a model
trained without the forget set and a model that underwent unlearning the forget set. However, this
raises a crucial question: on what output distribution are we measuring this difference?
In Definition 3.1, the (potentially randomized) learning algorithm A takes a training set D and pro-
duces a distribution over outputs. A common approach is to consider A(·) as returning a distribution
over loss values. If θ represents the learned weights (which are random variables due to the stochas-
tic nature of training), and f (·; θ) is the neural network parameterized by θ, then the distribution


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


considered in previous work is the average loss over the forget set: L(Dfy , f (Dfx ; θ)). Alternatively,
one could consider the individual losses of each input in Df . This approach to evaluating unlearning
quality was used in the NeurIPS’23 competition (Triantafillou et al., 2024) and in defining the LiRA
membership inference attack (Carlini et al., 2022) which was adapted to the context of unlearning
in Hayes et al. (2024).
Another possibility is to directly compare the distributions of the learned weights (θ’s). However,
the high dimensionality and permutation symmetries of neural networks make this comparison chal-
lenging, and it remains largely unexplored. A third option involves comparing lower-dimensional
representations learned by the network, such as penultimate layer activations, which are usually used
for the so-called conjugate kernel computation (e.g., (Hu & Huang, 2021)).
Due to the data processing inequality, we know that the information signal, and thus the closeness
between A(D \ Df ) and U(A(D), Df ) (as measured by ( , δ)), cannot be increased when moving
from comparing θ’s to comparing L(Dfy , f (Dfx ; θ)). Therefore, comparing unlearned models to
retrained models based on losses might provide a more optimistic view of unlearning performance
relative to comparisons based on weights.
In our work, we go beyond comparing losses and evaluate the closeness between A(D \ Df ) and
U(A(D), Df ) using various outputs, including learned weights and internal representations, as de-
scribed in Section 3.2.


3.2   U NLEARNING M ETRICS

Efficiency: The primary goal of approximate unlearning is to efficiently and effectively remove
the influence of forget samples while achieving performance comparable to exact unlearning. To
measure computation efficiency, we report the Relative Run Time (RRT), calculated as the ratio of
the time taken to unlearn the samples to the time required for an identical model to retrain from
scratch on Dr (oracle). To assess effectiveness, we compare the unlearned model to the oracle using
various metrics to determine how closely it mimics the oracle’s behavior. Specifically, we use the
following metrics:
Accuracy Gap: We compare the unlearned model with the oracle by evaluating the an accuracy gap,
i.e., difference in accuracy between the two models, on different subsets of data, each measuring
distinct aspects of unlearning (Liu et al., 2024). Remaining Accuracy (RA), defined as retain set
accuracy gap, assesses the fidelity of the unlearning method; Utility, defined as test set accuracy
gap, reflects generalization ability; and Unlearning Accuracy (UA), defined as forget set accuracy
gap, measures the effectiveness of unlearning. Additionally, for class unlearning scenarios, Class
Test Accuracy (CTA) measures test set accuracy gap for the specific class undergoing partial or
complete unlearning.
Canary Unlearning: To further evaluate the effectiveness of our unlearning method, we consider
the concept of unintended memorization. Carlini et al. (2019) observed that neural networks may
inadvertently memorize out-of-distribution (OOD) training samples, even though these samples, by
definition, are unrelated to the target distribution and do not contribute to improving model accuracy.
This phenomenon can inadvertently reveal the presence of specific samples in the training data.
Specifically, we replace 50 samples from the forget set with OOD samples, referred to as “canaries”,
as described in (Carlini et al., 2019), creating a mixed forget set comprising both in-distribution (IN)
and OOD samples. The original model (before unlearning) is trained using this modified training
set, which serves as the starting point for all unlearning methods. This experimental setup allows
us to investigate the robustness of our unlearning method in handling unintended memorization and
effectively removing the influence of these OOD samples.
Membership Inference Attack: Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs) serve as a crucial tool for
evaluating the effectiveness of unlearning techniques by assessing the extent to which a model has
truly “forgotten” the data it was instructed to unlearn. In the unlearning literature, various versions
of MIAs have been introduced (Carlini et al., 2022; Golatkar et al., 2021; Goel et al., 2022b). In
this work we use two of the commonly employed ones. The first version (MIA-I) involves training a
binary classifier to distinguish between samples from the forget set, Df , and those from the test set,
Dtest , (Kurmanji et al., 2024). This classifier relies on the loss values produced by the unlearned
model when presented with these samples. A higher accuracy of this classifier indicates that the


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Canary outlier experiment results. The forget set, Df consists of 1000 samples, 50 of
which are completely scrambled (OOD samples), while the remaining samples are randomly se-
lected from the training set (IN samples).Shorter bars reflect narrower accuracy gaps, suggesting
that the performance is closer to that of the oracle. The summary plot (far right) displays all the
plots from the first four panels stacked on top of each other.


unlearned model still retains information about the forget set, making it susceptible to membership
inference. The second version of MIA (MIA-II) trains a classifier to differentiate between training,
D, and test samples, Dtest , based on the model’s confidence in its predictions (Liu et al., 2024; Jia
et al., 2023; Song & Mittal, 2021). This classifier is then used to classify forget samples, Df , during
inference. A higher percentage of forget samples classified as test samples suggests that the model
has successfully unlearned the forget set, as its confidence values resemble those of samples it has
never seen before. For both types of MIAs, the performance of the unlearned model is compared
to that of the oracle model (a model retrained from scratch without the forget set) to assess the
effectiveness of the unlearning technique.
Membership Inference Attacks (MIA) are traditionally conducted as black-box attacks, where the
attacker relies solely on the model’s outputs to determine whether a specific data point was included
in the training set. In this work, we extend MIA to white-box attacks (Sablayrolles et al., 2019),
assuming the attacker has access to the model’s internal representation space, potentially through its
weights. This is achieved by implementing modified versions of the two discussed MIAs. Specif-
ically, the modified version of MIA-I involves training a k-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) classifier for
a binary classification task, aimed at distinguishing between the forgotten set, Df , and the test set,
Dtest , based on their embedding representations. Conversely, the modified version of MIA-II trains
a KNN classifier to distinguish between train samples, D, and test samples, Dtest , based on their
representations, subsequently applying this trained KNN to classify the forget samples, Df . While
traditional black-box attacks often use logistic regression, we opt for KNN in the embedding space.
This choice is motivated by the higher dimensionality of the embedding space compared to the out-
put space, as well as the potentially small size of the forget set, making a non-parametric classifier
more suitable. For brevity, we refer to MIA in Representation Space as MIARS.
Weight Space Comparisons: To assess the post-unlearning representation in the embedding space,
one effective method is to compare the weights and/or activations of the penultimate layer to those of
the oracle. However, directly comparing these values is complicated by the permutation invariance
property (Ainsworth et al., 2022) of neural networks, which arises from the permutation symme-
tries of the neurons in each layer (Brea et al., 2019). As noted by Nielsen, multiple arrangements
of weights can represent the same underlying function, making it challenging to draw meaningful
comparisons between the weights of two separately trained networks (Hecht-Nielsen, 1990). To ad-
dress this issue, we first align the weights of the unlearned model and the oracle using Git Re-Basin,
a matching algorithm (Ainsworth et al., 2022) designed to find a set of permutations that minimizes
the distance between the two sets of weights/activations. Weights are then compared using Euclidean
distance.


4   SURE: S ELECTIVE U NLEARNING VIA R EPRESENTATION E RASURE

Most networks designed for classification tasks can be viewed as consisting of two primary modules:
the feature-extractor (Gf (·; θf )) and the classifier (Gy (·; θy )). Our proposed unlearning-enabled
network, SURE, can be viewed as an extension of the original architecture, augmented with an
additional domain regressor module during the unlearning process. Unlike in DANN, however, in
SURE the domain regressor will be aiming to distinguish between the forget set, and a validation
set that the original model never trained on (instead of the source and target domains). In our


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Results for random, partial class, and full class unlearning. For each benchmark, the plot
displays the absolute value of the gap between the unlearned model and the oracle, so the ideal is
to be as close to the center as possible. The forget set size is 1000 samples for random unlearning
and 100 for partial unlearning. Results are averaged over 5 runs, each with a distinct forget set. To
enhance the visual clarity of the plot, we normalized each metric’s values to the maximum value.


experimental framework, the validation set comes from the same distribution as the forget set. The
primary goal of the domain regressor module is to assist the network in unlearning in the feature
space. This is accomplished by encouraging the network to change learned features in a way that
would be discriminative for the primary label classification task, while being non-discriminative
when identifying the forget set samples from the validation ones.
Using a similar training procedure as DANN, SURE fine-tunes the original network features to re-
move any signature of the forget set examples on the learned representation space while maintaining
classification performance.
Let Ly and Ld denote the loss functions for training the label classification module and the domain
regressor respectively, defined as

                               ˆ d) = d log 1 + (1 − d) log 1 ,
                          Ld (d,                                             and                    (1)
                                            dˆ             1 − dˆ
                                         X
                          Ly (ŷ, y) = −     yk log ŷk                                             (2)
                                             k

                      ˆ d) and (ŷ, y). The network is then trained by performing back-propagation
for arbitrary inputs (d,
on the sum of the following two objectives capturing the classification and discrimination tasks:
                                 1      X
            (OBJ1)                           Ly (Gy (Gf (x; θf ); θy ), y), and                   (3)
                               |Dr |
                                        (x,y)∈Dr
                                λ
                                                      Ld (Gd (R(Gf (x; θf )); θd ), 1(x ∈ Dfx )),
                                           X
           (OBJ2)                                                                                   (4)
                               |Dfx |
                                        x∈Dfx ∪Dval
                                                x



where R represents a so-called gradient reversal layer, such that R(x) = x on the forward pass and
dR(x)/dx is the negative identity matrix on the backward pass. In Appendix C, we describe how
this approach defines a saddle-point objective that the domain regressor maximizes and the feature
extractor and classification modules minimize. (Note that we assume |Dfx | = |Dval
                                                                                 x
                                                                                    |. If not, the sum
in Eq. (4) would need to weigh each term in inverse proportion to the respective size of each set.)
The feature-extractor and classification modules, as defined in Section 2.1, are initialized with
weights learned during pre-training on D. The domain-regressor is initialized randomly.


5   E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we present our findings showing that our method not only achieves a superior trade-
off between performance and unlearning efficiency compared to existing approaches but also ad-
dresses some of the limitations of current unlearning techniques. Specifically, our method mitigates
the instability issues seen in previous methods, where results can change significantly with minor
adjustments to the unlearning setup-compared to the one used for hyperparameter tuning (Fan et al.,


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Gap in Top-1 and Top-5 accuracy across all accuracy metrics for the four top performing
unlearning methods. For each metric, the best values are highlighted in bold.

                          Top-1 Accuracy                                 Top-5 Accuracy
  Metric    SURE      L1Sparse    SCRUB           RL        SURE      L1Sparse   SCRUB           RL
  ∆RA       .46±.10    .03±.02     1.50± .64   7.82±2.09    .42±.07    2.15±.50    1.33±.51   6.37 ±2.24
  ∆UA       1.0±.63    3.0±1.10     2.±2.53    4.2 ±2.56   2.52±1.2    3.0±1.46   3.88±2.57   14.64±2.50
 ∆Utility   .34±.27    .62±.26     1.26±.30     .40±.21     .66±.16   1.48± .14   1.02± .36    .88± .81
 ∆CTA       .84±.28   2.04±1.57   1.68± 1.15   2.34±1.56   2.41±.96   2.53±1.07   2.24±1.23    3.34±.56



2023). In addition, SURE reduces vulnerabilities to basic membership inference attacks in the rep-
resentation space that are exhibited by some other methods. We assess our method across three
distinct unlearning scenarios: random unlearning, where forget samples are randomly selected from
the entire training set; partial class unlearning, where the forget set (Df ) is a randomly chosen sub-
set of a specific class; and class unlearning, where the forget set (Df ) comprises all samples from a
particular class, with the primary focus on the partial class unlearning scenario.


Figure 4: Gap in Top-1 accuracy for forget set sizes of 500 (top), 100 (middle), and 10 (bottom).
All three experiments employed the same set of hyperparameters, tuned specifically for the forget
set size of 500. A shorter bar (smaller gap) indicates performance is closer to that of the oracle.


5.1   E XPERIMENT S ETUP

Stability Experiments: To assess the stability of unlearning methods, we conduct two sets of exper-
iments. First, we report the average accuracy over the top 5 epochs rather than just the best epoch,
to ensure that the results are not merely due to an anomalously good epoch. Second, we evaluate the
methods across various forget set sizes.
Baselines: We compare our method with several baselines: Oracle, which retrains the model from
scratch using only Dr ; FineTune, which fine-tunes the original model on Dr ; NegGrad, which
uses gradient ascent on Df ; SCRUB (Kurmanji et al., 2024), a student-teacher framework where
unlearning is achieved by minimizing KL divergence between the student and teacher for Dr and
maximizing it for Df ; BTeacher (Chundawat et al., 2023), another student-teacher framework with
a pre-trained good teacher and a randomly initialized bad teacher, where the unlearning loss is the
sum of KL divergence between the student and the good teacher for Dr , and between the student and


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(a) Weight Distance (L2) between (b) MIARS-I accuracy gap. At-
                                                                       (c) MIARS-II accuracy gap. At-
oracle and unlearned model vs Av- tacker is trained to distinguish be-
                                                                       tacker is trained to distinguish be-
erage Error Gap for each unlearning tween forget and test examples.
                                                                       tween training and test examples.
method.

Figure 5: Comparison of the post-unlearning embedding space with that of the oracle using weight
comparison (left), MIARS-I attack (middle) and MIARS-II attack (right). The results are plotted
across all unlearning methods for the partial class unlearning case with forget size of 10 samples.



the bad teacher for Df ; BE (Chen et al., 2023) introduces a new class for all forget samples, which
is then removed; BS (Chen et al., 2023) replaces each forget sample’s label with that of a similar
image from a different class, based on gradient space similarity; L1Sparse (Liu et al., 2024) applies
L1 regularization to the objective function to promote sparsity and facilitate unlearning and finally
RL replaces forget sample labels with random ones.
It is important to note that we faced difficulties achieving good results with NegGrad, BE, and BS
due to instability during unlearning. To address this, inspired by Kurmanji et al. (2024), we enhanced
these methods by incorporating an additional term into the objective function: cross-entropy loss
trained on the Dr . We refer to these enhanced methods as NegGrad+, BE+, and BS+ respectively.
Implementation Details: Extensive hyperparameter tuning was conducted independently for each
method. The primary hyperparameters optimized were the learning rate and α, where α controls
the weight of the retain set loss in methods with a weighted loss function that combines losses for
the retain and forget sets. Additional hyperparameters, including batch size for the forget set and
learning rate scheduling, were also tuned. Optimal hyperparameters for each model were determined
through Bayesian optimization to achieve the best unlearning to utility trade-off. The same original
model was used across all unlearning methods, trained for 150 epochs with a learning rate of 0.01
and a weight decay of 0.0005, without data augmentation, with the learning rate reduced by an order
of magnitude at epochs 80 and 150. For the random unlearning method, hyperparameter tuning was
carried out with a forget set comprising 5,000 samples. In contrast, for (partial) class unlearning,
the forget set was considered to contain 500 samples. In the (partial) class unlearning experiments,
we initially selected one class at random (class 5) and conducted all experiments for that particular
class.
Additional Experiments: To gain further insight into our method’s effectiveness, we conduct ad-
ditional experiments involving different datasets, architectures, benchmarks, and analyses, which
are not included here due to space constraints. These results are provided in the appendices. More
specifically, we evaluate our method on two additional datasets: CINIC-10 (Darlow et al., 2018), an
extension of CIFAR-10 augmented with samples from ImageNet, and Tiny ImageNet (Le & Yang,
2015) in Appendix D. We also test our method on ViT-Small, an example of a larger model architec-
ture, trained on CIFAR-10, as detailed in Appendix D. Additionally, we investigate the effectiveness
of our method on a non-privacy-related benchmark, Removing Confusion Kurmanji et al. (2024), in
Appendix E. Finally, we conduct a sensitivity analysis to evaluate the method’s robustness to slight
changes in hyperparameters, as presented in Appendix F.


5.2   E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

In this section, we examine the effectiveness of our method against both oracle and multiple base-
lines across various unlearning benchmarks.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: t-SNE visualization of the post-unlearning embedding space for the entire CIFAR-10
training set across all unlearned models. The first column compares these embeddings against the
original (top) and oracle models (bottom). Cyan represents retain samples from the forget class, blue
indicates other retain samples, and red denotes the 10 forget samples from the same class.



Result reporting: For each experiment, results are presented for the best epoch, defined as the one
for which the utility versus privacy trade-off is optimized. Since most baselines, except for SCRUB,
did not provide an explicit selection process, we applied our own method to determine the epoch
for reporting results. For SCRUB, the best epoch is selected according to the criteria outlined in the
original paper (corresponding to the SCRUB-R version of the algorithm). Additionally, unless stated
otherwise, the figures and tables in this section do not present the performance of the unlearned mod-
els, but rather the gap between their performance and that of the oracle for a particular benchmark.
The gap is calculated as the absolute value of their differences; thus, a smaller value indicates better
performance of the method. The difference is averaged over five separate runs, with the original
model remaining constant while the randomly selected forget set varies. Error bars represent the
variance across these five runs.
Accuracy and MIA: Fig. 3 presents a summary of the results for three key sets of benchmarks:
Accuracy metrics, MIAs and RRT, across all three unlearning scenarios and methods (see Ap-
pendix B for more detailed plots). Overall, our method outperforms all other unlearning methods in
most benchmarks across these scenarios. In the random unlearning scenario, the L1Sparse method
closely follows ours. While SURE outperforms L1Sparse overall all but one of the benchmarks,
L1Sparse achieves better RRT. This discrepancy is primarily due to the additional module in our
approach—the domain regressor—which tends to slow down performance compared to the others.
Regarding MIA attacks, our results indicate that these attacks are largely ineffective in this scenario,
with all methods, including the oracle, yielding similar outcomes. In contrast, we observed that
these attacks are more effective in class unlearning scenarios. Notably, our method excels in these
scenarios, outperforming all other methods across all accuracy benchmarks and both MIA attacks
while maintaining competitive RRT.
Canary Unlearning: Fig. 2 presents the accuracy results from the canary unlearning experiment.
SURE outperforms all other methods across all accuracy measures. It effectively unlearns both the
IN and OOD samples while maintaining strong generalizability (Utility) and fidelity (RA).
Representations and MIARS: The primary motivation for our method is the hypothesis that a cor-
relation exists between the similarity of the post-unlearning model’s representation to that of the
oracle and the effectiveness of the unlearning process. To investigate this hypothesis, we plot the
Average Error Gap against the L2 distance between the penultimate layer’s weights of the unlearned
model and the oracle, as shown in Fig. 5a. The Average Error Gap is defined as the average abso-
lute value of the difference between the unlearned model and the oracle across five key unlearning
benchmarks: UA, Utility, RA, CTA, and MIARS-I. The results clearly indicate a correlation be-


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tween the alignment of the unlearned representation with the oracle and the success of unlearning.
In addition, our method has the lowest Average Error Gap and second smallest weight distance,
After L1Sparse. The t-SNE visualization of the embedding space for all unlearned models, shown
in Fig. 6, further suggests a correlation. Notably, the most effective unlearning methods, SURE
followed by L1Sparse, exhibit representations that closely resemble the oracle.
In addition to subpar unlearning performance, discrepancies between the unlearned model and the
oracle in the representation space can render the model vulnerable to simple MIAs. The results
are shown in Fig. 5b and 5c. As with previous plots, the y-axis indicates the difference in MIA
accuracy between the unlearned model and the oracle. The model unlearned with SURE exhibit is
most successful in defending both attacks. Also, overall models whose representation is closer to
oracle (measured by weight distance) are less susceptible to attacks.
Stability: For an unlearning method to be effective in real-world applications, it must demonstrate
stability. We assess stability by conducting two sets of experiments. In the first set of experiments,
we report the top-5 accuracy, calculated as the average accuracy over the top 5 epochs for the four
highest-performing unlearning methods, in Table.1. We compare these results to the top-1 accuracy,
which reflects the performance from the best epoch. Our findings indicate that SURE outperforms
the other three methods overall and across most individual metrics.
In the second experiment, we perform unlearning for different forget sizes (100 and 10), other than
the one used for hyperparameter tuning (500). This experiment assesses how sensitive each unlearn-
ing method is to slight changes in the setup for which it is optimized. The results are presented in
Fig. 4. While L1Sparse and SCRUB both show performance comparable to SURE for the forget set
size used for hyperparameter tuning (top plot), the gap between their performance and that of SURE
widens as the difference between the forget set used for unlearning and the original forget set grows
(middle and bottom plots).



6   C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

In this work, we propose SURE, an approximate unlearning method that focuses on unlearning
in the representation space rather than solely in the output space. This approach is motivated by
our observation that achieving similarity with the oracle in the representation space leads to more
successful unlearning. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our method consistently
yields superior or comparable results compared to existing techniques across a range of scenarios
and for a variety of unlearning benchmarks, including multiple accuracy metrics and two MIAs.
Furthermore, we empirically validate that the post-unlearning representation of the unlearned model
closely resemble that of the oracle. Finally, our approach exhibits greater stability and reduced
susceptibility to white-box attacks in the representation space, enhancing overall model security.
One observed limitation of our method is the need for more unlearning updates compared to other
techniques, especially in the random unlearning scenario where forget samples are randomly se-
lected from any class. A potential solution could be to employ a class-conditional discriminator in-
stead of a generic one, allowing the discriminator to focus on differentiating between class-specific
forget and validation samples. While promising, such an approach would come at a cost of training
and storing multiple discriminators.



ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

We thank Mila – Quebec AI Institute and Google DeepMind for providing the computational re-
sources that supported this work. We also sincerely appreciate Devin Kwok for his valuable input
and for providing the implementation code, both of which were instrumental for our analyses in the
representation space. We also thank Katja Filippova for providing feedback on the drafts of this
work. Daniel M. Roy is supported by the funding through NSERC Discovery Grant and Canada
CIFAR AI Chair at the Vector Institute.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY
To ensure reproducibility, we provide a comprehensive outline of our experimental setup in Sec-
tion 5.1, including details on hyperparameters, hyperparameter tuning strategies, datasets, and al-
gorithms. The precise hyperparameter settings are further documented in the Appendix G. Our
stability experiments, as detailed in Section 5.2, significantly enhance reproducibility and reveal in-
herent instability in some previously proposed methods. Furthermore, we address a critical and often
overlooked aspect of unlearning algorithms in Section 5.2 by carefully outlining our stopping crite-
ria selection process. Finally, all average numerical values in our experimental results are presented
with error bars computed over 5 independent runs.

R EFERENCES
Samuel K Ainsworth, Jonathan Hayase, and Siddhartha Srinivasa. Git re-basin: Merging models
  modulo permutation symmetries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.04836, 2022.
Johanni Brea, Berfin Simsek, Bernd Illing, and Wulfram Gerstner. Weight-space symmetry in deep
  networks gives rise to permutation saddles, connected by equal-loss valleys across the loss land-
  scape. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02911, 2019.
Yinzhi Cao and Junfeng Yang. Towards making systems forget with machine unlearning. In 2015
  IEEE symposium on security and privacy, pp. 463–480. IEEE, 2015.

Nicholas Carlini, Chang Liu, Úlfar Erlingsson, Jernej Kos, and Dawn Song. The secret sharer:
  Evaluating and testing unintended memorization in neural networks. In 28th USENIX security
  symposium (USENIX security 19), pp. 267–284, 2019.
Nicholas Carlini, Steve Chien, Milad Nasr, Shuang Song, Andreas Terzis, and Florian Tramer. Mem-
  bership inference attacks from first principles. In 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
  (SP), pp. 1897–1914. IEEE, 2022.
Min Chen, Weizhuo Gao, Gaoyang Liu, Kai Peng, and Chen Wang. Boundary unlearning: Rapid
 forgetting of deep networks via shifting the decision boundary. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7766–7775, 2023.
Vikram S Chundawat, Ayush K Tarun, Murari Mandal, and Mohan Kankanhalli. Can bad teaching
  induce forgetting? unlearning in deep networks using an incompetent teacher. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 7210–7217, 2023.
R Dennis Cook and Sanford Weisberg. Criticism and influence analysis in regression. Sociological
  methodology, 13:313–361, 1982.
Luke N Darlow, Elliot J Crowley, Antreas Antoniou, and Amos J Storkey. Cinic-10 is not imagenet
  or cifar-10. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.03505, 2018.
Cynthia Dwork. Differential privacy. In International colloquium on automata, languages, and
  programming, pp. 1–12. Springer, 2006.
Chongyu Fan, Jiancheng Liu, Yihua Zhang, Dennis Wei, Eric Wong, and Sijia Liu. Salun: Em-
  powering machine unlearning via gradient-based weight saliency in both image classification and
  generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12508, 2023.
Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, François
  Laviolette, Mario March, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural networks.
  Journal of machine learning research, 17(59):1–35, 2016.
Shashwat Goel, Ameya Prabhu, and Ponnurangam Kumaraguru. Evaluating inexact unlearning
  requires revisiting forgetting. CoRR abs/2201.06640, 2022a.
Shashwat Goel, Ameya Prabhu, Amartya Sanyal, Ser-Nam Lim, Philip Torr, and Ponnurangam
  Kumaraguru. Towards adversarial evaluations for inexact machine unlearning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.06640, 2022b.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, and Stefano Soatto. Eternal sunshine of the spotless net:
  Selective forgetting in deep networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9304–9312, 2020a.
Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, and Stefano Soatto. Forgetting outside the box: Scrubbing
  deep networks of information accessible from input-output observations. In Computer Vision–
  ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part
  XXIX 16, pp. 383–398. Springer, 2020b.
Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, Avinash Ravichandran, Marzia Polito, and Stefano Soatto.
  Mixed-privacy forgetting in deep networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on com-
  puter vision and pattern recognition, pp. 792–801, 2021.
Chuan Guo, Tom Goldstein, Awni Hannun, and Laurens Van Der Maaten. Certified data removal
  from machine learning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03030, 2019.
Jamie Hayes, Ilia Shumailov, Eleni Triantafillou, Amr Khalifa, and Nicolas Papernot. Inexact
  unlearning needs more careful evaluations to avoid a false sense of privacy. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.01218, 2024.
Robert Hecht-Nielsen. On the algebraic structure of feedforward network weight spaces. In Ad-
  vanced Neural Computers, pp. 129–135. Elsevier, 1990.
Zhengmian Hu and Heng Huang. On the random conjugate kernel and neural tangent kernel. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4359–4368. PMLR, 2021.
Zachary Izzo, Mary Anne Smart, Kamalika Chaudhuri, and James Zou. Approximate data dele-
  tion from machine learning models. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 2008–2016. PMLR, 2021.
Jinghan Jia, Jiancheng Liu, Parikshit Ram, Yuguang Yao, Gaowen Liu, Yang Liu, Pranay
   Sharma, and Sijia Liu. Model sparsification can simplify machine unlearning. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2304.04934, 1(2):3, 2023.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 1885–1894. PMLR, 2017.
Meghdad Kurmanji, Peter Triantafillou, Jamie Hayes, and Eleni Triantafillou. Towards unbounded
 machine unlearning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Ya Le and Xuan Yang. Tiny imagenet visual recognition challenge. CS 231N, 7(7):3, 2015.
Jiancheng Liu, Parikshit Ram, Yuguang Yao, Gaowen Liu, Yang Liu, PRANAY SHARMA, Sijia
   Liu, et al. Model sparsity can simplify machine unlearning. Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Alexandre Sablayrolles, Matthijs Douze, Cordelia Schmid, Yann Ollivier, and Hervé Jégou. White-
  box vs black-box: Bayes optimal strategies for membership inference. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 5558–5567. PMLR, 2019.
Liwei Song and Prateek Mittal. Systematic evaluation of privacy risks of machine learning models.
  In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21), pp. 2615–2632, 2021.
Eleni Triantafillou, Peter Kairouz, Fabian Pedregosa, Jamie Hayes, Meghdad Kurmanji, Kairan
  Zhao, Vincent Dumoulin, Julio Jacques Junior, Ioannis Mitliagkas, Jun Wan, et al. Are we mak-
  ing progress in unlearning? findings from the first neurips unlearning competition. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.09073, 2024.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Top-1 accuracy for the three accuracy metrics, as indicated in the title of each plot, during
unlearning across all unlearned models for the random unlearning case. In contrast to the results
section, the values shown here represent the actual accuracy rather than the gap. The gray dashed
line in each plot illustrates the performance of the oracle.


A    R ELATED W ORK
Unlearning was first introduced in (Cao & Yang, 2015) who proposed a forgetting algorithm for sta-
tistical query learning. Nowadays, a plethora of unlearning methods have been proposed that attempt
to selectively remove the influence of the forget set from the trained model. Golatkar et al. (2020a)
introduced an information-theoretic method that uses a Newton step and adds noise to erase the for-
get set. Golatkar et al. (2020b) proposed NTK forgetting, employing a first-order Taylor expansion to
estimate the weights that would have been obtained if training without the forget set. These methods
work well under assumptions of stability of SGD. Izzo et al. (2021); Koh & Liang (2017) proposed
unlearning algorithms based on influence functions Cook & Weisberg (1982), drawing connections
to ( , δ)-forgetting (Guo et al., 2019). Goel et al. (2022a) introduced two approximate unlearning
methods: Catastrophic Forgetting-k(CF-K) and Exact Unlearning-k (EU-k). In both methods, the
first k layers of the pre-trained model are frozen. In CF-K, the remaining layers are fine-tuned on Dr
while in EU-k forgetting, they are trained from scratch on Dr . (Chundawat et al., 2023; Kurmanji
et al., 2024) proposed teacher-student formulations, where the teacher is the original model and the
student is initialized from the teacher and, through specially-crafted distillation procedures (where
the teacher is frozen and the student is updated), turns into the unlearned model. In (Chundawat
et al., 2023), the student distills retain set knowledge from the teacher, while being encouraged to
agree with another “incompetent” teacher on the forget set, whereas SCRUB (Chundawat et al.,
2023) considers only one teacher, and encourages the student to agree with it on the retain set while
disagreeing with it on the forget set. Chen et al. ((Chen et al., 2023)) adopted a unique strategy
for class unlearning by adjusting the decision boundary of the original model to mimic the oracle’s
decision-making. They introduced two boundary shift methods: Boundary Expanding, which cre-
ates a new class for all forget samples that will later be removed, and Boundary Shrinking, which
assigns forget samples labels from similar images in different classes. Liu et al. (2024) proposed
L1Sparse, adding an L1-penalty into the fine-tuning baseline, after conducting an investigation that
shows that sparsity makes unlearning easier. Fan et al. (2023) proposed a localized unlearning ap-
proach that targets only a subset of parameters that are deemed-to-be the most critical for the forget
set.
B U NLEARNING R ESULTS F OR CIFAR-10
Fig. 7 and Fig. 10 illustrate the accuracy metrics (UA, RA, and Utility, and in the case of class
unlearning, CTA) during the unlearning process across different methods for random and partial
class unlearning scenarios respectively. The gray dashed line in each plot represents the oracle
performance.
The label Original denotes the original model which serves as the starting point for all unlearning
methods. To evaluate the effectiveness of each unlearning method we compare the performance of
the unlearned model with that of the oracle on all accuracy metrics. For each unlearning method, the
comparison is made at the best epoch. The absolute value of the difference between the unlearned
model and the oracle model for each method is displayed in Fig. 8 and Fig. 11. In the random
unlearning scenario, the forget set consists of 1,000 samples randomly selected from the entire


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Gap in Top-1 accuracy for various accuracy metrics, as indicated in the title of each plot,
for the random unlearning scenario with a forget size of 1000, across all unlearned models. Results
are reported for the best epoch.


training set, while in the partial unlearning scenario, it consists of 100 samples randomly chosen
from class 5.


Figure 9: MIA-I (left) and MIA-II (right) in output space across all unlearned models for random
unlearning. Red line represents the performance of the oracle.


The results for MIA-I and MIA-II in the random and partial unlearning cases are shown in Fig. 9 and
Fig. 12, respectively. The red line indicates the attack accuracy on the oracle, serving as a reference
point for all unlearning methods. MIA-I does not appear to be effective in the random unlearning
scenario, as nearly all unlearning methods seem equally successful at defending against it. However,
this is not the case for the partial class unlearning scenario, where our method’s success rate is very
close to that of the oracle. For MIA-II, our method outperforms the others, showing an overall
success rate closest to the oracle’s for both random and partial unlearning scenarios, although the
results for the random scenario are quite similar across all methods.


Figure 10: Top-1 accuracy across all unlearned models for the partial class unlearning case with the
forget size of 100. Each panel presents a different accuracy metric, as indicated in the title. The gray
dashed line in each plot illustrates the performance of the oracle.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: Gap in Top-1 accuracy for various accuracy metrics for the partial unlearning case across
all unlearned models.


Figure 12: MIA-I (left) and MIA-II (right) results for the partial class unlearning scenario. Red line
represents the performance of the oracle.



C    G RADIENT UPDATES

The purpose of this section is to describe the mathematical optimization problem underlying train-
ing. We will see that it is implemented succinctly with a gradient reversal layer (GRL), which is how
we describe it in the main paper (Eqs. (3) and (4)). Readers may find one of these two equivalent
descriptions more intuitive.
Define

                                  1         X
            E(θf , θy , θd ) =                       Ly (Gy (Gf (x; θf ); θy ), y)
                                 |Dr |
                                         (x,y)∈Dr
                                          λ
                                                                Ld (Gd (Gf (x; θf )); θd ), 1(x ∈ Dfx )).
                                                     X
                                   −
                                         |Dfx |
                                                  x∈Dfx ∪Dval
                                                          x


This objective is the objective underlying domain adversarial neural networks (Ganin et al., 2016).
The first term captures the training error on the classification task and depends on the feature extrac-
tor and classification modules. The second term captures the error on the discrimination task, and
depends on the feature extractor and domain-regressor modules.
We optimize this objective for training in SURE. In particular, the goal of domain adversarial training
is to find a saddle point, where the optimal parameters for each module satisfy


                                       (θˆf , θˆy ) = arg min E(θf , θy , θ̂d ),                            (5)
                                                         θf ,θy

                                              θˆd = arg max E(θˆf , θˆy , θd ).                             (6)
                                                          θd



                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Results for the random and partial class unlearning scenarios on CINIC-10. Each bench-
mark plot illustrates the absolute difference between the unlearned model and the oracle. For ran-
dom unlearning, the forget set contains 1,000 samples, while for partial unlearning, it consists of 100
samples. The results are averaged over five distinct runs, each with a unique forget set. To enhance
visual clarity, the values for each metric have been normalized to their maximum value.


Following Ganin et al. (2016), we use the following gradient updates to seek a saddle-point:
                                                 ∂L         ∂Ld
                                                    y
                                 θf ← θf − µ           −λ         ,                                (7)
                                                 ∂θf        ∂θf
                                                 ∂L
                                                    y
                                 θy ← θy − µ            ,                                          (8)
                                                 ∂θy
                                                  ∂L
                                                      d
                                 θd ← θd − µλ             ,                                        (9)
                                                  ∂θd
where µ is the learning rate. As discussed in (Ganin et al., 2016), these updates closely resemble
SGD updates for a simple feed-forward deep model objective function, with one key difference: the
gradients from the domain regressor are subtracted instead of added. This adjustment ensures that,
while the regressor’s task is to distinguish between forget and validation samples, the feature extrac-
tor aims to deceive the regressor. As a result, the feature extractor learns a set of indiscriminative
features that cannot differentiate between the forget samples and previously unseen samples.


Figure 14: Results for the random and partial class unlearning scenarios on the Tiny ImageNet
dataset. For random unlearning, the forget set contains 1,000 samples, while for partial class un-
learning, it contains 400 samples. Results are averaged over five runs, each with a unique forget
set.


As noted by Ganin et al. (2016), this modification to the usual update rules is cumbersome to im-
plement naively in most deep learning libraries. To address this, the authors introduced a special
“gradient reversal layer” (GRL), which has no associated parameters. During forward propagation,


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: Results for the random and partial class unlearning scenarios using a Small-ViT trained
on CIFAR-10. For random unlearning, the forget set contains 1,000 samples, while for partial class
unlearning, it contains 10 samples. Results are averaged over five runs, each with a unique forget
set.


the GRL acts as an identity transformation. During backpropagation, however, it takes the gradient
from the subsequent layer and reverses its sign (i.e., multiplies it by the negative identity) before
passing it to the preceding layer. Because the computation involving the domain regressor weights
comes after the GRL, gradient descent minimizes the discrimination task objective in the domain
regressor weights. In contrast, the computation involving the feature extractor weights come before
the GRL, and so gradient descent maximizes the discrimination task objective in the feature extractor
weights.
In conclusion, if we perform backpropagation of the computation representing sum of Eq. (3) and
Eq. (4), the latter of which includes the GRL, we obtain updates identical to Eq. (7). This objective
with a GRL can be optimized using standard auto-differentiation tools.
 Method      Retain Err     Forget Err      Test Err      IC Retain    FGT Retain       IC Test       FGT Test
 SURE       0.08 ± 0.11    12.25 ± 4.57   22.75 ± 0.31     0.0 ± 0.0    0.4 ± 0.49    0.16 ± 0.01   29.4 ± 3.88
 SCRUB       0.32 ± 0.3     10.5 ± 2.03   25.36 ± 1.01     0.0 ± 0.0    4.0 ± 4.86    0.17 ± 0.01   35.6 ± 6.56
 L1Sparse   0.08 ± 0.11     12.25 ± 3.1   22.18 ± 0.53     0.0 ± 0.0     0.2 ± 0.4    0.15 ± 0.01   27.0 ± 3.63
 FineTune   2.77 ± 0.73    29.75 ± 5.33   26.89 ± 0.46   0.07 ± 0.01    2.6 ± 1.85    0.32 ± 0.01   17.4 ± 3.61
 BE+          0.0 ± 0.0     100.0 ± 0.0   28.61 ± 0.58   0.58 ± 0.12   25.0 ± 13.61   0.64 ± 0.08    10.0 ± 5.4
 BS+        2.13 ± 1.98    85.75 ± 3.92   34.14 ± 1.66   0.07 ± 0.04    7.8 ± 15.6    0.45 ± 0.02    13.0 ± 3.22
 RL         13.65 ± 1.25    19.75 ± 3.1   26.53 ± 0.48   0.07 ± 0.01   60.4 ± 14.36   0.17 ± 0.01    38.4 ± 6.44
 NegGrad+     0.0 ± 0.0     100.0 ± 0.0    28.6 ± 0.58     0.5 ± 0.0   3960.0 ± 0.0    0.5 ± 0.0    1000.0 ± 0.0
 BTeacher   1.17 ± 0.29     8.75 ± 3.45   27.67 ± 0.57   0.05 ± 0.01    2.0 ± 2.61    0.35 ± 0.01     11.6 ± 3.2

Table 2: Performance comparison of multiple unlearning methods on the RC task across various
metrics. Results are averaged over 5 runs.


D    M ORE U NLEARNING R ESULTS
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our unlearning method across additional datasets and
architectures. Specifically, we extend our analysis to CINIC-10, Tiny ImageNet, and ViT-Small,
comparing our method against other unlearning approaches across various benchmarks.
In Fig. 13, we compare the performance of our method on the CINIC-10 dataset against all other
baselines across various unlearning metrics, similar to Fig. 3. The figure displays the absolute
difference between the unlearned model and the oracle for all accuracy metrics (UA, RA, Utility,
and CTA), as well as for RRT and MIAs. We observe that SURE outperforms most benchmarks
in both scenarios. Consistent with the results from CIFAR-10, L1Sparse ranks as the second-best
performing method, occasionally surpassing SURE on a few metrics.
In addition, we evaluate the performance of our method on the Tiny ImageNet dataset, comparing it
against three other top-performing methods identified in previous experiments: L1Sparse, FineTune,
and SCRUB. The results, presented in Fig. 14, show that our method outperforms all others across all
benchmarks except for RRT, consistent with our findings on CIFAR-10 and CINIC-10. For random


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 16: Heatmaps illustrating the sensitivity analysis of SURE’s performance with respect to
the two key hyperparameters: lr and α, across the four main accuracy benchmarks: UA (top-left),
Utility (top-right), RA (bottom-left), and VTA (bottom-right). Each heatmap shows performance
variations relative to the best-tuned hyperparameter settings.


unlearning, we were unable to identify a set of hyperparameters for FineTune and SCRUB that
achieved successful unlearning. Both methods fail to achieve the desired unlearning-utility tradeoff,
as they completely unlearn all information. In the case of class unlearning, FineTune and SCRUB
are more competitive; however, the primary competition remains between our method (SURE) and
L1Sparse, with SURE outperforming L1Sparse in nearly all benchmarks.
To explore the effectiveness of our method on larger models, we tested its performance using ViT-
Small across both random and class unlearning scenarios. Results are presented in Fig. 15. For
random unlearning, our method demonstrates a slight edge over L1Sparse. We were unable to find
hyperparameters for SCRUB that enabled effective unlearning, as models using this method failed to
achieve the desired unlearning-utility tradeoff. For class unlearning, the results are more balanced:
our method outperforms L1Sparse on 4 out of 7 benchmarks, while L1Sparse outperforms on the
remaining 3. These findings highlight the robustness of our approach, while also demonstrating that
pruning-based methods like L1Sparse can remain competitive in specific settings.

E    U NLEARNING R ESULTS F OR T HE R ESOLVING C ONFUSION TASK
In this section, we apply our unlearning method to the Resolving Confusion (RC) task introduced in
Kurmanji et al. (2024). This task serves as an example of a non-privacy-related application where
unlearning is beneficial for resolving confusion between classes caused by a portion of the model’s
original training set being mislabeled.
We evaluated the performance of SURE on the RC task using a ResNet-18 model trained on the
CIFAR-10 dataset. We compared our method against all eight competing unlearning methods intro-
duced in the paper. In our implementation, the forget set consists of a randomly selected subset (1%)
of training samples from classes 0 and 1, which are intentionally mislabeled as the opposite class.
Given that all samples in the forget set are mislabeled, the objective of unlearning in this context
is to resolve the induced confusion. An unlearning method is considered successful if, at the end
of the unlearning process, the forget samples are correctly relabeled while maintaining the model’s
performance on the test and retain sets.
To evaluate the performance of our unlearning method, we report the forget error (Forget Err) along-
side the test (Test Err) and retain errors (Retain Err). An effective method is expected to exhibit low


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


error values across all three metrics. In addition to these, and in line with the original paper Kur-
manji et al. (2024), we also report the Interclass Confusion Error (IC-ERR) and FGT-ERR. Unlike
the previously introduced errors, which count all types of incorrect predictions, IC-ERR specifically
measures errors involving the confused classes (in our setup, class 0 and class 1). It counts instances
where a sample from class 0 is predicted to belong to any other class, and vice versa for class 1.
FGT-ERR, on the other hand, is even more specific, as it counts only cases where a sample from
class 0 is mislabeled as class 1, or a sample from class 1 is mislabeled as class 0. IC-ERR and
FGT-ERR are reported for both retain and test sets. Our results presented in Table 2 demonstrate
that SURE is the top-performing approach, alongside L1Sparse, yielding similar results for many
metrics.

F      S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS OF H YPERPARAMETERS
To assess the sensitivity of our method’s performance to variations in its hyperparameter values,
we conducted a sensitivity analysis focusing on the two most critical hyperparameters: α and the
learning rate (lr). This analysis was carried out for the class unlearning scenario using a ResNet-
18 model trained on the CIFAR-10 dataset, with a forget set consisting of 100 samples. Using a
grid search approach, we varied each parameter’s value within a range of -20% to +20% around its
optimal value and analyzed the resulting changes across multiple unlearning benchmarks.
The observed performance variations are illustrated in Fig. 16. The figure presents four heatmaps,
each providing a sensitivity analysis for a specific accuracy benchmark as a function of these hyper-
parameters. These heatmaps highlight the differences in performance relative to the model trained
with the best hyperparameter configuration from tuning. The visualizations reveal the sensitivity to
each parameter and their interactions, showing that, compared to other methods (see Section 4 and
Figure 2 in Fan et al. (2023)), SURE demonstrates low sensitivity to hyperparameter variations. For
comparison, Fan et al. (2023) reports fluctuations of approximately 40 points in the average perfor-
mance gap between the unlearned model and the oracle for the Influence Unlearning method. While
there is always room for improvement, our results suggest that sensitivity to hyperparameters is not
a significant limitation of SURE.

G       U NLEARNING H YPERPARAMETERS
The optimized values for all hyperparameters across unlearning methods in both random and partial
class unlearning scenarios are presented in Table 3 and Table 4, respectively. The main hyperparam-
eters we tuned in this work are the learning rate, lr, α (retain set loss weight in unlearning methods
with a weighted objective function), forget set batch size, and the learning rate scheduling, defined
by the epoch at which the learning rate drops.

     Params       SURE    L1Sparse   SCRUB    FineTune   Bteach    BE+     BS+     RL     NegGrad+
        rl        .045      .0045    .0008     .0043      .035    .0092   .0079   .0671      .0072
         α        .807     .00044     .997       -        .954     .982    .998      -        .991
    fbatch size   256         32      256       256         8      128     128      32          8
     lr decay      10         10       18        8          8       14      10      14         18

Table 3: Optimized hyperparameters for the random unlearning scenario: learning rate (lr), α, forget
set batch size (fbatch size), and the epoch for learning rate decay (lr decay).


      Params      SURE    L1Sparse   SCRUB    FineTune   Bteach    BS+     BE+     RL     NegGrad+
        lr        .0372     .0038      .001     .0025     .0320   .0047   .0058   .0014     .0694
         α        .4241    .00024     .6089        -      .3453   .9841   .4639      -      .9981
    fbatch size    128       256        32        32        64       8     128      64       256
     lr decay       4         18         6        18        8       12      4       10        18

Table 4: Optimized hyperparameters for the (partial) class unlearning scenario: learning rate (lr),
α, forget set batch size (fbatch size), and the epoch for learning rate decay (lr decay).



                                                  19
