Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARNING TO ENGINEER PROTEIN FLEXIBILITY
               Petr Kouba1,2        Joan Planas-Iglesias2,3      Jiri Damborsky2,3
                      Jiri Sedlar1      Stanislav Mazurenko2,3        Josef Sivic1
       1
         Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University
2
  Loschmidt Laboratories, Department of Experimental Biology and RECETOX, Masaryk University
            3
              International Clinical Research Centre, St. Anne’s University Hospital Brno


                                            A BSTRACT
         Generative machine learning models are increasingly being used to design novel
         proteins for therapeutic and biotechnological applications. However, the current
         methods mostly focus on the design of proteins with a fixed backbone structure,
         which leads to their limited ability to account for protein flexibility, one of the
         crucial properties for protein function. Learning to engineer protein flexibility is
         problematic because the available data are scarce, heterogeneous, and costly to
         obtain using computational as well as experimental methods. Our contributions to
         address this problem are three-fold. First, we comprehensively compare methods
         for quantifying protein flexibility and identify data relevant to learning. Second,
         we design and train flexibility predictors utilizing sequential or both sequential
         and structural information on the input. We overcome the data scarcity issue by
         leveraging a pre-trained protein language model. Third, we introduce a method for
         fine-tuning a protein inverse folding model to steer it toward desired flexibility in
         specified regions. We demonstrate that our method Flexpert-Design enables guid-
         ance of inverse folding models toward increased flexibility. This opens up new
         possibilities for protein flexibility engineering and the development of proteins
         with enhanced biological activities.

1   I NTRODUCTION
The goal of this study is to develop a tool that integrates protein flexibility into computational pro-
tein design. Computational protein engineering and design are crucial technologies that have shown
immense potential in creating next-generation enzymes for a wide range of applications, from the
production of fine chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and food ingredients to sustainable, environmen-
tally friendly solutions in green energy and biodegradation (Planas-Iglesias et al., 2021). These
approaches aim to propose new amino acid sequences, either from scratch (de novo) or by modify-
ing sequences of existing natural proteins to alter their properties in a desired way. Despite the long
history of these efforts, protein engineering and design remain labor-intensive and time-consuming,
with uncertain outcomes in each case (Listov et al., 2024). Recent advances in generative machine
learning have led to several powerful tools for designing proteins with specific topologies (the in-
verse folding problem), offering the potential for universal protein design platforms (Notin et al.,
2024; Kortemme, 2024). However, the number of successful case studies using these tools remains
relatively low. One of the major obstacles hindering their broader application is their inability to
account for protein flexibility (Chu et al., 2024; Kouba et al., 2023).
Proteins are highly dynamic biomolecules, and the presence of flexible regions is critical for their
biological function (Corbella et al., 2023; Lemay-St-Denis et al., 2022). In particular, fine-tuning
conformational dynamics of loops close to the active site has been shown to be an important method
for modulating substrate specificities (Romero-Rivera et al., 2022), turnover rates (Crean et al.,
2021), and pH dependency (Shen et al., 2021) of enzymes. In addition, the biological function of
many proteins often requires that a small molecule is transported through their structures, for ex-
ample via tunnels leading to the active site, whose dynamical properties are thus critical for protein
function (Jurcik et al., 2018). Modulating the flexibility of protein parts even far away from the ac-
tive sites has been shown to be an efficient strategy for improving proteins (Karamitros et al., 2022).
However, quantification of protein flexibility remains challenging despite recent progress in both
experimental and computational approaches. Experimental methods, such as X-ray crystallogra-
phy, nuclear magnetic resonance, and hydrogen-deuterium exchange coupled to mass spectroscopy,


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


require expensive equipment, specialized biophysical expertise, and time-consuming sample prepa-
ration and analysis (Peacock & Komives, 2021). Consequently, they lack the high throughput needed
for systematic protein flexibility evaluation. Computational methods provide a broad spectrum of
approaches for assessing protein flexibility, from rapid coarse-grained modeling to more accurate
but highly computationally intensive molecular dynamics (MD) simulations (Kmiecik et al., 2016).
However, the available datasets are limited, and systematic comparisons of different methods across
large protein datasets are thus lacking. More importantly, it remains unclear how to effectively in-
tegrate these computational methods into the state-of-the-art generative tools, increasingly used in
protein engineering and design (Kortemme, 2024).
In this work, we aim to fill these gaps by proposing a new method for designing protein flexibility.
First, we perform a comprehensive comparison of methods for quantification of protein flexibility
and identify relevant data for learning (Section 3). Second, we address the data scarcity issue by
proposing new flexibility predictors utilizing just sequential (Flexpert-Seq) or both sequential and
structural (Flexpert-3D) information on the input (Section 4.1). Importantly, our goal is to create a
fast predictor, which is crucial for its integration into state-of-the-art ML-guided protein engineering
pipelines. Third, we introduce a new method (Flexpert-Design) for fine-tuning a protein inverse
folding model to make it steerable toward desired flexibility in specified positions (Section 4.2).
Our results show that it is possible to predict flexibility from sequence, and that adding structural
information further improves the prediction. Furthermore, using our protein flexibility predictor, we
demonstrate that inverse folding models can be steered toward generating protein sequences with
increased flexibility, suggesting a potential strategy for engineering of protein flexibility.

2   R ELATED WORK
Experimental methods for measuring protein flexibility. Common experimental methods
for determining protein flexibility include X-ray crystallography, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
(NMR), and Hydrogen-Deuterium Exchange coupled to Mass Spectroscopy (HDX-MS) (Peacock
& Komives, 2021). X-ray crystallography provides flexibility estimates based on the consistency
of protein conformations in a crystalline state. The regularity of atomic positions across crystal
lattice cells determines the precision of atom location, quantified by the B-factor (or temperature
factor), which indicates mobility (Wlodawer et al., 2008). Details on NMR and HDX-MS are given
in Appendix A.
Computational methods for measuring protein flexibility. Protein flexibility can be predicted
using faster, more economical in silico methods (Rueda et al., 2007). A common approach in-
volves deriving flexibility from Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations, which apply Newton’s laws
to atoms to compute their motion over time. From these simulations, Root Mean Square Fluctua-
tions (RMSF) can be computed per residue to quantify their flexibility as observed in the simula-
tions. While effective, MD is time-consuming, as it must explore a wide range of protein conforma-
tions. Elastic Network Models (ENMs) offer a faster alternative by modeling proteins as a system
of beads and springs, using Normal Mode Analysis to predict motions (López-Blanco & Chacón,
2016; Tirion, 1996). ENMs were refined by Bahar et al. to include Gaussian and anisotropic move-
ments (Bahar et al., 1997; Atilgan et al., 2001) and are implemented in tools like ProDy (Bakan
et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2021). More details on ENMs are given in Appendix C. Recent machine
learning (ML)-based methods, such as AlphaFold (Jumper et al., 2021) and ESMFold (Lin et al.,
2022), have been adapted for flexibility prediction. Combining these models with flow matching
techniques in AlphaFlow has enabled sampling of broader conformational spaces at about 10 times
the speed of MD, though with reduced structural precision (Jing et al., 2024).
Protein flexibility engineering. Engineering flexibility in proteins remains a significant chal-
lenge. Traditional approaches often involve quantum mechanics (QM), QM/MM, molecular dynam-
ics (MD), and Monte-Carlo simulations, along with extensive experimental testing (Planas-Iglesias
et al., 2021). For example, Yu & Dalby (2018) employed MD simulations to analyze correlated
motions in enzyme dynamics. Similarly, Osuna’s group developed the Shortest Path Map (SPM)
algorithm to identify key conformational hotspots in enzymes like retro-aldolase and monoamine
oxidase (Casadevall et al., 2024; Romero-Rivera et al., 2017). Kamerlin’s lab also utilized MD to
study enzyme dynamics, particularly in (βα)8 barrel enzymes (Romero-Rivera et al., 2022). An-
other approach to flexibility design involves creating chimeras, where regions of one protein are
transplanted into another. Notable examples include chimeric TEM1/PSE4 β-lactamases studied


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with NMR (Morin et al., 2010) and Kamerlin’s transplantation of the WPD loop in phosphatases
(Moise et al., 2018; Shen et al., 2022). Damborsky’s lab has focused on transplanting dynamic
loops to explore flexibility and catalytic mechanisms in luciferases (Schenkmayerova et al., 2023;
Chaloupkova et al., 2019), leading to the development of LoopGrafter, a web tool for in silico protein
flexibility design (Planas-Iglesias et al., 2022).
Protein inverse folding. The task of predicting a sequence that folds into a given backbone struc-
ture (protein inverse folding) has become a key area where machine learning significantly contributes
to protein design, along with structure prediction. ProteinMPNN (Dauparas et al., 2022), based on
the graph neural network architecture introduced by Ingraham et al. (2019), is one of the most widely
used tools for this task. Recent benchmarks, such as ProteinInvBench (Gao et al., 2023c), feature
newer methods, e.g., KWDesign and PiFold (Gao et al., 2023b;a), which outperform ProteinMPNN
in standard metrics such as sequence recovery on datasets like CATH4.3 (Pearl et al., 2003). Despite
these advancements, ProteinMPNN remains the community standard, largely due to its extensive ex-
perimental validation. This highlights the limitations of such metrics as sequence recovery, which
do not fully capture a model’s ability to design functional or stable proteins (Wang et al., 2023). As
a result, there is growing interest in developing more comprehensive evaluation metrics and tasks
that better reflect real-world protein design challenges.

3     A NALYSIS OF DATA SOURCES FOR PROTEIN FLEXIBILITY
One of the key challenges in the engineering of protein flexibility is the lack of consistent and
affordable methods for flexibility measurement or estimation. This hinders the development of flex-
ibility datasets useful for learning. The most reliable type of data come from experiments and from
physics-based simulations, in particular molecular dynamics simulations. However, experimental
data are costly, time-consuming, and highly heterogeneous due to biases and different calibrations
of the experiments. Similarly, molecular dynamics data are time-consuming and subject to many
human-made choices, such as the choice of force field. Our goal in this section is to analyze the
available data and data generation methods for protein flexibility that could be utilized for learning
a fast flexibility predictor. We first specify how we quantify protein flexibility using relevant ex-
perimental and computational methods (Section 3.1). Then we critically compare these methods to
identify a relevant data source for learning (Section 3.2).

3.1   M ETHODS FOR QUANTIFICATION OF PROTEIN FLEXIBILITY

In this work we focus on flexibility as a quantity describing the ability of individual residues (mainly
their backbone) to move within the protein structure. To this end, we introduce in this section the
relevant methods for quantification of protein flexibility, and in particular, the metrics used with each
method for reporting per-residue protein flexibility values.
MD. Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations can be used to quantify protein flexibility by simulat-
ing the atomic movements in a given modeled solvent environment. MD simulations are considered
an accurate physics-based method and we thus regard them as the gold standard for flexibility es-
timation. However, their limitations should still be noted: (i) the simulation of the solvent is only
approximate, affecting mainly the simulation accuracy of side-chain atoms, and (ii) potential inter-
actions driven by molecules commonly present in the natural environment but not explicitly present
in the simulation might affect the flexibility. For working with data on MD simulation, we select the
recently published ATLAS dataset (Vander Meersche et al., 2023), particularly due to its excellent
level of data curation. ATLAS consists of MD trajectories of 1390 proteins, each simulated in three
replicas for 100ns per replica. For each protein and its residues, we quantify their flexibility by
computing their root mean square fluctuations (RMSF) averaged over the three simulation replicas
(see Appendix B for details on RMSF).
B-factors. The crystallographic B-factor carries information on protein flexibility, as it describes
the inherent thermal vibrations of atoms in a crystal lattice. In such an organized environment,
however, the natural movement of the protein is diminished, and crystal packing artifacts may lead
to an underestimation of the real protein motions (Eyal et al., 2005). In this paper, we report B-
factors obtained from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (Berman et al., 2000). Note that for a few cases
from PDB, we also kept the B-factors originating from NMR experiments, whose nature is different
from those obtained in crystallographic experiments (for details, see Appendix A).

                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Pearson correlation coefficients of flexibility predictions obtained by PDB B-factors and by
computational methods (see Section 3.1 for details of the studied flexibility quantification methods).
The reported coefficients are averaged over the 1383/1390 proteins from the ATLAS dataset (some
were skipped due to missing pieces of structure resulting in NaNs from ENMs). As the table is
symmetric, we show only values in the upper triangle. The best result in terms of correlation to MD
simulations is highlighted in bold, and the second best is underlined.
                             MD     B-factors    AlphaFold2     ESMFold       GNM      ANM
              MD               -       0.51          0.71          0.57       0.76     0.77
              B-factors                  -           0.52          0.38       0.55     0.51
              AlphaFold2                               -           0.66       0.55     0.56
              ESMFold                                                -        0.45     0.43
              GNM                                                               -      0.94
              ANM                                                                        -

AlphaFold2. The protein structure prediction model AlphaFold2 (AF2) (Jumper et al., 2021) con-
tains a confidence model predicting pLDDT scores. While the pLDDT score is primarily a measure
of estimated confidence by AlphaFold2 (that may be induced by sequence variability in the region,
for instance), it has been shown to be negatively correlated with flexibility (Ruff & Pappu, 2021; Guo
et al., 2022; Saldaño et al., 2022) and exploited to approximate flexibility as measured by Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) (Ma et al., 2023). Therefore, to quantify flexibility with AF2, we use
(1- pLDDT). Since the pLDDT prediction cannot be easily decoupled from the structure prediction,
its runtime is the same as for the structure prediction, resulting in a relatively slow speed.
ESMFold. The protein structure prediction model ESMFold (Lin et al., 2022) also provides a
pLDDT confidence model but with a significantly faster runtime than AlphaFold2. As in the case of
AlphaFold2, we use (1-pLDDT) to quantify flexibility with ESMFold.
GNM. Gaussian Network Models (GNM) are a type of Elastic Network Models that model the
atomic motions as isotropic, i.e., they model only the magnitudes of the displacements. To quantify
flexibility, we use GNM to estimate the RMSF of each residue using the input structure from the
ATLAS dataset that underwent a short MD relaxation. For details on the computation of RMSF for
GNMs, see Appendix B.
ANM. In contrast, Anisotropic Network Models (ANM) model the atomic motions as anisotropic,
i.e. they model also the direction of the displacement. As in the case of GNM, we quantify flexibility
using RMSF estimated from an MD relaxed structure. For details on the computation of RMSF for
ANMs, see Appendix B.

3.2 C OMPARISON OF PROTEIN FLEXIBILITY QUANTIFICATION METHODS
Next, we compare the selected methods for quantification of protein flexibility on the ATLAS dataset
(see Table 1). This is done via computing the correlation between the per residue flexibility profiles
obtained through the different methods. The results of this analysis are discussed next.
Table 1 shows that the B-factors obtained for the ATLAS proteins from the PDB database do not
correlate well with the other methods. We hypothesize that this is due to the crystal packing effect.
The root mean square fluctuations (RMSF) from MD simulations thus appear to be a more reliable
proxy for the true flexibility of single proteins (i.e., not in a crystal). We further support this conclu-
sion by training a predictor of the B-factor data, which reached only modest performance, hinting
at B-factor data being of insufficient quality for learning (see Appendix D). Hence, in the rest of the
paper, we regard the flexibility computed using RMSF from the MD simulations (denoted further as
MD) as the gold standard, which we will try to approach using learning.
Measured by the correlation to the RMSFs from the MD simulations, the best-performing compu-
tational methods are the Anisotropic Network Models (ANM), closely followed by the Gaussian
Network Models (GNM) (see highlighted row in Table 1). Here, both ANM and GNM are eval-
uated over the MD relaxed structures from the ATLAS dataset and both result in mutually highly
correlated RMSFs (Pearson correlation coefficient 0.94).
Having each simulation in three replicas in the ATLAS dataset allows us to evaluate the level of
reliability of the RMSF computed using the short ATLAS MD trajectories. To this end, we compute


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the correlation of RMSF between different simulation replicas of the same protein. We find that the
different replicas mutually correlate on average with the Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) of
0.88. We consider this number to be the indicative upper bound for the average correlation of any
flexibility predictor trained and evaluated on the ATLAS dataset.
ANMs require a protein (backbone) structure on the input, which can be a limiting factor if such
a structure is not available. While the ATLAS dataset provides MD relaxed structures, we also
want to know how the ANMs perform outside of the ATLAS setting, for example, on structures
coming from (i) the PDB, (ii) protein folding of the original sequence by ESMFold, or (iii) protein
folding of an alternative sequence obtained with ProteinMPNN (Dauparas et al., 2022). Therefore,
we investigate the effect of the type of input structure on the performance of ANMs in Table 6 in
Appendix E, where we show that redesigning the sequence of a protein with ProteinMPNN does not
have a significant effect on the performance of ANM.


4     M ETHODS

In this section, we introduce our new methods for predicting protein flexibility (Section 4.1) and
the new Flexpert-Design framework demonstrating the applicability for the problem of engineering
protein flexibility (Section 4.2).

4.1   L EARNING TO PREDICT PROTEIN FLEXIBILITY

Our above analysis of methods for protein flexibility quantification (see Section 3.2) motivates the
effort to develop a new protein flexibility predictor as there is still enough room for improvement in
terms of correlation to MD (compare the PCC of 0.77 for ANM with the indicative upper bound on
PCC of 0.88). Here we address the challenge by introducing a novel and fast predictor of protein
flexibility in two versions: Flexpert-Seq, taking a protein sequence on the input, and Flexpert-3D,
taking both sequence and structure on the input. In both versions, the method learns to predict the
RMSF of MD simulations in a supervised manner using the ATLAS dataset. The two predictors are
described next.

Flexpert-Seq: Predicting flexibility
from sequence. The goal is to de-
velop a predictor of protein flexibility
that uses only a protein sequence on
the input and learns to predict the pro-
tein sequence flexibility as close as
possible to the predictions from MD
trajectories. In detail, given a dataset
DSeq = {(si , yi )}i∈D of protein se-
quences si ∈ ANi and per residue
flexibility labels yi ∈ RNi , where D
is the set indexing the protein in the
dataset, A is the alphabet of 20 nat-
ural amino acids and Ni is the num-
ber of amino acids of protein i, the
goal is to train a regression model
FSeq : ANi →  − RNi to predict the per
                                         Figure 1: Overview of the architecture of our protein flex-
residue flexibility from a protein se-
                                         ibility prediction methods Flexpert-Seq (the red box) and
quence. To overcome the limitations
                                         Flexpert-3D (the whole architecture). Icons of snowflake
coming from the small amount of an-
                                         and flame denote frozen and unfrozen layers, respectively,
notated data (1390 proteins in the AT-
                                         in modules containing trainable parameters. Trainable (or-
LAS dataset), we leverage the pre-
                                         ange) and fixed (blue) modules denote whether any trainable
trained protein language model Prot-
                                         unfrozen parameters are present in the module.
Trans (Elnaggar et al., 2022) to obtain
per-residue embeddings, on top of which we learn a linear layer to regress a single scalar value for
each residue. An alternative choice for the backbone protein language model could be the ESM-2
model, which was shown to perform similarly to ProtTrans in fine-tuning for diverse downstream


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tasks (Schmirler et al., 2024). Following the procedure proposed by Schmirler et al. (2024), we
employ LoRA (Hu et al., 2021a) to fine-tune ProtTrans together with training the regression layer
for our downstream task. See Figure 1 for an overview of the method.

Flexpert-3D: Predicting flexibility from sequence and structure. Since inverse folding
pipelines usually have access to protein backbones on the input, we also explore the strategy of
using both protein sequence and protein backbone structure on the input to predict the protein se-
quence flexibility as close as possible to the predictions from MD trajectories. More formally,
given a dataset D3D = {(si , χi , yi )}i∈D of protein sequences si ∈ ANi , protein backbone struc-
tures χi ∈ R4×3Ni (4 atoms per residue backbone) and per residue flexibility labels yi ∈ RNi ,
where D is the set indexing the protein in the dataset, A is the alphabet of 20 natural amino
acids and Ni is the number of amino acids of protein i, the goal is to train a regression model
F3D : ANi × R4×3Ni →   − RNi to predict the per residue flexibility from protein sequence and back-
bone structure. As ANMs can be run relatively fast if the protein backbone is available and they
were the best performing method as evaluated in Section 3.2, we tackle the task by combining our
sequence-based method Flexpert-Seq with ANM-based flexibility values. This strategy is thus akin
to learning how to correct the crude flexibility annotations returned by ANMs to match more accu-
rate values derived from MD trajectories. To this end, we enhance the architecture of Flexpert-Seq
by a CNN head acting as an adaptor of the ANM-predicted flexibility into the embedding space of
Flexpert-Seq (see Figure 1). We train the CNN Adaptor together with the LoRA layers by fine-
tuning the ProtTrans Encoder of Flexpert-Seq and, together with the regression layer, mapping the
combined embeddings to per-residue flexibility.

4.2   F LEXPERT-D ESIGN : F LEXIBILITY ENGINEERING VIA FLEXIBILITY- AWARE INVERSE
      FOLDING

In this section, we apply our flexibility predictor Flexpert-3D for the task of engineering protein
flexibility. The goal is to generate a protein sequence that respects a given protein backbone structure
and a set of flexibility instructions.
More formally, we are given a dataset Dbb = {(si , χi )}i∈D of protein sequences si ∈ ANi and
protein backbone atom coordinates χi ∈ R4×3Ni (4 atoms per residue backbone), where D is the
set indexing the protein in the dataset, A is the alphabet of 20 natural amino acids and Ni is the
number of amino acids of protein i. We are also given a set of flexibility instructions F = {fi }i∈D ,
where fi ∈ RNi . The goal is to train model PF : RN × R4×3N →       − AN , which takes N flexibility
instructions and a backbone structure of a protein of length N and maps it to a protein sequence of
the length N , respecting the input backbone and the flexibility instructions.
We tackle the problem by leveraging the established protein inverse folding model ProteinMPNN
and modifying it to take the flexibility instruction on the input. We then devise a learning strategy
where we utilize our flexibility predictor Flexpert-3D to fine-tune the inverse folding model toward
respecting the flexibility instructions. Details are given next.

Teaching inverse folding model to engineer flexibility. The critical aspects of our flexibility
engineering task are the choice of the flexibility engineering instructions F and the design of the
learning strategy steering the inverse folding model to follow the instructions.
Our novel training strategy is to inform the inverse folding model about the flexibility of the native
sequence and to optimize the model toward generating sequences with flexibility preserved with re-
spect to the input. We hypothesize that such training makes the model pay attention to the flexibility
instructions f ∈ F provided on the input. During inference, this awareness enables us to exploit the
flexibility input of the model to pass our actual instructions for modifying the flexibility with respect
to the native one.
For learning the flexibility of native sequences, we propose the following sequence of steps. First,
we construct the set F native of flexibility pseudolabels obtained with Flexpert-3D as
                F native = {finative |finative = F3D (si , χi ), (si , χi ) ∈ Dbb , i ∈ D},     (1)
where the Flexpert-3D predictor is used to predict flexibility for all tuples of sequences si and
backbone coordinates χi from dataset Dbb . These predicted flexibilities finative , which we call
“native”, are used in training to inform the inverse folding model about flexibility.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Overview of the Flexpert-Design method for fine-tuning of inverse folding models toward
steerability by requirements on protein flexibility. The inverse folding model ProteinMPNN, taking
protein backbone structure on the input, is modified to additionally take on the input flexibility
instructions. This is implemented by adding a flexibility instruction to the zero-initialized node
feature for each residue. The predicted sequence is sampled in a differentiable way using Gumbel-
Softmax and passed to Flexpert-3D together with the input structure. Note that we are making use
of the assumption that ProteinMPNN does not modify the backbone structure as we are matching
together the newly predicted sequence with the ground truth backbone structure. The flexibility
of the sequence predicted by Flexpert-3D is passed to the loss function LF lex which computes
the distance between the input flexibility instructions and the flexibility of the predicted sequence.
Icons of snowflake and flame denote frozen and unfrozen layers, respectively, in modules containing
trainable parameters. Trainable (orange) and fixed (blue) modules denote whether any trainable
unfrozen parameters are present in the module.

Second, we take a vanilla ProteinMPNN inverse folding model P : R4×3N →      − AN , which maps
protein backbones of length N to protein sequences of the same length, and modify it to a flexibility-
aware ProteinMPNN model PF : RN × R4×3N →          − AN , which accepts flexibility instructions
            N
f ∈ F ⊂ R on the input as well (see Figure 2).
Third, we introduce a new loss function LF lex for guidance of the inverse folding model PF toward
preservation of the input flexibility by matching the input flexibility instructions f to the output
flexibility F3D (ŝ, χ):
                                      LF lex = L(F3D (ŝ, χ), f ),                                     (2)
where L is a regression loss (MSE or L1), χ is the input backbone structure, and ŝ = PF (f , χ) is
the sequence predicted by the flexibility-aware inverse folding model PF . We illustrate our method,
including the loss function LF lex , in Figure 2. Using the pseudolabels of flexibility F native ob-
tained by Flexpert-3D as the flexibility instructions in training, the LF lex loss ensures in the training
process that the model learns to preserve flexibility it has seen on the input. During inference, the
learned flexibility preservation is exploited to pass non-native flexibility instructions to the model to
steer the inverse folding toward generating sequences with the required flexibility.

Training to recover flexibility and sequence. To train ProteinMPNN toward flexibility aware-
ness, we still need to ensure it also works for its original objective of generating a protein sequence
that fits the input backbone. Therefore, we first train ProteinMPNN using its standard Cross-Entropy
loss LSeq and optimize it for maximal sequence recovery. Taking the pre-trained ProteinMPNN
model weights, we further fine-tune them using the combined LF lexpert loss:
                               LF lexpert = θ · LF lex + (1 − θ) · LSeq ,                           (3)
where θ ∈ [0, 1] is the parameter mixing the two losses LF lex and LSeq into a single loss. The
choice of θ and the sequence recovery of the trained models is discussed in Appendix H.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Pearson correlation coefficients between fast sequence-based baselines (AlphaFold2 and
ESMFold) and our method Flexpert-Seq (columns) and the RMSF values from MD simulations
and from Anisotropic Network Models (ANM) evaluated over MD relaxed structures (rows). Note
that an upper bound on correlation to MD is estimated to be 0.88. Evaluation performed for 139
proteins from ATLAS testset. Our approach outperforms the AlphaFold2 and ESMFold baselines
and obtains the best correlation with the flexibility estimates obtained from Molecular Dynamics (see
the value in bold). Interestingly, the correlation coefficient of our approach and Anisotropic Network
Models (ANM) is just 0.66, suggesting that both our approach and ANM might be complementary,
motivating the development of a predictor combining the sequence-based predictor with ANM.
                                   AF2     ESMFold      Flexpert-Seq (ours)
                           MD      0.72      0.58              0.78
                           ANM     0.56      0.43              0.66

Preserving differentiability through discrete language model input. An interesting challenge
in utilizing the protein language model-based predictor Flexpert-3D inside of an end-to-end training
pipeline is the question of preserving differentiability at the interface of the inverse folding model
output (continuous probability distribution) and the language model input (discrete tokens) (see
Figure 2). Our solution to this problem is to sample the learned distribution of amino acids using
the Gumbel-Softmax trick (Jang et al., 2017). In particular, we use its straight-through variant,
which takes the argmax of the input distribution in the forward pass but preserves the gradients by
approximating the argmax with the Gumbel-Softmax distribution in the backward pass. This enables
us to sample a discrete sequence for the language model while preserving the gradients and enabling
end-to-end training of the entire pipeline.

5     R ESULTS
In this section, we report the performance of our methods Flexpert-Seq and Flexpert-3D in terms
of protein flexibility prediction (Section 5.1) and the performance of Flexpert-Design in terms of
increasing flexibility in engineered protein regions (Section 5.2).


5.1   F LEXIBILITY PREDICTION

Experimental setup. We use the sequences and MD relaxed structures from the ATLAS dataset
as our inputs. The flexibility labels are the per residue RMSFs averaged over the 3 MD replicas for
each protein. We split the dataset using topology splitting, with the additional requirement that no
topologies present in the CATH4.3 test set are present in our ATLAS training set. The reason is to
prevent potential leakage when combining the flexibility predictors into the Flexpert-Design pipeline
which is trained using CATH4.3. We evaluate the Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) between the
predicted flexibility and the ground truth flexibility (RMSF) for each protein in the ATLAS test set.
We report the average PCC across the test set.

Results. Our predictors Flexpert-Seq and Flexpert-3D outperform the baselines when using only
the sequence on the input and when also using the structure, respectively. See Table 2 for the
sequence case and Table 3 for the case when using sequence and structure. Note that our predictor
Flexpert-3D, which partly relies on ANM, improves over them significantly and does not rely on
them exclusively (see PCC of 0.78 to ANM).
We further tested our predictors Flexpert-Seq and Flexpert-3D on a separate dataset called mdCATH
(Mirarchi et al., 2024), which features MD trajectories obtained at various simulation temperatures
ranging from 320 K to 450 K. Using this data, we test the effect of the simulation temperature on the
performance of our models trained on the ATLAS dataset simulated at a physiological temperature of
300 K. The experiment confirmed that the further the temperature is from the simulation temperature
in the training set, the lower the Pearson correlation coefficients are between the model predictions
and the RMSFs, see Appendix F.
In Appendix G, we provide qualitative examples of Flexpert-Seq and Flexpert-3D predictions and
how these predictions compare to the ground truth RMSF and to the predictions of ANM.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Pearson correlation coefficients between fast structure-based baselines (Anisotropic Net-
work Models and Gaussian Network Models) and our method Flexpert-3D (columns) and the RMSF
values from MD simulations and from Anisotropic Network Models (ANM) evaluated over MD re-
laxed structures (rows). Evaluation is performed for 139 proteins from ATLAS test set. Note that an
upper bound on correlation to MD is estimated to be 0.88. Also, note that our approach outperforms
the ANM and GNM baselines and obtains the best correlation with the flexibility estimates obtained
from Molecular Dynamics (row MD). The correlation coefficient of our model with ANM is 0.78
(see the bottom row), indicating that our model relies on ANM input only partially and actually
learns novel information from the sequence.
                                      ANM       GNM      Flexpert-3D (ours)
                             MD       0.76      0.76             0.83
                             ANM      1.00      0.93             0.78

5.2   P ROTEIN MPNN CAN BE STEERED BY FLEXIBILITY INSTRUCTIONS

Experimental setup. The evaluation is done using the CATH4.3 dataset. The set of flexibility-
increasing instructions F↑τ,S is constructed in the following way: (i) The flexibility instructions
are initialized by the native flexibilities F native (as defined in Equation (1)); (ii) For each protein
independently, a random contiguous segment S of length |S| is subselected from the sequence. In
case |S| ≥ N , where N is the length of the protein, the whole protein is selected as the segment;
(iii) For each residue i in each selected segment S, its flexibility instruction fi is incremented by
τ > 0, aiming at increasing the residues flexibility:
                                       fi = finative + τ · 1i∈S ,                                   (4)
where 1i∈S is the indicator function for the set of amino acids corresponding to the segment S.
We then take the set of flexibility increasing instructions F↑τ,S together with the corresponding back-
bones Dbb from the CATH4.3 test set and pass it to the flexibility-aware ProteinMPNN PF trained
using our Flexpert-Design method to obtain predicted protein sequences ŝ:
                            ŝj = PF (fj , χj ), ∀(fj , χj ) ∈ F↑τ,S × Dbb .                        (5)
We evaluate the predicted sequences using the metrics described next. For each predicted sequence
ŝj , we identify the mutated residues Mj ⊂ Sj inside the segment Sj engineered for increased
flexibility. For such residues, we define the flexibility enrichment ratio rij :
                                                F3D (ŝj , χj )i
                                        rij =       native
                                                                 ,                                  (6)
                                                  fij
where ŝj is the predicted sequence for protein j with backbone χj , i ∈ Mj indexes the mutated
                                             native
residues in the engineered region Sj , and fij       is the native flexibility of the residue (see Equa-
tion (1)). The flexibility enrichment ratios rij are then used to report the median enrichment ratio
and the proportion of flexibility-increasing mutations, i.e., those for which rij > 1.

Results. Table 4 shows that our method Flexpert-Design successfully managed to engineer in-
creased flexibility in the engineered region. This result is presented in more detail in Figure 3,
which shows that Flexpert-Design can shift the flexibility distribution in the engineered segment
toward higher flexibility. Furthermore, Figure 3 shows the change in the distribution of amino acid
types in the engineered region. The observation that the proportion of Alanine (A) and Glycine (G)
increases goes in line with the biochemical understanding that these amino acids are smaller and
tend to be more flexible. The sensitivity of Flexpert-Design to the size of the engineered region |S|
and the value of the flexibility increasing instruction τ is studied in Appendix J.
Interestingly, the most contributing component of Flexpert-Design is the inclusion of flexibility input
and training with the Flexpert-3D generated flexibility pseudolabels. The additional optimization
using LF lex brings only relatively modest improvements in steerability (see Table 4 and Figure 8).
Please compare “Flexpert-Design (without loss)”, which does not use LF lex , and the full model
denoted “Flexpert-Design”. The results also clearly demonstrate significant improvements of our


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Comparison of the enrichment ratio distributions (left) and the amino acid type distribu-
tions (right) for the flexibility-increasing experiment with segment lengths |S| = 50 and τ = 5.
Our Flexpert-Design model is compared to its variant that was trained without the LF lex loss but
with the flexibility on the input. Vanilla ProteinMPNN is presented as a baseline. On the left, the
median values for each distribution are denoted with a vertical line. On the right, the native amino
acid distributions in the examined segments are presented for reference.

Table 4: Comparison of the ability of flexibility engineering models to increase flexibility of engi-
neered segments. The presented median enrichment ratios Med(rij ) and the proportion of flexibility-
increasing mutations were obtained using the CATH4.3 test set with engineered segments of length
|S| = 50, and flexibility engineering instructions corresponding to native flexibility incremented by
τ = 5 in the engineered segment. The best results in each category are highlighted in bold, second
best are underlined.
                                 Median enrich. ratio Med(rij ) ↑   Prop. of flexibility incr. mutations ↑
    Flexpert-Design (ours)                    1.52                                  0.83
    Flexpert-Design (w/o loss)                1.43                                  0.80
    ProteinMPNN (baseline)                    1.07                                  0.61

model in the ability to engineer flexibility compared to the ProteinMPNN baseline. Additional
results in Section H of the Appendix also demonstrate virtually no loss in sequence recovery metrics
of our approach compared to the ProteinMPNN baseline. The analysis of the structure preservation
of the sequences with engineered increased flexibility is given in Appendix I.
We also investigated the use of our model for engineering of decrease in flexibility, results of which
we discuss in Appendix K.

6      C ONCLUSIONS
In this work, we address the problem of engineering protein flexibility—a highly relevant task due
to its potential impact on the field of protein design. Firstly, we analyze the available data obtained
in wet-lab experiments, physics-based simulations, or as a byproduct of machine learning-based
structure prediction models. We identify the flexibility estimate by molecular dynamics simulation
as the best learning target, set an upper bound on the potential performance of the learned predictor,
and analyze the effect of the type of input protein structure on the performance of Anisotropic Net-
work Models. Secondly, we develop a protein language model-based predictor of protein flexibility
working either with protein sequence (Flexpert-Seq) or with both sequence and protein backbone
structure on the input (Flexpert-3D) and show that our predictors outperform the relevant baselines.
Thirdly, we propose a learning strategy Flexpert-Design, which uses the Flexpert-3D flexibility pre-
dictor to steer an inverse folding model toward a generation of sequences with increased flexibility.
We demonstrate that inverse folding models can be steered toward generating protein sequences with
increased flexibility as measured by our protein flexibility predictor. This opens up new possibilities
for development of proteins with enhanced biological activities. In some practical protein engineer-
ing tasks, it would also be of interest to engineer protein sequences with decreased flexibility, where
the ability of our current Flexpert-Design model seems limited (see Appendix K). This motivates fu-
ture development of new models, which would provide a tighter control of the designed sequence’s
flexibility and which would be successful regardless of whether the flexibility was instructed to in-
crease or decrease. An interesting future direction could be to use Flexpert-3D or Flexpert-Seq for
guidance of discrete flow matching models.


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
The code, together with the instructions on how to download the data and trained weights for the
reproduction of this work, can be found at https://github.com/KoubaPetr/Flexpert.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Repub-
lic through projects ELIXIR (No. LM2023055), ESFRI RECETOX RI (No. LM2023069), and
OP JAK CLARA (No. 02 23 029). We acknowledge VSB – Technical University of Ostrava,
IT4Innovations National Supercomputing Center, Czech Republic, for awarding this project ac-
cess to the LUMI supercomputer, owned by the EuroHPC Joint Undertaking, hosted by CSC
(Finland) and the LUMI consortium through the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the
Czech Republic through the e-INFRA CZ (No. 90254). This work was also supported by the
European Union (ERC project FRONTIER (No. 101097822), ELIAS (No. 101120237), CLARA
(No. 101136607)), the Technology Agency of the Czech Republic under the NCC Programme from
the state budget (No. RETEMED TN02000122) and under the NRP from the EU RRF (No. TEREP
TN02000122/001N), and the CETOCOEN EXCELLENCE (No. 857560) projects supported from
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme. Views and opinions ex-
pressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European
Union or the European Research Council. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority
can be held responsible for them. Petr Kouba is a holder of the Brno Ph.D. Talent scholarship funded
by the Brno City Municipality and the JCMM.

R EFERENCES
A R Atilgan, S R Durell, R L Jernigan, M C Demirel, O Keskin, and I Bahar. Anisotropy of
  fluctuation dynamics of proteins with an elastic network model. Biophys. J., 80(1):505–515,
  January 2001.
I Bahar, A R Atilgan, and B Erman. Direct evaluation of thermal fluctuations in proteins using a
   single-parameter harmonic potential. Fold. Des., 2(3):173–181, 1997.
Ahmet Bakan, Lidio M Meireles, and Ivet Bahar. ProDy: protein dynamics inferred from theory
  and experiments. Bioinformatics, 27(11):1575–1577, June 2011.
H M Berman, J Westbrook, Z Feng, G Gilliland, T N Bhat, H Weissig, I N Shindyalov, and P E
  Bourne. The protein data bank. Nucleic Acids Res., 28(1):235–242, January 2000.
Guillem Casadevall, Jordi Casadevall, Cristina Duran, and Sı́lvia Osuna. The shortest path method
  (SPM) webserver for computational enzyme design. Protein Eng. Des. Sel., 37:gzae005, January
  2024.
Radka Chaloupkova, Veronika Liskova, Martin Toul, Klara Markova, Eva Sebestova, Lenka Herny-
  chova, Martin Marek, Gaspar P Pinto, Daniel Pluskal, Jitka Waterman, Zbynek Prokop, and Jiri
  Damborsky. Light-emitting dehalogenases: Reconstruction of multifunctional biocatalysts. ACS
  Catal., 9(6):4810–4823, June 2019.
Alexander E Chu, Tianyu Lu, and Po-Ssu Huang. Sparks of function by de novo protein design.
  Nat. Biotechnol., 42(2):203–215, February 2024.
Marina Corbella, Gaspar P Pinto, and Shina C L Kamerlin. Loop dynamics and the evolution of
 enzyme activity. Nat. Rev. Chem., 7(8):536–547, August 2023.
Rory M Crean, Michal Biler, Marc W van der Kamp, Alvan C Hengge, and Shina C L Kamerlin.
  Loop dynamics and enzyme catalysis in protein tyrosine phosphatases. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 143
  (10):3830–3845, March 2021.
J Dauparas, I Anishchenko, N Bennett, H Bai, R J Ragotte, L F Milles, B I M Wicky, A Courbet,
  R J de Haas, N Bethel, P J Y Leung, T F Huddy, S Pellock, D Tischer, F Chan, B Koepnick,
  H Nguyen, A Kang, B Sankaran, A K Bera, N P King, and D Baker. Robust deep learning–based
  protein sequence design using ProteinMPNN. Science, 378(6615):49–56, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ahmed Elnaggar, Michael Heinzinger, Christian Dallago, Ghalia Rehawi, Yu Wang, Llion Jones,
  Tom Gibbs, Tamas Feher, Christoph Angerer, Martin Steinegger, Debsindhu Bhowmik, and
  Burkhard Rost. ProtTrans: Toward understanding the language of life through self-supervised
  learning. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 44(10):7112–7127, October 2022.

Agustı́ Emperador, Tim Meyer, and Modesto Orozco. Protein flexibility from discrete molecular
  dynamics simulations using quasi-physical potentials. Proteins, 78(1):83–94, January 2010.

Eran Eyal, Sergey Gerzon, Vladimir Potapov, Marvin Edelman, and Vladimir Sobolev. The limit of
  accuracy of protein modeling: influence of crystal packing on protein structure. J. Mol. Biol., 351
  (2):431–442, August 2005.

Vincent Frappier and Rafael J Najmanovich. A coarse-grained elastic network atom contact model
  and its use in the simulation of protein dynamics and the prediction of the effect of mutations.
  PLoS Comput. Biol., 10(4):e1003569, April 2014.

Zhangyang Gao, Cheng Tan, and Stan Z. Li. Pifold: Toward effective and efficient protein inverse
  folding. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=oMsN9TYwJ0j.

Zhangyang Gao, Cheng Tan, and Stan Z. Li. Knowledge-design: Pushing the limit of protein design
  via knowledge refinement, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15151.

Zhangyang Gao, Cheng Tan, Yijie Zhang, Xingran Chen, Lirong Wu, and Stan Z. Li. Proteinin-
  vbench: Benchmarking protein inverse folding on diverse tasks, models, and metrics. In A. Oh,
  T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 68207–68220. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023c.
  URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/
  d73078d49799693792fb0f3f32c57fc8-Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.
  pdf.

Hao-Bo Guo, Alexander Perminov, Selemon Bekele, Gary Kedziora, Sanaz Farajollahi, Vanessa
  Varaljay, Kevin Hinkle, Valeria Molinero, Konrad Meister, Chia Hung, Patrick Dennis, Nancy
  Kelley-Loughnane, and Rajiv Berry. AlphaFold2 models indicate that protein sequence deter-
  mines both structure and dynamics. Sci. Rep., 12(1):10696, June 2022.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv [cs.CL], June
  2021a.

Yunfei Hu, Kai Cheng, Lichun He, Xu Zhang, Bin Jiang, Ling Jiang, Conggang Li, Guan Wang,
  Yunhuang Yang, and Maili Liu. NMR-based methods for protein analysis. Anal. Chem., 93(4):
  1866–1879, February 2021b.

John Ingraham, Vikas Garg, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Generative models for graph-
  based protein design. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox,
  and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2019/file/f3a4ff4839c56a5f460c88cce3666a2b-Paper.pdf.

Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. In 5th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26,
  2017, Conference Track Proceedings. OpenReview.net, 2017. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=rkE3y85ee.

Bowen Jing, Bonnie Berger, and Tommi Jaakkola. AlphaFold meets flow matching for generating
  protein ensembles. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria
  Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp (eds.), Proceedings of the 41st International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 22277–22303. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v235/jing24a.html.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žı́dek, Anna Potapenko, Alex Bridgland,
  Clemens Meyer, Simon A A Kohl, Andrew J Ballard, Andrew Cowie, Bernardino Romera-
  Paredes, Stanislav Nikolov, Rishub Jain, Jonas Adler, Trevor Back, Stig Petersen, David Reiman,
  Ellen Clancy, Michal Zielinski, Martin Steinegger, Michalina Pacholska, Tamas Berghammer,
  Sebastian Bodenstein, David Silver, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew W Senior, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Push-
  meet Kohli, and Demis Hassabis. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold.
  Nature, 596(7873):583–589, August 2021.
Adam Jurcik, David Bednar, Jan Byska, Sergio M Marques, Katarina Furmanova, Lukas Daniel,
  Piia Kokkonen, Jan Brezovsky, Ondrej Strnad, Jan Stourac, Antonin Pavelka, Martin Manak, Jiri
  Damborsky, and Barbora Kozlikova. CAVER analyst 2.0: analysis and visualization of channels
  and tunnels in protein structures and molecular dynamics trajectories. Bioinformatics, 34(20):
  3586–3588, October 2018.
Christos S Karamitros, Kyle Murray, Brent Winemiller, Candice Lamb, Everett M Stone, Sheena
  D’Arcy, Kenneth A Johnson, and George Georgiou. Leveraging intrinsic flexibility to engineer
  enhanced enzyme catalytic activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 119(23):e2118979119, June
  2022.
Sebastian Kmiecik, Dominik Gront, Michal Kolinski, Lukasz Wieteska, Aleksandra Elzbieta Dawid,
  and Andrzej Kolinski. Coarse-grained protein models and their applications. Chem. Rev., 116(14):
  7898–7936, July 2016.
Tanja Kortemme. De novo protein design-from new structures to programmable functions. Cell,
  187(3):526–544, February 2024.
Petr Kouba, Pavel Kohout, Faraneh Haddadi, Anton Bushuiev, Raman Samusevich, Jiri Sedlar, Jiri
  Damborsky, Tomas Pluskal, Josef Sivic, and Stanislav Mazurenko. Machine learning-guided
  protein engineering. ACS Catal., pp. 13863–13895, October 2023.
Claudèle Lemay-St-Denis, Nicolas Doucet, and Joelle N Pelletier. Integrating dynamics into enzyme
  engineering. Protein Eng. Des. Sel., 35, February 2022.
Zeming Lin, Halil Akin, Roshan Rao, Brian Hie, Zhongkai Zhu, Wenting Lu, Allan dos San-
  tos Costa, Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, Tom Sercu, Sal Candido, and Alexander Rives. Language
  models of protein sequences at the scale of evolution enable accurate structure prediction. bioRxiv,
  pp. 2022.07.20.500902, July 2022.
Dina Listov, Casper A Goverde, Bruno E Correia, and Sarel Jacob Fleishman. Opportunities and
  challenges in design and optimization of protein function. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 25(8):639–
  653, August 2024.
José Ramón López-Blanco and Pablo Chacón. New generation of elastic network models. Curr.
  Opin. Struct. Biol., 37:46–53, April 2016.
Puyi Ma, Da-Wei Li, and Rafael Brüschweiler. Predicting protein flexibility with AlphaFold. Pro-
  teins, 91(6):847–855, June 2023.
Antonio Mirarchi, Toni Giorgino, and Gianni De Fabritiis. mdcath: A large-scale md dataset
  for data-driven computational biophysics, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.
  14794.
Milot Mirdita, Konstantin Schütze, Yoshitaka Moriwaki, Lim Heo, Sergey Ovchinnikov, and Martin
 Steinegger. Colabfold: making protein folding accessible to all. Nature Methods, 19(6):679–682,
 Jun 2022. ISSN 1548-7105. doi: 10.1038/s41592-022-01488-1. URL https://doi.org/
 10.1038/s41592-022-01488-1.
Gwendolyn Moise, Yalemi Morales, Victor Beaumont, Timothy Caradonna, J Patrick Loria, Sean J
 Johnson, and Alvan C Hengge. A YopH PTP1B chimera shows the importance of the WPD-loop
 sequence to the activity, structure, and dynamics of protein tyrosine phosphatases. Biochemistry,
 57(36):5315–5326, September 2018.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sébastien Morin, Christopher M Clouthier, Sophie Gobeil, Joelle N Pelletier, and Stéphane M
   Gagné. Backbone resonance assignments of an artificially engineered TEM-1/PSE-4 class a β-
   lactamase chimera. Biomol. NMR Assign., 4(2):127–130, October 2010.
Pascal Notin, Nathan Rollins, Yarin Gal, Chris Sander, and Debora Marks. Machine learning for
  functional protein design. Nat. Biotechnol., 42(2):216–228, February 2024.
Riley B Peacock and Elizabeth A Komives. Hydrogen/deuterium exchange and nuclear magnetic
  resonance spectroscopy reveal dynamic allostery on multiple time scales in the serine protease
  thrombin. Biochemistry, 60(46):3441–3448, November 2021.
F M G Pearl, C F Bennett, J E Bray, A P Harrison, N Martin, A Shepherd, I Sillitoe, J Thornton,
  and C A Orengo. The CATH database: an extended protein family resource for structural and
  functional genomics. Nucleic Acids Res., 31(1):452–455, January 2003.
Joan Planas-Iglesias, Sérgio M Marques, Gaspar P Pinto, Milos Musil, Jan Stourac, Jiri Damborsky,
  and David Bednar. Computational design of enzymes for biotechnological applications. Biotech-
  nol. Adv., 47(107696):107696, March 2021.
Joan Planas-Iglesias, Filip Opaleny, Pavol Ulbrich, Jan Stourac, Zainab Sanusi, Gaspar P Pinto,
  Andrea Schenkmayerova, Jan Byska, Jiri Damborsky, Barbora Kozlikova, and David Bednar.
  LoopGrafter: a web tool for transplanting dynamical loops for protein engineering. Nucleic Acids
  Res., 50(W1):W465–W473, July 2022.
Carlos H M Rodrigues, Douglas E V Pires, and David B Ascher. DynaMut2: Assessing changes in
  stability and flexibility upon single and multiple point missense mutations. Protein Sci., 30(1):
  60–69, January 2021.
Adrian Romero-Rivera, Marc Garcia-Borràs, and Sı́lvia Osuna. Role of conformational dynamics
  in the evolution of retro-aldolase activity. ACS Catal., 7(12):8524–8532, December 2017.
Adrian Romero-Rivera, Marina Corbella, Antonietta Parracino, Wayne M Patrick, and Shina Car-
  oline Lynn Kamerlin. Complex loop dynamics underpin activity, specificity, and evolvability in
  the (βα)8 barrel enzymes of histidine and tryptophan biosynthesis. JACS Au, 2(4):943–960, April
  2022.
Manuel Rueda, Pablo Chacón, and Modesto Orozco. Thorough validation of protein normal mode
 analysis: a comparative study with essential dynamics. Structure, 15(5):565–575, May 2007.
Kiersten M Ruff and Rohit V Pappu. AlphaFold and implications for intrinsically disordered pro-
  teins. J. Mol. Biol., 433(20):167208, October 2021.
Tadeo Saldaño, Nahuel Escobedo, Julia Marchetti, Diego Javier Zea, Juan Mac Donagh, Ana Ju-
  lia Velez Rueda, Eduardo Gonik, Agustina Garcı́a Melani, Julieta Novomisky Nechcoff,
  Martı́n N Salas, Tomás Peters, Nicolás Demitroff, Sebastian Fernandez Alberti, Nicolas Palopoli,
  Maria Silvina Fornasari, and Gustavo Parisi. Impact of protein conformational diversity on Al-
  phaFold predictions. Bioinformatics, 38(10):2742–2748, May 2022.
Andrea Schenkmayerova, Martin Toul, Daniel Pluskal, Racha Baatallah, Glwadys Gagnot, Gaspar P
  Pinto, Vinicius T Santana, Marketa Stuchla, Petr Neugebauer, Pimchai Chaiyen, Jiri Damborsky,
  David Bednar, Yves L Janin, Zbynek Prokop, and Martin Marek. Catalytic mechanism for renilla-
  type luciferases. Nat. Catal., 6(1):23–38, January 2023.
Robert Schmirler, Michael Heinzinger, and Burkhard Rost. Fine-tuning protein language models
  boosts predictions across diverse tasks. Nat. Commun., 15(1):7407, August 2024.
Ruidan Shen, Rory M Crean, Sean J Johnson, Shina C L Kamerlin, and Alvan C Hengge. Single
  residue on the WPD-loop affects the pH dependency of catalysis in protein tyrosine phosphatases.
  JACS Au, 1(5):646–659, May 2021.
Ruidan Shen, Rory M Crean, Keith J Olsen, Marina Corbella, Ana R Calixto, Teisha Richan, Tiago
  A S Brandão, Ryan D Berry, Alex Tolman, J Patrick Loria, Sean J Johnson, Shina C L Kamer-
  lin, and Alvan C Hengge. Insights into the importance of WPD-loop sequence for activity and
  structure in protein tyrosine phosphatases. Chem. Sci., 13(45):13524–13540, November 2022.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M M Tirion. Large amplitude elastic motions in proteins from a single-parameter, atomic analysis.
 Phys. Rev. Lett., 77(9):1905–1908, August 1996.
Lukas Uhrik, Tomas Henek, Joan Planas-Iglesias, Josef Kucera, Jiri Damborsky, Martin Marek,
  and Lenka Hernychova. Study of protein conformational dynamics using hydrogen/deuterium
  exchange mass spectrometry. Methods Mol. Biol., 2652:293–318, 2023.
Yann Vander Meersche, Gabriel Cretin, Aria Gheeraert, Jean-Christophe Gelly, and Tatiana Ga-
  lochkina. ATLAS: protein flexibility description from atomistic molecular dynamics simu-
  lations. Nucleic Acids Research, 52(D1):D384–D392, 11 2023. ISSN 0305-1048. doi:
  10.1093/nar/gkad1084. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkad1084.
Chuanrui Wang, Bozitao Zhong, Zuobai Zhang, Narendra Chaudhary, Sanchit Misra, and Jian Tang.
  Pdb-struct: A comprehensive benchmark for structure-based protein design, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2312.00080.
Alexander Wlodawer, Wladek Minor, Zbigniew Dauter, and Mariusz Jaskolski. Protein crystallog-
  raphy for non-crystallographers, or how to get the best (but not more) from published macro-
  molecular structures. FEBS J., 275(1):1–21, January 2008.
Lei Yang, Guang Song, and Robert L Jernigan. Protein elastic network models and the ranges of
  cooperativity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(30):12347–12352, 2009.
Haoran Yu and Paul A Dalby. Coupled molecular dynamics mediate long- and short-range epistasis
  between mutations that affect stability and aggregation kinetics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.,
  115(47):E11043–E11052, November 2018.
She Zhang, James M Krieger, Yan Zhang, Cihan Kaya, Burak Kaynak, Karolina Mikulska-
  Ruminska, Pemra Doruker, Hongchun Li, and Ivet Bahar. ProDy 2.0: increased scale and scope
  after 10 years of protein dynamics modelling with python. Bioinformatics, 37(20):3657–3659,
  October 2021.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

A    E XPERIMENTAL MEASUREMENT OF PROTEIN FLEXIBILITY BY NMR AND
     HDX-MS

In contrast to crystallographic methods directly obtaining the B-factors (temperature factors), NMR
reads chemical shift perturbations, in other words, how the proximity of different atoms affects the
chemical environment of each other. As a product of these measurements, atom-to-atom distance
restraints can be inferred. Protein flexibility can be derived as the change in the intensity and ampli-
tude of the read signals over time; thus, different sets of restraints can be inferred for different time
points (Hu et al., 2021b). Hence, NMR usually provides an ensemble of structural models, from
which atomistic Root Mean Square Fluctuations (RMSFs) can be derived, which can be converted
to B-factors by the following equation:
                                               8π 2
                                        Bi =        (RM SFi )2 ,                                     (7)
                                                3
where B is the B-factors and i represents an individual atom (Emperador et al., 2010).
The HDX-MS relies on the exchange of isotopic hydrogen in a deuterium-rich medium over a given
span of time to detect the protein segments that are more exposed to solvent. Flexible regions (which
often lay on the protein surface away from the hydrophobic tightly packed protein core) allow for
higher solvent penetrance and, thus, attain higher deuteration values when compared to less flexible
areas (Uhrik et al., 2023).


B    ROOT MEAN SQUARE FLUCTUATIONS (RMSF) AS A MEASURE OF
     FLEXIBILITY

The Root Mean Square Fluctuations (RMSF) are a way of quantifying protein flexibility, typically
based on simulated data of dynamics or based on simplified models of dynamics such as the Elastic
Network Models (ENM). In this work, we use RMSF computed on top of both MD simulations and
ENM (Anisotropic Network Models and Gaussian Network Models). These RMSFs were obtained
in the following way:

RMSF from MD simulations. We used the values provided directly with the ATLAS dataset,
which provides the per residue RMSF for each of its simulation replicas. To represent each protein’s
flexibility profile, we used the per residue RMSF averaged over all 3 simulation replicas of each
protein. The values provided by the ATLAS dataset were computed as standard deviation of the
α-carbon displacements, using the GROMACS software. That is, the RMSF for MD simulations
were computed using the following formula:

                                               q
                                        ρi =       ⟨||ri − ⟨ri ⟩||22 ⟩,                              (8)
where ρi denotes the RMSF of residue i, ri stands for the coordinates of the α-carbon of residue i
in the global reference frame, the angle brackets 〈 〉 stand for the average over all the frames of the
simulation and || · ||2 denotes the Euclidean norm.

RMSF for Elastic Network Models (Anisotropic Network Models). We used the ProDy (Bakan
et al., 2011) package to compute the ENMs and the corresponding RMSF values. Firstly, we used
ProDy to build the Hessian matrix, based on the α-carbon coordinates of our input structure and the
cutoff of 16 Angstrom, then the non-trivial modes of the Hessian were calculated, and consequently
these modes were used to solve the problem of finding the inverse of the Hessian to compute the
fluctuations according to the formula for the ENMs:

                                               r
                                                   1
                                        ρi =         Tr([H −1 ]ii ),                                 (9)
                                                   C

                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Pearson correlation coefficients of MD flexibility and Flexpert-Seq predictions, when
trained on B-factors (B) and per protein normalized B-factors (B norm ).
                                     Flexpert-Seq          Flexpert-Seq
                                    (trained on B)     (trained on B norm )
                             MD          0.47                 0.56



where ρi denotes the RMSF of residue i, C denotes a constant that is typically equal to the product
of the Boltzmann constant and the temperature (C = kB T ), but for us this is arbitrary as we are
interested in the correlations of the fluctuations and the correlations are not affected by the scaling
by a constant. The Tr in the formula stands for the trace of the matrix [H −1 ]ii which is the 3x3
submatrix of the inverse Hessian corresponding to the residue i (the 3x3 submatrix comes from the
fact that the α-carbon positions are represented in 3D).

RMSF for Elastic Network Models (Gaussian Network Models). For Gaussian Network mod-
els, the procedure is analogous to the case of Anisotropic Network Models. The only difference is
that instead of Hessian matrix, the Kirchoff matrix is used:
                                             r
                                               1
                                       ρi =      Tr([Γ−1 ]ii ),                             (10)
                                               C
where Γ is the Kirchhoff matrix constructed for the α-carbon coordinates of the input structure
considering the cutoff of 16 Angstrom.
More details on calculation of fluctuations from ENMs (both Anisotropic and Gaussian Network
Models) can be found in (Yang et al., 2009).

C    F INER - GRAINED E LASTIC N ETWORK M ODELS

The complexity of the ENM model can increase by considering different types of beads and springs
(i.e., each amino acid and all the possible combinations of pairs) or making them finer-grained (i.e.,
considering more than one bead per amino acid), approaching the model at the atomistic resolution.
The order of the algorithm increases at least quadratically with the complexity of the model, mak-
ing these solutions more accurate but less efficient. Some implementations of modified ENMs are
available in ENCoM (Frappier & Najmanovich, 2014) and DynaMut (Rodrigues et al., 2021).

D    T HE DIFFICULTY OF LEARNING FROM B- FACTORS COMPARED TO MD
     TRAJECTORIES

We also investigated the potential of B-factors to be used as data for learning to predict protein
flexibility. To this end, we retrained Flexpert-Seq using B-factors instead of the RMSFs from MD
trajectories. Because the absolute values of B-factors strongly depend on the calibration of the
experiment, we trained both on the raw B-factors as well as on the B-factors standardized over each
protein chain separately, using the following equation:
                                                   Bi − B̄
                                         Binorm =                                             (11)
                                                    σ(B)
                                                  PN
where Bi is the raw B-factor of residue i, B̄ = N1 j=1 Bj is the average raw B-factor of a protein
                     q       PN
of size N and σB = N 1−1 j=1 (Bj − B̄)2 is the standard deviation of the raw B-factors across
protein i.
Table 5 reports the performance of Flexpert-Seq trained to predict B-factors and normalized B-
factors. We see the performance is significantly compromised compared to the results of Flexpert-
Seq trained on MD data (Pearson correlation coefficient to MD of 0.76). We suspect that the exper-
imental data suffer from the crystal packing effect, and they are too noisy to reliably learn from.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Pearson correlation coefficients between root mean square fluctuations (RMSF) from
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations (row) and flexibility predictions obtained by Anisotropic
Network Models (ANM) over differently processed input structures (columns).
                     ANM          ANM           ANM                   ANM
                    (MD str.)   (PDB str.)   (ESMFold str.)    (pMPNN + ESMFold str.)
             MD        0.77        0.73           0.73                   0.71



E    T HE EFFECT OF TYPE OF INPUT STRUCTURE ON THE PERFORMANCE OF
     A NISOTROPIC N ETWORK M ODELS
Table 6 shows that the PDB structure obscures some of the flexibility, probably due to the crystal
packing effect present in most cases. Similarly, the ANM performance is diminished when a struc-
ture obtained by ESMFold is given on the input. Interestingly, preceding the ESMFold by applying
ProteinMPNN to generate an alternative sequence leads to only a small additional drop in perfor-
mance. This is explained by the fact that the standard ANMs implemented in ProDy (Bakan et al.,
2011), which we used, do not consider the amino-acid identities and only work with the coordinates
of the backbone. And since ProteinMPNN is optimized to preserve the backbone geometry, it has
only a marginal effect on the performance of ANMs.

F    E VALUATION OF F LEXPERT-3D AND F LEXPERT-S EQ ON MD CATH
     DATASET

To evaluate the generalization capability of Flexpert-3D and Flexpert-Seq predictors outside of the
ATLAS dataset, we performed an additional experiment evaluating the predictors on the mdCATH
dataset (Mirarchi et al., 2024).
The recently introduced mdCATH dataset presents a challenging test of generalizability for our pre-
dictors trained on the ATLAS dataset. The mdCATH dataset is larger in terms of the number of data
points (5398 compared to 1390 in ATLAS) and the simulated data correspond to individual protein
domains (i.e., they are shorter proteins, on average with 137 residues compared to 236 residues in
ATLAS). Furthermore, the simulation times in mdCATH are longer than in ATLAS (on average 464
ns for mdCATH compared to 100 ns for ATLAS) and the simulations were performed at different
temperatures (320 K, 348 K, 379 K, 413 K, and 450 K) than the simulations in the ATLAS dataset
(300 K). The results of the evaluation are presented in Table 7.


Table 7: Evaluation of Flexpert-3D and Flexpert-Seq predictors on MD simulations from the md-
CATH dataset. Both predictors were evaluated on the full dataset (5398 proteins, columns “Full
data”) as well as on its subset excluding topologies present in the ATLAS training set (4013 pro-
teins, columns “Topo. filtered”). The reported numbers are Pearson correlation coefficients between
the model predictions and the RMSF from the dataset averaged over all the proteins in the dataset.
                                           Flexpert-3D                  Flexpert-Seq
       Simulation temperature        Full data / Topo. filtered   Full data / Topo. filtered
       T = 320 K                            0.69 / 0.66                  0.64 / 0.64
       T = 348 K                            0.64 / 0.63                  0.63 / 0.63
       T = 379 K                            0.59 / 0.57                  0.60 / 0.59
       T = 413 K                            0.49 / 0.48                  0.52 / 0.52
       T = 450 K                            0.34 / 0.33                  0.38 / 0.38


Despite some performance drop with respect to the performance achieved on the ATLAS dataset
(0.82 for Flexpert-3D and 0.76 for Flexpert-Seq), the performance of our predictors remains rea-
sonable for the simulations performed at the temperature T = 320 K (0.66 for Flexpert-3D and 0.64
for Flexpert-Seq, for the topology filtered dataset). Considering that the temperature in this part of
the mdCATH dataset is 20 K away from the temperature of the simulations in the ATLAS training


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: ATLAS datapoint 5jca S. Flexpert-Seq and Flexpert-3D seem to improve over the predic-
tion of ANMs mainly by correctly capturing the higher flexibility of the helix at the terminus.


set, this appears as a reasonable generalization. We also notice that Flexpert-3D experiences a more
dramatic decrease in performance than Flexpert-Seq for higher temperatures in mdCATH simula-
tions, suggesting that the sole reliance on sequence information makes the method more robust to
the change in the simulation temperature. In addition, the proteins are possibly getting unfolded in
the high-temperature simulations of mdCATH, leading to non-physiological degrees of flexibility.


G    Q UALITATIVE ANALYSIS OF F LEXPERT-S EQ AND F LEXPERT-3D
     FLEXIBILITY PREDICTIONS

In this section, we present some qualitative examples of Flexpert-Seq and Flexpert-3D predictions
in the form of visualization of protein structures colored by the flexibility. The visualized flexibility
is predicted by Flexpert-Seq and Flexpert-3D or estimated by MD (considered as the ground truth)
or by Anisotropic Network Models (ANM). See Figures 4 to 7.


H    BALANCING SEQUENCE RECOVERY AND FLEXIBILITY AWARENESS IN
     F LEXPERT-D ESIGN TRAINING

When training Flexpert-Design using the combined loss LF lexpert = θ·LF lex +(1−θ)·LSeq , where
θ ∈ [0, 1] is the parameter balancing the two losses. We studied the effect of θ on sequence recovery
of the fine-tuned ProteinMPNN model. On one hand, we want θ to be as high as possible to focus on
learning flexibility awareness; on the other hand, we still need the fine-tuned inverse folding model
to retain the sequence recovery so that it still has its inverse folding ability. We observed a drop of
only one percentage point in terms of sequence recovery, when we trained with θ = 0.8, with the
recovery further dropping for higher θ, see Table 8. Therefore, we selected θ = 0.8 as the parameter
that still sufficiently maintains the original performance of the vanilla ProteinMPNN.
When balancing the LF lexpert loss, we also tried to “effectively normalize” the LF lex and LSeq
losses to have better control with the parameter θ. This we did by normalization of the gradients
in the backward pass and then using the parameter θ to mix at the level of gradients instead of the
level of losses. Such training, however, exhibited high instability, so we did not use it for the final
version.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: ATLAS datapoint 1c52 A. Anisotropic Network Models perform relatively poorly, which
likely propagates to Flexpert-3D causing it to underperform (Pearson R = 0.77) with respect to
Flexpert-Seq (Pearson R = 0.8).


Figure 6: ATLAS datapoint 6o2v A. This is a failure case for Flexpert-Seq (Pearson R = 0.28),
which predicts one beta strand together with the terminal coil to be more flexible than what was
observed in MD simulation (see RMSF subfigure). Anisotropic Network Models perform better in
this case, possibly helping Flexpert-3D improve over Flexpert-Seq.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: ATLAS datapoint 1egw B. This datapoint features relatively high variance in the flexibil-
ity, posing a challenge for Flexpert-Seq (Pearson R = 0.75). The Anisotropic Network Models work
better (Pearson R=0.87) and presumably help Flexpert-3D to excel (Pearson R=0.92).


Table 8: Effect of the parameter θ for mixing of sequence recovery and flexibility awareness on the
sequence recovery of the fine-tuned ProteinMPNN model. The vanilla ProteinMPNN is denoted as
P. PFθ=X denotes Flexpert-Design trained with θ value of X.
                                        P      PFθ=0   PFθ=0.8   PFθ=0.9   PFθ=0.95
                  Sequence recovery    0.49    0.48     0.48      0.47      0.47



Training and fine-tuning. We tried to train Flexpert-Design from scratch using the LF lexpert loss,
but it seemed that the LF lex loss was not informative in the early stages. Therefore, we decided
to first train ProteinMPNN in a standard way for 100 epochs on topology split CATH4.3 dataset.
Second, we finetuned the model for 12 hours on 1 GPU using the LF lexpert , which resulted in
additional 8-11 epochs.

I   E VALUATION OF STRUCTURE PRESERVATION IN F LEXPERT-D ESIGN
    GENERATED SEQUENCES WITH INCREASED FLEXIBILITY

To evaluate how Flexpert-Design alters the structure of the proteins by the engineering of the in-
creased flexibility, we predicted the structures of the sequences with engineered flexibility using
AlphaFold2 inside Colabfold (Jumper et al., 2021; Mirdita et al., 2022). We compared the predicted
backbone structures with the input backbone structure and evaluated the confidence of the structure
prediction. The experiment was run for 700 randomly selected proteins from the CATH test set,
for which we ran the Flexpert-Design predictions with the flexibility increasing instructions and the
segment length S=50 (the same choice as in the experiment reported in Figure 3 and Table 4).
The predicted sequences were compared to the ground truth structures at the level of Cα using the
root mean square deviation between the structures (RMSD) (Table 9). Furthermore, the pLDDT
confidence overall across the whole protein and separately inside and outside the engineered region
(where the flexibility increasing instructions were provided) was analyzed, see Table 9.
We see that the Flexpert-Design generated sequences show lower recovery of the ground truth struc-
ture compared to ProteinMPNN, which could suggest that Flexpert-Design produces less stable
structures or that it introduces notable conformational changes. A particularly significant drop in


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 9: Evaluation of the Flexpert-Design generated protein sequences using the alignment of the
folded backbone structures to the ground truth backbone structures (RMSD column) and the AF2
predicted pLDDT of the whole protein, the engineered region (eng. region) and of the outside of the
engineered region (non-eng. region).

    Model                       RMSD (Å) ↓     ø pLDDT ↑          ø pLDDT ↑         ø pLDDT ↑
                                              (whole protein)     (eng. region)   (non-eng. region)
    ProteinMPNN                    2.00            0.77               0.81              0.73
    Flexpert-Design (no loss)      3.31            0.61               0.60              0.62
    Flexpert-Design (ours)         3.36            0.60               0.58              0.63


Figure 8: The effect of the flexibility increasing parameter τ (left) on the median enrichment ratio
of our Flexpert-Design model and its variant trained without LF lex compared to the vanilla Protein-
MPNN as a baseline. The effect of the length of the engineered segment on the median enrichment
ratio (right).



the pLDDT is in the engineered regions (which tended to be well-structured in the ground truth,
as suggested by the high pLDDT for ProteinMPNN sequences), which might hint at the increased
flexibility (which was shown by our predictor in Figure 3 and Table 4) causing the drop in pLDDT
and increase in RMSD.


J     T HE EFFECT OF FLEXIBILITY INSTRUCTION VALUE AND THE SIZE OF THE
      ENGINEERED SEGMENT ON FLEXIBILITY ENRICHMENT


The effect of the size of the engineered segment |S| and of the parameter τ used for increasing the
flexibility is presented in Figure 8. The graphs suggest that our model achieves the best median
enrichment ratio in the setting of |S| = 50 and τ = 5. At the same time, for parameters within
the range τ ∈ [2.5, 10] and |S| ∈ [10, 100], the results of our model are comparable to the optimal
setting demonstrating reasonable robustness of the model to setting these parameters.


K      L IMITATION : E NGINEERING DECREASE IN FLEXIBILITY

Analogically to the flexibility-increasing experiment presented in Section 5.2, we also investigated
the possibility of decreasing flexibility using our approach with parameter τ < 0. We present the
results for |S| = 50 and τ = −10 in Table 10.


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 10: Comparing the ability of flexibility engineering models to decrease the flexibility of engi-
neered segments. The presented median enrichment ratios M ed(rij ) and the proportion of flexibility
decreasing mutations were obtained using the CATH4.3 test set with engineered segments of length
|S| = 50, and flexibility engineering instructions corresponding to native flexibility incremented by
τ = −10 in the engineered segment. The best results in each category are highlighted in bold,
second best are underlined.
                                 Median enrich. ratio r ↓    Prop. of flexibility decreasing mutations ↑
 Flexpert-Design (MSE loss)                1.06                                 0.40
 Flexpert-Design (L1 loss)                 0.99                                 0.51
 Flexpert-Design (w/o loss)                1.04                                 0.46
 ProteinMPNN (vanilla)                     1.07                                 0.39



Table 10 also presents the variant of Flexpert-Design trained using L1 loss instead of MSE, which
seems to work better for the case of decreasing flexibility. However, despite achieving a modest
decrease in flexibility, we consider this task as a limitation of Flexpert-Design. Our explanation
is that Flexpert-Design is biased toward positive flexibility engineering instructions because it is
trained on the native distribution of flexibilities, which are mostly positive as they approximate
the RMSF quantity, which is by definition non-negative. Similarly, we suspect that the Flexpert-
3D predictor might be slightly biased toward overpredicting flexibility since it predicts a flexibility
increase even for the vanilla ProteinMPNN model. The possible reason is the effect of outliers in
the training set. Outliers can exist in the dataset for positive values, but cannot exist for negative due
to the non-negative nature of RMSF. Such disbalance can potentially skew the learning distribution
toward higher values.


                                                   23
