Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   OASIS U NCOVERS : H IGH -Q UALITY T2I M ODELS ,
S AME O LD S TEREOTYPES
    Sepehr Dehdashtian Gautam Sreekumar Vishnu Naresh Boddeti
    Michigan State University
    {sepehr, sreekum1, vishnu}@msu.edu



                                                                    A BSTRACT
            Images generated by text-to-image (T2I) models often exhibit visual biases and
            stereotypes of concepts such as culture and profession. Existing quantitative
            measures of stereotypes are based on statistical parity that does not align with
            the sociological definition of stereotypes and, therefore, incorrectly categorizes
            biases as stereotypes. Instead of oversimplifying stereotypes as biases, we propose
            a quantitative measure of stereotypes that aligns with its sociological definition.
            We then propose OASIS to measure the stereotypes in a generated dataset and
            understand their origins within T2I models. OASIS includes two scores to measure
            stereotypes from a generated image dataset: (M1) Stereotype Score to measure
            the distributional violation of stereotypical attributes, and (M2) WA L S to measure
            spectral variance in the images along a stereotypical attribute. OASIS also includes
            two methods to understand the origins of stereotypes in T2I models: (U1) StOP to
            discover attributes that the T2I model internally associates with a given concept,
            and (U2) SPI to quantify the emergence of stereotypical attributes in the latent
            space of the T2I model during image generation. Despite the considerable progress
            in image fidelity, using OASIS, we uncover that newer T2I models such as FLUX.1
            and SDv3 contain strong stereotypical predispositions about concepts and still
            generate images with widespread stereotypical attributes. Additionally, the severity
            of stereotypes worsens for nationalities with lower Internet footprints. Content
            warning: This paper contains images with potentially offensive stereotypes.

                                                           FLUX     SDv3         SDv2      Man    Turban                                Gender    Age   Beard
                                                                                                                            Attribute
     FLUX


                                                           Old    Cloths     Beard
                                                                                                                 0.15
                                                      70
                                                                                                                  0.1
                                                      60
                                   Stereotype Score


                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                      50
     SDv3


                                                                                                           SPI


                                                                                                                   0
                                                      40
                                                      30                                                     −0.05

                                                      20                                                         −0.1
     SDv2


                                                      10                                                     −0.15
                                                       0
                                                           2.2    2.3      2.4       2.5    2.6    2.7                  0      10       20       30     40
                                                                             WALS                                                       Time Step

                   (a)                                                     (b)                                                          (c)

Figure 1: Measuring Stereotypes in Text-to-Image Models. (a) The images generated by T2I mod-
els corresponding to the prompt “A photo of an Iranian person” overwhelmingly contain stereotypical
tropes such as beard, turban, and religious attire although the prompt is devoid of this information.
(b) The proposed toolbox OASIS includes complementary methods for quantifying stereotypes.
Stereotype Score measures the over-representation of stereotypical attributes while WA L S measures
the variance of images along these attributes. (c) SPI quantifies the emergence of stereotypes from
the latent space of these models and helps understand the origin of stereotypes within a T2I model.


1      I NTRODUCTION
In a sociological context, stereotypes are generalized beliefs or assumptions about a particular
group of people, things, or categories (Bordalo et al., 2016). These stereotypes are widespread


                                                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


in the images generated by text-to-image (T2I) models when the input textual prompts contain
concepts such as culture and profession. For instance, consider the images in Fig. 1 generated by
FLUX.1 (BlackForestLabs, 2024), SDv3 (Esser et al., 2024), and SDv2 (Rombach et al., 2022) for
the prompt “A photo of a/an <nationality> person”. There are clear portrayals of ethnic stereotypes
in attributes such as clothing, skin tone, and facial features across different nationalities, despite no
references to such attributes in the prompt. For example, the model consistently depicts an Iranian
person as a middle-aged or senior with a long beard, wearing a turban, and dressed in religious attire,
reinforcing harmful stereotypical representations about people with Iranian nationality. Besides
being demographically incorrect, stereotypical biases in these models can lead to broader harm. For
instance, when the biased outputs of these models are shared online, they can perpetuate damaging
stereotypes about marginalized groups, further exacerbating societal polarization on issues such as
beauty standards, ethnicity, and disability representation (Zhang et al., 2023; D’Incà et al., 2024;
Vázquez & Garrido-Merchán, 2024).
Existing methods to detect stereotypes primarily rely on feedback from human annotators, which
is both subjective and resource-intensive. It also becomes impractical in the era of the fast-paced
development of generative models and changing regulations. Additionally, the feedback from human
annotators may be affected by their personal and political leanings (Sap et al., 2022; Geva et al.,
2019), e.g., annotation of continuous-valued attributes such as nose size and skin tone. Human
annotation can also affect the users’ privacy by exposing the generated images to external evaluators.
In contrast, automated methods use classifiers to detect stereotypes (Cho et al., 2023; Friedrich et al.,
2023; Zhang et al., 2023), overcoming several drawbacks of human annotators. However, these
methods incorrectly rely on a general bias metric, i.e., statistical parity, as a stereotype measure
that fails to account for the directionality in the sociological definition of stereotypes. For example,
consider a biased T2I model that generates images of predominantly female doctors. Existing works
categorize this bias as a stereotype, although the generally known gender stereotype associated with
the concept of doctor is that all doctors are male (Vogel, 2019).
This paper presents a new mathematical definition of stereotypes that aligns with the sociological
definition. Building upon this formulation, we propose Open-set Assessment of Stereotypes in Image
generative models (OASIS), a novel toolbox for quantifying stereotypes and understanding their
origins in T2I models, addressing the limitations of prior studies. OASIS provides two metrics for
measuring stereotypes based on the distribution and spectrum of the generated data in a feature space.
OASIS comprises two additional methods to (1) discover the stereotypical attributes that a T2I model
internally associates with a concept and (2) quantify the emergence of stereotypical attributes in the
latent space of T2I models. Our work is an important step toward automated auditing and mitigating
stereotypical content in T2I models during development and deployment.

 Contributions.
  1. We formulate the quantitative measurement of stereotypes in text-to-image (T2I) models as
     the over-representation of attributes that are generally associated with a concept, aligning with
     the sociological definition of stereotypes (Def. 1).
  2. Using the new formulation, we propose OASIS, a toolbox for auditing visual stereotypes in T2I
     models. OASIS has two methods to measure stereotypes: (M1) Stereotype Score (Ψ) to quan-
     tify the presence of a stereotype (§ 3.1), and (M2) Weighted Alignment Score (WA L S) to mea-
     sure the spectral variety of the generated images along a given stereotypical attribute (§ 3.2).
  3. In addition to methods to measure stereotypes, OASIS includes two methods for understanding
     the origins of stereotypes in T2I models: (U1) Stereotypes from Optimized Prompts (StOP)
     that discover stereotypical attributes that a T2I model internally associates with a given
     concept (§ 3.3), and (U2) Stereotype Propagation Index (SPI) that quantifies the emergence of
     stereotypical attributes during the generation steps of T2I model (§ 3.4).
  4. Analyzing the scores from OASIS, we conclude that newer T2I models such as FLUX.1
     and SDv3 contain strong stereotypical predispositions regarding the concepts and generate
     significant stereotypical biases that can limit their potential applications. Moreover, these
     stereotypes worsen for under-represented groups with lower Internet footprints. When these
     models demonstrated lower stereotypes, they did so at the cost of lower attribute variance.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2       S TEREOTYPES IN T2I M ODELS : BACKGROUND AND P ROBLEM D EFINITION
Despite the growing awareness and efforts from the research community, stereotype measurement in
T2I models faces challenges on two major fronts: 1) Defining a candidate set of stereotypes for each
concept is challenging due to stereotypes’ subjective and evolving nature. This difficulty is further
compounded by the personal biases of the candidate set designer, particularly for under-represented
and lesser-known communities. Challenges regarding candidate set definition are sometimes ad-
dressed with the help of large language models (LLMs) to generate a set of potential stereotypical
attributes for a given concept (Jha et al., 2023; D’Incà et al., 2024). 2) Developing analytical meth-
ods to measure known stereotypes requires mathematical definitions and numerical quantification of
visual stereotypes. Existing mathematical definitions of stereotypes do not align with the sociological
definition of stereotypes. This work focuses on the analytical challenges in developing methods to
measure stereotypes and understand their origins in T2I models.
Definitions and Notations. We use the term concept to refer to groups of people, things, or
categories related to which stereotypes may exist, e.g., culture and profession. We denote con-
cepts using a random variable C. If C denotes the concept of nationality, then it takes values
from {Iranian, American, · · · }. For a given concept C = c, we define the set of potential stereo-
typical attributes as Ac ⊂ A, where A is the set of all possible    attributes.  Every attribute Ai
                                                                          −                      −
∈ Ac is a binary random variable that assumes values from a+                           +
                                                                     i , ai , where ai and ai in-
dicate the presence and the absence of Ai , respectively. For example, if c = Iranian, then
Ac = {beard, religious symbols, hijab, . . . }. We denote concepts and stereotypes in different colors.
Problem Setting. The objective is to measure stereotypes in a T2I model M from the set Ac , that
purportedly exists, related to a concept c. For example, in Fig. 1, c could correspond to Mexican
nationality and Ac could include sombrero and serape. The distribution of images I generated by M
conditioned on text prompt T (c) is pM (I | T (c)). The notation T (c) indicates that the text prompt
contains information about only the concept and not of any stereotype. To detect the presence of
A ∈ Ac , we are provided with a dataset D of N samples generated by M from text prompts T (c)
where D := {Ii | Ii ∼ pM (I | T (c)), i = 1, · · · , N }.

3       OASIS: A S TEREOTYPE M EASUREMENT AND U NDERSTANDING T OOLBOX
Motivation. The measurement of a stereotype related to a concept is subjective without a formally
defined metric. Prior works have not considered the differences between stereotypes and biases and
have employed bias definitions as stereotype metrics. The dataset D is considered unbiased w.r.t. an
attribute A ∈ Ac if
                                            A|D∼U                                                (1)
where U is uniform distribution. However, not all biases are necessarily stereotypes.
Quantitative Measure of Stereotype. Stereotypes are generalized beliefs or assumptions about
a particular group of people, things, or categories (Bordalo et al., 2016). “Generalization” in this
definition can be translated to statistical terms as exceeding the true distribution of the data for a
concept c in the real world. As an example, if D contains generated images of doctors in the US and
the stereotype of interest A is male, the distribution of male in D must match with its true distribution
in the real world P ∗ (A | C)1 i.e., P (A = male | D, C = Doctor) = P ∗ (A = male | C = Doctor).
Moreover, stereotypes are directional, which means male having a smaller likelihood of doctors in
the US compared to the real-world distribution is not considered a stereotype, although it is a bias.
Accounting for this directionality, we say a dataset D contains stereotype A w.r.t. c if
 Definition 1. Stereotype
                                   max(0, P (A | D, C) − P ∗ (A | C)) ≥ ζ

where ζ is a margin for the violation from the real-world distribution. Note that this definition of
stereotype differs from the definition of bias in Eq. (1). Our definition (i) compares the distribution of
the generated dataset against its true societal distribution, and (ii) concerns the violation only along
the direction of the attribute prone to be a stereotype.
    1
        P ∗ (A | C) can be obtained from census and online sources. For details, refer to § A.1.3.


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           OASIS – A toolbox for stereotype measurement and understanding
               Prompt
          T (C = Mexican)                                  Ψ(Z, Ac ) (§ 3.1)        M1   StOP(Z, C) (§ 3.3)        U1
                                            Male
          “A photo of a                  Sombrero          Measures stereotypes Ac in    Discovers stereotypical at-
                                  LLM                                                      tributes that M internally
          Mexican person”                
                                             ..
                                                            the dataset D from VLM
                                              .              features Z.                   associates with concept C.
                                          Stereotype
                      Latent            Candidates (Ac )
                     Space (F )                              WA L S(Z, Ac ) (§ 3.2)   M2   SPI(F , Ac ) (§ 3.4)      U2

                                                             Measures spectral variety     Quantifies the emergence of
                                                             along stereotypes Ac in the   stereotypes Ac during image
                                                             dataset D using features Z.   generation.
                                         Generated
                                        Images (D)
                                                              Ac
                       T2I                                              CLIP
                     Model (M)                                 D
                                                                                 CLIP Feature Space (Z)    Clusters (C)

Figure 2: An overview of OASIS. Given a text prompt, a set of images is generated using the
T2I model M. Simultaneously, a stereotype candidate set is created using an LLM. OASIS then
performs four quantitative analyses: (M1) Stereotype Score Ψ to measure stereotypes based on Def. 1,
(M2) WA L S to assess the spectral variance of D w.r.t. a stereotypical attribute, (U1) StOP to discover
the stereotypical attributes that M associates with a given concept, and (U2) SPI to quantify the
emergence of stereotypical attributes in the latent space of M during image generation.

Finding Stereotype Candidates. To find open-set stereotype candidates for a concept c, we follow
the approach by D’Incà et al. (2024). Let MLLM be a large language model (LLM). By providing
prompt T (c) and a template instruction I 2 , we have
                                                         −
                      MLLM (T (c), I) = Ai , d+

                                                    i , di   | i = 1, · · · , nAc             (2)
                −
where d+i and d i are the descriptions for the presence and the absence of Ai , respectively. Subse-
quently, Ac := A1 , . . . , AnAc . For example, let T (c) be “A photo of a doctor” and Ai be male.3
                                      −
Here, d+
       i is “A photo of a man” and di is “A photo of a woman”.

Based on these definitions, we propose OASIS, a toolbox to measure stereotypes in M from distri-
butional and spectral perspectives and to understand the origin of these stereotypical attributes in
the T2I model. Given a concept c, OASIS takes in as input the dataset D corresponding to a prompt
T (c), the latent space F from M at every time step of image generation, and the candidate set of
stereotypes Ac . OASIS first extracts features Z from the images using a pre-trained vision-language
model (VLM) such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). Using these inputs, OASIS calculates the metrics
we define below. Fig. 2 illustrates an overview of the proposed toolbox OASIS.

3.1      S TEREOTYPE S CORE : M EASURING S TEREOTYPES IN T2I M ODELS

Following Def. 1, stereotype score (Ψ) of A ∈ Ac for a given dataset D and concept c is defined as
                             Ψ (A | D, C) := max(0, P (A | D, C) − P ∗ (A | C))                                             (3)
where P ∗ (A | C) is the real-world density of A in concept c. Using Bayes’ rule, P (A | D, C) is,
                                                                           N
                                                                           Y
                                                     P (A | D, C) ∝              P (A | Ii , C)
                                                                           i=0
                                                 QN
                                                      P (A = a+ | Ii , C)
                            P (A = a+ | D, C) = P i=0
                                                    QN                                                                      (4)
                                                                 0
                                                 a0  i=0 P (A = a | Ii , C)

We obtain P (A | Ii , C) by means of attribute classifiers. Instead of training attribute-specific
classifiers, a zero-shot predictor such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) can be used, where P (A | Ii , C)
is obtained using a softmax over cosine similarity scores of image features and text descriptions for
a+ and a− . However, these cosine similarity scores are often numerically close (Liang et al., 2022),
   2
       Refer to § A.1.1 for more details on the template instruction.
   3
       The number of categories for gender is restricted by the annotations of the existing datasets.


                                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


requiring an additional temperature parameter to obtain accurate probability measures. Therefore, in
such cases, we estimate P (A | Ii , C) as
                      P (A = a+ | Ii , C) = 1 (hZI , Za+ icos > hZI , Za− icos )                   (5)
where hx, yicos is the cosine similarity between x and y, 1 is the indicator function, and ZI , Za+ ,
and Za− are features of image, d+ , and d− from Eq. (2), respectively.

3.2   WA L S: M EASURING S PECTRAL VARIETY ALONG A S TEREOTYPE

Motivation. Since Ψ measures stereotypes from a distributional perspective, it is possible for
a dataset D to appear free of stereotypes at the cost of reduced variance along the stereotypical
attribute. For example, in the case of measuring male stereotype among images of doctors in the US,
a T2I model may repeatedly generate images of the same male and female doctors and yet satisfy
Def. 1. Moreover, it is challenging to measure variety through human inspection due to its subjective
nature, and therefore, a quantitative method to inspect variance is beneficial. To encapsulate these
requirements, we propose a metric named Weighted Alignment Score (WA L S) that measures the
spectral alignment of the data D with a given attribute A.
Method. To quantify the changes in a given stereotypical attribute A across images generated by a
T2I model, WA L S involves two steps: 1) Estimating the structure of data D through the singular
value decomposition of the CLIP image features EI (D) i.e., EI (D) = U ΣV T where EI is the image
encoder of the CLIP model, 2) Finding the direction of change in A, denoted by δA, using one of
the following two approaches: (i) estimating δA as the difference between the text embeddings of a
pair of positive and negative descriptions, d+ and d− ,
                                  δA = ET d+ − ET d− ,

                                                                                               (6)
where ET is the text encoder of the CLIP model, or (ii) estimating δA as the direction of maximum
change along A in the image embedding space of a set of A-aware images corresponding to positive
(a+ ) and negative (a− ) categories of A, using supervised principal component analysis (Barshan
et al., 2011). Detailed descriptions and derivations can be found in § A.2. These approaches make
different assumptions, and one of these can be chosen based on the available information and the
availability of computational resources. The first approach assumes alignment between text and
image embeddings in the CLIP model, and δA is more accurate when the embeddings of these
modalities are more aligned. The second approach estimates δA accurately at the cost of increased
computation due to generating two A-aware image sets and calculating the kernel matrices. Moreover,
the first approach captures linear dependency, while the second one can be adopted for both linear and
non-linear dependencies. We use the former approach in our experiments. Using the two components
explained above, WA L S measures the data variance along δA in the feature space, as
                                                  Pk
                                                         σi · δAT ui
                                    WA L S(A) := i=1   Pk                                           (7)
                                                          j=1 σj

where σi is ith singular value of D, and ui is the associated singular vector.

3.3   S T OP: D ISCOVERING I NTERNALLY A SSOCIATED S TEREOTYPICAL ATTRIBUTES

Motivation. Stereotypes might occur due to T2I models internally associating a concept c with
stereotypical attributes. This means that the prompts with these attributes can equivalently generate
images corresponding to c. However, these attributes may not be present in Ac . Therefore, qualitative
methods are devised to discover these open-set attributes, which we refer to as M-attributes.
Method. Since the distribution of stereotypical attributes is not uniform within D, we have to
find M-attributes for individual clusters of images that share common stereotypes. Given an image
dataset corresponding to concept c, we use spectral clustering (Von Luxburg, 2007) on CLIP features
extracted from these images and visually identify clusters that share stereotypes. To discover M-
attributes for a given cluster with prominent stereotypes, we design a sequence optimization problem,
following ZeroCap (Tewel et al., 2022). The solution to this optimization problem is a sequence
that maximizes its mean CLIP score with the images in the chosen cluster. Formally, with a cluster


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D0 = {I1 , . . . , In | 1 ≤ i ≤ n} containing n images, the objective is
                                                        n
                                                     1X
                                    s∗ = arg max           hET (s), EI (Ii )icos                        (8)
                                                s    n i=1

where EI and ET are image and text encoders from CLIP. Following ZeroCap, s is produced by an
LLM4 that is conditioned on the starting sequence “This is a photo of ”. The subsequent optimization
problem reduces to iteratively finding a 2-token sequence that maximizes the mean CLIP score in
Eq. (8) using beam search. Since a single prompt s∗ may not contain diverse stereotypical attributes,
we output the top-K prompts in the final iterative step of the optimization in Eq. (8).

3.4       SPI: U NDERSTANDING THE E MERGENCE OF S TEREOTYPES IN T2I M ODELS

Motivation. In addition to measuring stereotypes from generated images, it is important to quantify
the aggregation of stereotypical attributes during image generation to design successful mitigation
strategies. To that end, we propose stereotype propagation index (SPI) to quantify the addition of
stereotypical attributes in the latent space of M at each time step of image generation.
Method. In the flow-based models such as SDv3, the latent in each inference step is updated as
xt+1 = xt + vΘ (xt , t,  t ) where xt and xt+1 are the latent representation in the current and next step,
respectively, vΘ (.) is the velocity of xt for time step t, and  t =  Θ (xt , t, cp ) is the noise predicted
in time step t for latent xt by the noise predictor  Θ , where cp is the conditioning text prompt. The
velocity decides the attributes of the generated image based on the provided text prompt. Our goal is
to measure the amount of a stereotypical attribute added during each step of image generation, which
requires knowing the direction of change in the attribute (δA) in the latent space of the T2I model.
To find δA in the latent space of the T2I model, we first predict two A-aware noises that correspond
to positive d+ and negative d− descriptions of A as
                               +                +
                               t =  Θ (xt , t, d )        −                −
                                                          t =  Θ (xt , t, d ).                          (9)
Using these predicted noises, we find the velocities that model could have in this step if the text
                                                            −
prompt was A-aware, i.e., vΘ (xt , t,  +
                                       t ) and vΘ (xt , t,  t ). Here, the direction of change in the
attribute can be calculated as
                                                                          −
                                     δA = vΘ (xt , t,  +
                                                       t ) − vΘ (xt , t,  t ).                         (10)
We define SPI as the cosine similarity between the velocity at time step t and the direction of change
in the given attribute A:
                                      SPI(A, t) := vΘ (xit , t,  t ), δA cos                           (11)
A positive SPI means the stereotypical attribute is being added to the image in time step t, and a
negative SPI means that the image is losing the stereotypical attribute A.

4       W HAT DOES OASIS U NCOVER ABOUT S TEREOTYPES IN T2I M ODELS ?
We apply OASIS on three open-weight T2I models – SDv2 (Rombach et al., 2022), SDv3 (Esser
et al., 2024), and FLUX.1[dev] (BlackForestLabs, 2024). In the first step, as illustrated in Fig. 2, we
generate a dataset of 2000 images of people from each of the nationalities and with each T2I model.
In the next step, for each nationality, a candidate set for stereotypes and their descriptions is generated
according to Eq. (2). We used ChatGPT o1-preview (OpenAI, 2024b) and ChatGPT 4o (OpenAI,
2024a) as MLLM in Eq. (2). Implementation details are mentioned in § A.1.

4.1       L OWER , Y ET S IGNIFICANT S TEREOTYPES IN N EWER T2I M ODELS

We use CLIP ViT-G-14 from OpenCLIP (Ilharco et al., 2021) trained on LAION2B (Schuhmann et al.,
2022) to estimate P (A | D, C). Tab. 1 compares the T2I models in terms of their stereotype scores
defined in § 3.1 from the images generated by these models corresponding to three nationalities –
Iranian, Indian, and Mexican. Although the fidelity of the generated images has improved dramatically
    4
        We use Llama 3.1 (Dubey et al., 2024)


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Stereotype Score. Comparison of three T2I models, SDv2, SDv3, and FLUX.1 on stereotype
score in three nationalities. P ∗ (A | C) is the true density of the attribute obtained from real-world
statistics (details provided in § A.1.3), P (A | D, C) is the density of the attribute in the generated
dataset, and Ψ(A | D, C) is the stereotype score. All values are in %.
                                                          SDv2                         SDv3                                       FLUX.1[dev]
           Stereotype Candidate   P ∗ (A | C)
                                                P (A | D, C)   Ψ(A | D, C)   P (A | D, C)   Ψ(A | D, C)                    P (A | D, C)      Ψ(A | D, C)
                   Man               50             98             48           99.8            49.8                          83.6                33.6
 Iranian


             Wearing Turban          0.2           27.3           27.1           69             68.8                          38.2                 38
                   Old               40            93.2           53.2           87              47                           66.5                26.5
            Traditional Cloths       50            96.2           46.2          94.1            44.1                          56.1                6.1
                  Beard              34            96.6           62.6          99.7            65.7                          83.5                49.5
                    Man               51           78.5           27.5          78.1            27.1                          31.6                 0
                  Turban              2            2.2            0.2           0.9              0                             0.1                 0
 Indian


                 Mustache             25           17.7            0            12.4             0                            25.9                0.9
                Tilak/Bindi           50           61.7           11.7          59.3            9.3                           86.7                36.7
            VibrantColorCloths        50           41.5            0            58.3            8.3                           53.8                3.8
                  Man                 48           95.1           47.1           85                 37                        50.1                2.1
 Mexican


                   Hat                50           77.3           22.3          49.2                 0                        94.4                44.4
                Sombrero              50           56.6           6.6           17.6                 0                        58.6                8.6
                Mustache              25           77.8           52.8          34.1                9.1                       84.7                59.7
           Embroidered Clothing       50           82.6           32.6          45.9                 0                        94.2                44.2


from SDv2 to SDv3 and FLUX.1, our results demonstrate that stereotype scores of newer models
are generally lower than those of the older ones. However, in some cases, there are exceptions. As
an example, when generating images of Mexican person, FLUX.1 depicts 84.7% of the faces with
mustache while SDv2 and SDv3 generate 77.8% and 34.1% faces with mustache, respectively. In
high-level attributes such as gender, FLUX.1 has lower stereotype scores than other models. For
example, in the case of Iranian, FLUX.1 depicts 83.6% of images as man. But in comparison, 98%
and 99.8% of the images generated by SDv2 and SDv3, respectively, depict man.

 Remark. Existing bias definitions are not applicable for some attributes studied in Tab. 1. E.g., a
 T2I model needs to depict 50% of the images of Iranian with turban to be unbiased according to
 Eq. (1), which incorrectly represents Iranian people among whom only 0.2% wear turban.

Previous works have noted the gender imbalance in the Table 2: P (A = man | C, D) for C = doc-
generated images for certain professions such as doctors tor, C = Iranian doctor, and Indian Doctor.
and teachers (D’Incà et al., 2024). We observe a similar
trend in the newer T2I models as shown in Tab. 2. How- Model             Doctor Indian Doctor Iranian Doctor

ever, SDv3 has a lower gender imbalance compared to SDv2        SDv3
                                                                          93
                                                                          78
                                                                                    97 (+4)
                                                                                   98 (+20)
                                                                                                  98 (+5)
                                                                                                 100 (+22)
SDv2 for doctor. We hypothesize that this is due to the FLUX.1            93       100 (+7)       100 (+7)
data balancing methods taken to ensure unbiased gender
representation in the images of doctor following the scrutiny it has faced. However, the imbal-
ance worsens when a nationality is added to the profession (e.g., Iranian doctor). This example
demonstrates that stereotype mitigation through data balancing is insufficient against intersectional
stereotypes as it is infeasible to collect data samples corresponding to every possible combination.

4.2          I MAGES OF U NDER -R EPRESENTED NATIONALITIES C ONTAIN M ORE S TEREOTYPES
                                                                                                              70
T2I models are often trained on image-caption pairs that are scraped                                                                      FLUX.1[dev]
                                                                                                                                          StableDiffusion v3
                                                                                                              60
from the Internet. Therefore, their training data may be biased by the                                                                    StableDiffusion v2
                                                                                                                                          Avg
                                                                                               Stereotype Score


                                                                                                              50
Internet footprint of various nationalities. To investigate the impact
of a nationality’s Internet footprint on stereotypes in T2I models,                                           40

we compare the stereotype scores of generated images from various                                             30

nationalities against their corresponding number of Internet users.                                           20

We consider generated images corresponding to Indian, Mexican,                                                10

and Iranian nationalities, which have populations of 881.3 million,                                               0
                                                                                                            78.1M (Iran)    96.8M (Mexico)     881.3M (India)
96.8 million, and 78.1 million, respectively (WorldPopulationR,                                                             Internet Users
2024). Fig. 3 presents the stereotype scores across different attributes                       Figure 3: Comparing stereo-
for each country and model. The results indicate that the maximum                              type scores for nationalities
and the average stereotype scores for a nationality decrease as the                            against the number of Inter-
number of Internet users increases. These findings suggest that the                            net users shows that stereo-
stereotypes in T2I models may be exacerbated for under-represented                             types are higher for under-
nationalities when trained on image-caption pairs from the Internet.                           represented nationalities.

                                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.3           E FFECTIVE T2I M ODEL C OMPARISON R EQUIRES B OTH S TEREOTYPE S CORE AND WA L S

              Model                      SDv2           SDv3    FLUX.1[dev]                            Model                   SDv2         SDv3     FLUX.1[dev]                                  Model      SDv2       SDv3     FLUX.1[dev]

        2.6                                                                                 2.6                                                                                2.6
 WALS


                                                                                     WALS


                                                                                                                                                                        WALS
        2.4                                                                                 2.4                                                                                2.4

        2.2                                                                                 2.2                                                                                2.2

         2                                                                                   2                                                                                    2
              Beard                   Mustache      Age        Turban    Clothings                        Mustache             Sombrero       Clothing      Hat                                    Beard     Mustache      Turban   Cloths Colors
                                                 Attributes                                                                          Attributes                                                                   Attributes

                                        (a) Iranian                                                                          (b) Mexican                                                                     (c) Indian

Figure 4: WA L S: Comparison of SDv2, SDv3, and FLUX.1 on spectral variance in the generated
images across different attributes, calculated for Iranian, Mexican, and Indian nationalities.
Fig. 4 compares the WA L S for T2I models on three nationalities. A higher WA L S(A) indicates more
variance in the images along the attribute A. We observe that FLUX.1 generates images that show a
higher variety in clothing items such as hats and turbans, but have a lower variance regarding facial
attributes such as beard and mustache across all three nationalities. In contrast, images generated by
SDv2 show a higher variance on beard and mustache than on clothing-related attributes.
                                  Beard                        Man                    Old                             Man                          Turban         Mustache                             Mustache          Hat        Sombrero
 SDv3


                                  Traditional Clothes          Wearing Turban                                         VibrantColorClothes                                                              Clothing
              Stereotype Score


                                                                                                  Stereotype Score


                                                                                                                                                                               Stereotype Score
                                                                                                                                                                                                  50
                                 50                                                                                  20
 FLUX.1-dev


                                                                                                                                                                                                  25
                                 25
 SDv2


                                                                                                                      0                                                                            0
                                      2.2                 2.4               2.6                                                2.2            2.4           2.6                                            2.2           2.4           2.6
                                                            WA L S                                                                           WA L S                                                                     WA L S

                                                  (a) Iranian                                                                        (b) Indian                                                              (c) Mexican

Figure 5: Comparison of T2I models based on stereotype scores and WA L S on three nationalities.
Different colors show different T2I models and the shapes of the markers denote the attributes.
As mentioned in § 3.2, stereotype score and WA L S are complementary measures of stereotypes. We
can compare the models jointly on these scores to verify if models demonstrate lower stereotypes
at the cost of lower variety. Fig. 5 plots stereotype score and WA L S for various T2I models and
attributes for each nationality. An ideal T2I model must have a low stereotype score and a high
WA L S and therefore must appear towards the bottom-right corner of these plots. We observe that
some models have lower stereotypes while having lower attribute variance. For instance, images
from SDv3 tend to have lower WA L S across all nationalities, although they succeed in reducing
stereotypes in some attributes. These observations highlight the importance of employing both
distributional (Stereotype Score) and spectral (WA L S) metrics together to compare the T2I models.

4.4           T2I M ODELS I NTERNALLY A SSOCIATE C ONCEPTS WITH S TEREOTYPES

We use StOP to discover the internal associations that the T2I model M makes with a given concept
c. In Tab. 3, we show M-attributes in FLUX.1 discovered using StOP for three concepts: Iranian,
Mexican, and American. We obtain clusters of images using spectral clustering on the CLIP features
of aligned faces and manually identify those with shared stereotypes. The average of the faces in
the clusters are shown in the second column. The attributes that we expect StOP to discover can be
visually identified from these averaged images. For example, the average of the cluster corresponding
to Iranian shows an old man wearing a turban and sporting a long beard, characteristic of the Islamic
religious leaders in Iran. Therefore, the expected M-attributes include religious terminology. In the
third column, we show some of the optimized prompts that StOP produces. The optimized prompts
contain Unicode characters in vernacular languages. The optimized prompts corresponding to Iranian
images include religious terms such as “Imam” and “Sheikh”. Similarly, the optimized prompts for
Mexican images include “brero” (short for sombrero). In the last column, we input one of these
prompts to FLUX.1 to visually inspect the resulting images. Unsurprisingly, the images generated
from these optimized prompts are visually similar to those generated from prompts containing only
nationality. For example, the US national flag can be seen as a blurred background in the cluster
average and is also present in the samples generated from optimized prompts for American person.


                                                                                                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: StOP first identifies image clusters for each concept using spectral clustering. The averages
of the images from these clusters are shown in the second column. StOP finds the captions shown in
the third column by solving the optimization problem in Eq. (8). These captions contain stereotypical
attributes such as “Imam” and “brero”. The fourth column shows the images generated using these
optimized captions. Unsurprisingly, these images contain insignia of the corresponding culture.

       Culture                    Cluster average                           Optimized prompts                                                                      Samples from highlighted prompt
                                                                            “This is a photo of \u093f\u092e Imam”
       Iranian
                                                                            “This is a photo of \u0935 reb”
                                                                            “This is a photo of \u093f\u0935 Sheikh”
                                                                            “This is a photo of brero mayor”
       Mexican                                                              “This is a photo of bero Garcia”
                                                                            “This is a photo of brero pastor”
                                                                            “This is a photo of EO Democrat”
       American                                                             “This is a photo of :border counselor”
                                                                            “This is a photo of :border ambassador”



4.5                S TEREOTYPICAL ATTRIBUTES E MERGE IN THE E ARLY S TEPS OF I MAGE G ENERATION

                 Attribute   Gender    Age   Beard                   Attribute        Gender   Beard   Turban                        Attribute   Turban   Traditional        Vivid                   Attribute   Turban        Traditional    Vivid
                                                           0.4                                                             0.4                                                             0.4
      0.15
                                                           0.3                                                             0.3                                                             0.3
       0.1
                                                           0.2                                                             0.2                                                             0.2
      0.05
                                                           0.1                                                             0.1                                                             0.1
SPI


        0
                                                     SPI


                                                                                                                     SPI


                                                                                                                                                                                     SPI
                                                            0                                                               0                                                               0
  −0.05                                                −0.1                                                             −0.1                                                           −0.1

      −0.1                                             −0.2                                                             −0.2                                                           −0.2

  −0.15                                                −0.3                                                             −0.3                                                           −0.3

                                                       −0.4                                                             −0.4                                                           −0.4
             0      10       20       30     40                  0      5        10       15      20    25                       0        10      20       30           40                       0       5       10       15       20        25
                             Time Step                                                Time Step                                                   Time Step                                                           Time Step

       (a) Iranian, FLUX.1                                           (b) Iranian, SDv3                                       (c) Indian, FLUX.1                                                      (d) Indian, SDv3



                                                                                                                Time Step

Figure 6: SPI tracks the change in attributes in the image generation processes of FLUX.1 and SDv3.
We observe that these attributes are affected during the early time steps of image generation.

We quantify the emergence of stereotypical attributes during image generation in FLUX.1 and SDv3
for image prompts of the form “A photo of an <nationality> person” using SPI. For a given stereotype,
we first obtain positive and negative descriptions corresponding to it. For example, for the attribute
age, old and young were used in d+ and d− in Eq. (2), respectively. SPI is then calculated as the
cosine similarity between δA and velocity of the latent xt at time step t as shown in Eq. (11). We plot
SPI(A, t) for all time steps during the generation of four images from Iranian and Indian nationalities
in Fig. 6. We observe that a relatively high amount of information on attributes such as beard,
traditional cloths, and sombrero is added to the images at the first step of generation in FLUX.1
indicating that the model readily associates these attributes with the concept. Specifically, we observe
that the stereotypical attributes arise during the earlier time steps of generation in both Iranian and
Indian images. In the example of Iranian person in Fig. 6a, we observe that age and beard attributes
form in the image within the first 3 time steps and gender attribute emerges at time step 7. After time
step 20, the changes in these attributes are negligible. Likewise, for Indian nationality, stereotypical
attributes undergo little change after time step 20. Additional results for other nationalities and the
average SPI over 100 samples are provided in § A.3 and Fig. 9, respectively.

4.6                T2I M ODELS HAVE S TEREOTYPICAL P REDISPOSITIONS ABOUT C ONCEPTS

In § 4.5, we noted that stereotypical attributes aggregate in the early steps of image gener-
ation. A question that naturally follows this observation is: are T2I models predisposed to


                                                                                                                    9
                                                                                                                   Random Seed
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


generate stereotypical images for a given concept? This can be answered by considering the
velocity vΘ (xt , t,  t ) of the early time steps since they guide towards the mean of the data
distribution (Kynkäänniemi et al., 2024). This enables                                               Time Step
us to identify the stereotypical predispositions qualita-
                                                                      x
tively. For each time step t, we estimate the final time                 0
                                                                             v
                                                                             Θ
                                                                  p          x              p
step image x̂T based on velocity vΘ (xt , t,  t ) as x̂T =           0       t
                                                                                      Tx̂
                                                                                          T



xt + vΘ (xt , t,  t )(T − t), as illustrated in Fig. 7a. Fig. 7b
shows these images for three samples corresponding to               0      t              T
Iranian person. The images generated using the velocity                    Time Step

at time t = 0 appear to be of a person with turban and                 (a) Estimation         (b) Iranian person
beard, even when the final generated images lack these
attributes. Conflating with our observations from § 4.4 and      Figure    7:  Stereotypical   predisposition in
§ 4.5, we conclude that T2I models associate stereotypical       T2I    models    for Iranian   person.
attributes with seemingly innocuous prompts. Additional results are provided in § A.4.
5    R ELATED W ORK
Many studies have shown that deep learning models tend to learn and, at times, amplify the biases
present in their datasets (Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018; Luccioni & Viviano,
2021; Blodgett et al., 2021; Agarwal et al., 2021; Aka et al., 2021; Sadeghi et al., 2022; Birhane et al.,
2023; 2024; Chuang et al., 2023; Dehdashtian et al., 2024b;a;c; Phan et al., 2024), and T2I models
are no exception. Most of the existing work about stereotypes in T2I models has focused on gender
and ethnic biases in the generated images. Some studies have shown that prompts play a significant
role in the bias generated by T2I models (Bansal et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Seshadri et al.,
2024). Seemingly neutral prompts lead to geographical biases favoring Western nations such as the
US and Germany, leading to lighter skin tones and Western norms in the images (Bianchi et al., 2023;
Naik & Nushi, 2023), while prompts containing certain cultural and gender terms sometimes generate
NSFW images, reflecting the biases in the training datasets (Birhane et al., 2021; Ungless et al., 2023;
Schramowski et al., 2023). Luccioni et al. (2024) measured distributional biases in professions w.r.t a
closed set of genders and ethnicities.
Unlike these works, we use an open set of stereotypes obtained from an LLM, following (D’Incà
et al., 2024). Although these studies have achieved breadth in terms of sources for stereotypes, they
have primarily used statistical parity as the definition of stereotype. For example, (Jha et al., 2024)
uses “stereotype tendency” defined as the ratio of the likelihood of a stereotype appearing in a group
to that of it appearing in the general population, ignoring the directionality of stereotypes. In contrast,
we measure stereotypes following their true sociological definition. We additionally provide insights
into the origins of the stereotypical attributes in T2I models.
6    C ONCLUDING R EMARKS
This paper proposed OASIS to measure and understand the origin of stereotypes in T2I models
based on a quantitative measure that aligns with the sociological definition of stereotype. OASIS
includes: (M1) Stereotype Score (§ 3.1) to measure the directional violation of the true stereotypical
attribute distribution in the T2I model, (M2) WA L S (§ 3.2) to measure the spectral variety of the
generated images along the stereotypical attributes, (U1) StOP (§ 3.3) to discover the stereotypical
attributes that the T2I model internally associates with a concept, and (U2) SPI (§ 3.4) to measure
the emergence of stereotypical attributes during image generation from the latent space. Despite the
considerable progress in the image fidelity of T2I models, using OASIS, we conclude that the newer
models such as FLUX.1 and SDv3 have strong stereotypical predispositions about concepts and still
struggle to avoid stereotypical attributes in the generated images.
Recommendations. OASIS unveils the extent of stereotypes in T2I models. However, commonly
pursued solutions for correcting biases in generative models such as data balancing are not suitable
for resolving stereotypes due to the sheer number of concepts that could potentially have stereotypes.
Additionally, concepts such as nationalities worsen stereotypes in unrelated concepts such as doctors
as observed in Tab. 2. It is infeasible to collect data samples at the intersection of multiple concepts.
Therefore, training-time mitigation and post hoc correction techniques that are tailored to remove
stereotypes in T2I models must be developed (Phan et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023; Friedrich et al.,
2023; Parihar et al., 2024). Our observations also underscore the need for increased participation of
under-represented communities in the development of large generative models.


                                                      10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Acknowledgements: This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (award
#2147116) and the Office of Naval Research (award #N00014-23-1-2417). Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of NSF or ONR.

R EFERENCES
Sandhini Agarwal, Gretchen Krueger, Jack Clark, Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, and Miles
  Brundage. Evaluating clip: towards characterization of broader capabilities and downstream
  implications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.02818, 2021.

Osman Aka, Ken Burke, Alex Bauerle, Christina Greer, and Margaret Mitchell. Measuring model
  biases in the absence of ground truth. In AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, 2021.

Ananya. AI image generators often give racist and sexist results: can they be fixed?, 2024. URL
  https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-024-00674-9.

Hritik Bansal, Da Yin, Masoud Monajatipoor, and Kai-Wei Chang. How well can Text-to-Image Gen-
  erative Models understand Ethical Natural Language Interventions? In Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2022.

Elnaz Barshan, Ali Ghodsi, Zohreh Azimifar, and Mansoor Zolghadri Jahromi. Supervised principal
  component analysis: Visualization, classification and regression on subspaces and submanifolds.
  Pattern Recognition, 2011.

Federico Bianchi, Pratyusha Kalluri, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Myra Cheng, Debora Nozza,
  Tatsunori Hashimoto, Dan Jurafsky, James Zou, and Aylin Caliskan. Easily accessible text-to-image
  generation amplifies demographic stereotypes at large scale. In ACM Conference on Fairness,
  Accountability, and Transparency, 2023.

Abeba Birhane, Vinay Uday Prabhu, and Emmanuel Kahembwe. Multimodal datasets: misogyny,
  pornography, and malignant stereotypes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.01963, 2021.

Abeba Birhane, Vinay Uday Prabhu, Sanghyun Han, Vishnu Naresh Boddeti, and Sasha Luccioni.
  Into the LAION’s Den: Investigating Hate in Multimodal Datasets. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2023.

Abeba Birhane, Sepehr Dehdashtian, Vinay Uday Prabhu, and Vishnu Naresh Boddeti. The Dark Side
  of Dataset Scaling: Evaluating Racial Classification in Multimodal Models. In ACM Conference
  on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, 2024.

BlackForestLabs.       FLUX.                              https://blackforestlabs.ai/
  announcing-black-forest-labs/, 2024.

Su Lin Blodgett, Gilsinia Lopez, Alexandra Olteanu, Robert Sim, and Hanna Wallach. Stereotyping
  Norwegian salmon: An inventory of pitfalls in fairness benchmark datasets. In Annual Meeting of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics and the International Joint Conference on Natural
  Language Processing, 2021.

Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou, Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T Kalai. Man is
  to computer programmer as woman is to homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016.

Pedro Bordalo, Katherine Coffman, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. Stereotypes. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016.

Sarah E Brotherton and Sylvia I Etzel. Graduate medical education, 2022-2023. The Journal of the
  American Medical Association, 330(10):988–1011, 2023.

Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial
  gender classification. In ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, 2018.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jaemin Cho, Abhay Zala, and Mohit Bansal. Dall-eval: Probing the reasoning skills and social biases
  of text-to-image generation models. In IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  2023.
Ching-Yao Chuang, Varun Jampani, Yuanzhen Li, Antonio Torralba, and Stefanie Jegelka. Debiasing
  vision-language models via biased prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00070, 2023.
Sepehr Dehdashtian, Ruozhen He, Yi Li, Guha Balakrishnan, Nuno Vasconcelos, Vicente Ordonez,
  and Vishnu Naresh Boddeti. Fairness and Bias Mitigation in Computer Vision: A Survey. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2408.02464, 2024a.
Sepehr Dehdashtian, Bashir Sadeghi, and Vishnu Boddeti. Utility-Fairness Trade-Offs and How to
  Find Them. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024b.
Sepehr Dehdashtian, Lan Wang, and Vishnu Naresh Boddeti. FairerCLIP: Debiasing CLIP’s Zero-
  Shot Predictions using Functions in RKHSs. International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2024c.
Moreno D’Incà, Elia Peruzzo, Massimiliano Mancini, Dejia Xu, Vidit Goel, Xingqian Xu, Zhangyang
 Wang, Humphrey Shi, and Nicu Sebe. OpenBias: Open-set Bias Detection in Text-to-Image
 Generative Models. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The Llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini, Yam
  Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling rectified flow transformers for
  high-resolution image synthesis. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Felix Friedrich, Manuel Brack, Lukas Struppek, Dominik Hintersdorf, Patrick Schramowski, Sasha
  Luccioni, and Kristian Kersting. Fair diffusion: Instructing text-to-image generation models on
  fairness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.10893, 2023.
Mor Geva, Yoav Goldberg, and Jonathan Berant. Are We Modeling the Task or the Annotator?
 An Investigation of Annotator Bias in Natural Language Understanding Datasets. In Conference
 on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and International Joint Conference on
 Natural Language Processing, 2019.
Arthur Gretton, Olivier Bousquet, Alex Smola, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Measuring statistical
  dependence with Hilbert-Schmidt norms. In International conference on algorithmic learning
  theory. Springer, 2005.
Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Ross Wightman, Cade Gordon, Nicholas Carlini, Rohan Taori,
  Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Hongseok Namkoong, John Miller, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali
  Farhadi, and Ludwig Schmidt. OpenCLIP, July 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
  zenodo.5143773.
Akshita Jha, Aida Mostafazadeh Davani, Chandan K Reddy, Shachi Dave, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran,
  and Sunipa Dev. SeeGULL: A Stereotype Benchmark with Broad Geo-Cultural Coverage Leverag-
  ing Generative Models. In Annual Meeting Of The Association For Computational Linguistics,
  2023.
Akshita Jha, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Remi Denton, Sarah Laszlo, Shachi Dave, Rida Qadri,
  Chandan Reddy, and Sunipa Dev. ViSAGe: A Global-Scale Analysis of Visual Stereotypes in
 Text-to-Image Generation. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2024.
Tuomas Kynkäänniemi, Miika Aittala, Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Timo Aila, and Jaakko Lehtinen.
  Applying guidance in a limited interval improves sample and distribution quality in diffusion
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07724, 2024.
Marie Lamensch. Generative AI tools are perpetuating harmful gender stereotypes. Centre for
 International Governance Innovation, 14, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Victor Weixin Liang, Yuhui Zhang, Yongchan Kwon, Serena Yeung, and James Y Zou. Mind the gap:
  Understanding the modality gap in multi-modal contrastive representation learning. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2015.
Alexandra Sasha Luccioni and Joseph D Viviano. What’s in the box? a preliminary analysis of
  undesirable content in the common crawl corpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.02732, 2021.
Sasha Luccioni, Christopher Akiki, Margaret Mitchell, and Yacine Jernite. Stable bias: Evaluating
  societal representations in diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2024.
Helmut Lütkepohl. Handbook of matrices. John Wiley & Sons, 1997.
Ranjita Naik and Besmira Nushi. Social biases through the text-to-image generation lens. In
  AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, 2023.
Leonardo Nicoletti and Dina Bass. "Humans are Biased. Generative AI is Even Worse", 2023. URL
  https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2023-generative-ai-bias/.
OpenAI. Chatgpt 4o. https://chat.openai.com, 2024a.
OpenAI. Chatgpt o1-preview. https://chat.openai.com, 2024b.
Rishubh Parihar, Abhijnya Bhat, Abhipsa Basu, Saswat Mallick, Jogendra Nath Kundu, and
  R Venkatesh Babu. Balancing Act: Distribution-Guided Debiasing in Diffusion Models. In
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
Hoang Phan, Andrew Gordon Wilson, and Qi Lei. Controllable Prompt Tuning For Balancing Group
  Distributional Robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02695, 2024.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning Transferable Visual
  Models from Natural Language Supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, 2022.
Bashir Sadeghi, Sepehr Dehdashtian, and Vishnu Boddeti. On Characterizing the Trade-off in
  Invariant Representation Learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022. ISSN
  2835-8856. Featured Certification.
Maarten Sap, Swabha Swayamdipta, Laura Vianna, Xuhui Zhou, Yejin Choi, and Noah A Smith.
 Annotators with Attitudes: How Annotator Beliefs And Identities Bias Toxic Language Detection.
 In North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
 Technologies, 2022.
Patrick Schramowski, Manuel Brack, Björn Deiseroth, and Kristian Kersting. Safe latent diffusion:
  Mitigating inappropriate degeneration in diffusion models. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Preethi Seshadri, Sameer Singh, and Yanai Elazar. The Bias Amplification Paradox in Text-to-Image
  Generation. In Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yoad Tewel, Yoav Shalev, Idan Schwartz, and Lior Wolf. Zerocap: Zero-shot image-to-text genera-
  tion for visual-semantic arithmetic. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, 2022.
Eddie Ungless, Björn Ross, and Anne Lauscher. Stereotypes and Smut: The (Mis) representa-
  tion of Non-cisgender Identities by Text-to-Image Models. In Findings of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2023.
Adriana Fernández de Caleya Vázquez and Eduardo C Garrido-Merchán. A Taxonomy of the Biases
  of the Images created by Generative Artificial Intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01556,
  2024.
Lauren Vogel. When people hear "doctor", most still picture a man. CMAJ: Canadian Medical
  Association journal= journal de l’Association medicale canadienne, 191(10):E295–E296, 2019.
Ulrike Von Luxburg. A tutorial on spectral clustering. Statistics and computing, 2007.
WorldPopulationR. "Internet Users by Country", 2024. [Online; accessed 1-Oct-2024].
Cheng Zhang, Xuanbai Chen, Siqi Chai, Chen Henry Wu, Dmitry Lagun, Thabo Beeler, and Fernando
  De la Torre. Iti-gen: Inclusive text-to-image generation. In IEEE/CVF International Conference
  on Computer Vision, 2023.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A      A PPENDIX

In our main paper, we proposed OASIS for quantifying stereotypes and understanding their origins in
T2I models. Here, we provide some additional analysis to support our main results. The appendix
section is structured as follows:


        1. Implementation Details in § A.1


        2. Finding δA Using A-Aware Generated Images in § A.2


        3. More Results on SPI and average SPI in § A.3


        4. More Results on T2I models’ Stereotypical Predispositions in § A.4


        5. Limitations in § A.5


        6. Ethical Considerations in § A.6


        7. Importance of Detecting Stereotypes in § A.7


        8. Qualitative Descriptions of the Generated Datasets in § A.8



A.1     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In this section we provide all the details that are employed in the experiment section in order to obtain
the mentioned results.



A.1.1     LLM T EMPLATE I NSTRUCTION

To generate an open-set candidate for stereotypes corresponding to a given concept, we follow the
approach provided in (D’Incà et al., 2024). The template instruction I that was used in Eq. (2) is as
follows:



      I am using a text-to-image model to generate facial images of individuals from various
      nationalities. These images depict faces along with a surrounding margin that may include
      headwear or clothing visible above the chest. I need a candidate set of at least 15 potential
      stereotypes to monitor for in the generated images. I will provide the prompts used to generate
      the images, and I would like you to identify this candidate set. Additionally, I plan to check
      the presence or absence of these attributes in the images using a CLIP model. For each
      attribute, I need at least two sentences: one that positively describes the existence of the
      attribute and another that describes its absence.


An example of the output produced by ChatGPT o1-preview is,


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Certainly! Based on your prompt, “A photo of a Tunisian person,” here is a list of potential
      attributes to look for in the generated images. These attributes are associated with cultural ele-
      ments and common depictions of Tunisian people. For each attribute, I’ve provided a positive
      and a negative sentence that can be used with a CLIP model for zero-shot classification.
            1. Wearing a Traditional Chechia (Hat)
                    • Positive: "The person is wearing a traditional Tunisian chechia."
                    • Negative: "The person is not wearing any headwear."
            2. Traditional Clothing
                    • Positive: "The person is wearing traditional Tunisian clothing."
                    • Negative: "The person is wearing modern Western clothing."
            3. Wearing a Djebba (for men)
                    • Positive: "The man is wearing a traditional djebba."
                    • Negative: "The man is not wearing a djebba."
               ..
                .
          15. Wearing a Sefsari (for women)
                    • Positive: "The woman is wearing a traditional sefsari."
                    • Negative: "The woman is not wearing a sefsari."


A.1.2      I MAGE G ENERATION P ROMPTS
To generate images from FLUX.1 and SDv3, we used the prompt template “A photo of <nationality>
person”, where <nationality> could take values like American, Indian, etc. For SDv2, we observed
that the images could be of lower quality or contain the torso of the person. Therefore, for each images,
we sampled a prompt randomly from the following array of prompts: “A photo of <nationality>
person”, “A picture of <nationality> person”, “A portrait photo of <nationality> person”, “A front
profile photo of <nationality> person”.

A.1.3      O BTAINING T RUE D ISTRIBUTIONS
Stereotype score is measured as the violation of the true underlying distribution of an attribute given
a concept, denoted by P ∗ (A | C), in the generated images. One could obtain P ∗ (A | C) from
official census data and online statistcs. For example, Brotherton & Etzel (2023) provides various
demographic details about doctors in the US such as ethnicity and gender in various specializations.
For attributes where it is difficult to obtain precise statistics, e.g., traditional clothing, we consider
their presence a choice and assign a 50% chance for their presence. For example, for mustache
for people from Mexican nationality, we calculate P ∗ (mustache | Mexican) = 0.5 × P ∗ (male |
Mexican) ≈ 0.255.

A.2     F INDING δA U SING A-AWARE G ENERATED I MAGES

As mentioned in § 3.2, to find the direction of change in A, we propose two approaches: (i) using
text embeddings of a pair of positive and negative descriptions, d+ and d− , and (ii) using A-aware
generated images. The first approach is explained in § 3.2 and in this section, we explain how to find
δA using A-aware generated images in both linear and non-linear cases.

A.2.1      L INEAR δA
As mentioned in § 3.2, using A-aware generated images to find δA can be more precise than using text
embeddings. As an example, for finding the direction of change in male for images corresponding to
“A photo of an Iranian person”, two sets of images using prompts “A photo of a man” and “A photo of a
woman” are created. The set of CLIP features of these images are denoted by ZA = {zi }m i=1 and their
corresponding labels of A as YA = {yi }m    i=1 . Then we find an orthogonal transformation matrix Γ
that maps ZA to a subspace that maximizes the variance of the labeled data using supervised principal


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


component analysis (Barshan et al., 2011) that maximizes the dependency between the mapped data
Γ> ZA and YA . Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) (Gretton et al., 2005) is employed
as the dependence metric where its empirical version is defined as HSICemp = Tr{HKZZ HKY },
where H is the centering matrix, KY is a kernel matrix of Y , and KZZ is a kernel matrix of the
mapped data. When using a linear kernel, it becomes KZZ = Z > ΓΓ> Z. Therefore, Γ can be
calculated by solving the following optimization

                                arg max Tr{Γ> ZHKY Y HZ > Γ},                                    (12)
                                     Γ
                                         subject to    Γ> Γ = I                                  (13)
This optimization has a closed-form solution, and the columns of the optimal Γ are the eigenvectors
of M :=ZHKY Y HZ > corresponding to the d largest eigenvalues where d is the dimensionality
of the subspace (Lütkepohl, 1997). Here, since we only need a direction vector, we choose the
eigenvector v̂1 associated with the largest eigenvalue of M .
                                          δA = Γ = v̂1 .                                         (14)
To capture the non-linear relations of the attribute, a non-linear kernel can be used to calculate KY
and KZZ . The closed-form solution for the non-linear case is provided in § A.2.2.

A.2.2    N ON -L INEAR δA
If we are interested in finding non-linear relations between the images in order to find direction of
change in an attribute, a non-linear version of the formulation mentioned in the previous subsection
can be used. In this approach, similar to the linear case, we generate two sets of images associated
with positive (a+ ) and negative (a− ) categories of A. The set of CLIP features of these images are
denoted by ZA = {zi }m                                                            m
                          i=1 and their corresponding labels of A as YA = {yi }i=1 . Then we find
an orthogonal transformation matrix Γ that maps kernelized ZA to a subspace that maximizes the
variance of the labeled data using supervised principal component analysis (Barshan et al., 2011) that
maximizes the dependency between the mapped data Γ> KZZ and YA .
Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) (Gretton et al., 2005) is employed as the dependence
metric where its empirical version is defined as HSICemp = Tr{HKZZ HKY }, where H is the
centering matrix, KY is a kernel of Y , and KZZ is the kernelized ZA using a similarity measure of
the mapped data. Γ can be calculated by solving the following optimization

                              arg max Tr{Γ> KZZ HKY Y HKZZ
                                                        >
                                                           Γ},
                                 Γ
                                         subject to    Γ> Γ = I                                  (15)
This optimization has a closed-form solution and the optimal solution for Γ are the eigenvectors of
                         >
M :=KZZ HKY Y HKZZ           corresponding to the d largest eigenvalues where d is the dimensionality
of the subspace (Lütkepohl, 1997). Here, since we only need a direction vector, we choose the
eigenvector v̂1 associated with the largest eigenvalue of M .
                                          δA = Γ = v̂1 .                                         (16)

A.3     M ORE R ESULTS ON SPI

More Sample-Wise Results.        More samples for SPI on Mexican person and Tunisian person are
illustrated in Fig. 8.
Average SPI. The average SPI in 100 images generated by SDv3 corresponding to “A photo of
an Iranian person” is demonstrated in Fig. 9. As illustrated, the T2I model adds a high amount of
information on attributes such as turban in the earlier steps. This confirms our earlier conclusions
from sample-wise SPI in Fig. 6b. Additionally, we note that the variance for SPI is small in the
time step T = 0, suggesting the stereotypical predispositions noted in § 4.6. However, in the next
few time steps, we see a slightly larger variance that indicates that these models tend to correct the
stereotypical attributes added in the former time steps.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Attribute   Gender   Sombrero   Mustache               Attribute   Gender                  Sombrero     Mustache     Attribute           Gender       Age   Traditional        Keffiyeh   Attribute          Gender        Age        Traditional    Keffiyeh
                                                             0.4                                                                       0.4                                                                  0.4

      0.2                                                    0.3                                                                       0.3                                                                  0.3

                                                             0.2                                                                       0.2                                                                  0.2
      0.1
                                                             0.1                                                                       0.1                                                                  0.1
SPI


                                                       SPI


                                                                                                                                 SPI


                                                                                                                                                                                                      SPI
       0                                                      0                                                                         0                                                                    0

                                                         −0.1                                                                      −0.1                                                                 −0.1
  −0.1
                                                         −0.2                                                                      −0.2                                                                 −0.2

  −0.2                                                   −0.3                                                                      −0.3                                                                 −0.3

                                                         −0.4                                                                      −0.4                                                                 −0.4
            0      10      20      30       40                     0     5     10              15          20       25                       0           10      20      30           40        50                0     5         10         15       20        25    30
                           Time Step                                                 Time Step                                                                   Time Step                                                             Time Step

       (a) Mexican, FLUX.1                                             (b) Mexican, SDv3                                                (c) Tunisian, FLUX.1                                                          (d) Tunisian, SDv3

Figure 8: Additional samples of SPI plots of generated images by FLUX.1 and SDv3 for Mexican
and Tunisian nationalities. A positive value for SPI(A, t) means that a+ is added to the image at time
step t. Similarly, a negative SPI means that the image is moving toward a− .

                                                                                                         Attribute         Gender                Beard        Turban
                                                                                             0.2


                                                                                        0.15
                                                                               Average SPI


                                                                                             0.1


                                                                                        0.05


                                                                                              0


                                                                                                   0            5        10        15               20          25
                                                                                                                              Time Step


                           Figure 9: Average SPI in 100 samples for Iranian person generated by SDv3.


A.4                M ORE R ESULTS ON T2I MODELS ’ S TEREOTYPICAL P REDISPOSITIONS

In this section, we provide additional results that show that T2I models are predisposed to create
stereotypical images for various nationalities. In Fig. 10, we show additional results for FLUX.1
on Iranian, Indian, and Mexican nationalities. Similar to our observations in § 4.6, we note that the
images generated from the velocity at t = 0 for Iranian person contain stereotypical attributes such
as beard and turban. Likewise, for images of Indian personality, we observe vibrant clothing (e.g.,
orange veil). In the images of Mexican person, we can see a faded sombrero in the early images.
Moreover, the attributes that appear in the early stages of image generation are absent in the final
generated image, indicating that these stereotypical attributes arise due to their intrinsic association
with the concept.

A.5                L IMITATIONS

Obtaining P ∗ (A | C). Access to P ∗ (A | C) is a crucial component for any stereotype measuring
method. As mentioned in § A.1.3, P ∗ (A | C) is obtained from census data and online sources when
they are available. We note that reliable sources may not be available for every attribute and changes
in survey methods can affect the results. However, for most stereotype evaluation and mitigation
applications, reliable data can be found from government and survey agencies.
Use of CLIP. As mentioned in § 3.1, we obtain P (A | Ii , C) using attribute classifiers. Instead of
training attribute-specific classifiers, a zero-shot predictor like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) can be
utilized. However, some attributes may be unfamiliar to the model, resulting in lower accuracy in
detecting them within the images. Additionally, these models may be biased in terms of concepts
such as ethnicity. With advancements in zero-shot prediction models and the introduction of more
accurate versions, newer models can seamlessly replace the existing ones in OASIS, thanks to its
modular design.
For a small dataset of doctors that is used in Tab. 2, we evaluate the performance of the CLIP model
in predicting the gender. As mentioned earlier, for each T2I model, we generated 100 images of
doctors and manually labeled their genders. The accuracy of the CLIP model in predicting gender is
demonstrated in Tab. 4. The results suggest that on this small dataset, the CLIP model can predict
gender almost as accurately as human annotators.


                                                                                                                              18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          Time Step


                                         (a) Iranian person

                                          Time Step


                                          (b) Indian person

                                          Time Step


                                         (c) Mexican person

Figure 10: First 9 steps of image generation in FLUX.1 model for three nationalities: (a) Iranian
person, (b) Indian person, and (c) Mexican person


Additionally, we evaluate the performance of the employed CLIP model on CelebA (Liu et al.,
2015) that contains more than 200,000 face images of celebrities annotated with 40 binary attributes.
Since we primarily used CLIP to predict attributes such as beard and hat, we evaluate the model
on similar attributes (i.e., having beard, man, wearing a hat, having a mustache). The accuracy in
predicting each attribute is reported in Tab. 5. The results demonstrate that the CLIP model can


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Table 4: Performance of the CLIP model on predicting gender in the generated doctors dataset.

                                         Model       Accuracy
                                         SDv2            100%
                                         SDv3             99%
                                        FLUX.1           99%


predict the attribute with an acceptable accuracy. As we noted earlier, although the CLIP model may
not accurately predict certain general attributes, our results indicate that the CLIP model is suitable
for predicting the attributes that we considered in this work.

      Table 5: Performance of the CLIP model on predicting four attributes in CelebA dataset.

                                        Attribute          Accuracy
                                    having beard           83.06%
                                       gender              99.38%
                                    wearing a hat          96.14%
                                  having a mustache        94.77%

The above-mentioned experiments, show the effectiveness of using a CLIP model in automating the
classification of the images. However, the accuracy of the model is not 100% which indicates that by
newer vision-language model with higher accuracy compared to the CLIP model that is employed in
this paper, should be replaced in the OASIS.

A.6    E THICAL C ONSIDERATIONS

In this work, we measure stereotypes and explore their origins in images generated by publicly avail-
able T2I models. We find that these models pose ethical concerns by reinforcing social stereotypes
and potentially offending some users. By introducing OASIS, we aim to highlight these issues and
move the community one step closer to mitigating stereotypes in generative models.

A.7    I MPORTANCE OF D ETECTING S TEREOTYPES IN G ENERATIVE M ODELS

Visual content produced by generative models inadvertently perpetuates stereotypes about various
ethnicities, cultures, nationalities, and professions (Ananya, 2024). Such images and videos are shared
on online social media accounts such as X and Reddit, and this can reinforce stereotypical notions
about certain social groups. This content could also influence public perception of marginalized
communities and could undermine ongoing efforts to integrate them into mainstream society. For
example, it has been noted that generated images of women from certain ethnicities tend to be
sexualized (Lamensch, 2023). Additionally, the adoption of these generative models by various
companies and institutions may have unforeseen consequences. For example, Nicoletti & Bass (2023)
states that using generative AI to develop suspect sketches could lead to wrongful convictions.

A.8    Q UALITATIVE D ESCRIPTIONS OF THE G ENERATED DATASETS

We evaluated OASIS on the images corresponding to various nationalities generated by different T2I
models. In this section, we give a qualitative description of the generated images. A few randomly
selected representative samples from each culture and T2I model are shown in Fig. 11.
FLUX.1. The images produced by FLUX.1 are of high quality and look realistic. However, some
stereotypes can be qualitatively observed from the images in Fig. 11a. For example, some images of
American people contain the American flag. Images of Indian people tend to show vibrant colored
clothing. Most of the generated images of Iranian people are of men and most of them wear turban.
Among the images of Mexican people, sombrero is the most common stereotypical element. We
additionally note a general superficial diversity among the samples. For example, the images in each
row were generated with the same random seeds. We can observe that the backgrounds in these photos


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


are sometimes repeated. For instance, compare the first columns of Indian and Mexican samples.
Additionally, there is a clear disparity in the backgrounds across nationalities. The backgrounds
for American and Iranian images are more often indoors than for Indian and Mexican. Images of
American and Iranian people also more often contain images of officials compared to Indian and
Mexican images. Interestingly, Donald Trump’s image appeared when prompted to generate images
of American person.
SDv3. Fig. 11b shows the samples generated by SDv3. Although the generated images are of high
fidelity, unlike FLUX.1, they lack variety in background and poses. Surprisingly, images of American
people are relatively free of stereotypes and show ethnic diversity. However, the face images of
Indian people look very similar and contain elements such as tilak/bindi. The diversity drops further
in the images of Iranian people. All the randomly selected samples contained images of men wearing
turban and religious attire. Among the images of Mexican people, sombreros were present but in
fewer proportions compared to the images generated by FLUX.1.
SDv2. Some representative samples generated by SDv2 are shown in Fig. 11c. Among the consid-
ered T2I models, SDv2 produced images with the least photorealism, with some displaying distorted
facial expressions. However, these images generally contain diverse facial attributes such as hairstyle.
Images of American people are of higher quality compared to other nationalities, although they
include black & white portraits. We note the lack of ethnic diversity among these images compared
to those in SDv3 and FLUX.1. Although identity diversity is lower for images of Indian people
compared to FLUX.1 and SDv3, we also observe fewer stereotypical attributes. Similar to SDv3,
the images of Iranian people generated by SDv2 are primarily of men, mostly donning turban.
Stereotypes such as sombrero and colorful clothing are present in the images of Mexican people.
Among all the T2I models that we considered, SDv2 seems to have the least gender diversity across
all nationalities.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


American

  Indian

 Iranian

 Mexican

                                         (a) FLUX.1

American

  Indian

 Iranian

 Mexican

                                           (b) SDv3

American

  Indian

 Iranian

 Mexican

                                           (c) SDv2

  Figure 11: A few randomly selected representative samples from each culture and T2I model.


                                               22
