Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E NHANCING C OGNITION AND E XPLAINABILITY OF
M ULTIMODAL F OUNDATION M ODELS WITH
S ELF -S YNTHESIZED DATA
 Yucheng Shi1 Quanzheng Li2 Jin Sun1 Xiang Li2 Ninghao Liu1
 1
   School of Computing, University of Georgia
 2
   Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School


                                                                  A BSTRACT
              Large Multimodal Models (LMMs), or Vision-Language Models (VLMs), have
              shown impressive capabilities in a wide range of visual tasks. However, they
              often struggle with fine-grained visual reasoning, failing to identify domain-
              specific objectives and provide justifiable explanations for their predictions. To
              address the above challenge, we propose a novel visual rejection sampling frame-
              work to improve the cognition and explainability of LMMs using self-synthesized
              data. Specifically, visual fine-tuning requires images, queries, and target answers.
              Our approach begins by synthesizing interpretable answers that include human-
              verifiable visual features. These features are based on expert-defined concepts,
              and carefully selected based on their alignment with the image content. After
              each round of fine-tuning, we apply a reward model-free filtering mechanism to
              select the highest-quality interpretable answers for the next round of tuning. This
              iterative process of synthetic data generation and fine-tuning progressively im-
              proves the model’s ability to generate accurate and reasonable explanations. Ex-
              perimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in improving both
              the accuracy and explainability of specialized visual classification tasks.


1      I NTRODUCTION
Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have recently demonstrated remarkable performance in visual
descriptive tasks, excelling in applications such as image captioning and visual question answer-
ing (Liu et al., 2024a; Alayrac et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024b). However, recent
research (Kim & Ji, 2024; Geigle et al., 2024) reveals a significant drop in their effectiveness when
applied to knowledge-intensive, domain-specific visual classification tasks. We observe that even
advanced models like LLaVA-1.5 (Liu et al., 2024a) can only achieve a mere 12.2% classification
accuracy in the Stanford Dogs dataset (Khosla et al., 2011). Further investigation reveals that cur-
rent LMMs struggle to utilize key visual features for reasoning in classification and fail to provide
justifiable explanations for their predictions, as illustrated by the examples in Figure 1.
User: Identify the bird species and explain your reasoning.
                                                                  The core issue stems from insufficient domain-specific
                                                                  alignment, as the model struggles to recognize key vi-
                                                                  sual features and link them to the correct labels. To ad-
                                                                  dress this problem, we propose enhancing the LMM’s
                                                                  domain-specific cognition and explainability through
                                                                  fine-tuning (Touvron et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2021).
                                                                  However, this approach is hindered by a lack of data, as
    LMM: The bird species           LMM: The bird species is      creating high-quality, feature-level image annotations is
    shown in this image is a        a black crow. The reason
    seagull. The reason for         for this identification is
                                                                  both complex and resource-intensive (Liu et al., 2024c).
    this identification is that     that the bird is perched on   While labeling images by category and identifying key
    the bird is flying over the     a tree branch, which is a     features for each class independent of the image is man-
    ocean, which is a typical       common behavior for
    habitat for seagulls.           crows.                        ageable, annotating the specific visual characteristics
    Label: Black footed Albatross   Label: Groove billed Ani      per image requires an extensive workload. Moreover,
Figure 1: LLaVA-1.5 struggles to utilize key                      this level of detailed annotation goes beyond the ca-
visual features in images for reasoning and ex-                   pacity of standard annotators and current LMMs (Chen
plaining predictions in classification tasks.                     et al., 2024a), making it impractical to scale.


                                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The biggest challenge now is synthesizing high-quality training data, specifically interpretable target
answers. Given a dataset with images and labels, a naive approach would be to use only labels as
target answers. However, training on such data may result in shortcut learning, where models pick
up spurious correlations instead of truly understanding key visual features (Geirhos et al., 2020).
While including general label-associated features as target answers might seem beneficial, it often
results in overly generic explanations that lack the image-specific details necessary for accurate
interpretation. We illustrate these shortcomings with examples in Figure 2.
To tackle this challenge, we propose a framework that allows                                Q: What is this
LMMs to self-synthesize interpretable answers without rely-                                 bird's species?
ing on explicit image-specific annotations. For a given image,                               Explain your
we first leverage the LMM’s captioning ability to generate de-                                reasoning.
scriptions, which are then used to identify visual features rel-                                   Synthesized
evant to that specific image. Each description may only cover                                        Answer
part of the key features, but by collecting a large set of descrip-     #only label
tions from the LMM, we can approximate the true distribution            A: This is a Black Footed Albatross.
of the image’s features, reducing the incompleteness in indi-           #label and general label-level features
vidual descriptions. We provide a formal justification for this         A: … Black Footed Albatross,
approach in Section 3.2. Moreover, to ensure precise identifi-          because …black feet; long, narrow
cation, we apply an information bottleneck technique to select          wings;…, hooked bill…, dark eyes
the most relevant features. Once the image-specific concepts            #label and specific image-level features
are identified, they are rewritten into interpretable answers.          A: … a Black Footed Albatross
                                                                        based on its large, hooked bill, dark
For the training procedure, we also design an iterative fine-           feathers, small, dark eyes on either
tuning approach to further improve performance over a one-              side of its head ....
shot training scheme. We begin by extracting image-level fea- Figure 2: Examples of synthetic
tures and transforming them into interpretable answers, which, answers for query Q. Training with
together with the corresponding images and queries, form the the first two types leads to shortcut
initial training dataset. Fine-tuning on this data results in an learning or overgeneralization.
updated model that can generate more accurate answers. The
updated model is then used to repeatedly generate answers, with the best one selected for the next
round of fine-tuning. This self-boosting process progressively improves the LMM’s ability to deliver
reliable explanations.
In summary, our contributions are threefold: (1) We propose a novel framework that improves
LMMs’ interpretable visual classification abilities without requiring extensive manual labeling, (2)
We introduce an information-theoretic approach to select interpretable visual concepts for each im-
age and a reward model-free filtering method to ensure high-quality data selection from synthetic
outputs, and (3) We develop an iterative process of data synthesis and model fine-tuning to progres-
sively enhance LMMs’ cognitive abilities and explainability.


2    P RELIMINARY

Problem Statement. We aim at developing a Large Multimodal Model (LMM) for explainable
visual classification. Let fθ denote the LMM model, X be the input image, and q be the query
prompt. The model’s answer is denoted as ŷ = fθ (X, q), where ŷ is expected to correctly predict
the label and explain its prediction by using the visual features observed in the image. To build such
a model, a straightforward strategy is to fine-tune the LMM with a training dataset that contains the
ground-truth answer for each input image. However, most available datasets D = {(Xi , ci )}N       i=1
only consist of images Xi and class labels ci (Khosla et al., 2011). To solve this, we propose a data
synthesis approach that transforms the raw dataset into an augmented dataset D∗ = {(Xi , qi , yi )}N
                                                                                                   i=1
with queries and explainable answers. While generating queries qi is straightforward, the challenge
lies in synthesizing explainable answers yi , which must include detailed visual features Zi∗ that
humans can identify and use for explanations. Therefore, the key problem is developing a method
to automatically annotate visual features Zi∗ for each image Xi , given their labels ci .
Visual Fine-Tuning. Visual fine-tuning adapts a pre-trained LMM to understand specific visual
information by training on image-text pairs. Typically, an LMM fθ consists of a vision encoder
that extracts visual embeddings from an input image X, a projector that maps these embeddings
into the language embedding space, and a language model that processes the combined visual and


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    𝑋
                                Base                                          Tuned                                       Tuned
                                                   Initial Data                                    …   Rejection                            …             Final
                                LMM                                           LMM                                          LMM
                                                    Synthesis                                          Sampling                                           LMM
                              (LLaVA)                                       (round 1)                                   (round N)
    Black footed
     Albatross
                                                                                                                         Tuned
                                                                                                        Query             LMM             𝑌 = {𝑦1 , 𝑦2, … , 𝑦𝑛 }
                                                                                                        Prompt         (round N)
                                                                          𝑍∗                                                                 𝑦∗
                   Label-level Concepts 𝑍                          𝑋             𝑍
                                                                                                                          The bird species shown in this image
              Black footed Albatross                                                                    𝐷    𝑍∗    𝑍      is a Black footed Albatross. The
    "Predominantly dark plumage",                           Image-level Concepts 𝑍 ∗                         𝑦∗
                                                                                                                          image features, such as the unique
    "Long, narrow wings adapted for soaring",                                                                             large, hooked bill, dark eyes, and
                                                      "Large, hooked bill, typically dark gray",
    "White-tipped wings and tail feathers",                                                                               dark grayish-brown body, support
                                                      "Small, dark eyes on the sides of …”,                               this identification.
    "Large, hooked bill, typically dark gray",
                                                      "Predominantly dark plumage",                          𝑌
    "Small, dark eyes on the sides of the head",
    …                                                         Concepts Selection



          Figure 3: Our framework: An iterative approach of data synthesis and model fine-tuning.


textual information (Liu et al., 2024b;a; Lin et al., 2024). Formally, given a round of conversation
containing an image X, a question q and an answer y, the model is trained to maximize the likeli-
                                                 P|y|
hood of generating the target answer: L(θ) = i=1 log pθ (y i |X, q, y <i ). Here, y i is the i-th token
of the answer y, and |y| is the length of the answer. The fine-tuning process typically optimizes
performance by freezing the pre-trained visual encoder to preserve learned visual representations
while updating the projector and language model parameters to improve language understanding for
visual inputs (Liu et al., 2024b; Lin et al., 2024). Recognizing the critical role of fine-tuning data
quality in model performance, our research proposes synthesizing high-quality conversation data to
improve performance.


3        M ETHODOLOGY

3.1         OVERVIEW

Our approach leverages synthetic data for visual fine-tuning to enhance both the cognitive ability
and explainability of LMMs, as illustrated in Figure 3. There are two major steps:
1. Image-level Visual Concept Selection: Given an image and its label, our first task is to extract a
set of image-specific concepts that explain the connection between the image and label. We propose
a selection method that identifies a subset of concepts most relevant to the image content while
ensuring the subset is concise. Using these concepts, we prompt the LMM to rewrite them into
textual answers that explain the label. These answers are used for the first round of fine-tuning.
2. Reward Model-Free Rejection Sampling: After the initial fine-tuning, the model can generate
synthetic answers, which can be used for next-round fine-tuning, but their quality still varies. To
filter out low-quality explanations and only select the best quality one as training data, we use
previously selected concepts as filtering criteria, quantifying alignment between explanations and
the concepts. The synthetic answer with the best-aligned explanation is then selected and combined
with the corresponding image and query, forming a new data pair for subsequent rounds of tuning.

3.2         S TEP 1: I MAGE - LEVEL V ISUAL C ONCEPT S ELECTION

In this step, our goal is to identify the visual concepts present in a given image. Let X represent
the true content of the image and c its class label. Each label class c is associated with a set of
expert-defined visual concepts Z, which can be obtained by consulting domain experts or using a
large language model. However, not all concepts in Z will necessarily be present in the image X.
Therefore, we aim to select a subset of concepts, Z ∗ ⊆ Z, that are observable in the image X.
To achieve this, we propose concept selection by leveraging the Information Bottleneck (IB) prin-
ciple, which seeks a compressed representation that preserves maximal information about another
variable (Tishby et al., 2000). In our context, we need to find Z ∗ that maximizes its mutual infor-
mation with the image content X, i.e., I(X; Z ∗ ), while minimizing the redundancy by penalizing
the mutual information between the selected concepts Z ∗ and the full concept set Z, i.e., I(Z ∗ ; Z).


                                                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Formally, we define the optimization problem:
                             Z ∗ = arg max
                                        ′
                                            [I(X; Z ′ ) − βI(Z ′ ; Z)] ,                               (1)
                                          Z ⊆Z
where β is a Lagrange multiplier that balances relevance and redundancy. However, directly comput-
ing I(X; Z ′ ) is intractable due to the high dimensionality and complexity of the image space. To ad-
dress this, we introduce an intermediate variable: a set of image descriptions D = {d1 , d2 , . . . , dn },
generated by prompting an LMM (i.e., the base LLaVA-1.5 (Liu et al., 2024a)), with instructions
like “Please describe the image.” Each description di attempts to capture some aspects of the image
content X. By increasing the number of collected descriptions n with different prompts, we aim to
approximate the true distribution of X.
This approach is analogous to assembling pieces of a puzzle: Each description provides partial in-
formation about the image, and collectively, they form a more complete representation. Similarly,
multiple potentially partial descriptions generated from different prompts can collectively approx-
imate the true image content. Under this intuition, we formalize the approximation in Theorem 1,
with proof provided in the appendix.
Theorem 1. Let X be the true image content with label c and D = {d1 , d2 , . . . , dn } be independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples from P (D|X). Let Z be an expert-defined concept list
about label c. Under the assumptions of conditional independence and convergence (Assumptions 1
and 2), as n → ∞, the mutual information I(D; Z) converges to I(X; Z):
                                       lim I(D; Z) = I(X; Z).
                                       n→∞

In practice, we cannot sample an infinite number of descriptions, and LMMs may generate inconsis-
tent or contradictory descriptions due to hallucinations or uncertainties. To mitigate this, we design
high-quality prompts and encourage diverse responses to improve the reliability of the generated
descriptions. By doing so, we assume that most of the descriptions will accurately reflect the image
content. This assumption is further validated through experiments in Section 4.4. From another per-
spective, if a feature is not consistently covered by image descriptions, it means that the model is not
certain about its presence, which will naturally result in lower MI scores for the associated concepts,
reducing their likelihood of being selected. Using the set of descriptions D, we reformulate the IB
objective in Equation. 1 as:
                                Z ∗ = arg max′
                                                 [I(D; Z ′ ) − βI(Z ′ ; Z)] .                        (2)
                                          Z ⊆Z
However, computing mutual information in high-dimensional space directly remains challenging.
Therefore, we employ the InfoNCE loss (Oord et al., 2018) as a lower-bound estimator of mutual
information. For each concept zj ∈ Z, we calculate an InfoNCE score sj :

                   X                        exp sim edi , ezj /τ
            sj =       log                       P                             ,           (3)
                  d ∈D
                           exp sim edi , ezj /τ + dk ∈D̄ exp sim edk , ezj /τ
                    i

where sim(·, ·) denotes the cosine similarity between embeddings, edi and ezj are the embeddings of
description di and concept zj , respectively, and τ is a temperature parameter. D̄ are the descriptions
for other images as negative samples. We can easily obtain the above embeddings through an off-
                                                                                                         ∗
the-shelf language embedding model (e.g., BERT (Devlin, 2018)). Next, we
                                                                       ∗
                                                                               P approximate I(D; Z )
as the sum of InfoNCE scores for the selected concepts: I(D; Z ) ≈                zj ∈Z ∗ sj . To minimize
I(Z ∗ ; Z), we selectively include concepts   to reduce  redundancy.   Given    that Z ∗ is a subset of Z,
we have: H(Z ) = I(Z ; Z) = − zi ∈Z ∗ p(zi ) log p(zi ), where H(Z ) is the entropy of Z ∗ . A
                ∗         ∗                                                   ∗
                                      P
selected subset Z ∗ with a smaller size and higher probabilities for its zi elements will result in lower
entropy. Combining these approximations, our selection criterion for Z ∗ becomes:
                                         n                        o
                                   Z ∗ = zj ∈ Z sj > µ + β̂σ ,                                          (4)
                                                                                   |Z|
where µ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of the InfoNCE scores {sj }j=1 , respectively. The
parameter β̂ controls the trade-off between including relevant concepts and avoiding redundancy.
The selected concepts Z ∗ are not only relevant to the image but also capture the most informative
features unique to the class label, providing strong evidence for the classification result and serving
as reasonable explanations. Once we obtain Z ∗ , we can generate an explainable answer for a
classification query on the image X. Specifically, we prompt the base LMM with these concepts to
produce a coherent explanation. The prompts used are detailed in the appendix. After gathering the
image and query-answer pairs, we can use them to fine-tune our LMMs.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.3   S TEP 2: R EWARD M ODEL -F REE R EJECTION S AMPLING

After the initial round of fine-tuning with explainable visual query-answer pairs, the LMMs have
significantly improved their ability to generate reasonable explanations. This improvement allows
us to leverage the current fine-tuned model to generate new data for subsequent training rounds.
However, the quality of newly generated data can vary considerably in terms of label accuracy and
explanation quality. Training on low-quality data could lead to performance degradation. To address
this issue, we propose a rejection sampling technique that filters out low-quality outputs.
Rejection sampling, also known as Best-of-N, is an inference-time strategy that generates multiple
candidates and selects the best one for further tuning (Touvron et al., 2023; Stiennon et al., 2020).
In our work, we adapt this idea for visual fine-tuning to iteratively improve LMM performance. Our
proposed rejection sampling process begins by generating a series of answer candidates, using the
fine-tuned model fθT from the last round T , and then identify the best answer from these candidates.
For language-only conversations, this selection is typically performed by a reward model, which
assigns higher rewards to answers aligning with desired criteria (Touvron et al., 2023). The answer
with the highest reward is then selected and used for the next round (T + 1) of training. However,
in the visual domain, finding a reliable reward model remains challenging, as noted by (Chen et al.,
2024a). To address this, we propose a reward model-free data filtering method to select the highest
quality interpretable answers.
Specifically, we leverage the selected concept set Z ∗ from Section 3.2 as a reference to evaluate
explanation quality. Our aim is to select the answer that best aligns with these relevant concepts.
Formally, let Y = {y1 , y2 , . . . , ym } represent the set of answers generated by the fine-tuned model
for a given image. These answers are obtained by prompting the model with questions like “What
is the {item} in this image? Please provide your reasoning.” The “item” here is set to be an coarse-
level label, like bird, airplane. Our goal is to select the answer y ∗ ∈ Y that maximizes the mutual
information with Z ∗ :
                                           y ∗ = arg max I(yi ; Z ∗ ).                               (5)
                                                 yi ∈Y
We approximate I(yi ; Z ∗ ) using the InfoNCE score:

         ′
              X                             exp sim eyi , ezj /τ
        si =        log                        P                                          ,         (6)
             z ∈Z ∗
                        exp sim eyi , ezj /τ + zk ∈Z,zk ∈Z / ∗ exp (sim (eyi , ezk ) /τ )
                j

where eyi is the embedding of answer yi . We select the answer with the highest score: y ∗ =
arg maxyi ∈Y s′i . The InfoNCE score provides a quantitative measure of how well the generated an-
swer aligns with the relevant concepts. Therefore, our method eliminates the need for a separate
reward model, which is particularly beneficial given the lack of reliable reward models for multi-
modal data (Chen et al., 2024a). Additionally, we add another empirical constraint: the selected
answer should contain the correct label c; otherwise, it will be discarded.
In summary, our framework, outlined in Algorithm 1, enhances the model’s fine-grained classifi-
cation capabilities by iteratively fine-tuning on diverse, high-quality, synthetic visual classification
query-answer pairs. Step 1 identifies the most informative concepts in the image, while Step 2 se-
lects the explanations that best align with these concepts. This two-step approach improves both the
accuracy and interpretability of the model’s predictions, enabling it to perform more effectively in
complex visual classification tasks.

3.4   T HEORETICAL J USTIFICATION

Our approach is grounded in information theory, specifically the maximization of mutual informa-
tion among the image X, the expert-defined concepts Z for the whole class, and the generated
answer Y with explanations. Theoretically, the problem of finding the best Y ∗ is equivalent to
maximizing the three-way mutual information:
                                       max∗
                                            I(X; Y ; Z),                                     (7)
                                           Y
where Y ∗ captures the maximum amount of information from both the image and the expert-defined
concepts. However, directly optimizing this objective is intractable due to the high dimensionality
of X and Y (Poole et al., 2019). To make the problem manageable, we decompose it into two
subproblems corresponding to our two-step method.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In Step 1, we select a subset of concepts Algorithm 1 Iterative synthesis and fine-tuning.
Z ∗ ⊆ Z that maximizes I(X; Z ∗ ), capturing Require: Dataset D = {(Xi , ci )}N         i=1 , Concept
the most relevant concepts for the image. This                              |C|
                                                     Sets Z = {Zi }i=1 of every label, Pre-
aligns with the Information Bottleneck princi-       trained LMM fθ0 , synthetic query set Q =
ple, where Z ∗ serves as a distilled subset of Z
                                                     {qi }N
                                                          i=1 , Descriptive query qd
that retains maximal information about X. In
                                               ∗ Ensure: Fine-tuned LMM fθ for accurate, in-
Step 2, we select the generated explanation Y
                                                     terpretable explanations
that maximizes I(Y ∗ ; Z ∗ ), ensuring that the
                                                  1: Initialize training set D ∗ ← ∅
generated explanation closely aligns with the
                                                  2: for each (Xi , ci ) ∈ D do
selected concepts. With this decomposition, we
                                                  3:     Z ← Z[ci ]
establish a lower bound on the three-way mu-
                                                  4:     Di ← fθ0 (Xi , qd )
tual information (proof provided in appendix).
                                                  5:     for zj ∈ Z do
Theorem 2. Let X, Y , and Z be discrete ran- 6:               sij ← InfoNCE(Di , zj )
dom variables. Define:                            7:     end for
                                                  8:     µi ← mean({sij }), σi ← std({sij })
     Z ∗ = arg max I(X; Z ′ ) − βI(Z ′ ; Z)
                ′
              Z ⊆Z                                9:     Zi∗ ← {zj ∈ Z | sij > µi + βσi }
                                                 10:     yi ← assemble(Zi∗ )
     Y ∗ = arg max I(Y ′ ; Z ∗ )                 11:     D∗ ← D∗ ∪ {(Xi , qi , yi )}
              Y ′ ⊆Y
                                                 12: end for
Then, the following inequality holds:            13: FT: Fine-tune fθ0 on D ∗ to obtain fθ1
                                                 14: repeat
      I(X; Y ; Z) ≥                              15:     for each (Xi , ) ∈ D do
      I(Y ∗ ; Z ∗ ) + I(X; Z ∗ ) − I(Z ∗ ; Z).   16:          Yi ← fθT (Xi , qi )
                                                 17:          for yij ∈ Yi do
                                                 18:                s′ij ← InfoNCE(Zi∗ , yij )
This theoretical foundation justifies our two-   19:          end    for
                                                                ∗
step optimization process, ensuring that our     20:          y i   ←   arg maxyij s′ij
method effectively captures the essential infor- 21:          D ← D∗ ∪ {(Xi , qi , yi∗ )}
                                                                  ∗

mation shared among the image, concepts, and 22:         end for
explanations.                                    23:     Iterative FT: Fine-tune fθT on D∗
                                                 24: until Max iterations T m
                                                 25: return fθm
4 E XPERIMENTS
We conduct experiments to address the following questions. Q1: How effectively does our method
improve performance on fine-grained visual classification tasks? Q2: How does our method enhance
the explainability of the fine-tuned model? Q3: How does our concept selection strategy compare
to baseline methods? Q4: Does our training scheme mitigate shortcut learning? Q5: How usable is
our trained model?

4.1     E XPERIMENTS S ETTINGS

Implementation Details: We evaluated our approach on a variety of datasets, including fine-grained
classification datasets (CUB-200 (Wah et al., 2011), Stanford Dogs (Khosla et al., 2011), FGVC-
Aircraft (Maji et al., 2013)), medical datasets (HAM10000 (Tschandl et al., 2018), Chest X-Ray
for Pneumonia (Kermany et al., 2018)), and the Plant Disease Dataset (PLD) (Vipooool, 2020). By
testing on datasets from diverse domains, we demonstrate the versatility of our proposed frame-
work with self-synthesized data. Our experiments used LLava-1.5-7B (Liu et al., 2024a) as the base
LMM, and for the Chest X-Ray datasets, we employed its medical version (Li et al., 2024b). Ad-
ditionally, E5 (Wang et al., 2022) served as the embedding model. We fine-tuned the LMMs using
LoRA, focusing on all linear layers. Training was conducted on 8 H100 GPUs, utilizing Hugging-
Face (Wolf, 2019) and DeepSpeed frameworks for efficient distributed training and optimization.
Further details are provided in the appendix. We also provide our code here1 .
Baselines: Given the novel problem of generating interpretable answers without image-specific
annotations, we design the following baselines for comparisons: (1) Base LMM: Assesses the
base multimodal model’s performance in the zero-shot setting. (2) Naive Label Fine-tuning (NL):
   1
       https://github.com/sycny/SelfSynthX


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Table 1: Our method achieves superior accuracy and explanation quality across diverse datasets.
                                            Accuracy ↑                      Explanation          General
         Dataset       Method
                                            Per Iteration                     Quality            Ability
                                    1        2        3       4      EE ↑     CS ↑    FS ↓       MMMU ↑
                       Base        2.69      –        –       –      0.92      0.67       4.28    35.56
                       NL         73.42    78.25    79.94   82.21    0.00       –           –     35.67
        CUB-200
                       L+GE       61.48    72.23    73.23   73.06    1.00      0.70       6.84    34.89
                       Ours       80.24    83.76    84.69   85.02    1.00      0.82       6.53    35.00
                       Base        12.2      –        –       –      0.94      0.69       5.47    35.56
        Stanford       NL         82.73    82.34    84.03   84.27    0.00       –           –     34.67
          dogs         L+GE       73.45    77.89    78.15   76.55    1.00      0.77       7.50    34.56
                       Ours       85.29    86.75    86.86   86.91    1.00      0.86       7.41    34.56
                       Base        3.00      –        –       –      0.97      0.42       5.39    35.56
                       NL         83.47    87.28    87.82   87.73    0.00       –           –     35.56
        FGVC-A
                       L+GE       72.13    79.87    82.45   82.69     1.0      0.76       8.59    35.56
                       Ours       88.78    90.91    91.42   91.99     1.0      0.79       7.00    37.33
                       Base        0.00      –        –       –      0.95       –       –         35.56
                       NL         89.38    94.52    94.29   93.95    0.00       –       –         34.78
          PLD
                       L+GE       24.03    25.27    24.56   24.90    1.00      0.76   10.45       35.44
                       Ours       75.96    92.80    96.59   97.16    1.00      0.86   9.01        35.22
                       Base        1.62       –       –       –      0.98      0.63       3.93    35.56
                       NL         77.28    80.75    82.49   81.71    0.00       –           –     35.33
       HAM10000
                       L+GE       7.47      8.83     9.35    8.45    1.00      0.94       9.68    35.22
                       Ours       79.37    82.29    83.69   85.06    1.00      0.87       7.43    35.89
                       Base      62.50       –         –      –      1.00     0.24    3.49         –
       Chest X-ray
                       NL        85.58 89.10 85.90 89.58 0.00                   –       –          –
        Pneumonia
                       L+GE      62.50 62.50 62.98 62.66 1.00                 0.79    7.19         –
      (LLaVA-Med)
                       Ours      97.60 96.31 99.04 98.72 1.00                 0.87    8.25         –
      Base: original model; NL: only train with labels; L+GE: train with labels and general explanations

Fine-tunes the base model using only class labels and a simple template (e.g., “This is a picture of
{label}”). (3) Label with General Explanations (L+GE): We adopt the data synthesis approach
introduced in the LLaVA paper (Liu et al., 2024b) and (Kim & Ji, 2024), where training data is
generated using a language-only model (e.g., GPT-4), based on class labels and their corresponding
label-level knowledge. More details, including the prompts, are in the appendix.

4.2     RQ1: T RAINING ON OUR SYNTHETIC DATA IMPROVES CLASSIFICATION

We evaluated our model’s classification capabilities using a multi-round, progressive rejection sam-
pling training process comprising four iterations, each with two epochs. Classification accuracy was
measured after each iteration, with success defined as the presence of the ground truth label in the
model’s response (Kim & Ji, 2024). All trainable baselines were trained and evaluated under identi-
cal settings to ours for a fair comparison. More details on training are provided in the appendix.
Our proposed method achieves higher accuracy than both NL and L+GE baselines, as shown in Ta-
ble 1. While the baselines, particularly NL, exhibit overfitting, our method improves accuracy with
each iteration, demonstrating its effectiveness in fine-grained classification tasks. Our approach’s
resilience to overfitting stems from the use of rejection sampling, which generates a more diverse
training dataset. This expanded data pool enhances the model’s generalization capabilities. More-
over, training with our dataset, which includes specific visual features, helps the model learn more
detailed visual knowledge, contributing to further gains in classification performance. In contrast,
the L+GE baseline struggles with certain datasets, notably HAM10000, likely due to irrelevant
information in general explanations impeding effective learning. Moreover, we assessed the gen-
eral ability of the models using the MMMU metric (Yue et al., 2024) evaluated by the LMMs-eval
tool (Zhang et al., 2024). The results indicate that all trained models maintain comparable general
abilities to the base model, with negligible degradation. Note that the LMMs-eval tool does not sup-
port the LLaVA-Med model; therefore, the general ability metric is not reported. More experiment
results can be found in the appendix.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Ours: The specific name of this bird is the
           Rusty Blackbird. The Rusty Blackbird is a          Ours: "The specific name of this dog is a      Ours: The airplane shown in this image is a Cessna
                                                                                                             Citation. This conclusion is based on the visual features
           medium-sized blackbird with a slightly curved,     Tzu. The Tzu is a small, compact dog with
                                                                                                             of the aircraft, such as the short, rounded wing roots
           slender black bill. It is known for its rusty or   a square-like frame, short legs, and a short   connecting to the fuselage, the low-wing design, the
           brownish tones on its body, particularly in the    muzzle. The dog's hair is often tied up        distinctive nose with a slight downward curve, and the
           non-breeding season. The bird is often seen in     with a bow on top of the head, and it has a    retractable tricycle landing gear. These features are
           large flocks and is commonly found in wetland      distinctive undershot bite."                   characteristic of Cessna Citation aircraft, which are
           habitats.                                                                                         known for their performance, comfort, and reliability.


                                                              Ours: "The specific name of this dog is a      Ours: The airplane shown in this image is a Canadair
           Ours: The specific name of this bird is the
                                                              Tibetan Terrier. This breed is known for       CRJ-900. This conclusion is based on the following
           Western      Meadowlark.         The   Western                                                    visual features:\n\n1. The presence of two engines
                                                              its distinctive appearance, which includes
           Meadowlark is a small bird with a bright yellow                                                   mounted on the rear fuselage, which is a characteristic
                                                              a wide range of colors, a pronounced
           underbelly, a black \"V\" shape on the chest,                                                     feature of the CRJ-900.\n2. The slanted cockpit
           and a long, pointed bill. It is commonly found     beard and moustache, and a square              windshield with a modern, streamlined appearance,
           in the grasslands and meadows of the western       proportioned body. The dog in the image        which is consistent with the design of the CRJ-900.\n3.
                                                              has a black and white coat, which is a         The long, narrow fuselage with a sleek, aerodynamic
           United States.
                                                                                                             design, which is also a common feature of the CRJ-900.
                                                              common color pattern for this breed."

                                                              Stanford dogs                                         FGVC-A
                    Figure 4: Our generated answers contain detailed visual explanations.
4.3   RQ2: O UR METHOD PROVIDES HIGH - QUALITY EXPLANATION

Assessing the quality of generated explanations is challenging, especially without case-by-case
ground truth annotations (Ding et al., 2022; Schuff et al., 2022). Following Mohseni et al. (2021),
we evaluate our explanation from three aspects: explanation existence, cognition level, and fluency.
Explanation Existence (EE). This metric assesses a model’s capability to generate explanations (Xu
et al., 2023). Following Bills et al. (2023); Bricken et al. (2023), we employ an advanced proprietary
LLM (GPT-4o) to determine whether each model-generated answer includes an explanation. For-
mally, for a set of generated answers Y = {y1 , y2 , . . . , ynP
                                                               } queried by prompt like “What is the bird
                                                                 n
name? Provide your reason.”, EE is defined as: EE = n1 i=1 ei , where ei = 1 if the ith answer yi
includes an explanation, and ei = 0 otherwise. We provide the evaluation prompt in the appendix.
Results: As shown in Table 1, our method achieves an EE of 1.00 across all datasets, indicating that
it consistently produces explanations for its predictions. The base model can generate explanations
at most times but fails to do so in some cases. In contrast, the NL baseline records an EE of 0.00,
reflecting its inability to generate explanations due to training solely on class labels. The L+GE
method also attains an EE of 1.00 but falls short in other quality metrics compared to our approach.
Cognition Score (CS). This metric evaluates the coherence and logical flow of generated expla-
nations (Nourani et al., 2019; Fan et al., 2020). Following Liu et al. (2024e); Bills et al. (2023);
Lieberum et al. (2024), we employ an advanced proprietary LLM (GPT-4o) to assess the ratio-
nal integrity of explanations by analyzing their alignment with expert knowledge. For an an-
swer yi containing a label and explanation, we first extract label-level concepts Z correspond-
ing to the label. We then use an evaluation prompt to obtain a cognition score from LLM:
csi = LLM(yi , Z, Eval Prompt). The Eval Prompt is detailed in the appendix. Scores range from
0 to 1, with higher scores indicating better alignment with expert-predefined knowledge. We only
                                                                  P|Yc |
assess correct answers. The total CS is calculated as: CS = |Y1c | i=1   csi , where Yc is the set of
correct answers.
Results: Our method generally achieves higher CS values than the baselines, demonstrating superior
coherence and logical reasoning in the explanations. This improvement reflects the effectiveness
of our approach in generating explanations that are more useful and trustworthy to human users.
The reason behind our better cognition is that we select image-level concepts to build the training
dataset, rather than using all label-level features. This ensures that our model focuses on relevant
features present in the image and effectively connects the image content with expert-defined con-
cepts, avoiding distractions from irrelevant features not shown in the image.
Fluency Score (FS). This metric evaluates the grammatical correctness and naturalness of the ex-
planations (Liu et al., 2021). We use perplexity, a standard metric that measures how well a language
model predicts the text, with lower values indicating better fluency.
Results: Our method demonstrates good fluency in the generated explanations. The base model
receives the best fluency. This is because training on expert-level knowledge inevitably increases
the complexity of explanations, which can lead to higher perplexity scores. However, our method
generally achieves lower perplexity than the L+GE baseline, indicating that our explanations are
more natural, highlighting the robustness of our approach.
In summary, our proposed method not only enhances classification accuracy but also consistently
generates high-quality explanations that are coherent, logical, and fluent. We also show some quan-
titative results in our explanation in Figure 4. More results can be found in the appendix.


                                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.4       RQ3: E VALUATION ON I NTERPRETABLE C ONCEPTS S ELECTION

To evaluate the efficacy of our proposed model in select-
ing expert-defined features from images, we conducted a
                                                                  Concept Selection Precision
comprehensive study with human experts. Experts were
invited to identify and annotate the top-4 relevant con-     70
cepts for each image from a dataset of six bird species,


                                                                                          Precision (%)
providing ground truth annotations for our evaluation.       65
Our investigation examined two primary aspects: the ef-
fect of varying the number of descriptions on concept se-    60
                                                                                       Ours
lection performance, and a comparative analysis against                                LLaVA_select
several baseline methods. These baselines include GPT-       55                        GPT-4o_select
                                                                                       CLIP_select
4o for concept extraction, which relied on a carefully
crafted prompt to guide the model in identifying and re-        0    5    10   15     20    25 30
turning the four most probable concepts for each image.          Number of Descriptions per Image
We applied the same approach to the LLaVA model for
concept extraction. In contrast, for the CLIP model, con- Figure 5: Our method demonstrates
cept selection was performed by identifying top-4 con- superior precision in concept selection
cepts with the highest CLIPScore (Hessel et al., 2021) compared to applying GPT-4o.
relative to the target image.
We evaluated performance using precision, comparing model-selected concepts with human-
annotated ground truth. Results demonstrated that our model outperforms strong baselines in the
concept selection task. Its precision improves proportionally with the increased number of descrip-
tions, peaking at 72.89% with 25 descriptions. In contrast, GPT-4o maintained a relatively high
precision of 63.95%, while both LLaVA and CLIP showed weaker performances at approximately
55%. These findings highlight our model’s superior ability to leverage repeated sampled descrip-
tions for more accurate concept selection. We show some qualitative results in Figure 6, with more
in the appendix.
                                                           Ø Deep-set facial folds
                   Ø White crescent-shaped                 Ø Underbite, often noticeable when the                              Ø Yellowing of leaf margins and
                     markings around the eyes                mouth is closed                                                     interveinal areas
                                                           Ø Wrinkled short-muzzled face                                       Ø Overall reduced leaf size compared
                   Ø Dark sooty-brown plumage                                                                                    to healthy leaves
                                                           Ø Distinctive facial expression, often
                   Ø Dusky, almost black head                characterized as "worried" or "thoughtful"                        Ø Curling and distortion of leaf edges
                                                           Ø Round, prominent eyes
                                                           Ø Short, glossy coat                                                Ø Thickening of leaf texture
                   Ø Long, slender wings                   Ø Small, floppy ears, either rose-shaped                            Ø Curling and distortion of leaf edges
                   Ø Streamlined body                        or button-shaped                                                  Ø Increased prominence of veins,
                   Ø Often seen gliding with stiff         Ø Short, straight limbs                                               sometimes appearing as a mosaic
                     wing posture                          Ø Underbite, often noticeable when the                              Ø Upward or downward cupping of
                                                             mouth is closed                                                     leaves
                   Ø Subtle light streaks on               Ø Wrinkled short-muzzled face                                       Ø Leaves may appear more rigid and
 Sooty Albatross     upper wings                     Pug   Ø Square, sturdy build
                                                                                                          Tomato Yellow Leaf
                                                                                                          Curl Virus Disease     less flexible
                                                                                                                                    FGVC-A
                   Figure 6: Different image-level visual concepts for objects with the same label.
4.5       RQ4: V ISUALIZATION OF V ISUAL F OCUS OF LMM S

To interpret our model’s predictions, we visualize the outputs of LMMs using a gradient-based ex-
planation method (Wu et al., 2023). This approach identifies the image regions most influential in
generating the model’s answer by computing gradients of answer token probabilities with respect
to image pixels. Figure 7 presents case examples demonstrating that training on our synthetic an-
swers with cognitive explanations can effectively prevent the model from learning spurious features,
whereas directly linking images to naive labels may result in shortcut learning.

4.6       RQ5: E VALUATION ON U SABILITY

Previous LMMs often struggle with specialized questions due to difficulty recognizing domain-
specific objects. Our method enhances LMMs’ ability to identify specialized objects and provide
verifiable visual details, as demonstrated in Table 10. In Case 1, the LMM accurately identifies a bell
pepper leaf disease, describing specific visual cues such as brown necrotic spots and chlorosis. It
then recommends an appropriate treatment. In Case 2, the LMM correctly identifies a male Northern
Cardinal, noting distinctive features like its bright red plumage and black mask. These improvements
enable LMMs to serve as effective visual assistants in specialized domains, offering users accurate
and interpretable responses that can be verified against the provided images.


                                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Stanford dogs                         FGVC-A                                Chest-Xray


Figure 7: Visualization of heatmaps for different datasets. From left to right in each triplet: Original
Image, Heatmap of NL model, Heatmap of Ours.

    Table 2: LMMs fine-tuned with our method provide verifiable details, enhancing user trust.
                     User:    What is the name of this leaf disease? Can you give me your reason?
                     LMM:     The name of this leaf disease is Bell Pepper Leaf with Bacterial Spot Dis-
                              ease. The reason for this name is that the leaf has brown or black necrotic
                              spots, which are characteristic of bacterial infections. These spots can coalesce,
                              forming larger necrotic areas, and the leaf may exhibit chlorosis or yellowing
                              of surrounding leaf tissue. The spots are often located on the underside of the
                              leaf, and the leaf may become crinkled or deformed near affected areas.
                     User:    OK then, what chemical should I use to treat this disease?
                     LMM:     It is recommended to use a copper-based fungicide to treat this disease.
                     User:    Identify this bird. What features led to your conclusion?
                     LMM:     The bird is a male Northern Cardinal with a bright red plumage on its head,
                              throat, and chest. The presence of a crest on its head and a black ”mask” around
                              its eyes further supports the identification of this bird.
                     User:    Where can I find this bird?
                     LMM:     You can find this bird in the United States, specifically in the eastern and
                              central parts of the country. The Northern Cardinal is a common resident bird
                              in areas with dense woodlands, shrubs, and gardens.


5   R ELATED W ORK : S ELF - IMPROVEMENT AND DATA S YNTHESIS
In the field of LLMs, self-generated data has become a powerful tool for enhancing model per-
formance (Liu et al., 2024d). Researchers have explored various techniques, such as rejection
sampling (Touvron et al., 2023; Dubey et al., 2024), self-rewarding (Yuan et al., 2024), and self-
play (Chen et al., 2024c), enabling models to improve using synthetic data. Recent studies (Snell
et al., 2024; Brown et al., 2024) have proposed the “inference-time scaling law”, suggesting that in-
creasing inference samples size boosts the likelihood of generating high-quality data. Data synthesis
techniques have also been applied to LMMs, improving general vision tasks like visual question an-
swering (Zhou et al., 2024a; Deng et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024b) and enhancing
instruction-following capabilities (Luo et al., 2024). Our work extends this line of research by fo-
cusing on domain-specific visual classification to enable effective visual assistance in professional
tasks. In contrast to existing methods, we address the unique challenges of data synthesis in special-
ized domains, thereby extending these techniques to support expert-driven applications.

6   C ONCLUSION
In this work, we addressed LMMs’ limitations in domain-specific visual classification tasks by in-
troducing a novel framework that enhances their cognition and explainability through iterative fine-
tuning with self-synthesized interpretable answers. By applying the IB principle to select relevant
visual concepts without extensive image-specific annotations, our approach significantly improved
classification accuracy and explanation quality across various datasets. By enabling LMMs to gener-
ate accurate, interpretable explanations grounded in domain-specific visual features, our framework
advances their applicability in specialized domains, paving the way for more reliable multimodal
models in knowledge-intensive applications. Future work may explore more complex tasks than
classification tasks, and refinements to enhance scalability and generalizability.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work is, in part, supported by NSF (#IIS-2223768). Dr. Xiang Li is supported by the Google
Research Scholar Program. The views and conclusions in this paper are those of the authors and
should not be interpreted as representing any funding agencies.


R EFERENCES
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:23716–
  23736, 2022.

Steven Bills, Nick Cammarata, Dan Mossing, Henk Tillman, Leo Gao, Gabriel Goh, Ilya Sutskever,
  Jan Leike, Jeff Wu, and William Saunders. Language models can explain neurons in lan-
  guage models. URL https://openaipublic. blob. core. windows. net/neuron-explainer/paper/index.
  html.(Date accessed: 14.05. 2023), 2, 2023.

Trenton Bricken, Adly Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jermyn, Tom Con-
  erly, Nick Turner, Cem Anil, Carson Denison, Amanda Askell, Robert Lasenby, Yifan Wu,
  Shauna Kravec, Nicholas Schiefer, Tim Maxwell, Nicholas Joseph, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Alex
  Tamkin, Karina Nguyen, Brayden McLean, Josiah E Burke, Tristan Hume, Shan Carter,
  Tom Henighan, and Christopher Olah. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language
  models with dictionary learning. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2023. https://transformer-
  circuits.pub/2023/monosemantic-features/index.html.

Bradley Brown, Jordan Juravsky, Ryan Ehrlich, Ronald Clark, Quoc V Le, Christopher Ré, and
  Azalia Mirhoseini. Large language monkeys: Scaling inference compute with repeated sampling.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21787, 2024.

Dongping Chen, Ruoxi Chen, Shilin Zhang, Yinuo Liu, Yaochen Wang, Huichi Zhou, Qihui Zhang,
  Pan Zhou, Yao Wan, and Lichao Sun. Mllm-as-a-judge: Assessing multimodal llm-as-a-judge
  with vision-language benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04788, 2024a.

Lin Chen, Jinsong Li, Xiaoyi Dong, Pan Zhang, Yuhang Zang, Zehui Chen, Haodong Duan, Jiaqi
  Wang, Yu Qiao, Dahua Lin, et al. Are we on the right way for evaluating large vision-language
  models? arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.20330, 2024b.

Zixiang Chen, Yihe Deng, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, and Quanquan Gu. Self-play fine-tuning
  converts weak language models to strong language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01335,
  2024c.

Yihe Deng, Pan Lu, Fan Yin, Ziniu Hu, Sheng Shen, James Zou, Kai-Wei Chang, and Wei Wang. En-
  hancing large vision language models with self-training on image comprehension. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.19716, 2024.

Jacob Devlin. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

Weiping Ding, Mohamed Abdel-Basset, Hossam Hawash, and Ahmed M Ali. Explainability of
 artificial intelligence methods, applications and challenges: A comprehensive survey. Information
 Sciences, 615:238–292, 2022.

Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.

Ming Fan, Wenying Wei, Xiaofei Xie, Yang Liu, Xiaohong Guan, and Ting Liu. Can we trust your
 explanations? sanity checks for interpreters in android malware analysis. IEEE Transactions on
 Information Forensics and Security, 16:838–853, 2020.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chaoyou Fu, Peixian Chen, Yunhang Shen, Yulei Qin, Mengdan Zhang, Xu Lin, Zhenyu Qiu, Wei
  Lin, Jinrui Yang, Xiawu Zheng, et al. Mme: a comprehensive evaluation benchmark for multi-
  modal large language models. corr abs/2306.13394 (2023), 2023.

Jiahui Gao, Renjie Pi, Jipeng Zhang, Jiacheng Ye, Wanjun Zhong, Yufei Wang, Lanqing Hong,
   Jianhua Han, Hang Xu, Zhenguo Li, et al. G-llava: Solving geometric problem with multi-modal
   large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11370, 2023.

Gregor Geigle, Radu Timofte, and Goran Glavaš. African or european swallow? benchmarking large
  vision-language models for fine-grained object classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14496,
  2024.

Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel,
  Matthias Bethge, and Felix A Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature
  Machine Intelligence, 2(11):665–673, 2020.

Yu Gu, Robert Tinn, Hao Cheng, Michael Lucas, Naoto Usuyama, Xiaodong Liu, Tristan Naumann,
  Jianfeng Gao, and Hoifung Poon. Domain-specific language model pretraining for biomedical
  natural language processing. ACM Transactions on Computing for Healthcare (HEALTH), 3(1):
  1–23, 2021.

Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Clipscore: A
  reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08718, 2021.

Daniel S Kermany, Michael Goldbaum, Wenjia Cai, Carolina CS Valentim, Huiying Liang, Sally L
  Baxter, Alex McKeown, Ge Yang, Xiaokang Wu, Fangbing Yan, et al. Identifying medical diag-
  noses and treatable diseases by image-based deep learning. cell, 172(5):1122–1131, 2018.

Aditya Khosla, Nityananda Jayadevaprakash, Bangpeng Yao, and Li Fei-Fei. Novel dataset for fine-
  grained image categorization. In First Workshop on Fine-Grained Visual Categorization, IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Colorado Springs, CO, June 2011.

Jeonghwan Kim and Heng Ji. Finer: Investigating and enhancing fine-grained visual concept recog-
  nition in large vision language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16315, 2024.

Bohao Li, Yuying Ge, Yi Chen, Yixiao Ge, Ruimao Zhang, and Ying Shan. Seed-bench-2-plus:
  Benchmarking multimodal large language models with text-rich visual comprehension. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2404.16790, 2024a.

Chunyuan Li, Cliff Wong, Sheng Zhang, Naoto Usuyama, Haotian Liu, Jianwei Yang, Tristan Nau-
  mann, Hoifung Poon, and Jianfeng Gao. Llava-med: Training a large language-and-vision assis-
  tant for biomedicine in one day. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024b.

Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 12888–12900. PMLR, 2022.

Tom Lieberum, Senthooran Rajamanoharan, Arthur Conmy, Lewis Smith, Nicolas Sonnerat, Vikrant
  Varma, János Kramár, Anca Dragan, Rohin Shah, and Neel Nanda. Gemma scope: Open sparse
  autoencoders everywhere all at once on gemma 2. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.05147, 2024.

Ji Lin, Hongxu Yin, Wei Ping, Pavlo Molchanov, Mohammad Shoeybi, and Song Han. Vila: On pre-
   training for visual language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
   Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 26689–26699, 2024.

Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, and Yong Jae Lee. Improved baselines with visual instruction
  tuning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, pp. 26296–26306, 2024a.

Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 36, 2024b.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jiacheng Liu, Alisa Liu, Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Peter West, Ronan Le Bras, Yejin Choi, and Han-
   naneh Hajishirzi. Generated knowledge prompting for commonsense reasoning. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2110.08387, 2021.
Mingxuan Liu, Subhankar Roy, Wenjing Li, Zhun Zhong, Nicu Sebe, and Elisa Ricci. Democratiz-
 ing fine-grained visual recognition with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.13837,
 2024c.
Ruibo Liu, Jerry Wei, Fangyu Liu, Chenglei Si, Yanzhe Zhang, Jinmeng Rao, Steven Zheng, Daiyi
  Peng, Diyi Yang, Denny Zhou, et al. Best practices and lessons learned on synthetic data for
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07503, 2024d.
Yuan Liu, Haodong Duan, Yuanhan Zhang, Bo Li, Songyang Zhang, Wangbo Zhao, Yike Yuan,
  Jiaqi Wang, Conghui He, Ziwei Liu, et al. Mmbench: Is your multi-modal model an all-around
  player? In European conference on computer vision, pp. 216–233. Springer, 2024e.
Run Luo, Haonan Zhang, Longze Chen, Ting-En Lin, Xiong Liu, Yuchuan Wu, Min Yang,
  Minzheng Wang, Pengpeng Zeng, Lianli Gao, et al. Mmevol: Empowering multimodal large
  language models with evol-instruct. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.05840, 2024.
S. Maji, J. Kannala, E. Rahtu, M. Blaschko, and A. Vedaldi. Fine-grained visual classification of
   aircraft. Technical report, 2013.
Sina Mohseni, Niloofar Zarei, and Eric D Ragan. A multidisciplinary survey and framework for
  design and evaluation of explainable ai systems. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent
  Systems (TiiS), 11(3-4):1–45, 2021.
Mahsan Nourani, Samia Kabir, Sina Mohseni, and Eric D Ragan. The effects of meaningful and
 meaningless explanations on trust and perceived system accuracy in intelligent systems. In Pro-
 ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing, volume 7, pp.
 97–105, 2019.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Ben Poole, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Van Den Oord, Alex Alemi, and George Tucker. On variational
  bounds of mutual information. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5171–
  5180. PMLR, 2019.
Hendrik Schuff, Heike Adel, Peng Qi, and Ngoc Thang Vu. Challenges in explanation quality
  evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07126, 2022.
Yucheng Shi, Yushun Dong, Qiaoyu Tan, Jundong Li, and Ninghao Liu. Gigamae: Generalizable
  graph masked autoencoder via collaborative latent space reconstruction. In Proceedings of the
  32nd ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pp. 2259–
  2269, 2023.
Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling llm test-time compute optimally
  can be more effective than scaling model parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03314, 2024.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Naftali Tishby, Fernando C Pereira, and William Bialek. The information bottleneck method. arXiv
  preprint physics/0004057, 2000.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Philipp Tschandl, Cliff Rosendahl, and Harald Kittler. The ham10000 dataset, a large collection of
  multi-source dermatoscopic images of common pigmented skin lesions. Scientific data, 5(1):1–9,
  2018.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Vipooool. New plant diseases dataset. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
  vipoooool/new-plant-diseases-dataset, 2020. Accessed: 2024-09-25.
C. Wah, S. Branson, P. Welinder, P. Perona, and S. Belongie. Cub-200. Technical Report CNS-TR-
  2011-001, California Institute of Technology, 2011.
Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Binxing Jiao, Linjun Yang, Daxin Jiang, Rangan Ma-
  jumder, and Furu Wei. Text embeddings by weakly-supervised contrastive pre-training. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2212.03533, 2022.
T Wolf. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.
Xuansheng Wu, Wenlin Yao, Jianshu Chen, Xiaoman Pan, Xiaoyang Wang, Ninghao Liu, and Dong
  Yu. From language modeling to instruction following: Understanding the behavior shift in llms
  after instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.00492, 2023.
Lin Xu, Zhiyuan Hu, Daquan Zhou, Hongyu Ren, Zhen Dong, Kurt Keutzer, See-Kiong Ng, and
  Jiashi Feng. Magic: Investigation of large language model powered multi-agent in cognition,
  adaptability, rationality and collaboration. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Large Language Model
  (LLM) Agents, 2023.
Weizhe Yuan, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Kyunghyun Cho, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jing Xu, and Jason
 Weston. Self-rewarding language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10020, 2024.
Xiang Yue, Yuansheng Ni, Kai Zhang, Tianyu Zheng, Ruoqi Liu, Ge Zhang, Samuel Stevens,
  Dongfu Jiang, Weiming Ren, Yuxuan Sun, et al. Mmmu: A massive multi-discipline multi-
  modal understanding and reasoning benchmark for expert agi. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9556–9567, 2024.
Kaichen Zhang, Bo Li, Peiyuan Zhang, Fanyi Pu, Joshua Adrian Cahyono, Kairui Hu, Shuai Liu,
  Yuanhan Zhang, Jingkang Yang, Chunyuan Li, and Ziwei Liu. Lmms-eval: Reality check on
  the evaluation of large multimodal models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.
  12772.
Yiyang Zhou, Chenhang Cui, Rafael Rafailov, Chelsea Finn, and Huaxiu Yao. Aligning modalities
  in vision large language models via preference fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11411,
  2024a.
Yiyang Zhou, Zhiyuan Fan, Dongjie Cheng, Sihan Yang, Zhaorun Chen, Chenhang Cui, Xiyao
  Wang, Yun Li, Linjun Zhang, and Huaxiu Yao. Calibrated self-rewarding vision language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14622, 2024b.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     T HEORETICAL P ROOF ON T HEOREM 1
Theorem 3. Let X be the true image content with label c and D = {d1 , d2 , . . . , dn } be independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples from P (D|X). Let Z be an expert-defined concept list
about label c. Under the assumptions of conditional independence and convergence (Assumptions 1
and 2), as n → ∞, the mutual information I(D; Z) converges to I(X; Z):
                                       lim I(D; Z) = I(X; Z).
                                     n→∞


Proof. We proceed with the following steps:

A.1   A SSUMPTIONS

Assumption 1. Conditional Independence: d1 , d2 , . . . , dn are conditionally independent of Z given
X.
Assumption 2. Convergence of Mutual Information: As n → ∞, the mutual information between
D and X converges to the entropy of X:
                                    lim I(D; X) = H(X)
                                      n→∞


A.2   P ROOF S TEPS

      1. Mutual Information Expression: We start with the definition of mutual information:
                                     I(D; Z) = H(D) − H(D|Z)

      2. Expanding H(D|Z) Using the Chain Rule: Apply the chain rule for entropy:
                             H(D|Z) = H(D|Z, X) + H(X|Z) − H(X|D, Z)
         Substituting this back into the mutual information expression:
                        I(D; Z) = H(D) − [H(D|Z, X) + H(X|Z) − H(X|D, Z)]

      3. Applying Conditional Independence: By Assumption 1, we have:
                                       H(D|Z, X) = H(D|X)
         Therefore,
                       I(D; Z) = H(D) − H(D|X) − H(X|Z) + H(X|D, Z)
         Recognizing I(D; X) = H(D) − H(D|X), we have:
                            I(D; Z) = I(D; X) − H(X|Z) + H(X|D, Z)

      4. Taking the Limit as n → ∞: Apply the limit to both sides:
                        lim I(D; Z) = lim [I(D; X) − H(X|Z) + H(X|D, Z)]
                        n→∞               n→∞

         By Assumption 2, we have:
                                            lim I(D; X) = H(X)
                                           n→∞

         For the term H(X|D, Z), we argue that:
                                        lim H(X|D, Z) = 0
                                            n→∞
         This follows from Assumption 2, as it implies that D becomes a sufficient statistic for X
         as n → ∞. Therefore, conditioning on Z does not add any information about X once we
         have D.
      5. Conclusion: Substituting these limits into our equation:
                            lim I(D; Z) = H(X) − H(X|Z) + 0 = I(X; Z)
                            n→∞

This demonstrates that as the number of sampled descriptions n increases indefinitely, the mutual
information between the aggregated descriptions D and the human concepts Z converges to the
mutual information between the true image content X and Z.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3     A DDITIONAL N OTES

A.3.1    C ONVERGENCE OF I(D; X) TO H(X)
The statement:
                                        lim I(D; X) = H(X)
                                        n→∞

This is directly from Assumption 2. To understand its implications:

        • Recall that mutual information is defined as: I(D; X) = H(X) − H(X|D)
        • For this equality to hold as n → ∞, it must be true that:
                                                  lim H(X|D) = 0
                                                  n→∞

        • This means that as we gather more samples (D), we eliminate all uncertainty about X.
        • In other words, with infinite samples, D contains all information about X.

A.3.2    C ONVERGENCE OF H(X|D, Z) TO 0
The statement:
                                         lim H(X|D, Z) = 0
                                        n→∞

This follows from the previous point. Here’s the reasoning:

        • We’ve established that as n → ∞, D contains all information about X.
        • This means D becomes a sufficient statistic for X.
        • A sufficient statistic contains all the information that the sample provides about the param-
          eter (in this case, X).
        • Therefore, once we know D, knowing Z doesn’t provide any additional information about
          X.
        • Mathematically, this means: H(X|D, Z) = H(X|D)
        • But we know from the first part that limn→∞ H(X|D) = 0
        • Thus, limn→∞ H(X|D, Z) = 0

B     T HEORETICAL P ROOF ON T HEOREM 2
Theorem 4. Let X, Y , and Z be discrete random variables. Define:
                                Z ∗ = arg max I(X; Z ′ ) − βI(Z ′ ; Z)
                                         Z ′ ⊆Z

                                Y = arg max I(Y ′ ; Z ∗ )
                                  ∗
                                         Y ′ ⊆Y

Then, the following inequality holds:
                         I(X; Y ; Z) ≥ I(Y ∗ ; Z ∗ ) + I(X; Z ∗ ) − I(Z ∗ ; Z).                     (8)
where I(·; ·) denotes mutual information and H(·) denotes entropy.

Proof. We prove this theorem using fundamental principles of information theory:

      1. Recall the definition of multivariate mutual information:
                                      I(X; Y ; Z) = I(X; Y ) − I(X; Y |Z)                           (9)

      2. By the chain rule of mutual information (Shi et al., 2023), we can rewrite this as:
                               I(X; Y ; Z) = I(X; Z) + I(Y ; Z) − I(X, Y ; Z)                     (10)


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     3. Consider our subsets Z ∗ and Y ∗ . By definition of mutual information and the data process-
        ing inequality:
                                           I(Y ∗ ; Z ∗ ) ≤ I(Y ; Z ∗ )                         (11)
                                            I(X; Z ∗ ) ≤ I(X; Z)                               (12)

     4. Substituting these into our equation:
                           I(X; Y ; Z) ≥ I(X; Z ∗ ) + I(Y ∗ ; Z ∗ ) − I(X, Y ; Z)              (13)

     5. For any random variables A and B:
                                      I(A; B) ≤ min(H(A), H(B))                                (14)
        Therefore:
                            I(X, Y ; Z) ≤ min(H(X, Y ), H(Z)) ≤ I(Z ∗ ; Z)                     (15)

     6. Applying this to our inequality:
                            I(X; Y ; Z) ≥ I(X; Z ∗ ) + I(Y ∗ ; Z ∗ ) − I(Z ∗ ; Z)              (16)

     7. Therefore, we can conclude:
                            I(X; Y ; Z) ≥ I(Y ∗ ; Z ∗ ) + I(X; Z ∗ ) − I(Z ∗ ; Z)              (17)


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    P ROMPTS FOR DIFFERENT TASKS
E XAMPLE P ROMPT FOR B IRD I MAGE D ESCRIPTION IN CUB-200

 Prompt 1        Focus solely on the bird shown in the image. Describe the bird’s appearance in detail,
                 emphasizing its most prominent physical features. Avoid mentioning the background
                 or other elements not related to the bird.
 Prompt 2        Provide a focused analysis of the bird in this image, detailing its distinctive physical
                 features. Concentrate exclusively on the bird and describe its appearance without
                 referencing the surroundings or any extraneous details.
 Prompt 3        Directly observe the bird depicted and offer a precise description of its visual
                 attributes. Ensure your description is limited to the bird itself, detailing its primary
                 features and omitting any unrelated background elements.

                  Table 3: Prompts for bird image analysis in CUB-200 dataset


E XAMPLE R EWRITE P ROMPTS FOR D IFFERENT DATASETS

 Dataset              Prompt
                      This is a picture of a {label} with the following visual features:
 cub-200 /            {concepts str}. Based on the information provided, please answer the
 stanford dogs        following question.
                      Question: ’{query}’
                      This is a dermatoscopic image of {label} disease with the following visual
                      features: {concepts str}. Based on the information provided, please
 HAM10000
                      answer the following question.
                      Question: ’{query}’
                      This is a picture of {label} with the following visual features:
                      {concepts str}. Based on the information provided, please answer the
 PLD / fgvc
                      following question.
                      Question: ’{query}’
                      This is a chest-xray of {label} with the following visual features:
                      {concepts str}. Based on the information provided, please answer the
 chest-xray
                      following question.
                      Question: ’{query}’

                     Table 4: Answer rewrite prompts for different datasets.


L+GE SYNTHESIZE PROMPT E XAMPLE

 Dataset                  Prompt
                          There is a picture of a {label}, which is known for the following
                          characteristics: {concepts str}.
 L+GE synthesize
                          Act as if you can see the picture. Please answer the following question
 prompt
                          based on the above information. Make your answer concise.
                          Question: ’{query}’
                          Answer:

Table 5: Prompt for answering questions based on image characteristics for general image datasets.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E VALUATION P ROMPTS FOR E XPLANATION E XISTENCE (EE) AND C OGNITION S CORE (CS)

 Prompt Type         Prompt
                     Determine whether the following answer contains a valid explanation
                     supporting its conclusion. Respond with only ’true’ or ’false’.
 EE Prompt
                     Answer: {answer}

                     Contains an explanation?
                     Evaluate the coherence and logical alignment of the following explanation
                     with the provided concepts. Please note: the explanation does not need to
                     fully encompass all concepts.

                     Assign a consistency score between 0 and 1, where 1 indicates the
                     explanation contains no irrelevant information to the listed concepts, and 0
 CS Prompt
                     indicates complete misalignment with entirely irrelevant information.
                     Only give the score.

                     Concepts: {concepts formatted}
                     Explanation: {explanation}

                     Consistency Score:

          Table 6: Prompts for Explanation Existence (EE) and Cognition Score (CS).


C ONCEPT E XTRACTION P ROMPTS

To obtain label-level concepts, we used GPT-4o with prompts designed to elicit detailed visual
features associated with each class label. An example prompt is:

 Prompt Type         Prompt
 Concept             Please provide a list of visual characteristics that are commonly associated
 Extraction          with the bird species {Class Name}. Include features such as color
 Prompt              patterns, shapes, and distinctive markings.

                           Table 7: Prompts for Concept Extraction.


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D       E XPERIMENTS D ETAILS
D.1      T RAINING F RAMEWORK I MPLEMENTATION

Our experimental setup leverages state-of-the-art techniques for fine-tuning the LLaVA-1.5-7B
model. We initialize the model using pre-trained weights obtained from the Hugging Face model
hub2 . Our training process uses the SFTTrainer for supervised fine-tuning and implement Low-
Rank Adaptation (LoRA) to achieve efficient parameter fine-tuning. In our configuration, we set the
LoRA rank (r) to 128, the scaling factor (α) to 256, and the dropout rate to 0.1. We fine tune model
on a mixure of our domain-specific synthetic data with LLaVA-1.5’s original general instruction-
following training data to stabilize training without introducing additional data. We enable gradient
checkpointing to reduce memory usage, allowing us to process larger batch sizes by not storing
all intermediate activations. In addition, we employ DeepSpeed ZeRO Stage 3 to fully utilize our
multi-GPU configuration. We also utilize mixed precision training with the BF16 format, which
further reduces memory requirements while maintaining computational performance. Gradient ac-
cumulation is implemented with 2 steps and a per-device train batch size of 16. Moreover, slight
data augmentation are applied to the image data to create diversity and enhance training robustness.

D.2      DATASET OVERVIEW AND E XPERIMENTAL RUNNING T IMES

                              Table 8: Summary of Selected Datasets

    Dataset Name         Test / Training Cases     Label Categories      Running Time Per Iter
    CUB-200-2011             5,794 / 5,994               200                 143 minutes
    FGVC-Aircraft            3,333 / 6,667               100                 171 minutes
    Stanford Dogs           8,580 / 12,000               120                 310 minutes
    Chest X-ray images         624 / 5,216                 2                 113 minutes
    HAM1000                  5,008 / 5,007                 7                 107 minutes
    PLD                     47,523 / 5,279                37                 109 minutes

We use the original labels and train/test split from the original datasets. Detailed train/test data
statics are reported in Table 8. Regarding the experiments running time, each iteration of rejection
sampling and fine-tuning took approximately 2.5 hours on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU for datasets
like CUB-200 and FGVC-Aircraft. A more detailed report can be found in Table 8.

E       V ISUALIZATION R ESULTS


    2
        https://huggingface.co/llava-hf/llava-1.5-7b-hf


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Table 9: Generated Answer Examples.
                   User:     Based on the visual content, what is the specific name of this bird? Provide an
                             explanation.
                   LMM:      The specific name of this bird is the Yellow breasted Chat. This bird is known
                             for its bright yellow throat and chest, olive-green back, wings, and tail, and
                             short, rounded wings. It is a small bird that is commonly found in the Americas,
                             particularly in the United States and Canada.
                   User:     Based on the visual content, what is the specific name of this bird? Provide an
                             explanation.
                   LMM:      The specific name of this bird is the Blue Grosbeak. The Blue Grosbeak is a
                             small, colorful bird with a deep blue overall plumage in males and a brown over-
                             all coloration with subtle blue tinges and faint streaking in females. The bird
                             has a slightly glossy sheen to its blue feathers and is known for its melodious
                             songs.
                   User:     Based on the visual content, what is the specific name of this bird? Provide an
                             explanation.
                   LMM:      The specific name of this bird is the Orchard Oriole. The bird has a black head,
                             back, throat, and upper chest, with a rich chestnut-brown underparts. It has a
                             black tail and a black throat patch developing. The bird’s wings are black with
                             white wing bars, and it has a black bill. The Orchard Oriole is a small bird with
                             a distinctive appearance, and it is known for its melodious songs.
                   User:     Based on the visual content, what is the specific name of this bird? Provide an
                             explanation.
                   LMM:      The specific name of this bird is the Black throated Sparrow. This bird is
                             known for its distinctive black throat patch and white stripe below its eyes. It is
                             a small bird with a brown and white coloration, and it is often seen perched on
                             branches or low vegetation.


                   User:     Based on the visual content, what is the specific name of this bird? Provide an
                             explanation.
                   LMM:      The specific name of this bird is the Henslow Sparrow. This bird is known for
                             its olive-colored head, short, pointed bill, and pale eye-ring. It is a small bird
                             with a brown and white coloration, and it is often seen flitting low in dense
                             grassy habitats.


F     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

F.1   I MPACT ON G ENERAL A BILITIES

To assess the effect of our proposed training method on the general abilities of the models, we
conducted evaluations on four widely used multimodal benchmarks: MMStar, SEED-Bench-2 Plus,
MMBench, and MME (Cognition). Table 11 summarizes the results.

• MMStar (Chen et al., 2024b): MMStar is a benchmark designed to evaluate vision-indispensable
  multimodal capabilities of MLLMs. It comprises 1,500 high-quality samples selected through a
  meticulous process from an initial pool of 22,401 samples. The benchmark assesses six core ca-
  pabilities, each containing 250 samples, distributed across 18 detailed axes. This structure ensures
  a comprehensive evaluation of models’ performance in tasks that require visual understanding.
• SEED-Bench-2 Plus (Li et al., 2024a): SEED-Bench-2 Plus is specifically designed to evalu-
  ate text-rich visual comprehension in MLLMs. It features 2,300 multiple-choice questions with
  precise human annotations, spanning three broad categories: Charts, Maps, and Webs. These
  categories encompass a wide spectrum of real-world text-rich scenarios, effectively simulating
  environments where visual and textual information are intertwined. The benchmark aims to as-
  sess models’ proficiency in interpreting complex visual data embedded with textual content.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Table 10: Selected Concepts Examples.
                   Concepts: ”Powerful, thick neck”
                             ”Broad and strong back”
                             ”Large and muscular build”
                             ”Well-sprung ribs”

                   Concepts: ”Pure white or cream-colored fur”
                             ”Well-feathered tail that blends with the body fur”
                             ”Strong, straight legs”
                             ”Broad head with a slightly rounded skull”


                   Concepts: ”Straight, arched tail that rests on the back”
                             ”Broad, flat skull”
                             ”Thick double coat, either rough or smooth”


                   Concepts: ”Deep-set, almond-shaped eyes”
                             ”Erect, triangular ears”
                             ”Thick ruff of fur around the neck”
                             ”Thick double coat, either rough or smooth”


                   Concepts: ”Ears: Large, bat-like ears that stand erect and move attentively.”
                             ”Distinctive facial features: Elongated muzzle with a moderate stop and expres-
                             sive eyes.”
                             ”Whiskers: Short or absent due to the lack of hair follicles around the muzzle
                             area.”


• MMBench (Liu et al., 2024e): MMBench is a comprehensive benchmark that evaluates MLLMs
  across 20 ability dimensions. It includes approximately 3,000 multiple-choice questions, each
  with a single correct answer. MMBench addresses limitations of traditional benchmarks by focus-
  ing on fine-grained abilities and introducing robust evaluation strategies. The benchmark employs
  ChatGPT to match a model’s prediction with the choices of a question, providing a more reliable
  assessment of model performance.

• MME (Cognition) (Fu et al., 2023): MME (Cognition) benchmark evaluates the cognitive abili-
  ties of MLLMs through tasks requiring reasoning and understanding of visual and textual inputs.
  The cognition part includes four subtasks: Commonsense Reasoning, Numerical Calculation, Text
  Translation, and Code Reasoning. These tasks test the model’s ability to integrate multimodal in-
  formation, such as interpreting visual scenes, performing arithmetic based on images, translating
  text in images, and reasoning about code snippets. The dataset consists of carefully curated images
  and instruction-answer pairs to ensure robust and fair assessment.


As shown in Table 11, the fine-tuned models exhibit improved performance across multiple bench-
marks. Notably, the model fine-tuned on HAM10000 achieves a significant overall improvement of
12.9%, indicating that our training method enhances domain-specific cognition without compromis-
ing and, in some cases, improves the models’ general abilities.


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 11: General ability evaluation across additional benchmarks. The results demonstrate that
our fine-tuned models not only retain their general abilities but also achieve overall improvements
compared to the base LLaVA-1.5 model.

   Model                          MMStar        SEED-Bench-2 Plus         MMBench       MME (Cognition)         Overall Improvement
   LLaVA-1.5 (Base)                   34.46             41.81              63.05                334.28                       –
   Trained on CUB-200                 33.40             41.78              63.14                355.00                 3.2% ↑
   Trained on Stanford Dogs           34.93             40.97              63.06                365.71                 8.3% ↑
   Trained on FGVC-Aircraft           35.14             40.14              63.23                348.57                 2.1% ↑
   Trained on PLD                     35.30             40.89              63.14                337.14                 1.1% ↑
   Trained on HAM10000                34.46             41.11              64.08                378.21                12.9% ↑



F.2     E FFECTIVENESS OF F ILTERING S TRATEGIES

To evaluate the importance of our reward model-free rejection sampling method described in Sec-
tion 3.3, we conducted an ablation study comparing our approach with a baseline that does not
employ the filtering mechanism. In this baseline, the model generates the most probable responses
during each iteration, which are used directly for training without any filtering. Table 12 presents the
classification accuracy and cognition score (CS) across four iterations for both the baseline without
filtering and our proposed method.

Table 12: Comparison of accuracy and cognition scores (CS) for the baseline without filtering and
our proposed method across iterations.

  Dataset               Method          Accuracy (Iter 1)    Accuracy (Iter 2)     Accuracy (Iter 3)     Accuracy (Iter 4)       CS Score
                      w/o Filtering           68.90               70.11                 70.85                 70.45                0.71
  CUB-200
                          Ours                80.24               83.76                 84.69                 85.02                0.82
                      w/o Filtering           76.36               76.60                 77.11                 76.78                0.72
  FGVC-Aircraft
                          Ours                88.78               90.91                 91.42                 91.99                0.79
                      w/o Filtering           76.60               78.53                 78.61                 78.26                0.74
  Stanford Dogs
                          Ours                85.29               86.75                 86.86                 86.91                0.86
                      w/o Filtering           61.19               63.74                 62.32                 62.59                0.66
  PLD
                          Ours                75.96               92.80                 96.59                 97.16                0.86
                      w/o Filtering           71.79               72.10                 72.34                 72.29                0.75
  HAM10000
                          Ours                79.37               82.29                 83.69                 85.06                0.87


From Table 12, it is evident that our filtering strategy significantly enhances both classification
accuracy and explanation quality, as measured by the CS score. The baseline without filtering shows
marginal improvements initially but fails to achieve comparable performance to our method. This
demonstrates the critical role of our filtering mechanism in refining synthetic data and improving
the model’s performance iteratively.

F.3     I MPACT OF T EXT E NCODER

Our framework relies on a text embedding model for estimating mutual information during con-
cept selection (Section 3.2). To assess the impact of different text encoders on concept selection
accuracy, we compared three models: E5 (Wang et al., 2022), BERT-Large (Devlin, 2018), and
BERT-Base (Devlin, 2018). The results are presented in Table 13.

                   Table 13: Concept selection accuracy using different text encoders.

                                      Text Encoder          Concept Selection Accuracy (%)
                                      E5                                     72.9
                                      BERT-Large                             71.4
                                      BERT-Base                              69.7

As shown in Table 13, the E5 model achieves the highest concept selection accuracy. This indicates
that using a more powerful text embedding model improves the quality of concept selection, which
in turn enhances the effectiveness of our overall framework.


                                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.4   C ROSS -DATASET T RANSFER P ERFORMANCE

We conducted experiments to evaluate the cross-dataset transferability of our method. Specifically,
we trained the model on the CUB-200 dataset and evaluated its performance on the Stanford Dogs
dataset. The results are shown in Table 14.
Table 14: Cross-dataset transfer performance when training on CUB-200 and evaluating on Stanford
Dogs.

                          Training Dataset         Evaluation Dataset              Accuracy (%)
                          None                         Stanford Dogs                  12.20
                          CUB-200                      Stanford Dogs                  16.60
                          Stanford Dogs                Stanford Dogs                  86.91


The results in Table 14 indicate that training on CUB-200 provides a marginal improvement when
evaluated on Stanford Dogs. However, the performance remains significantly lower than when the
model is trained directly on Stanford Dogs. This suggests that while our method may improve
general cognition to some extent, domain-specific fine-tuning is crucial for achieving high accuracy
in specialized tasks.

F.5   E XPLANATION Q UALITY I MPROVEMENT ACROSS I TERATIONS

To assess the benefits of our iterative fine-tuning approach, we evaluated the Cognition Score (CS)
of the models across four iterations for various datasets. The results are summarized in Table 15.
Table 15: Cognition Scores (CS) across iterations for various datasets. The CS Improvement repre-
sents the percentage increase from Iteration 1 to Iteration 4.

      Dataset         CS Value (Iter 1)   CS Value (Iter 2)    CS Value (Iter 3)    CS Value (Iter 4)   CS Improvement
      CUB-200               0.77                0.76                 0.78                 0.82             6.5% ↑
      Stanford Dogs         0.82                0.84                 0.83                 0.86             4.9% ↑
      FGVC-Aircraft         0.78                0.78                 0.78                 0.79             1.3% ↑
      PLD                   0.84                0.85                 0.85                 0.86             2.4% ↑
      HAM10000              0.77                0.84                 0.83                 0.87             13.0% ↑
      Chest X-ray           0.67                0.80                 0.81                 0.87             29.9% ↑


As observed in Table 15, the CS scores generally improve over iterations, indicating that our iterative
fine-tuning process enhances the explanation quality of the models. The most significant improve-
ments are seen in the HAM10000 and Chest X-ray datasets, with 13.0% and 29.9 % reported.


                                                              24
