Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


CPS AMPLE : C LASSIFIER P ROTECTED S AMPLING FOR
G UARDING T RAINING DATA D URING D IFFUSION
 Joshua Kazdan1 , Hao Sun2 , Jiaqi Han2 , Felix Petersen2 , Frederick Vu3 , Stefano Ermon2
 1
   Department of Statistics, Stanford University
 2
   Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
 3
   Department of Mathematics, UCLA



                                             A BSTRACT

         Diffusion models have a tendency to exactly replicate their training data, especially
         when trained on small datasets. Most prior work has sought to mitigate this problem
         by imposing differential privacy constraints or masking parts of the training data,
         resulting in a notable substantial decrease in image quality. We present CPSample,
         a method that modifies the sampling process to prevent training data replication
         while preserving image quality. CPSample utilizes a classifier that is trained to
         overfit on random binary labels attached to the training data. CPSample then uses
         classifier guidance to steer the generation process away from the set of points
         that can be classified with high certainty, a set that includes the training data.
         CPSample achieves FID scores of 4.97 and 2.97 on CIFAR-10 and CelebA-64,
         respectively, without producing exact replicates of the training data. Unlike prior
         methods intended to guard the training images, CPSample only requires training a
         classifier rather than retraining a diffusion model, which is computationally cheaper.
         Moreover, our technique provides diffusion models with greater robustness against
         membership inference attacks, wherein an adversary attempts to discern which
         images were in the model’s training dataset. We show that CPSample behaves like
         a built-in rejection sampler, and we demonstrate its capabilities to prevent mode
         collapse in Stable Diffusion.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Diffusion models are an emerging method of image generation that have surpassed GANs on many
common benchmarks (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), achieving state-of-the-art FID scores on CIFAR-
10 (Krizhevsky, 2009), CelebA (Liu et al., 2015), ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009), and other touchstone
datasets. Although their capabilities are impressive, diffusion models still suffer from the tendency
to exactly replicate images found in their training sets (Carlini et al., 2021; Jagielski et al., 2023;
Somepalli et al., 2023a). This problem is especially pronounced when the training set contains
duplicates (Webster et al., 2023). Given that diffusion models are sometimes trained on sensitive
content, such as patient data (Kazerouni et al., 2023; Pinaya et al., 2022) or copyrighted data (Dhariwal
& Nichol, 2021), this behavior is generally unacceptable. Indeed, Google, Midjourney, and Stability
AI are already facing lawsuits for using copyrighted data to train image generation models (Brittain,
2023; 2024), some of which exactly replicate images from their training data during inference (Marcus
& Southen, 2024).
The strongest formal guarantee against replicating or revealing training data is differential privacy
(DP) (Dwork & Roth, 2014). Unfortunately, differential privacy is at odds with generation quality.
Although differentially private training has been implemented for GANs (DP-GAN) (Xie et al.,
2018), diffusion models (DPDM, DP-Diffusion) (Dockhorn et al., 2023; Ghalebikesabi et al.,
2023), and latent diffusion models (DP-LDM) (Lyu et al., 2024), it typically results in significant
degradation of image quality. Moreover, one cannot easily make a pretrained model differentially
private, implying that to achieve differential privacy, one must retrain from scratch. This makes
negotiating the trade-off between privacy and quality challenging, as trying different levels of privacy
requires retraining. Due to the difficulty of achieving differential privacy while simultaneously
maintaining quality, some researchers have pursued more attainable model characteristics that have


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the same flavor as differential privacy. A frequent benchmark for privacy is robustness to membership
inference attacks (Hu & Pang, 2023), whereby the attacker aims to infer whether a given image was
used to train the model. Although researchers have devised a multitude of loss and likelihood-based
membership inference attacks, so far, there are few existing methods that explicitly aim to defend
against these attacks besides differential privacy and data augmentation (Matsumoto et al., 2023b;
Pang et al., 2023). A second privacy benchmark measures the cosine similarity in a feature space of a
generated image to its nearest neighbor in the training data (Daras et al., 2024; Douze et al., 2024).
Ambient diffusion (Daras et al., 2024) is one method to prevent excessive similarity to the training
data without enforcing differential privacy; however, ambient diffusion still has notable negative
effects on FID scores.
Until recently, preventing image replication by
diffusion models has involved various forms
of data corruption during training, either by
adding noise to gradients (Abadi et al., 2016),
diversifying images and captions (Somepalli
et al., 2023b), or corrupting the images them-
selves (Daras et al., 2024). Hyperparameter
tuning for these methods requires retraining,
making it difficult to calibrate them to the
necessary level of privacy. Simple alternatives,
like rejection sampling, are effective because
they can guarantee that the training images will
not be exactly replicated. However, standard
rejection sampling has major drawbacks, too.
For instance, rejection sampling redistributes
probability mass in an inefficient way and
requires resampling, which can decrease speed.
In extreme cases of mode collapse such as
those uncovered by Webster (2023), Stable          Figure 1: Generated image and most similar train-
Diffusion must be queried dozens or even           ing image pairs for DDIM sampling (left) and
hundreds of times before producing an original     CPSample with α=0.001, s=1 000 (right). We
image, making rejection sampling impractical.      sample 100 images and display the four with the
Rejection sampling is also prone to membership     highest similarity to their nearest neighbors in the
inference attacks and privacy leakages (Awan &     training data.
Rao, 2023).
We present classifier-protected sampling (CPSample), a diffusion-specific data protection technique
that, while not strictly differentially private, fortifies against some membership inference attacks and
greatly reduces excessive similarity between the training and generated data. CPSample is compu-
tationally more efficient than existing training-based methods of improving privacy for diffusion
models. The basic idea is to overfit a classifier on random binary labels assigned to the training
data and use this classifier during sampling to guide the images away from the training data. We
show that our method has an effect similar to rejection sampling while removing or reducing the
need to resample. Unlike rejection sampling, CPSample offers protection against some membership
inference attacks during the generation process rather than only protecting the end product. CPSample
achieves SOTA image quality, improving over previous data protection methods, such as ambient
diffusion, DPDMs, and PAC Privacy Preserving Diffusion Models (Xu et al., 2023) for similar levels
of “privacy.” Unlike most other methods designed to shield the training data, one can simply adjust
the level of protection provided by CPSample without retraining the classifier used for guidance.
CPSample is applicable to existing image models without any expensive retraining of the diffusion
models. We summarize the primary contributions of our work as follows:

       • In Section 3.1, we introduce CPSample, a novel method of classifier-guidance for privacy
         protection in diffusion models that can be applied to existing models without retraining.

       • We show theoretically in Section 3.2 and empirically in Section 4.1 that CPSample prevents
         training data replication in unguided diffusion. We also provide evidence in Section 4.2 that
         CPSample can protect text-based image generation models, like Stable Diffusion.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • We give empirical evidence that CPSample can foil some membership inference attacks in
         Section 4.3.
       • We demonstrate in Section 4.4 that CPSample attains better FID scores than existing methods
         of privacy protection while still eliminating replication of the training data.

2     BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
2.1   D IFFUSION M ODELS

We begin with a review of diffusion models. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) (Sohl-
Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020) gradually add Gaussian noise to image data during the “forward”
process. Meanwhile, one trains a “denoiser” to predict the original image from the corrupted samples
in a so-called “backward” process. During the forward process, one assigns
                                              √         √
                                        xt = αt x0 + 1 − αt ϵ                                       (2.1)
where ϵ ∼ N (0, I), x0 is the original image, and αt indicates the noise schedule. The variable
t ∈ {0, ..., T } specifies the step of the forward process, where x0 represents an image in the training
data. When αT is set sufficiently close to 0, xT is approximately drawn from a standard normal
distribution. During intermediate steps, the distribution of xt is
                                                       √
                                  q(xt | x0 ) = N (xt ; αt x0 , (1 − αt )I).                        (2.2)

During training, one performs gradient descent on θ to minimize the score-matching loss, given by
                                   " T                                        #
                                    X 1               √       √             2
                  Eϵ∼N (0,1),x0 ∼D           ∥ϵ − ϵθ ( αt x0 + 1 − αt ϵ, t)∥ .               (2.3)
                                    t=1
                                        2σt2
Here, D is the target distribution, which is approximated by sampling from the training data. Finally,
to generate a new image, one samples standard Gaussian noise xT ∼ N (0, I). Then, one gradually
denoises xT by letting

                                     1            1 − αt
                           xt−1 = √        xt − √         ϵθ (xt , t) + σt zt ,                 (2.4)
                                      αt           1 − αt
where in each step, one has zt ∼ N (0, I), and σt and αt are scalar functions determined by the noise
schedule that govern the rate of the backward diffusion process.
Despite the superior image quality afforded by DDPMs, the sampling process sometimes involves
1 000 or more steps, which has led to a variety of sampling schemes and distillation methods for
speeding up inference (Song et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2024; Song et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2023). One
of the most commonly used modifications to the sampling process is denoising diffusion implicit
models (DDIMs), which enable skipping steps in the backward process.
Currently, the state-of-the-art for guided generation is achieved by models with classifier-free guid-
ance (Ho & Salimans, 2022). However, since CPSample employs a classifier to prevent replication of
its training data, it is more useful for us to review its predecessor, classifier-guided diffusion (Lim et al.,
2023; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). In classifier guided diffusion, √        a pretrained classifier pϕ (y | xt , t)
                                                     √
assigns a probability to the event that xt = αt x0 + 1 − αt ϵ for some x0 with label y. The
sampling process for classifier-guided DDIM is modified by
                                                 √
                                ϵ̂t = ϵθ (xt ) − 1 − αt ∇xt log pϕ (y | xt , t)                          (2.5)
                                                      √
                                                                        √

                                     p           xt − 1 − αt ϵ̂t
                            xt−1 = αt−1                √            + 1 − αt ϵ̂t .                       (2.6)
                                                          αt
Such a modification of the sampling procedure corresponds to sampling xt from the joint distribution:
                          pθ,ϕ (xt , y | xt+1 , t) = Zpθ (xt | xt+1 , t)pϕ (y | xt , t)                   (2.7)
where Z is a normalization constant. This formulation can be adapted for continuous-time models,
but for discrete-time models, additional care must be taken to ensure accuracy (see Appendix A for
additional details).


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.2   P RIVACY IN D IFFUSION M ODELS

Differential privacy (DP) is generally considered to be the gold standard for protecting sensitive data.
The formal definition of (ε-δ) differential privacy is as follows (Dwork et al., 2006; Dwork & Roth,
2014):
Definition 2.1 ((ε-δ)-Differential privacy). Let A be a randomized algorithm that takes a dataset as
input and has its output in X . If D1 and D2 are datasets with symmetric difference 1, then A is ε-δ
differentially private if for all S ⊂ X ,
                                 P(A(D1 ) ∈ S) ≤ P(A(D2 ) ∈ S)eε + δ.                             (2.8)
DP ensures that the removal or addition of a single data point to the dataset does not significantly
affect the outcome of the algorithm, thus protecting the identity of individuals within the dataset.
Existing DP diffusion models (Dockhorn et al., 2023; Ghalebikesabi et al., 2023; Lyu et al., 2024)
achieve DP through DP stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) (Abadi et al., 2016), in which Gaussian
noise is added to the gradients during training.
Though DP offers a formal guarantee that one’s data is secure, imposing a DP constraint in practice
severely compromises the quality of the synthetic images. Therefore, researchers have largely resorted
to demonstrating that models exhibit various relaxations of strict DP (Vyas et al., 2023), such as
Probably Approximately Correct DP (PAC-DP) (Xiao & Devadas, 2023) or other empirical metrics
of privacy.
One common approach is to measure the similarity between a generated image and its nearest neigh-
bors in the training dataset with the aim of minimizing the number of highly similar neighbors (Daras
et al., 2022; 2024). Typically, similarity is quantified using either Euclidean distance or cosine
similarity, which is given by
                                               xT · C(x)
                                                          ,                                      (2.9)
                                             ∥x∥ · ∥C(x)∥
with C(x) denoting the nearest neighbor of x among the training data, and which is typically computed
in a feature space rather than the raw pixel space (Nguyen & Bai, 2011; Xia et al., 2015). Tools have
been developed to help compute nearest neighbors efficiently, since naïve pairwise comparisons are
too computationally expensive. In 2023, MetaAI developed the FAISS library for efficient similarity
search using neural networks (Douze et al., 2024), making this type of privacy metric possible to
compute approximately in a reasonable amount of time. Empirically, for CIFAR-10, we observed that
images with similarity scores above 0.97 were nearly identical, whereas for CelebA, the threshold
was approximately 0.95, and for LSUN Church, images with similarity above 0.90 were sometimes,
though not always, nearly identical.
Ambient diffusion reduces similarity to the nearest neighbor by masking pixels during training and
only scoring the model based on the visible pixels. In this way, the model never has access to a
full, uncorrupted image and is therefore less likely to replicate full images (Daras et al., 2024). The
downside is that masking pixels, even at the relatively modest rate of 20%, leads to notable image
quality degradation as measured via the FID score. Moreover, ambient diffusion shifts the entire
distribution of similarity scores towards lower similarity, whereas we should ideally prevent the
generation of images with high similarity to the training data while leaving the rest of the distribution
untouched.
Until recently, all attempts at enforcing privacy for diffusion models occurred during training. In 2023,
Xu et al. (2023) developed a method of classifier-guided sampling (PACPD) that has PAC privacy
advantages over standard denoising. For text-guided models, Somepalli et al. (2023b) developed
a method of randomly changing influential input tokens to avoid exact memorization, and Wen
et al. (2024) protected training data using a regularization technique on the classifier-free guidance
network during training. Golatkar et al. (2024) used a mixture of public and private images to prevent
copyright infringement, and Golatkar et al. (2023) developed “compositional diffusion models" to
customize data access across different groups. Recently,Chen et al. (2024) devised a guidance method
(AMG) which calculates similarity metrics at each step in the denoising schedule in order to guide
the sampling process away from similar data points in the training corpus. By utilizing similarity
metrics directly, they were able to effectively eliminate memorization in both text-conditional and
unconditional diffusion models. Though theoretically valuable, the need to have access to the training
data– or at least to embeddings of the training data points– and to compute similarity measures at
runtime is impractical for use outside of a research environment.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.3   M EMBERSHIP I NFERENCE ATTACKS

A third privacy measurement comes from membership inference attacks (Dubiński et al., 2024; Pang
& Wang, 2023; Duan et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2022), whereby one tries to discern whether a given data
point was a member of the training set for the model. Robustness to membership inference attacks is
implied by differential privacy. Membership inference attacks against diffusion models usually hinge
on observed differences in reconstruction loss or likelihood that come from overfitting. In this paper,
we will use a slight modification of the membership inference attack from Matsumoto et al. (2023a)
as described in Algorithm 1 in Appendix E.

3     P ROTECTING P RIVACY D URING S AMPLING
In this section, we address the problem of training data replication in diffusion models, which poses
significant privacy risks. One common solution to this problem is rejection sampling, whereby
samples that closely resemble training data are discarded. However, rejection sampling has several
shortcomings: it is computationally expensive and inefficient, and it only provides protection in the
final output, not during the sampling process itself. Moreover, in extreme cases of mode collapse,
one may need to generate dozens of images before generating original content when using rejection
sampling.
To overcome these limitations, we introduce CPSample, a method that reproduces some of the benefits
of rejection sampling without the need for resampling. CPSample integrates classifier guidance into
the sampling process to steer the generation away from the training data. We overfit a classifier on
random binary labels assigned to the training data and use this classifier during sampling to adjust the
generated images, thereby reducing the likelihood of replicating training data while preserving image
quality.

3.1   S AMPLING M ETHOD

The first step in CPSample is to train a network that can provide information about how likely a sample
xt is to turn into a member of the training data at the end of the denoising process. For this task, we
use a classifier trained to memorize random binary labels assigned to the training data. It was shown
in Zhang et al. (2017) that this can be achieved with a network with a number of parameters that is
linearly proportional to the size of the dataset, with a small constant of proportionality. Additionally,
the training time required to memorize random labels is only a small constant factor more compared
to the time it takes to memorize real, non-random labels.
To address duplicated data in the training corpus, after the classifier has been sufficiently trained,
items for which the classifier still shows significant loss can be reassigned a common label. Further
training then ensures the classifier memorizes these items.
During the denoising process, whenever the classifier predicts a label y ∈ {0, 1} for xt with
probability greater than 1 − α, we perturb xt−1 towards the opposite label using classifier guidance.
For example, if the classifier predicts the label 1 with high probability, we employ classifier guidance
to adjust the sampling process to draw from the conditional distribution pθ,ϕ (xt−1 | xt , t, y = 0),
reducing the likelihood of the generated sample being close to the training data.
To state our procedure more precisely, let ϵθ (·, ·) be the denoiser. Note that the classifier is trained
only once on the training data and not during each sample generation. The sampling process is then
modified in the following steps:

      1. Randomly assign Bernoulli(0.5) labels to each member of the training data, and let B ∈
         {0, 1}n index these random labels. Train a classifier pϕ (y | xt , t) to predict these
                                                                                            √ labels.
                                                                                  √
         Here, xt is generated by corrupting the training data x0 with noise: xt = αt x0 + 1 − αt ϵ
         for ϵ ∼ N (0, I) and t ∈ {0, ..., T }.
      2. Set a tolerance threshold 0 < α < 0.5 and a scale parameter s. Let pϕ (y | xt , t) be the
         probability assigned to the label y by the classifier pϕ (y | xt , t). Sample xT ∼ N (0, I). For
         t ∈ {T, ...., 1}, if pϕ (y = 0 | xt , t) < α, replace ϵθ (xt , t) with
                                                         √
                         ϵ̂θ,ϕ (xt , t) = ϵθ (xt , t) − s 1 − αt · ∇ log(pϕ (y = 0 | xt , t)).


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         If pϕ (y = 1 | xt , t) < α, replace ϵθ with
                                                        √
                        ϵ̂θ,ϕ (xt , t) = ϵθ (xt , t) − s 1 − αt · ∇ log(pϕ (y = 1 | xt , t)).
         Otherwise, we leave the sampling process unchanged.

Though the choice of random labels for the classifier initially may seem counter-intuitive, it has
several advantages over other approaches. If we used labels corresponding to real attributes of the data,
the classifier would influence the content of the generated images in ways that could compromise their
authenticity and diversity. This is because the guidance would push the generated images towards
or away from specific attributes, altering the intended distribution. The perturbation applied by the
gradient of the log probability in CPSample moves the generated images away from regions where
they can be easily classified as similar to the training data. This method is more effective than adding
random noise, which would require a significant amount of noise to achieve the same effect, thus
degrading image quality.
Unlike past training-based methods of privacy protection such as ambient diffusion and DPDM, once
we have trained the classifier, we can adjust the level of protection by tuning the hyperparameters
s and α without necessitating retraining of the classifier or denoiser. Our method also does not
require access to the training data or excessive additional computation during sampling as the
inferenced-based method AMG does.

3.2   T HEORY

In this section, we show that CPSample functions similarly to rejection sampling when preventing
exact replication of the training images. We work under the following assumptions:
Assumption 1. Suppose that the classifier pϕ (y | x, t) has Lipschitz constant L in the argument x
with respect to a metric d(·, ·) : χ × χ → R≥0 , where χ denotes the image space.
Assumption 2. Let yi be the random label assigned to xi ∈ D, where D is the training data. Let
κ < 21 be such that for all xi ∈ D, we have
                                       pϕ (yi | xi , 0) ∈ (1 − κ, 1].                              (3.1)
Assumption 3. Suppose that CPSample generates data x̃ such that λ < pϕ (y | x̃, 0) < 1 − λ
with probability greater than 1 − ν, where we are able to govern ν and λ by adjusting s and α in
Section 3.1.

In Assumption 1 the constant L can be difficult to evaluate, but the assumption holds for neural
network classifiers. Methods exist that can bound the local Lipschitz constant around the training
data (Huang et al., 2021), which one can use to strengthen the guarantees of Lemma 1. Assumption 3
holds well empirically, and in Assumption 2, one can typically exert strong control over the size of
κ without incurring too much additional computational overhead Zhang et al. (2017). Concretely,
we were able to train our classifier to have a cross-entropy loss below 0.05 in the experiments from
Sections 4.1 and 4.2. Moreover, during sampling, we observed that CPSample had control over the
quantity pϕ (y | xt , t). An example is given in Figure 7.
Given these assumptions, we can demonstrate the following simple lemma, which links the behavior
of CPSample to that of a rejection sampler without requiring expensive comparisons to the training
dataset. A proof can be found in Appendix A. We note that the assumptions are admittedly relatively
strong, as Lemma 1 is designed primarily to give theoretical intuition for how CPSample works rather
than practical guarantees on how well it protects the data. We refer to reader to our empirical results
(See Section 4) for practical demonstrations of the method’s efficacy.
                                                                                 1
                                                                                     −κ
Lemma 1. Under the above assumptions, choose ε > 0 and 0 < δ < 2 L . Setting ν = ε and
λ = κ + Lδ, when drawing a single  Ssample, with probability greater than 1 − ε, CPSample generates
an image that lies outside of S = x∈D Bδ (x) in the metric space defined by d.
                                       S
Note that the ability to control P x̃ ∈ x∈D Bδ (x) gives the same guarantee offered by rejection
sampling. However, in extreme instances of mode collapse such as those exhibited by Stable Diffusion
in Section 4.2, one might have to resample hundreds of times to generate original images, making
standard rejection sampling highly inefficient. CPSample is able to produce original images without
this high level of inefficiency.

                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Cosine similarity in feature space between generated images and their nearest neighbor in
the fine-tuning dataset for standard DDIM sampling (red) and CPSample (blue) with α = 0.001, s = 1
on CIFAR-10 (left) and with α = 0.001, s = 1 000 on CelebA-64 (right). Similarity scores were com-
puted for 21 000 generated samples for CIFAR-10 and 8 000 images for CelebA. Note that standard
DDIM exhibits many more samples with similarity scores exceeding the thresholds from Table 1.


4     E MPIRICAL R ESULTS
We run three distinct sets of experiments to demonstrate the ways in which CPSample protects the
privacy of the training data. First, we statistically test the ability of CPSample to reduce similarity
between generated data and the training set for unguided diffusion. We then demonstrate that
CPSample can prevent Stable Diffusion from generating memorized images. Finally, we measure
robustness against membership inference attacks. Hyperparameters, in all empirical tests, are chosen
to maximize image quality while eliminating exact matches. In our tests of image quality, we find
that CPSample far outperforms existing methods of protecting the training data.

4.1   S IMILARITY R EDUCTION

We generate images using DDIM with CPSample and 1 000 denoising steps. The nearest neighbor to
each generated image is found using Meta’s FAISS model (Douze et al., 2024). Similarity between
two images is measured by cosine similarity in a feature space defined by FAISS. We empirically
find that a similarity score exceeding 0.97 often indicates nearly-identical images for CIFAR-10. For
CelebA and LSUN Church, the thresholds lie around 0.95 (Daras et al., 2024) and 0.90, respectively.
Note that a cosine similarity score above the thresholds given is a necessary but not sufficient
condition for images to look very alike. To ensure that we can observe a larger number of images with
similarities exceeding our thresholds, we fine-tune the models using DDIM (Song et al., 2021) on a
subset of the data that consisted of 1 000 images, as was done in Daras et al. (2024). This modification
allows us to statistically test the efficacy of CPSample without the large number of samples required
to do hypothesis testing on rare exact replication events. After fine-tuning, up to 12.5% of the images
produced by unprotected DDIM are nearly exact replicates of the fine-tuning data. One can see
from Table 1 that CPSample significantly reduces the fraction of generated images that have high
cosine similarity to members of the fine-tuning set. One can see histograms of the similarity score
distribution with and without CPSample in Figures 2 and 10. Figures 1 and 3 show the most similar
pairs of samples and fine-tuning data points. Uncurated images generated from CPSample can be
found in Appendix F. While CPSample effectively reduces the similarity between generated images
and the training data, our results in Table 4 indicate that CPSample achieves minimal degradation in
quality compared to previous methods.

4.2   S TABLE D IFFUSION

As a second demonstration of CPSample, we present evidence that CPSample can prevent well-known
examples of mode collapse in near-verbatim attacks against Stable Diffusion (Webster, 2023; Wen
et al., 2024). We curate a small dataset of commonly reproduced images (Somepalli et al., 2023b)
and include other images from the LAION dataset depicting the same subjects, while ensuring that
this dataset contains no duplicates. In this more targeted application, CPSample can prevent exact
replication when used with the right hyperparameters. See Figure 6 and Table 2 for more details.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



     DDIM                 CPSample                    DDIM                                   CPSample
  (Unprotected)          (Protected)               (Unprotected)                            (Protected)


Figure 3: Generated images and their most similar training image pairs for DDIM sampling and
CPSample with α = 0.001, s = 1 on CIFAR-10 (left) and α = 0.1, s = 10 on LSUN Church (right).
For each pair, the image on the left is the generated sample, and the one on the right is its nearest
neighbor in the training set. These are the four examples out of 21 000 images on CIFAR-10 and two
out of 1 700 images on LSUN Church with the highest similarity scores with their nearest neighbor.
Table 1: Reduction in cosine similarity between generated images and nearest neighbor in fine-tuning
data. 1 p-values were computed using a χ2 test for the null hypothesis H0 : “CPSample did not
reduce the fraction of images with similarity score exceeding the threshold.”

             Dataset        FT Steps     α      Scale       Threshold    DDIM    CPSample        p-value1
            CIFAR-10            150k   0.001       1          0.97       6.25%     0.00 %        <0.0001
             CelebA             650k   0.001    1 000         0.95       12.5%     0.10%         <0.0001
           LSUN Church          455k    0.1       10          0.90       0.73%     0.04%          0.013


Although CPSample does not provide as robust protection in this setting compared to Somepalli
et al. (2023b); Wen et al. (2024), these results highlight its potential for data protection in text-guided
diffusion models. Moreover, the methods developed in Somepalli et al. (2023b); Wen et al. (2024) do
not apply to unguided diffusion models. This application also highlights how CPSample can protect
only a private subset of the training data, for which it does not require access to the entire training
dataset.

                             Table 2: Details of generation on Stable Diffusion.

 Image       Original caption                   Modified caption                      α        scale      guidance
      A      “Rambo 5 and Rocky Spin-Off -      “Rocky and Rambo Spin-Off -           0.5      2 000        1.5
             Sylvester Stallone gibt Updates”   Sylvester Stallone gibt Updates”
      B      “Classic cars for sale”            “Classic car for sale”                0.3       100         1.5
      C      “Red Exotic Fractal Pattern        “Red Exotic Fractal Pattern           0.5      2 000        1.5
             Abstract Art On Canvas-7 Panels”   Abstract Art On Canvas-7 Panels”



4.3       M EMBERSHIP I NFERENCE ATTACKS

We also assess CPSample’s ability to protect against membership inference attacks. Following
Algorithm 1, we compute the mean reconstruction error for the training and test datasets and
determine whether there is a statistically significant difference. To evaluate resistance to inference
attacks, we use a model trained on the entire set of 50 000 CIFAR-10 training images. We compare
the reconstruction loss on these 50 000 training images to the reconstruction loss on the 10 000
withheld test samples included in the CIFAR-10 dataset. We compare the difference in reconstruction
loss between these two datasets both for CPSample, using a classifier trained on the entirety of the
CIFAR-10 training data with random labels, and for standard DDIM sampling. We demonstrate
CPSample’s resistance to inference attacks for α ∈ {0.5, 0.25, 0.001} over approximately 8000


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


images from each of the training and test datasets. The p-values in this experiment are based on a
two-sample, single-tailed Z-score that tests the null hypothesis “the average training reconstruction
loss is less than or equal to the average test reconstruction loss.” Precisely, let n denote the number of
training data points and m denote the number of sampled test data points. The test statistic is then
given by
                                              µtest − µtrain
                                         p                          .
                                             Vtest /m + Vtrain /n

Here, the symbol V indicates the variance and µ indicates the mean. In this context, failure to reject
the null hypothesis indicates a success for CPSample.
We observe that in our experiments, a very low value of α leads to a higher p-value, which is counter-
intuitive on first glance. However, we believe that this occurs due to the fact that a small value of
α results in a more targeted application of CPSample, driving the loss up exclusively around the
training data points. As shown in Table 3 for values of α between 0 and 0.5, a conclusive membership
inference attack against CPSample is not possible. We provide a second black-box membership
inference attack based on permutation testing in Appendix E.


Figure 4: Uncurated samples from DP-LDM (Lyu et al.,                    Figure 5: The generated and real im-
2024) on CelebA (Top) and Ambient Diffusion (Daras et al.,              ages with the highest similarity for
2024) with corruption 0.2 (Bottom). These samples are of                CIFAR-10 (left) and CelebA (right)
noticably lower quality than the uncurated samples from                 out of 50 000 samples used to com-
CPSample, found in Appendix F.                                          pute FID score.



4.4   Q UALITY C OMPARISON

As mentioned in the introduction and Sec-
tion 4.1, other methods of privacy protection
suffer from severe degradation of quality as mea-
sured by FID score. Here, we provide an FID
score comparison between the CPSample model
fine-tuned on curated subsets of CIFAR-10 and
CelebA and existing methods of privacy protec-
tion. FID scores for unconditional generation of
CIFAR-10 and CelebA are presented in Table
4. The images with the highest similarity to the
training set, determined using FAISS, are shown
in Figure 5. The particular values of α and s
were set in an attempt to find the least aggres-
sive settings that still completely prevent exact
replication of the training data. FID scores over
a grid search on the hyperparameters α and s
are displayed in Table 7. We include images           Figure 6: Selected examples for Stable Diffusion:
from DP-LDM (Lyu et al., 2024) and Ambient            original image (left), image generated from a simi-
Diffusion (Daras et al., 2024) in Figure 4 to em-     lar caption by Stable Diffusion v1.4 (center), image
phasize the gains in quality.                         generated with CPSample (right).

                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Difference in mean reconstruction error          Table 4: FID score comparison on the CIFAR-
between train and test data for CIFAR-10.                 10 and CelebA datasets.
                                                           Method                     CIFAR-10 CelebA
 Method                     Test statistic p-value
                                                           DDIM                         3.17       1.27
 DDIM                            138       ≈0
 Ambient (Corruption 0.2)       0.141      0.44            Ambient (Corruption 0.2)    11.70      25.95
 Ambient (Corruption 0.8)      -0.024      0.51            DPDM (ϵ = 10)               97.7        78.3
                                                           DP-Diffusion (ϵ = 10)        9.8         -
 CPSample (α = 0.5)            0.59        0.28
                                                           DP-LDM (ϵ = 10)              8.4        16.2
 CPSample (α = 0.25)           0.23        0.41
 CPSample (α = 0.001)          -0.86       0.81            CPSample (α = 0.001, 0.05) 4.97         2.97



5    L IMITATIONS
As mentioned in Section 3.1, the difference in training time required to get a classifier to memorize
random labels versus real labels has been shown to be only a small constant factor Zhang et al.
(2017). Compared to other leading methods of protecting training data, such as ambient diffusion,
DPDM, and AMG, our method is significantly easier to employ in terms of computational resources.
However, as we lack the resources to provide further empirical evidence beyond what has already
been demonstrated in the literature, we leave this remark as a flag for a potential practical limitation
of our method.
Of slight theoretical concern is the difficulty in providing practical upper bounds on the Lipschitz
constant of the classifier, for which a lower value would provide stronger formal guarantees of privacy.
Further research into employing Lipschitz regularizations may both improve the performance of our
method and provide stronger guarantees. In practice, we observe stronger protections than the formal
guarantees provide. Thus, we include the formal guarantees primarily as a source of intuition.

6    C ONCLUSION
We have presented a new approach to prevent memorized images from appearing during inference
time. Our method is applicable to both guided and unguided diffusion models. Unlike previous
methods intended to protect privacy of unguided diffusion models, CPSample does not necessitate
retraining the denoiser. Moreover, the presence of duplicated data in the training corpus does not
affect on our approach, and after training the classifier, one can adjust the level of protection enforced
by CPSample without further training. We have shown theoretically that our method behaves similarly
to rejection sampling without necessitating resampling. Finally, we have provided empirical evidence
with rigorous statistical testing that our method is effective in unguided settings. We have also given
examples in which CPSample was able to prevent extreme instances of mode collapse in Stable
Diffusion. Despite its efficacy at preventing replication of training images, CPSample has little
negative impact on image quality.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We provide source code, scripts, and configuration details for experiments in the supplementary
material for those seeking to reproduce this study. Proofs of original claims are given in the
appendix, along with details for the implementation and training of the model. Statistical measures of
significance are included to ensure the robustness of our results.

E THICS S TATEMENT

This paper addresses privacy concerns in generative AI models. Our method is designed to mitigate
these risks by safe guarding against membership inference attacks and data replication. We caution
users that although our method prevents exact replication of training data, the theoretical assumptions
are relaxed in practice, so it does not guarantee complete protection. We encourage others to act
responsibly in the application of this work and to further research methods to prevent exact replication
of trainign data.


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H. Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
 Conference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS ’16, pp. 308–318, New York, NY,
 USA, 2016. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450341394. doi: 10.1145/2976749.
 2978318. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978318.
Jordan Awan and Vinayak Rao. Privacy-aware rejection sampling. Journal of machine learning
  research, 24(74):1–32, 2023.
Blake Brittain. Artists take new shot at stability, midjourney in updated copyright law-
  suit.   Reuters, 2023.    URL https://www.reuters.com/legal/litigation/
  google-sued-by-us-artists-over-ai-image-generator-2024-04-29/.
Blake Brittain. Google sued by us artists over ai image generator. Reuters,
  2024.            URL      https://www.reuters.com/legal/litigation/
  google-sued-by-us-artists-over-ai-image-generator-2024-04-29/.
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramèr, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Kather-
  ine Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Úlfar Erlingsson, Alina Oprea, and Colin
  Raffel. Extracting training data from large language models. In 30th USENIX Security Sympo-
  sium (USENIX Security 21), pp. 2633–2650. USENIX Association, August 2021. ISBN 978-1-
  939133-24-3. URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity21/
  presentation/carlini-extracting.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers, 2021.
Chen Chen, Daochang Liu, and Chang Xu. Towards memorization-free diffusion models, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.00922.
Giannis Daras, Mauricio Delbracio, Hossein Talebi, Alexandros G. Dimakis, and Peyman Milanfar.
  Soft diffusion: Score matching for general corruptions, 2022.
Giannis Daras, Kulin Shah, Yuval Dagan, Aravind Gollakota, Alex Dimakis, and Adam Klivans. Am-
  bient diffusion: Learning clean distributions from corrupted data. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
   Pattern Recognition, pp. 248–255, 2009. URL http://www.image-net.org/papers/
   imagenet_cvpr09.pdf.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Tim Dockhorn, Tianshi Cao, Arash Vahdat, and Karsten Kreis. Differentially private diffusion
  models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=ZPpQk7FJXF.
Matthijs Douze, Alexandr Guzhva, Chengqi Deng, Jeff Johnson, Gergely Szilvasy, Pierre-Emmanuel
 Mazaré, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, and Hervé Jégou. The faiss library, 2024.
Jinhao Duan, Fei Kong, Shiqi Wang, Xiaoshuang Shi, and Kaidi Xu. Are diffusion models vulnerable
   to membership inference attacks?, 2023.
Jan Dubiński, Antoni Kowalczuk, Stanisław Pawlak, Przemyslaw Rokita, Tomasz Trzciński, and
  Paweł Morawiecki. Towards more realistic membership inference attacks on large diffusion models.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV),
  01 2024.
Cynthia Dwork and Aaron Roth. The Algorithmic Foundations of Differential Privacy. Foundations
  and Trends in Theoretical Computer Science, 2014.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity in
  private data analysis. volume Vol. 3876, pp. 265–284, 01 2006. ISBN 978-3-540-32731-8. doi:
  10.1007/11681878_14.

Stefan Elfwing, Eiji Uchibe, and Kenji Doya. Sigmoid-weighted linear units for neural network
  function approximation in reinforcement learning, 2017.

Sahra Ghalebikesabi, Leonard Berrada, Sven Gowal, Sofia Ira Ktena, Robert Stanforth, Jamie Hayes,
  Soham De, Samuel Smith, Olivia Wiles, and Borja Balle. Differentially private diffusion models
  generate useful synthetic images, 02 2023.

Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, Ashwin Swaminathan, and Stefano Soatto. Training data
  protection with compositional diffusion models. CoRR, abs/2308.01937, 2023. URL https:
 //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.01937.

Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, Luca Zancato, Yu-Xiang Wang, Ashwin Swaminathan, and Ste-
  fano Soatto. CPR: retrieval augmented generation for copyright protection. CoRR, abs/2403.18920,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.18920.

Jiatao Gu, Shuangfei Zhai, Yizhe Zhang, Lingjie Liu, and Josh Susskind. Boot: Data-free distillation
   of denoising diffusion models with bootstrapping, 2023.

Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance, 2022.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Hailong Hu and Jun Pang. Membership inference of diffusion models, 2023.

Yujia Huang, Huan Zhang, Yuanyuan Shi, J Zico Kolter, and Anima Anandkumar. Training certifiably
  robust neural networks with efficient local lipschitz bounds. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin,
  P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=FTt28RYj5Pc.

Matthew Jagielski, Om Thakkar, Florian Tramer, Daphne Ippolito, Katherine Lee, Nicholas Carlini,
 Eric Wallace, Shuang Song, Abhradeep Guha Thakurta, Nicolas Papernot, and Chiyuan Zhang.
 Measuring forgetting of memorized training examples. In The Eleventh International Confer-
 ence on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
 7bJizxLKrR.

Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-
  based generative models, 2022.

Amirhossein Kazerouni, Ehsan Khodapanah Aghdam, Moein Heidari, Reza Azad, Mohsen Fayyaz,
 Ilker Hacihaliloglu, and Dorit Merhof. Diffusion models for medical image analysis: A compre-
 hensive survey, 2023.

Dongjun Kim, Chieh-Hsin Lai, Wei-Hsiang Liao, Naoki Murata, Yuhta Takida, Toshimitsu Uesaka,
 Yutong He, Yuki Mitsufuji, and Stefano Ermon. Consistency trajectory models: Learning prob-
  ability flow ODE trajectory of diffusion. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ymjI8feDTD.

Alex Krizhevsky. Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images. Technical report, Univer-
  sity of Toronto, 2009. URL https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/cifar.html.

Sungbin Lim, Eunbi Yoon, Taehyun Byun, Taewon Kang, Seungwoo Kim, Kyungjae Lee, and
  Sungjoon Choi. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic evolution equations in hilbert
  spaces. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=GrElRvXnEj.

Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2015.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Saiyue Lyu, Michael F. Liu, Margarita Vinaroz, and Mijung Park. Differentially private latent
  diffusion models, 2024.
Gary Marcus and Reid Southen. Generative ai has a visual plagiarism problem, 2024. URL
  https://spectrum.ieee.org/midjourney-copyright.
Tomoya Matsumoto, Takayuki Miura, and Naoto Yanai. Membership inference attacks against
  diffusion models, 2023a.
Tomoya Matsumoto, Takayuki Miura, and Naoto Yanai. Membership inference attacks against
  diffusion models. pp. 77–83, 05 2023b. doi: 10.1109/SPW59333.2023.00013.
Hieu V. Nguyen and Li Bai. Cosine similarity metric learning for face verification. In Ron Kimmel,
  Reinhard Klette, and Akihiro Sugimoto (eds.), Computer Vision – ACCV 2010, pp. 709–720,
  Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-642-19309-5.
Yan Pang and Tianhao Wang. Black-box membership inference attacks against fine-tuned diffusion
  models, 2023.
Yan Pang, Tianhao Wang, Xuhui Kang, Mengdi Huai, and Yang Zhang. White-box membership
  inference attacks against diffusion models, 2023.
Walter H. L. Pinaya, Petru-Daniel Tudosiu, Jessica Dafflon, Pedro F da Costa, Virginia Fernandez,
 Parashkev Nachev, Sebastien Ourselin, and M. Jorge Cardoso. Brain imaging generation with
 latent diffusion models, 2022.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation, 2015.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Diffusion
  art or digital forgery? investigating data replication in diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6048–6058, 2023a.
Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Under-
  standing and mitigating copying in diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 36:47783–47803, 2023b.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Inter-
   national Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/
   forum?id=St1giarCHLP.
Yang Song, Prafulla Dhariwal, Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Consistency models, 2023.
Nikhil Vyas, Sham M. Kakade, and Boaz Barak. On provable copyright protection for generative
  models. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan
  Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 35277–35299. PMLR,
  23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/vyas23b.html.
Ryan Webster. A reproducible extraction of training images from diffusion models, 2023.
Ryan Webster, Julien Rabin, Loic Simon, and Frederic Jurie. On the de-duplication of laion-2b. 03
  2023.
Yuxin Wen, Yuchen Liu, Chen Chen, and Lingjuan Lyu. Detecting, explaining, and mitigating memo-
  rization in diffusion models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=84n3UwkH7b.
Yixin Wu, Ning Yu, Zheng Li, Michael Backes, and Yang Zhang. Membership inference attacks
  against text-to-image generation models, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Peipei Xia, Li Zhang, and Fanzhang Li. Learning similarity with cosine similarity ensemble.
  Information Sciences, 307:39–52, 2015. ISSN 0020-0255. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.
  2015.02.024. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S0020025515001243.
Hanshen Xiao and Srinivas Devadas. Pac privacy: Automatic privacy measurement and control of
  data processing. In Annual International Cryptology Conference, pp. 611–644. Springer, 2023.
Liyang Xie, Kaixiang Lin, Shu Wang, Fei Wang, and Jiayu Zhou. Differentially private generative
  adversarial network, 2018.
Qipan Xu, Youlong Ding, Jie Gao, and Hao Wang. Pac privacy preserving diffusion models, 2023.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning requires rethinking generalization. In 5th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings.
  OpenReview.net, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sy8gdB9xx.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    P ROOFS

Details of classifier guidance For completeness, we include a derivation of the classifier-guidance
introduced in (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021).
During the conditional denoising process, one should sample xt−1 from the conditional distribution
                                      P(xt−1 , xt , y)   P(xt−1 | xt )P(y | xt , xt−1 )
                 P(xt−1 | xt , y) =                    =                                .      (A.1)
                                        P(xt , y)                 P(y | xt )
One can show that P(y | xt , xt−1 ) = P(y | xt−1 ) (see Dhariwal & Nichol (2021) for details). The
denominator P(y | xt ) does not depend on xt−1 . Therefore, we write this term as Z. To get an
estimate of the probability P(y | xt−1 ), we train a classifier of the form pϕ (y | xt−1 ). Thus, we
should estimate the conditional probability P(xt−1 | xt , y) via
                          pθ,ϕ (xt−1 , xt , y) = Zpθ (xt−1 | xt )pϕ (y | xt−1 ).               (A.2)

In continuous time, we can write p(xt , y) = p(xt )p(y | xt ), and the score function is:


                ∇xt log(pθ (xt )pϕ (y | xt )) = ∇xt log pθ (xt ) + ∇xt log pϕ (y | xt ).       (A.3)

The network ϵθ (xt , t) predicts the noise added to a sample, which can be used to derive the score
function
                                                          1
                              ∇xt log pθ (xt , t) = − √        ϵθ (xt , t).
                                                        1 − αt
Substituting this into equation A.3, we get
                                       1
                               −√           ϵθ (xt ) + ∇xt log pϕ (y | xt ).                   (A.4)
                                     1 − αt

This leads to a new prediction for
                                                    √
                           ϵ̂θ (xt ) = ϵθ (xt ) −       1 − αt ∇xt log pϕ (y | xt ).
The conditional sampling then follows in the same manner as standard DDIM with ϵθ replaced by ϵ̂θ .

Proof of Lemma 1

Proof. Let x′ ∈ Bδ (x0 ), where x0 ∈ D is assigned the random label y. By Lipschitz continuity, we
have that
                            |pϕ (y | x0 , t) − pϕ (y | x′ , t)| < Ld(x0 , x′ ).
By Assumption 2, we have pϕ (y | x0 , 0) > 1 − κ, it follows that
                   pϕ (y | x′ , 0) = pϕ (y | x0 , 0) − pϕ (y | x0 , 0) + pϕ (y | x′ , 0)
                                  = pϕ (y | x0 , 0) − (pϕ (y | x0 , 0) − pϕ (y | x′ , 0))
                                  ≥ pϕ (y | x0 , 0) − |pϕ (y | x0 , 0) − pϕ (y | x′ , 0)|
                                  ≥ pϕ (y | x0 , 0) − Ld(x0 , x′ )
                                  ≥ pϕ (y | x0 , 0) − Lδ
                                  ≥ 1 − κ − Lδ
                                  = 1 − λ.

Therefore, for all points x′ ∈ S, we have pϕ (y | x′ , 0) ∈ [0, λ] [1 − λ, 1]. By Assumption 3,
                                                                   S
CPSample generates samples x̃ with pϕ (y | x̃) ∈ [λ, 1 − λ] with probability at least 1 − ε. Thus, we
have that CPSample generates samples outside of S with probability at least 1 − ε.


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: CPSample is able to generate images with pϕ (y | x̃, 0) ∈ (λ, 1 − λ). This example shows
the probability pϕ (y = 1 | xt , t) during the generation process with Stable Diffusion guided by the
caption “Rambo 5 and Rocky Spin-Off - Sylvester Stallone gibt Updates.” Note that a higher step
indicates a later point in the denoising process. In this example, Stable diffusion exactly replicated
the memorized image of Stallone, whereas CPSample (α = 0.5, s = 2000) produced an original
image.


B    C LASS G UIDED D IFFUSION

As a final experiment, we implement CPSample alongside classifier-free guidance for CIFAR-10 to
ensure that CPSample does not cause frequent out-of-category samples. The models used for guided
diffusion were smaller, so the image quality is naturally lower.


Figure 8: Uncurated samples using classifier-free guidance on CIFAR-10. The image in the position
second row, third column from the top left is a near-exact replica of a member of the training data.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Uncurated samples using CPSample (ϵ = 0.1, s = 10) along with classifier-free guidance
on CIFAR-10. Note that although CPSample slightly reduces image quality, it does not cause out-of-
category samples.


C    T RAINING DETAILS
Training classifiers. For training the classifier, we randomly selected subsets of 1 000 images each
from the CIFAR-10, CelebA, and LSUN Church datasets, on which we trained the classifier from
scratch. The architecture of our classifier is a modified version of the U-Net model. We retained
key components of the U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) model structure, including the timestep
embedding, multiple convolutional layers for downsampling, and middle blocks. The output from
the middle blocks underwent processing through Group Normalization, SiLU (Elfwing et al., 2017)
activation layers, and pooling layers before being fed into a single convolutional layer, yielding the
classifier’s output. Parameters for layers identical to the standard U-Net were consistent with those
used to pretrain the DDIM model on these datasets. Additionally, akin to the pretraining of DDIM,
we incorporated Exponential Moving Average during training to stabilize the training process. The
training of each classifier model was conducted using 4 NVIDIA A4000 GPUs with 16GB of memory.
For subsets of 1 000 images, the classifier took only hours to train. For larger datasets consisting of
60 000 − 160 000 data points, the classifier took up to 1 week to train. By comparison, retraining a
diffusion model to be differentially private or using the method presented in (Daras et al., 2024) can
take weeks or months depending on the dataset.

Fine-tuning pretrained denoiser model on subsets. For fine-tuning the pretrained denoiser model
on subsets, we commenced with the 500 000-step pretrained checkpoints available for the denoiser
DDIM model. Fine-tuning was performed on subsets of 1 000 images each from the CIFAR-10,
CelebA, and LSUN Church datasets until the model began generating data highly resembling the
respective subsets. The number of training steps varied across different models, and specific details
regarding the fine-tuning process can be found in Table 5. Throughout the fine-tuning process,
hyperparameters remained consistent with those used during the pretraining phase. We employed 2
NVIDIA A5000 GPUs with 24GB of memory for fine-tuning each model on the subsets.

D    E VALUATION D ETAILS
Numerical stability For the purposes of numerical stability, we slightly modified the sampling
process described in Section 3.1. We noticed in earlier iterations of our method that very small
numbers of images were becoming discolored or black because in float16, the classifier was predicting


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Table 5: Training Parameters & Steps

                       Batch Size LR Optimizer EMA Rate Classifier Steps Fine-tune Steps
       CIFAR-10            256     2e-4     Adam         0.9999      560 000          110 000
       CelebA              128     2e-4     Adam         0.9999      610 000          150 000
       LSUN Church          8      2e-5     Adam         0.999      1 250 000         880 000


probabilities of 0.0000 or 1.0000 for the random label 1, causing the logarithm to blow up. To fix this
in practice, we do the following. Sample xT ∼ N (0, I). For t ∈ {T, ...., 1}, if pϕ (y = 0|xt , t) < α,
replace ϵθ (xt , t) with
                                                    √
                    ϵ̂θ,ϕ (xt , t) = ϵθ (xt , t) − s 1 − αt · ∇ log(τ + pϕ (y = 0|xt , t)).
If pϕ (y = 1|xt , t) < α, replace ϵθ with
                                                  √
                  ϵ̂θ,ϕ (xt , t) = ϵθ (xt , t) − s 1 − αt · ∇ log(τ + pϕ (y = 1|xt , t)).
Otherwise, leave the sampling process unchanged.
By setting τ equal to 0.001, we were able to prevent the undesirable behavior.

Similarity Reduction Evaluation. We employ the fine-tuned denoiser model to generate 3 000
image samples for each of the aforementioned datasets. Additionally, we utilize the Classifier-guided
method to generate another set of 3 000 images. Subsequently, we employ DINO (Caron et al.,
2021) to find nearest neighbors in the subset using a methodology akin to ambient diffusion. From
the perspectives of both DINO’s similarity scores and human evaluation, we observe that images
generated through the classifier-guided approach exhibit significantly lower similarity to the original
images in the subset compared to those generated without guidance.

FID Evaluation. For each dataset, we utilize the denoiser model fine-tuned on the subset to
generate 30 000 images under the guidance of the classifier. Subsequently, we employ the FID score
implementation from the EDM (Karras et al., 2022) paper to compute the FID score.

Inference Speed Although speed was not a goal of our method, we provide some context for how
fast it is compared to standard diffusion. We do our comparison using a batch size of 1 to generate 10
images with 50 denoising steps. CPSample with α = 0.5 (i.e. computing gradients of the classifier at
every step) had an average per-image generation time of 26.1 ± 0.029s. By contrast, standard stable
diffusion had an average generation time of 23.92 ± 0.055s. Therefore, when the classifier is small
compared to the size of the diffusion model, the added time cost is insignificant.

E    M EMBERSHIP I NFERENCE ATTACKS

Algorithm 1 Test statistic for membership inference attack against diffusion models (Matsumoto
et al., 2023a)
                                                                                     Qt
   Input: Target samples x1 , ..., xm , CPSample denoiser ϵ̂θ,ϕ , noise schedule αt = s=1 (1 − βs )
   total_error ← 0
   for x in {x1 , ..., xm } do                  √      √
        total_error ← total_error + ∥ϵ − ϵ̂θ,ϕ ( αt x + 1 − αt ϵ, t)∥2
   end for
   mean_error ← total_error/m.

In keeping with our goal of preventing membership inference attacks that are based on high similarity
to a single member of the training set, we also perform a permutation test to ensure that we are
not producing images that are anomalously close to the training data. Explicitly, we test the null
hypothesis: generating images from CPSample produces images that are no more similar to the
training data than they are to arbitrary points drawn from the data distribution. Our tests are performed
in the same setting used in Section 4.1. Let S = {x1 , ..., xk } be the data used for fine-tuning. Let


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T = {x1 , ..., xk , xk+1 , ..., xn } be the entire training set. Finally, let P = {x̃1 , ..., x̃m } be samples
from CPSample. Then our permutation test is as follows:
      1. Sample x̃1 , ..., x̃k from P without replacement. For each x̃i , compute the quantity in 2.9
         where the nearest neighbor is chosen among S. Let the similarity score of the most similar
         pair be a.
      2. Repeat the following process ℓ times: sample S i ⊂ T without replacement from T so that
         |S i | = k. Sample P i without replacement from P so that |P i | = k. Compute the most
         similar image in S i for each member of P i . Call the similarity of the most similar pair ai .
                                                                      Pℓ
      3. For a pre-specified level α, reject the null hypothesis if 1ℓ i=1 1{a0 > ai } > α.
The results can be found in Table 6. Note that the test fails to reject on CIFAR-10 and LSUN Church,
but succeeds on CelebA. This is likely because we fine-tuned the CelebA model more extensively
than the other two.
Table 6: Reduction in cosine similarity between generated images and nearest neighbor in fine-tuning
data.

                                     Dataset            FT Steps     α     Scale DDIM CPSample
                        CIFAR-10                          150k     0.001   1         0.92       0.47
                         CelebA                           650k     0.001 1 000       0.99       0.99
                       LSUN Church                        455k      0.1   10         0.99       0.60
                   1
                     p-values were computed using a χ2 test for H0 : CPSample did
                   not reduce the fraction of images with similarity score exceeding
                   the threshold.


F    A DDITIONAL E MPIRICAL R ESULTS

                                           Table 7: FID score w.r.t. α and Scale on CIFAR-10.

                                                α = 0.001     α = 0.01     α = 0.1     α = 0.25        α = 0.49
             Scale = 1                           4.14275       4.15467     4.19058      4.19208        4.21859
             Scale = 5                           4.15772       4.20731     4.36005      4.58839         4.9566
             Scale = 10                          4.18083       4.26594     5.05858      6.17326        7.88949
             Scale = 100                         4.96727       16.7173     74.7247      113.199        139.626


                                              Similarity Scores with Nearest Neighbor for LSUN Church
                                           70                                       Standard DDIM
                                           60                                       CPSample
                       Number of samples


                                           50
                                           40
                                           30
                                           20
                                           10
                                            0
                                            0.0          0.2        0.4        0.6        0.8      1.0
                                                                      s(x, NN(x))
Figure 10: Similarity scores with nearest neighbor for standard DDIM and CPSample (α = 0.1,
scale= 10) on LSUN Church. In both cases, the network was fine-tuned for 455k gradient steps on a
subset of 1 000 images.


                                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: Uncurated samples using standard DDIM fine-tuned for 455k gradient steps on a subset of
1 000 images from LSUN Church.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: Uncurated samples using CPSample (α = 0.1, scale= 10) applied to a network fine-tuned
for 455k gradient steps on a subset of 1 000 images from LSUN Church. Note that there is no visual
discrepancy in quality between these and the images from standard DDIM.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Uncurated samples using standard DDIM fine-tuned for 580k gradient steps on a subset of
1 000 images from CelebA.


Figure 14: Uncurated samples using CPSample (α = 0.001, scale= 1 000) applied to a network
fine-tuned for 580k gradient steps on a subset of 1 000 images from CelebA. Note that there is little
visual discrepancy in quality between these and the images from standard DDIM.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: Uncurated samples using standard DDIM fine-tuned for 150k gradient steps on a subset of
1 000 images from CIFAR-10.


Figure 16: Uncurated samples using CPSample (α = 0.001, scale= 1) applied to a network fine-
tuned for approximately 150k gradient steps on a subset of 1 000 images from CelebA. Note that
there is little visual discrepancy in quality between these and the images from standard DDIM.


                                               23
