Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


U NIFYING C AUSAL R EPRESENTATION L EARNING
WITH THE I NVARIANCE P RINCIPLE

    Dingling Yao, Dario Rancati, Riccardo Cadei, Marco Fumero, and Francesco Locatello

                            Institute of Science and Technology Austria



                                            A BSTRACT
         Causal representation learning (CRL) aims at recovering latent causal variables
         from high-dimensional observations to solve causal downstream tasks, such as
         predicting the effect of new interventions or more robust classi’¼ücation. A plethora
         of methods have been developed, each tackling carefully crafted problem settings
         that lead to different types of identi’¼üability. These different settings are widely
         assumed to be important because they are often linked to different rungs of PearlŌĆÖs
         causal hierarchy, even though this correspondence is not always exact. This work
         shows that instead of strictly conforming to this hierarchical mapping, many
         causal representation learning approaches methodologically align their representa-
         tions with inherent data symmetries. Identi’¼ücation of causal variables is guided by
         invariance principles that are not necessarily causal. This result allows us to unify
         many existing approaches in a single method that can mix and match different
         assumptions, including non-causal ones, based on the invariance relevant to the
         problem at hand. It also signi’¼ücantly bene’¼üts applicability, which we demon-
         strate by improving treatment effect estimation on real-world high-dimensional
         ecological data. Overall, this paper clari’¼ües the role of causal assumptions in the
         discovery of causal variables and shifts the focus to preserving data symmetries.

1    I NTRODUCTION
Causal representation learning (Sch├Člkopf et al., 2021) posits that many high-dimensional percep-
tual data can be described through a simpli’¼üed latent structure speci’¼üed by a few low-dimensional
causally-related variables. Discovering hidden causal structures from data has been a long-standing
goal across many scienti’¼üc disciplines, spanning neuroscience (Vig├Īrio et al., 1997; Brown et al.,
2001), communication theory (Ristaniemi, 1999; Donoho, 2006), economics (Angrist & Pischke,
2009) and social science (Antonakis & Lalive, 2011). From the machine learning perspective, algo-
rithms and models integrated with causal structure are often proven to be more robust at distribution
shift (Ahuja et al., 2022a; Bareinboim & Pearl, 2016; Rojas-Carulla et al., 2018), providing better
out-of-distribution generalization results and reliable agent planning (Fumero et al., 2024; Seitzer
et al., 2021; Urp├Ł et al., 2024). The general goal of CRL approaches is formulated as to provably
identify ground-truth latent causal variables and their causal relations (up to certain ambiguities).
Many existing approaches in causal representation learning carefully formulate their problem set-
tings to guarantee identi’¼üability and justify the assumptions within the framework of PearlŌĆÖs causal
hierarchy, such as ŌĆ£observational, interventional, or counterfactual CRL" (von K├╝gelgen et al., 2024;
Ahuja et al., 2023; Brehmer et al., 2022; Buchholz et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a; Varici et al.,
2024a). Yet, several emerging lines of work reveal that not all approaches adhere strictly to this
framework; for instance, the problem setting of temporal CRL works (Lachapelle et al., 2022; Lippe
et al., 2022a;b; 2023) does not always align straightforwardly with existing categories. They of-
ten assume that an individual trajectory is ŌĆ£intervenedŌĆØ upon, but this is not an intervention in the
traditional sense, as noise variables are not resampled. It is also not a counterfactual, as the value
of non-intervened variables can change due to default dynamics. Similarly, domain generalization
(Sagawa et al., 2019; Krueger et al., 2021; Ahuja et al., 2022a) and certain multi-task learning ap-
proaches (Lachapelle et al., 2023; Fumero et al., 2024) are sometimes framed as informally related
to CRL. However, the precise relation to causality is not always clearly articulated. Consequently, a
wide range of methods and empirical ’¼ündings has emerged, although some of these approaches rely
on assumptions that might be too narrowly tailored for practical, real-world applications. For exam-
ple, Cadei et al. (2024) collected a dataset for estimating treatment effects from high-dimensional


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


observations in real-world ecology experiments. Despite the clear causal focus of the benchmark,
they note that even when multiple views and interventions are accessible, neither existing multiview
nor interventional CRL methods are directly applicable due to mismatching assumptions.
This paper contributes a uni’¼üed framework of many existing CRL works through the lens of invari-
ance (Peters et al., 2014; Heinze-Deml et al., 2018; Arjovsky et al., 2020). We observe that many ex-
isting CRL approaches share methodological similarities, particularly in aligning the representation
with known data symmetries, while differing primarily in how the invariance principle is invoked.
Typically, the invariance principle is formulated implicitly within the assumed data-generating pro-
cess. By making it explicit, we demonstrate that latent causal variable identi’¼ücation originates from
various data subsets characterized by inherent equivalence relations, which are often known a priori-
with a few exceptions. This explicit formulation not only uni’¼ües disparate CRL methods but also
offers clear practical advantages. First, it helps clarify the alignment between seemingly different
categories of CRL methods, contributing to a more coherent and accessible framework for under-
standing CRL. This perspective may also allow for the integration of multiple invariance relations in
latent variable identi’¼ücation, which could improve the ’¼éexibility of these methods in certain practical
settings. Additionally, our theory highlights a critical discrepancy between the assumptions required
for causal graph learning and those necessary for identifying causal variables: While graph learning
often requires explicit causal assumptions such as interventions, the invariance principles for vari-
able identi’¼ücation do not have to be causal. Last but not least, this formulation of invariance relation
links CRL to many existing representation learning areas outside of causality, including invariant
training (Arjovsky et al., 2020; Ahuja et al., 2022a), domain adaptation (Sagawa et al., 2019; Krueger
et al., 2021), and geometric deep learning (Cohen & Welling, 2016; Bronstein et al., 2017; 2021).
We highlight our contributions as follows:
ŌĆó We propose a uni’¼üed framework for existing CRL approaches that leverages the invariance
  principles and proving latent variable identi’¼üability in this general setting (┬¦ 3). We show
  that 30 existing identi’¼ücation results can be seen as special cases directly implied by our
  framework (Tab. 4). This approach also enables us to derive new results, including latent variable
  identi’¼üability from one imperfect intervention per node in the nonparametric setting (Cor. D.1).
ŌĆó In addition to employing different methods, many CRL works use varying de’¼ünitions of ŌĆ£iden-
  ti’¼üability." We formalize these de’¼ünitions at different levels of granularity and highlight their
  interconnections (Proposition C.1). Moreover, we show that existing CRL algorithms can achieve
  different levels of identi’¼üability based on additional (e.g., parametric) assumptions, obviating the
  need for separate proofs in each case (Proposition C.2).
ŌĆó Upon the identi’¼üability of the latent variables, we discuss the necessary causal assumptions for
  graph identi’¼ücation and the possibility of partial graph identi’¼ücation using the language of causal
  consistency. With this, we draw a distinction between the causal assumptions necessary for graph
  discovery (such as interventions or graphical assumptions) and those required for variable discov-
  ery (App. C.2). This distinction relaxes the stringent requirements typically imposed for latent
  variable identi’¼üability, thereby enhancing the frameworkŌĆÖs applicability in real-world settings.
ŌĆó Our framework is broadly applicable across a range of settings. We observe improved results
  on real-world experimental ecology data using a high-dimensional causal inference benchmark
  by Cadei et al. (2024) (┬¦ 5.1). Additionally, we present a synthetic ablation to demonstrate
  that existing methods, which assume access to interventions, actually only require a form of
  distributional invariance to identify variables. This invariance does not necessarily need to
  correspond to a valid causal intervention (┬¦ 5.2).

2    P ROBLEM S ETTING
Notation. [N ] is used as a shorthand for {1, . . . , N }. We use bold lower-case z for random
vectors and normal lower-case z for their realizations. A vector z can be indexed either by a single
index i Ōłł [dim(z)] via zi or a index subset A ŌŖå [dim(z)] with zA := {zi : i Ōłł A}. Pz denotes
the probability distribution of the random vector z and pz (z) denotes the associated probability
density function (We omit the subscription and write p(z) when the context is clear). By default, a
"measurable" function is measurable w.r.t. the Borel sigma algebras and de’¼üned w.r.t. the Lebesgue
measure. A more comprehensive summary of notations is provided in App. A.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Concrete examples of CRL categories and domain generalization are uni’¼üed by our
framework, their invariance, and a non-exhaustive list of corresponding references. The invariant
partition A is highlighted with a smoke blue box (ŌłŚ : Iz1A represents the interventional target for
z1 which is {1} in this example). For further technical details and an in-depth discussion on how
various approaches ’¼üt within our uni’¼üed framework, see Appendix App. D.


  Category                                   Example                               Invariance                Related work

                                                                                                             Locatello et al. (2020);
                      z11    z12      z13     z14    z21   z22     z23   z24       Sample level invariance   von K├╝gelgen et al.
  Multiview CRL
                                                                                   z1A = z2A                 (2021); Gresele et al.
                             x1                            x2
                                                                                                             (2020)

  Interventional
                                                                                   ŌłŚ                         von K├╝gelgen et al.
  CRL (two            z11    z12       z13    z14    z21   z22     z23   z24
                                                                                    Same interventional
                                                                                                             (2024); Varici et al.
  interventions per                                                                target Iz1 = Iz2
                             x1                            x2
                                                                                            A       A        (2024a)
  node)

  Interventional
                                                                                                             Zhang et al. (2024a);
  CRL (one            z11    z12       z13    z14    z21   z22     z23   z24
                                                                                   Marginal invariance
                                                                                                             Squires et al. (2023);
  intervention per                                                                 p z 1 = p z2
                             x1                            x2
                                                                                       A     A               Buchholz et al. (2024)
  node)

  Interventional
  CRL (one            z11    z12      z13     z14    z21   z22     z23   z24
                                                                                   Score invariance          Varici et al. (2023;
  intervention per                                                                 S z1 = S z 2              2024a)
                                 1                             2                       A        A
  node)                      x                             x


                      z╠āt1   z╠āt2     z╠āt3    z╠āt4   zt1   zt2     zt3   zt4
                                                                                   Transition invariance     Lippe et al. (2022b;a;
  Temporal CRL
                                                                                   pzA |ztŌłÆ1 = pz╠āA |ztŌłÆ1    2023)
                             x╠āt                           xt


                                              y1     y2
                                                                                   Overlapping task          Lachapelle et al. (2023);
  Multi-task CRL
                                 T1    z1     z2     z3    z4      T2              support zTA1 = zTA2       Fumero et al. (2024)
                                               x


                                                                                   Risk invariance on
                      y1                             y2                                                      Arjovsky et al. (2020);
  Domain                                                                           optimal weights
                                                                                                             Krueger et al. (2021);
  generalization      z11    z12       z13    z14    z21   z22     z23   z24       RŌłŚ1 (wŌłŚ z1A , y1 ) =
                                                                                                             Ahuja et al. (2022a)
                                                                                   RŌłŚ2 (wŌłŚ z2A , y2 )
                             x1                            x2


This section de’¼ünes our problem setting using standard CRL concepts and assumptions (Formal
de’¼ünitions are deferred to App. B). While prior works in CRL typically categorize their settings us-
ing established causal language (such as ŌĆ£counterfactual," ŌĆ£interventional," or ŌĆ£observational"), our
approach introduces a more general invariance principle that aims to unify diverse problem settings.
We introduce the following concepts as mathematical tools to describe our data generating process.
De’¼ünition 2.1 (Invariance property). Let A ŌŖå [N ] be an index subset of the Euclidean space RN and
                                                                                             |A|
let Ōł╝╬╣ be an equivalence relationship on R|A| , with A of known dimension. Let M := R              Ōł╝╬╣ be
the quotient of R|A| under this equivalence relationship; M is a topological space equipped with the
quotient topology. Let ╬╣ : R|A| ŌåÆ M be the projection onto the quotient induced by the equivalence
relationship Ōł╝╬╣ . This projection ╬╣ is termed the invariance property of this equivalence relation. Two
vectors a, b Ōłł R|A| are invariant under ╬╣ if and only if they belong to the same Ōł╝╬╣ equivalence class,
i.e.:
                                         ╬╣(a) = ╬╣(b) Ōćö a Ōł╝╬╣ b.

Extending this de’¼ünition to the entire latent space RN , we say that two latent vectors z, z╠ā Ōłł RN are
non-trivially invariant on a subset A ŌŖå [N ] if
  (i) the invariance property ╬╣ holds on the indices A ŌŖå [N ] in the sense that ╬╣(zA ) = ╬╣(z╠āA );


                                                                               3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  (ii) for any smooth functions h1 , h2 : RN ŌåÆ R|A| , the invariance property between z, z╠ā breaks
       under the h1 , h2 transformations if either function depends on some other component zq with
       q Ōłł [N ] \ A. More formally, considering h1 and z as an example,
                                            Ōłéh1 ŌłŚ
       Ōłāq Ōłł [N ] \ A, zŌłŚ Ōłł RN ,      s.t.       (z ) exists and is non zero     ŌćÆ      ╬╣(h1 (z)) ╠Ė= ╬╣(h2 (z╠ā)).
                                            Ōłézq
       This indicates the output of function h1 is in’¼éuenced by a latent variable zq outside the invari-
       ant set A, thereby violating the invariance property.

 Intuition: The invariance property ╬╣ maps the invariant latent subset zA to the quotient space
 M. Both ╬╣ and M can take various concrete forms depending on the problem settings: In the
 multi-view literature (von K├╝gelgen et al., 2021; Brehmer et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023), ╬╣ is
 the identity map because the pre-and post action views share the exact value of the invariant
 latents. For both interventional and temporal CRL (Varici et al., 2023; von K├╝gelgen et al.,
 2024; Lachapelle et al., 2022; Lippe et al., 2022a), ╬╣ acts as an operator that maps the invariant
 latent subset zA to its associated density function ŌĆō yielding the marginal density pzA in the
 interventional setting and conditional density pztA |ztŌłÆ1 in the temporal setting. In this context,
 the codomain M is the set of valid density functions. In multi-task CRL (Lachapelle et al., 2023;
 Fumero et al., 2024) and domain generalization (Arjovsky et al., 2020; Krueger et al., 2021), ╬╣
 maps the overlapping task support and the risk implied by ground truth latent-target dependency,
 respectively. Concrete examples and detailed formulations of the corresponding invariance
 properties for each case are provided in Tab. 1.

Remark: Defn. 2.1 (ii) is crucial for ensuring latent variable identi’¼ücation on the invariant partition
A. Its necessity is further justi’¼üed in App. E.1, where we demonstrate that violating (ii) leads to
non-identi’¼üability. Intuitively, condition (ii) enforces a clear separation between the invariant and
variant components of the ground truth generating process. This idea parallels key identi’¼üability
assumptions in CRL ŌĆō albeit under different names ŌĆō such as suf’¼ücient variability (von K├╝gelgen
et al., 2024; Lippe et al., 2022b), interventional regularity (Varici et al., 2023; 2024b), and interven-
tional discrepancy (Wendong et al., 2024; Varici et al., 2024a). At a high level, these assumptions
ensure that the mechanism under intervention deviates suf’¼üciently from the default causal mecha-
nism, thereby allowing one to distinguish between intervened and non-intervened latent variablesa
function that is directly served by Defn. 2.1 (ii). We elaborate on this link further in App. E.1.
We denote by Sz := {z1 , . . . , zK } the set of latent random vectors with zk Ōłł RN and write its
joint distribution as PSz . The joint distribution PSz has a probability density pSz (z 1 , . . . , z K ). Each
individual random vector zk Ōłł Sz follows the marginal density pzk with the non-degenerate support
Z k ŌŖå RN , whose interior is a non-empty open set of RN .
De’¼ünition 2.2 (Observable of a set of latent random vectors). Consider a set of random vectors
Sz := {z1 , . . . , zK } with zk Ōłł RN , the corresponding set of observables Sx := {x1 , . . . , xK } is
generated by Sx = F (Sz ), where the map F de’¼ünes a push-forward measure F# (PSz ) on the image
of F as:
                         F# (PSz )(x1 , . . . , xK ) = PSz (f1ŌłÆ1 (x1 ), . . . , fK
                                                                                 ŌłÆ1 K
                                                                                   (x ))           (2.1)
with the support X := Im(F ) ŌŖå RK├ŚD . Note that F satis’¼ües the diffeomorphism assump-
tion (Asm. B.1) as each fk is a diffeomorphism onto its image according to Asm. B.1.

 Intuition. Defn. 2.2 formalizes how the set of observables Sx is generated from a set of latent ran-
 dom vectors Sz via a joint pushforward. For example, in the multiview scenario (von K├╝gelgen
 et al., 2021; Daunhawer et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023), PSx represents the distribution of the con-
 currently observed views {x1 , . . . , xk }. In interventional CRL, each observable xk corresponds
 to data collected under different environments, so that PSx factorizes into environment-speci’¼üc
 distributions. In temporal CRL, the observable distribution PSx explicitly conditions on the pre-
 vious time step, re’¼éecting the sequential dependencies inherent in the process. In the supervised
 setting, such as multi-task CRL and domain generalization, the observables xk are augmented
 with task labels yk , capturing additional structure necessary for the task. Overall, Defn. 2.2
 provides a uni’¼üed formulation of the data-generating process across diverse settings, serving as
 the foundation for the uni’¼üed latent variable identi’¼ücation techniques developed in later sections.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In the following, we denote by I := {╬╣i : R|Ai | ŌåÆ Mi } a ’¼ünite set of invariance properties with
their respective invariant subsets Ai ŌŖå [N ] and their equivalence relationships Ōł╝╬╣i , each inducing
a projection onto its quotient and invariance property ╬╣i (Defn. 2.1). For a set of observables
Sx := {x1 , . . . , xK } Ōłł X generated from the data generating process described in ┬¦ 2, we assume:
Assumption 2.1. For each ╬╣i Ōłł I, there exists a unique, known index subset Vi ŌŖå [K] with at least
two elements (i.e., |Vi | Ōēź 2) such that the corresponding observables xVi := {xk : k Ōłł Vi } are
generated from an equivalence class of latent vectors:
                                  [z]Ōł╝╬╣i := {z╠ā Ōłł RN : zAi Ōł╝╬╣i z╠āAi }.
Following Defn. 2.2, the generating process is formally written as:
                         xVi = {f k (zk ) : k Ōłł Vi , zk Ōłł [z]Ōł╝╬╣i } = F ([z]Ōł╝╬╣i ).

Remark: Intuitively, Asm. 2.1 ensures that for each invariance property ╬╣i Ōłł I, there are at least
two observables generated from latents that share ╬╣i ; otherwise the invariance partition Ai becomes
unde’¼üned and no identi’¼ücation results can be derived. While I does not need to be fully described
with explicit forms, the assignment of observables to equivalence classes is known (denoted as
Vi ŌŖå [K] for the invariance property ╬╣i Ōłł I). This is a standard assumption and is equivalent to
knowing, e.g., two views are generated from partially overlapped latents (Yao et al., 2023).

 Problem setting. Given a set of observables Sx Ōłł X satisfying Asm. 2.1, we show that we can
 simultaneously identify multiple invariant latent blocks Ai under a set of weak assumptions. In
 an ideal scenario, if each individual latent component is represented as a single invariant block
 through individual invariance property ╬╣i Ōłł I, we can learn a fully disentangled representation
 and further identify the latent causal graph by additional technical assumptions.

3    I DENTIFIABILITY T HEORY VIA THE I NVARIANCE P RINCIPLE
High-level overview. This section presents a general theory for latent variable identi’¼ücation that
brings together many identi’¼üability results from existing CRL works, including multiview, inter-
ventional, temporal, and multi-task CRL. Our theory of latent variable identi’¼üability, based on the
invariance principle, consists of two key components: (1) ensuring the encoderŌĆÖs suf’¼üciency, thereby
obtaining an adequate representation of the original input for the desired task; (2) guaranteeing the
learned representation to preserve known data symmetries as invariance properties. The suf’¼üciency
is often enforced by minimizing the reconstruction loss (Locatello et al., 2020; Ahuja et al., 2022b;
Lippe et al., 2022b;a; Lachapelle et al., 2022) in auto-encoder based architecture, maximizing the
log likelihood in normalizing ’¼éows or maximizing entropy (Zimmermann et al., 2021; von K├╝gel-
gen et al., 2021; Daunhawer et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023) in self-supervised approaches. The in-
variance property in the learned representations is often enforced by minimizing some equivalence
relation-induced regularizer (von K├╝gelgen et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2023; Lippe et al., 2022b; Zhang
et al., 2024a) or by some iterative algorithm that provably ensures the invariance property on the
output (Squires et al., 2023; Varici et al., 2024b). As a result, all invariant blocks Ai , i Ōłł [|I|] can be
identi’¼üed up to a mixing within the blocks while being disentangled from the rest. This type of iden-
ti’¼üability is de’¼üned as block-identi’¼üability (von K├╝gelgen et al., 2021) which we restate as follows:
De’¼ünition 3.1 (Block-identi’¼üability (von K├╝gelgen et al., 2021)). A subset zA := {zj }jŌłłA with
A ŌŖå [N ] of the latent variables is block-identi’¼üed by an encoder g : RD ŌåÆ RN on the invariant
subset A if the learned representation z╠éA╠é := [g(x)]A╠é with A╠é ŌŖå [N ], |A| = |A╠é| contains all and only
information about the ground truth zA , i.e. z╠éA╠é = h(zA ) for some diffeomorphism h : R|A| ŌåÆ R|A| .

 Intuition: Block-identi’¼üability relaxes the standard notion of disentanglement (Locatello et al.,
 2020; Lachapelle et al., 2023; Fumero et al., 2021) by allowing the learned representation zA
 to be an entangled block that still captures all the information of the true latent block zA up to
 a diffeomorphism. In this framework, classical disentanglement corresponds to the special case
 where each latent variable is identi’¼üed as an individual invariant block.
De’¼ünition 3.2 (Encoders). The encoders G := {gk : X k ŌåÆ Z k }kŌłł[K] consist of smooth functions
mapping from the observational support X k to the corresponding latent support Z k (┬¦ 2).


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Intuition: For the purpose of generality, we design the encoder gk to be speci’¼üc to individual
 observable xk Ōłł Sx . However, multiple gk can share parameters if they work on the same
 modality. Ideally, the encoders should preserve as many invariances (from I) as possible. Thus, a
 clear separation between different encoding blocks is needed. To this end, we introduce selectors.

De’¼ünition 3.3 (Selection (Yao et al., 2023)). A selection ŌŖś operates between two vectors a Ōłł
{0, 1}d , b Ōłł Rd where a ŌŖś b := [bj : aj = 1, j Ōłł [d]].
De’¼ünition 3.4 (Invariant block selectors). The invariant block selectors ╬” := {ŽĢ(i,k) }iŌłł[|I|],kŌłłVi
with ŽĢ(i,k) Ōłł {0, 1}N perform selection (Defn. 3.3) on the encoded information z╠ék : for any invari-
ance property ╬╣i Ōłł I, any observable xk , k Ōłł Vi we have the selected representation:
                                                  h                                  i
                                                                  (i,k)
                ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś z╠ék = ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś gk (xk ) = [gk (xk )]j : ŽĢj     = 1, j Ōłł [N ] ,        (3.1)
                         ŌĆ▓
with ŽĢ(i,k) 0 = ŌłźŽĢ(i,k ) Ōłź0 = |Ai | for all ╬╣i Ōłł I, k, k ŌĆ▓ Ōłł Vi .

 Intuition: Selectors select the relevant encoding dimensions for each invariance property ╬╣i Ōłł I.
                                                             (i,k)
 Each selector ŽĢ(i,k) implies a index subset A╠éki := {j : ŽĢj       = 1} ŌŖå [N ] that is speci’¼üc to the
 invariance property ╬╣i and the observable xk . The assumption of known invariance size |Ai | can
 be lifted in certain scenarios by, e.g., enforcing sharing between the learned latent variables, as
 shown by Fumero et al. (2024); Yao et al. (2023), or leveraging sparsity constraints (Lachapelle
 et al., 2022; 2024; Zheng et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2024).

Constraint 3.1 (Invariance constraint). For any invariance property ╬╣i Ōłł I, i Ōłł [|I|], the selected
representations ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś gk (xk ), k Ōłł Vi must be ╬╣i -invariant across the observables from the subset
Vi ŌŖå [K]:
                                                 ŌĆ▓           ŌĆ▓
               ╬╣i (ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś gk (xk )) = ╬╣i (ŽĢ(i,k ) ŌŖś gkŌĆ▓ (xk )) ŌłĆi Ōłł [|I|] ŌłĆk, k ŌĆ▓ Ōłł Vi          (3.2)

Constraint 3.2 (Suf’¼üciency constraint). For any ╬╣i Ōłł I, i Ōłł [|I|], the selected representation
ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś gk (xk ), k Ōłł Vi must preserve all information of the invariant partition zAi that we aim to
identify, i.e., I(zAi , ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś gk (xk )) = H(zAi ) ŌłĆi Ōłł [|I|], k Ōłł Vi , where I(┬Ę, ┬Ę) denotes the mutual
information and H(┬Ę) denotes the differential entropy of the ground truth latent distribution pzAi .

 Intuition: The regularizer enforcing this suf’¼üciency constraint can be tailored to suit the speci’¼üc
 task of interest. For example, for self-supervised training, it can be implemented as the mutual
 information between the input data and the encodings, i.e., I(x, g(x)) = H(x), to preserve the
 entropy from the observations; for classi’¼ücation, it becomes the mutual information between
 the task labels and the learned representation I(y, g(x)). Sometimes, suf’¼üciency does not have
 to be enforced on the whole representation. For example, in the multiview line of work (von
 K├╝gelgen et al., 2021; Daunhawer et al., 2023), when considering a single invariant block A,
 enforcing suf’¼üciency on the shared partition (implemented as entropy on the learned encoding
 H(g(x)1:|A| )) is enough to block-identify these shared latent variables zA .

Theorem 3.1 (Identi’¼üability of multiple invariant blocks). Consider a set of observables Sx =
{x1 , x2 , . . . , xK } Ōłł X generated from ┬¦ 2 satisfying Asm. 2.1. Let G, ╬” be the set of smooth
encoders (Defn. 3.2) and selectors (Defn. 3.4) that satisfy Constraints 3.1 and 3.2, then the invariant
component zkAi is block-identi’¼üed (Defn. 3.1) by ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś gk for all ╬╣i Ōłł I, k Ōłł [K].

 Discussion: Thm. 3.1 demonstrates that by enforcing all invariance properties ╬╣i Ōłł I jointly,
 our framework can simultaneously learn representations that block-identify all invariant la-
 tent blocks. This uni’¼üed approach accommodates multiple invariance principles, making it
 well-suited for complex real-world scenarios where diverse invariance relations coexist. In
 practice, the resulting constrained optimization problem admits various solution strategies.
 For instance, Lippe et al. (2022b;a) adopt a two-stage process: ’¼ürst addressing the suf’¼üciency
 constraint and then the invariance constraint, while Lachapelle et al. (2023); Fumero et al. (2024)
 frame the problem as a bi-level constrained optimization task. Some works (von K├╝gelgen et al.,
 2021; Yao et al., 2023; Daunhawer et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024a; Ahuja et al., 2024) propose


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 loss functions that directly enforce these constraints, whereas others (Squires et al., 2023; Varici
 et al., 2024a;b) develop iterative, step-by-step algorithms. This diversity of solution methods
 not only underscores the ’¼éexibility of our theoretical framework but also highlights its practical
 relevance across different CRL settings.
What about the variant latents? Intuitively, the variant latents are not identi’¼üable, as the invariance
constraint (Constraint 3.1) is applied only to the selected invariant encodings, leaving the variant
part without any weak supervision (Locatello et al., 2019). This result is formalized as follows:
Proposition 3.2 (General Snon-identi’¼üability of variant latent variables). Consider the setup
in Thm. 3.1, let A :=      iŌłł[|I|] Ai denote the union of block-identi’¼üed latent indices and
Ac := [N ] \ A the complementary set where no ╬╣-invariance ╬╣ Ōłł I applies, then the variant latents
zAc cannot be identi’¼üed.
Although variant latent variables are generally non-identi’¼üable, they can be identi’¼üed under certain
conditions. The following demonstrates that variant latent variables can be identi’¼üed under invertible
encoders when the variant and invariant partitions are mutually independent.
Proposition 3.3 (Identi’¼üability of variant latent under independence). Consider an optimal encoder
g Ōłł GŌłŚ and optimal selector ŽĢ Ōłł ╬”ŌłŚ from Thm. 3.1 that jointly identify an invariant block zA (we
omit subscriptions k, i for simplicity), then zAc (Ac := [N ] \ A) can be identi’¼üed by the complemen-
tary encoding partition (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g only if
     (i) g is invertible in the sense that I(x, g(x)) = H(x);
    (ii) zAc is independent on zA .

 Discussion: The generalization of new interventions in CRL can be viewed through two distinct
 layers. The ’¼ürst layer involves generalizing to unseen interventional values, where the model
 encounters novel combinations of intervention settings; this has been demonstrated in several
 existing works (Zhang et al., 2024a; von K├╝gelgen et al., 2024). The second layer concerns
 generalization to unseen nodes, which, as Proposition 3.2 shows, is fundamentally challenging
 without additional conditions. However, under weak assumptions such as the independence of
 variant and invariant latent partitions and suf’¼ücient latent representation for reconstruction, non-
 intervened nodes in the training phase can be identi’¼üed during inference (Proposition 3.3). This
 observation aligns with the identi’¼üability algebra described in (Yao et al., 2023) and is supported
 by ’¼ündings in disentanglement literature (Locatello et al., 2020; Fumero et al., 2024) as well as
 in temporal CRL (Lippe et al., 2022b; Lachapelle et al., 2024). Overall, this result emphasizes
 the need for carefully considering the conditions under which variant latents can be identi’¼üed,
 and it delineates the practical limitations of CRL methods when generalizing to unseen nodes.

4    R ELATED W ORKS AS S PECIAL C ASES OF O UR T HEORY
This section provides an overview of the literature on CRL, including multiview, interventional,
temporal, and multi-task settings, as well as domain generalization. We explain the underlying in-
variance principles and show how they naturally ’¼üt into our framework as special cases. Tab. 1 lists
concrete examples and the explicit forms of their underlying invariance, and further mathematical
details are deferred to Appendix App. D.
Multiview CRL. Multiview CRL (also considered as ŌĆ£counterfactual" CRL) considers a setting
where each view (observable xk ) is generated from a subset of latent causal variables (Locatello
et al., 2020; Ahuja et al., 2022b; von K├╝gelgen et al., 2021; Daunhawer et al., 2023; Yao et al.,
2023). Given any set of jointly observed views, the view-speci’¼üc generating latents could overlap,
giving rise to sample level invariance on all realizations of these shared latents. The common
theoretical contribution in this line of work in terms of identi’¼üability is that the invariant partition
of latents (shared ones) can be block-identi’¼üed by enforcing aligned and suf’¼ücient representation,
which is a special case of Thm. 3.1 with speci’¼üed sample invariance.
Interventional CRL. Interventional (also termed multi-environment) CRL (Ahuja et al., 2023;
Squires et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024a; Buchholz et al., 2024; Varici et al., 2023; 2024a; von
K├╝gelgen et al., 2021; Wendong et al., 2024) collects data from multiple environments that follow
different data distributions, often originated from interventions (xk Ōł╝ P k ). Current interventional


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


CRL literature has provided fruitful identi’¼üability results based on various types of interventions:
either atomic or paired interventions per node or different parametric assumptions on the mixing
function or the latent causal model. Interventions give rise to many types of invariance: When
performing an atomic intervention on an arbitrary node, the marginal of its non-descendants
remain invariant; the score of all other nodes than its parents and itself also remain invariant. By
utilizing these two types of invariance, we can not only explain various prior identi’¼ücation theories
as special cases of Thm. 3.1, but also directly develop new element-wise identi’¼ücation results
on the latent variables, given imperfect atomic interventions per node (Cor. D.1). Some other
works (von K├╝gelgen et al., 2021; Varici et al., 2024a) consider paired interventions per node,
with an invariant interventional target between these paired interventional environments. This
invariance imposes a certain score structure in the latent space, which can be used as the invariant
constraint (Constraint 3.1). More details in this regard are provided in App. D.2. More recently,
Ahuja et al. (2024) explains previous interventional identi’¼üability results from a general weak distri-
butional invariance perspective. Ahuja et al. (2024) proves block-af’¼üne identi’¼ücation (Defn. C.1) by
additionally assuming the mixing function to be ’¼ünite degree polynomial, which can be explained
by Proposition C.2 together with our block-identi’¼üability results under the general nonparametric
setting. They consider one single invariance set, which is a special case of Thm. 3.1 with one joint
╬╣-property. Another line of interventional CRL work (Zhang et al., 2024a) employs an orthogonal
proof technique, originating from nonlinear ICA with auxiliary variables (Hyvarinen et al., 2019).
We remark that our framework does not directly include this line of identi’¼üability theory.
Temporal CRL. Extending CRL into time-series setting, temporal CRL often assumes an ŌĆ£inter-
venable" trajectory in the latent space (Lippe et al., 2022a;b; 2023; Lachapelle et al., 2022; Yao
et al., 2022b;a; Li et al., 2024b). At each time step, an intervention/action modi’¼ües the dynamics
of a subset of latent variables, with the remaining invariant partition following the default dynamics
conditioning on the previous time step. Existing works have shown that the intervened part can
be disentangled from the invariant part when there is no causal link between the latent causal
variables at the same time step (Lachapelle et al., 2022; Lippe et al., 2022a;b). Comparing the
ŌĆ£counterfactual" latent with the actual partially intervened latents on the same time step, one
observes the transitional distribution (current latents conditioning on previous latents) remain
invariant for the non-intervened partition (see Tab. 1 for concrete examples). This formulates an
explicit ╬╣-property (Defn. 2.1) for each time step with potentially different invariant partitions,
explaining many existing temporal CRL identi’¼üability theories by incorporating Thm. 3.1.
Multi-task CRL In supervised CRL, latent variables (Lachapelle et al., 2023; Fumero et al.,
2024) are shown to be identi’¼üable under multi-task setting, meaning there are multiple task labels
available for each observable (xk := (x, yk )). The key criterion for achieving identi’¼üability is
overlapping task support, i.e., a set of tasks depends on a shared set of latents. This shared set of
latents constitutes the invariant partition zA , as illustrated in Tab. 1. Incorporating this invariance
principle into Thm. 3.1 explains the identi’¼ücation results of (Lachapelle et al., 2023; Fumero et al.,
2024), showing the overlapping task support can be identi’¼üed.
Domain Generalization. The ’¼üeld of domain generalization focuses on the out-of-distribution
performance of the learned representation instead of the theoretical identi’¼üability guarantee (Rojas-
Carulla et al., 2018; Arjovsky et al., 2020; Ahuja et al., 2022a; Krueger et al., 2021; Sagawa et al.,
2019). The goal is to learn representations that perform equally well across domains originating
from distributional shifts, such as covariates shift or concept shift. Domain generalization typically
assumes the same downstream prediction task, and this task depends on the same subset of latent
factors A across all domains. Given the same ground truth task-latent dependency, the domain risk
w.r.t. ground truth inverting process remains invariant across all domains. This invariance property
together with Thm. 3.1 could provide theoretical insights for domain generalization works such
as (Krueger et al., 2021; Sagawa et al., 2019) (formal mathematical derivation provided in (f)).

5    E XPERIMENTS
This section illustrates the expanded applicability of CRL algorithms under the invariance princi-
ple. ┬¦ 5.1 shows improved treatment effect estimation on the high-dimensional causal inference
benchmark (Cadei et al., 2024) by enforcing the invariance principle through existing domain gen-
eralization techniques (Krueger et al., 2021). This result underscores the practical utility of our
uni’¼üed approach. Additionally, ┬¦ 5.2 provides ablation studies on existing interventional CRL meth-


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           140                                                             1.0                                  140                                                                1.0
                 Model Selection Criteria                                                                             Model Selection Criteria
                      Min ERM                                                                                              Min ERM
           120        Min Invariance                                                                            120        Min Invariance
                      Min TERB                                             0.9                                             Min TERB                                                0.9
           100                                                                                                  100
                                                                           0.8                                                                                                     0.8


                                                                             Balanced Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                     Balanced Accuracy
           80                                                                                                   80
TERB (%)


                                                                                                     TERB (%)
           60                                                              0.7                                  60                                                                 0.7

           40                                                              0.6                                  40                                                                 0.6

           20                                                                                                   20
                                                                           0.5                                                                                                     0.5
            0                                                                                                    0
                   0          0.1           1   10    100   1000   10000                                                0          0.1           1     10     100   1000   10000
                 (ERM)                                                                                                (ERM)
                                                INV                                                                                                     INV


                              (a) Experiment Sampling                                                                                 (b) Position Sampling

Figure 1: TERB and Balanced Accuracy with standard deviation over 20 different seeds varying the
invariance weight ╬╗INV of V-REx (Krueger et al., 2021) on ISTAnt dataset (Cadei et al., 2024). Stars
represent the selected best models based on a small but heterogeneous validation set.

ods (Ahuja et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024a), showcasing that the non-trivial distributional invariance
required for latent variable identi’¼ücation can arise from non-causal assumptions.
5.1 C ASE S TUDY: ISTA NT
This experiment focuses on ISTAnt (Cadei et al., 2024), a recent real-world ecological benchmark de-
signed for treatment effect estimation. ISTAnt consists of video recordings of ants triplets with occa-
sional grooming behavior. The goal is to extract a per-frame representation for supervised behavior
classi’¼ücation (grooming or not) to estimate the Average Treatment Effect of an intervention (expo-
sure to a chemical substance). Further details about the problem setting are provided in App. F.1.
Experiment settings. Different videos in ISTAnt are considered different experiments as the
experiment settings and treatments vary. We consider hard annotation sampling criteria (more
non-annotated than annotated) for both experiments (videos) and positions, as described by Cadei
et al. (2024). For the training, we adopt a domain generalization objective that utilizes the invariance
principle (Krueger et al., 2021), which is restated as follows:
                                                                      P
        RV-REx (w ŌŚ” g) = ╬╗INV Var({R1 (w ŌŚ” g), . . . , RK (w ŌŚ” g)}) + kŌłł[K] Rk (w ŌŚ” g),             (5.1)
                           |                  {z                  } |           {z         }
                                                                           invariance                                                                suf’¼üciency

we provide a detailed derivation in (f) showing the invariance term above is indeed enforcing risk
invariance. We vary the strength of the invariant component in eq. (5.1) by setting the regularization
multiplier ╬╗INV from 0 (ERM) to 10 000. We repeat 20 independent runs for each ╬╗INV to estimate
the statistical error. Further implementational details are deferred to App. F.1. We evaluate the
performance with both balanced accuracy and Treatment Effect Relative Bias (TERB). TERB is
de’¼üned by Cadei et al. (2024) as the ratio between the bias in the predictions across treatment groups
and the true average treatment effect estimated with ground-truth annotations over the whole trial.
Results. Fig. 1 depicts the model performance regarding varying invariance regularization strength
╬╗INV . Consistent with our expectation, the balanced accuracy initially increases with the ╬╗INV , as
adequate invariance enforces identifying task-related latents, thus bene’¼üting the prediction problem.
At a later point, the performance decreases because the suf’¼üciency component is not correctly
balanced with the invariance. Similarly, the TERB improves positively, weighting the invariance
component until a certain threshold. On average, with ╬╗INV = 100 the TERB decreases to 20%
(from 100% using ERM) with experiment subsampling. In agreement with (Cadei et al., 2024),
a naive estimate of the TERB on a small validation set is a reasonable (albeit not perfect) model
selection criterion. Although it performs slightly worse than model selection based on Empirical
Risk Minimization(ERM) loss in the position sampling case, it shows more reliability overall.
This experiment underscores the advantages of ’¼éexibly enforcing known invariances in the data,
corroborating our identi’¼üability theory (┬¦ 3).
5.2 S YNTHETIC A BLATION WITH ŌĆ£N INTERVENTIONS ŌĆØ
This subsection presents identi’¼üability results under non-causal conditions using simulated data. We
consider a simple graph of three causal variables as z1 ŌåÆ z2 ŌåÆ z3 . The corresponding joint density


                                                                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


has the form of
                             pz (z1 , z2 , z3 ) = p(z3 | z2 )p(z2 | z1 )p(z1 ).
This experiment aims at demonstrating that existing methods of interventional CRL rely primarily
on distributional invariance, regardless of whether this invariance arises from a well-de’¼üned inter-
vention or some other arbitrary transformation. To illustrate this, we introduce the concept of a
ŌĆ£nintervention," which has a similar distributional effect to a regular intervention, maintaining cer-
tain conditionals invariant while altering others, but without a causal interpretation.
De’¼ünition 5.1 (Nintervention). We de’¼üne a ŌĆ£ninterventionŌĆØ on a causal conditional as the process
of changing its distribution but cutting all incoming and outgoing edges. Child nodes condition
on the old, pre-intervention, random variable. Formally, we consider the latent SCM as de’¼üned
in Defn. B.1, an nintervention on a node j Ōłł [N ] gives rise to the following conditional factorization
                                                Q
                               p╠āz (z) = p╠ā(zj ) iŌłł[N ]\{j} p(zi | zpa(i)
                                                                    old
                                                                          )

Note that the marginal distribution of all non-nintervened nodes Pz[N ]\j remain invariant after nin-
tervention. In previous example, we perform a nintervention by replacing the conditional density
p(z2 | z1 ) using a suf’¼üciently different marginal distribution p╠ā(z2 ) that satis’¼ües Defn. 2.1 (ii), which
gives rise to the following new factorization p╠āz (z1 , z2 , z3 ) = p(z3 | z2old )p╠ā(z2 )p(z1 ). Note that z3
conditions on the random variable z2 before nintervention, whose realization is denoted as z2old . Dif-
fering from a causal intervention, we cut both the incoming and outgoing links of z2 and keep the
marginal distribution of z3 the same. Clearly, this is a non-sensical intervention from the causal
perspective because we eliminate the causal effect from z2 to its descendants.
Experiment settings. As a proof of concept, we choose a linear Gaussian additive noise model and
a nonlinear mixing function implemented as a 3-layer invertible MLP. We average the results over
three independently sampled ninterventional densities p╠ā(z2 ) while guaranteeing all ninterventional
distributions satisfy Defn. 2.1 (ii). As the marginal distribution of both z1 , z3 remains the same after
a nintervention, we expect z1 , z3 to be block-identi’¼üed (Defn. 3.1) according to Thm. 3.1. In prac-
tice, we enforce the marginal invariance constraint (Constraint 3.1) by minimizing the MMD loss, as
implemented by the interventional CRL works (Zhang et al., 2024a; Ahuja et al., 2024) and train an
auto-encoder for a suf’¼ücient representation (Constraint 3.2). Further details are included in App. F.2.
Results. To validate block-identi’¼üability, we perform Kernel-Ridge Regression between the
estimated block [z╠é1 , z╠é3 ] and the ground truth latents z1 , z2 , z3 . Both z1 and z3 are block-identi’¼üed
with high R2 scores of 0.863 ┬▒ 0.031 and 0.872 ┬▒ 0.035. In contrast, z2 is not identi’¼üed, with a low
R2 of 0.065 ┬▒ 0.017, indicating identi’¼ücation is driven by the underlying distributional invariance.

6    C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we examined a broad range of CRL methods and found that many of them share
common strategies for aligning representations with known data symmetries. We identi’¼üed two key
components in achieving identi’¼üability: preserving data information and enforcing a set of known in-
variances (see ┬¦ 3). Our work clari’¼ües the role of causal assumptions in latent variable identi’¼ücation,
shifting the focus from speci’¼üc, often impractical, assumptions to a general recipe that enables practi-
tioners to specify and leverage known invariances in their problems. Following this recipe, we exem-
pli’¼üed the practical impact of our approach on ecological data (┬¦ 5.1). This paper leaves out settings
involving discrete variables and ’¼ünite sample guarantees, which might be interesting for future work.
E THICS S TATEMENT
This work uni’¼ües many existing theoretical results in CRL, thus vastly broadening its real-world ap-
plicability. As the paper is predominantly theoretical, we believe it poses no immediate ethical risks.
R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
All proofs in this paper are deferred to App. E. The ISTAnt dataset in ┬¦ 5.1 is published
by (Cadei et al., 2024). Results provided in ┬¦ 5 can be reproduced following the details
given in App. F. Since our primary focus is on the theoretical uni’¼ücation of latent vari-
able identi’¼ücation algorithms, the practical implementation of the invariance and suf’¼üciency
constraints may take various forms (as illustrated in Tab. 4) and should be tailored to the
speci’¼üc problem at hand. For a brief example of the ecology experiment (┬¦ 5.1), please visit:
https://github.com/CausalLearningAI/ISTAnt/blob/main/experiments/invariance.ipynb.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Jiaqi Zhang, Francesco Montagna, David Lopez-Paz, Kartik Ahuja, Thomas Kipf, Sara
Magliacane, Julius von K├╝gelgen, Kun Zhang, and Bernhard Sch├Člkopf for extremely helpful
discussion. Riccardo Cadei was supported by a Google Research Scholar Award to Francesco
Locatello. We acknowledge the Third Bellairs Workshop on Causal Representation Learning held
at the Bellairs Research Institute, February 9/16, 2024, and a debate on the difference between
interventions and counterfactuals in disentanglement and CRL that took place during Dhanya
SridharŌĆÖs lecture, which motivated us to signi’¼ücantly broaden the scope of the paper. We thank
Dhanya and all participants of the workshop.

R EFERENCES
Kartik Ahuja, Ethan Caballero, Dinghuai Zhang, Jean-Christophe Gagnon-Audet, Yoshua Bengio,
  Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Irina Rish. Invariance principle meets information bottleneck for out-of-
  distribution generalization, 2022a. 1, 2, 3, 8, 27, 44

Kartik Ahuja, Jason S Hartford, and Yoshua Bengio. Weakly supervised representation learning
  with sparse perturbations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:15516ŌĆō15528,
  2022b. 5, 7, 23, 42

Kartik Ahuja, Divyat Mahajan, Yixin Wang, and Yoshua Bengio. Interventional causal representa-
  tion learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 372ŌĆō407. PMLR, 2023. 1,
  7, 9, 20, 24, 25, 29, 34

Kartik Ahuja, Amin Mansouri, and Yixin Wang. Multi-domain causal representation learning via
  weak distributional invariances. In International Conference on Arti’¼ücial Intelligence and Statis-
  tics, pp. 865ŌĆō873. PMLR, 2024. 6, 8, 10, 24, 25, 39

Joshua D Angrist and J├Črn-Steffen Pischke. Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricistŌĆÖs com-
  panion. Princeton university press, 2009. 1

J Antonakis and R Lalive. Counterfactuals and causal inference: Methods and principles for social
  research. Structural Equation Modeling, 18(1):152ŌĆō159, 2011. 1

Md Rifat Are’¼ün, Yan Zhang, Aristide Baratin, Francesco Locatello, Irina Rish, Dianbo Liu, and
 Kenji Kawaguchi. Unsupervised concept discovery mitigates spurious correlations. In Forty-’¼ürst
 International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. 38

Martin Arjovsky, L├®on Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization,
 2020. 2, 3, 4, 8, 27, 28, 43

Jinze Bai, Rui Men, Hao Yang, Xuancheng Ren, Kai Dang, Yichang Zhang, Xiaohuan Zhou, Peng
   Wang, Sinan Tan, An Yang, et al. Ofasys: A multi-modal multi-task learning system for building
   generalist models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04408, 2022. 26

Elias Bareinboim and Judea Pearl. Causal inference and the data-fusion problem. Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences, 113(27):7345ŌĆō7352, 2016. 1

Sander Beckers and Joseph Y Halpern. Abstracting causal models. In Proceedings of the aaai
  conference on arti’¼ücial intelligence, volume 33, pp. 2678ŌĆō2685, 2019. 22

Sara Beery, Grant Van Horn, and Pietro Perona. Recognition in terra incognita. In Proceedings of
  the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 456ŌĆō473, 2018. 27

Gilles Blanchard, Gyemin Lee, and Clayton Scott. Generalizing from several related classi’¼ücation
  tasks to a new unlabeled sample. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24, 2011.
  27

Johann Brehmer, Pim De Haan, Phillip Lippe, and Taco S Cohen. Weakly supervised causal repre-
  sentation learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:38319ŌĆō38331, 2022.
  1, 4, 21, 23, 42


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Yann LeCun, Arthur Szlam, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Geomet-
 ric deep learning: going beyond euclidean data. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 34(4):18ŌĆō42,
 2017. 2, 38

Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Taco Cohen, and Petar Velic╠īkovic╠ü. Geometric deep learning:
 Grids, groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13478, 2021. 2, 38

Glen D Brown, Satoshi Yamada, and Terrence J Sejnowski. Independent component analysis at the
  neural cocktail party. Trends in neurosciences, 24(1):54ŌĆō63, 2001. 1

Simon Buchholz, Goutham Rajendran, Elan Rosenfeld, Bryon Aragam, Bernhard Sch├Člkopf, and
  Pradeep Ravikumar. Learning linear causal representations from interventions under general non-
  linear mixing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024. 1, 3, 7, 19, 24, 28,
  39

Riccardo Cadei, Lukas Lindorfer, Sylvia Cremer, Cordelia Schmid, and Francesco Locatello. Smoke
  and mirrors in causal downstream tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37,
  2024. 1, 2, 8, 9, 10, 35, 36

Rich Caruana. Multitask learning. Machine learning, 28:41ŌĆō75, 1997. 26

Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Group equivariant convolutional networks. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 2990ŌĆō2999. PMLR, 2016. 2, 38

Taco S Cohen, Mario Geiger, Jonas K├Čhler, and Max Welling. Spherical cnns. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1801.10130, 2018. 38

Elliot Creager, Joern-Henrik Jacobsen, and Richard Zemel. Environment inference for invariant
  learning. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  2189ŌĆō2200. PMLR, 18ŌĆō24 Jul 2021. 38

Imant Daunhawer, Alice Bizeul, Emanuele Palumbo, Alexander Marx, and Julia E Vogt. Identi’¼üa-
  bility results for multimodal contrastive learning. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023. 4, 5, 6, 7, 23, 42

Thomas Dean and Keiji Kanazawa. A model for reasoning about persistance and causation. In
  Computational Intelligence, pp. 5, 1989. 25

David L Donoho. Compressed sensing. IEEE Transactions on information theory, 52(4):1289ŌĆō1306,
  2006. 1

Chen Fang, Ye Xu, and Daniel N Rockmore. Unbiased metric learning: On the utilization of multiple
  datasets and web images for softening bias. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
  on Computer Vision, pp. 1657ŌĆō1664, 2013. 27

Marco Fumero, Luca Cosmo, Simone Melzi, and Emanuele Rodol├Ā. Learning disentangled repre-
 sentations via product manifold projection. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
 3530ŌĆō3540. PMLR, 2021. 5, 38

Marco Fumero, Florian Wenzel, Luca Zancato, Alessandro Achille, Emanuele Rodol├Ā, Stefano
 Soatto, Bernhard Sch├Člkopf, and Francesco Locatello. Leveraging sparse and shared feature
 activations for disentangled representation learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 36, 2024. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 27, 29, 43

Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, Fran├¦ois Lavi-
  olette, Mario March, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural networks.
  Journal of machine learning research, 17(59):1ŌĆō35, 2016. 27, 28

Luigi Gresele, Paul K Rubenstein, Arash Mehrjou, Francesco Locatello, and Bernhard Sch├Člkopf.
  The incomplete rosetta stone problem: Identi’¼üability results for multi-view nonlinear ica. In
  Uncertainty in Arti’¼ücial Intelligence, pp. 217ŌĆō227. PMLR, 2020. 3


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ishaan Gulrajani and David Lopez-Paz. In search of lost domain generalization. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2007.01434, 2020. 35
Christina Heinze-Deml, Jonas Peters, and Nicolai Meinshausen. Invariant causal prediction for
  nonlinear models. Journal of Causal Inference, 6(2):20170016, 2018. 2
Irina Higgins, David Amos, David Pfau, Sebastien Racaniere, Loic Matthey, Danilo Rezende,
   and Alexander Lerchner. Towards a de’¼ünition of disentangled representations. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1812.02230, 2018. 38
Patrik Hoyer, Dominik Janzing, Joris M Mooij, Jonas Peters, and Bernhard Sch├Člkopf. Nonlinear
  causal discovery with additive noise models. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  21, 2008. 22
Minyoung Huh, Brian Cheung, Tongzhou Wang, and Phillip Isola. The platonic representation
 hypothesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07987, 2024. 37
Aapo Hyvarinen, Hiroaki Sasaki, and Richard Turner. Nonlinear ica using auxiliary variables and
  generalized contrastive learning. In The 22nd International Conference on Arti’¼ücial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 859ŌĆō868. PMLR, 2019. 8, 29
Dominik Janzing and Sergio Hernan Garrido Mejia. A phenomenological account for causality in
  terms of elementary actions. Journal of Causal Inference, 12(1):20220076, 2024. 37
John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin ┼Į├Łdek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate
  protein structure prediction with alphafold. nature, 596(7873):583ŌĆō589, 2021. 38
Ilyes Khemakhem, Ricardo Monti, Diederik Kingma, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Ice-beem: Identi’¼üable
   conditional energy-based deep models based on nonlinear ica. Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems, 33:12768ŌĆō12778, 2020. 26, 29
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.           Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013. 26
Bohdan Kivva, Goutham Rajendran, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Bryon Aragam. Identi’¼üability of
  deep generative models without auxiliary information. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal,
  D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 35, pp. 15687ŌĆō15701. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022. 29
David A Klindt, Lukas Schott, Yash Sharma, Ivan Ustyuzhaninov, Wieland Brendel, Matthias
  Bethge, and Dylan Paiton. Towards nonlinear disentanglement in natural data with temporal
  sparse coding. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. 26
Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoffrey Hinton. Similarity of neural
  network representations revisited. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3519ŌĆō
  3529. PMLR, 2019. 37
David Krueger, Ethan Caballero, Joern-Henrik Jacobsen, Amy Zhang, Jonathan Binas, Dinghuai
  Zhang, Remi Le Priol, and Aaron Courville. Out-of-distribution generalization via risk extrapola-
  tion (rex). In International conference on machine learning, pp. 5815ŌĆō5826. PMLR, 2021. 1, 2,
  3, 4, 8, 9, 27, 28, 29, 35, 37, 44
S├®bastien Lachapelle, Rodriguez Lopez, Pau, Yash Sharma, Katie E. Everett, R├®mi Le Priol, Alexan-
  dre Lacoste, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Disentanglement via mechanism sparsity regularization:
  A new principle for nonlinear ICA. In First Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning, 2022.
  1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 19, 20, 25, 26, 29
S├®bastien Lachapelle, Tristan Deleu, Divyat Mahajan, Ioannis Mitliagkas, Yoshua Bengio, Simon
  Lacoste-Julien, and Quentin Bertrand. Synergies between disentanglement and sparsity: Gen-
  eralization and identi’¼üability in multi-task learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 18171ŌĆō18206. PMLR, 2023. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 27, 29, 43


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S├®bastien Lachapelle, Pau Rodr├Łguez L├│pez, Yash Sharma, Katie Everett, R├®mi Le Priol, Alexan-
  dre Lacoste, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Nonparametric partial disentanglement via mecha-
  nism sparsity: Sparse actions, interventions and sparse temporal dependencies. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.04890, 2024. 6, 7, 25, 26, 29
Da Li, Yongxin Yang, Yi-Zhe Song, and Timothy M Hospedales. Deeper, broader and artier domain
  generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
  5542ŌĆō5550, 2017. 27
Yixuan Li, Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Hod Lipson, and John Hopcroft. Convergent learning: Do
  different neural networks learn the same representations? arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07543, 2015.
  37
Zijian Li, Ruichu Cai, Zhenhui Yang, Haiqin Huang, Guangyi Chen, Yifan Shen, Zhengming Chen,
  Xiangchen Song, Zhifeng Hao, and Kun Zhang. When and how: Learning identi’¼üable latent
  states for nonstationary time series forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12767, 2024a. 25
Zijian Li, Yifan Shen, Kaitao Zheng, Ruichu Cai, Xiangchen Song, Mingming Gong, Zhifeng Hao,
  Zhengmao Zhu, Guangyi Chen, and Kun Zhang. On the identi’¼ücation of temporally causal repre-
  sentation with instantaneous dependence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15325, 2024b. 8, 25, 26
Phillip Lippe, Sara Magliacane, Sindy L├Čwe, Yuki M Asano, Taco Cohen, and Efstratios Gavves.
  Causal representation learning for instantaneous and temporal effects in interactive systems. In
  The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022a. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 25,
  26, 42
Phillip Lippe, Sara Magliacane, Sindy L├Čwe, Yuki M Asano, Taco Cohen, and Stratis Gavves. Cit-
  ris: Causal identi’¼üability from temporal intervened sequences. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 13557ŌĆō13603. PMLR, 2022b. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 25, 26, 30, 42
Phillip Lippe, Sara Magliacane, Sindy L├Čwe, Yuki M Asano, Taco Cohen, and Efstratios Gavves.
  Biscuit: Causal representation learning from binary interactions. In Uncertainty in Arti’¼ücial
  Intelligence, pp. 1263ŌĆō1273. PMLR, 2023. 1, 3, 8, 25, 26, 43
Yuejiang Liu, Alexandre Alahi, Chris Russell, Max Horn, Dominik Zietlow, Bernhard Sch├Člkopf,
  and Francesco Locatello. Causal triplet: An open challenge for intervention-centric causal repre-
  sentation learning. In Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning, pp. 553ŌĆō573. PMLR, 2023.
  23
Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Gunnar Raetsch, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard
  Sch├Člkopf, and Olivier Bachem. Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learning
  of disentangled representations. In international conference on machine learning, pp. 4114ŌĆō4124.
  PMLR, 2019. 7
Francesco Locatello, Ben Poole, Gunnar Raetsch, Bernhard Sch├Člkopf, Olivier Bachem, and
  Michael Tschannen. Weakly-supervised disentanglement without compromises. In Hal Daum├®
  III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 6348ŌĆō6359. PMLR, 13ŌĆō18
  Jul 2020. 3, 5, 7, 23, 42
Luca Moschella, Valentino Maiorca, Marco Fumero, Antonio Norelli, Francesco Locatello, and
  Emanuele Rodol├Ā. Relative representations enable zero-shot latent space communication. Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. 37
Kevin Patrick Murphy. Dynamic bayesian networks: representation, inference and learning. Uni-
  versity of California, Berkeley, 2002. 25
Maxime Oquab, Timoth├®e Darcet, Th├®o Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning
 robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193, 2023. 36
Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge university press, 2009. 21


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xingchao Peng, Qinxun Bai, Xide Xia, Zijun Huang, Kate Saenko, and Bo Wang. Moment matching
  for multi-source domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference
  on computer vision, pp. 1406ŌĆō1415, 2019. 27
Jonas Peters, Joris M Mooij, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Sch├Člkopf. Causal discovery with
  continuous additive noise models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2014. 2, 37
Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schlkopf. Elements of Causal Inference: Foundations
  and Learning Algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017. ISBN 0262037319. 37
Mohammad Pezeshki, Diane Bouchacourt, Mark Ibrahim, Nicolas Ballas, Pascal Vincent, and David
 Lopez-Paz. Discovering environments with xrm. In Forty-’¼ürst International Conference on Ma-
 chine Learning, 2024. 38
Danilo Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing ’¼éows. In Interna-
  tional conference on machine learning, pp. 1530ŌĆō1538. PMLR, 2015. 26
Tapani Ristaniemi. On the performance of blind source separation in cdma downlink. In Proceed-
  ings of the International Workshop on Independent Component Analysis and Signal Separation
  (ICAŌĆÖ99), pp. 437ŌĆō441, 1999. 1
James M Robins, Miguel Angel Hernan, and Babette Brumback. Marginal structural models and
  causal inference in epidemiology. Epidemiology, 11(5):550ŌĆō560, 2000. 35
Mateo Rojas-Carulla, Bernhard Sch├Člkopf, Richard Turner, and Jonas Peters. Invariant models for
 causal transfer learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 19(36):1ŌĆō34, 2018. 1, 8
P Rubenstein, S Weichwald, S Bongers, J Mooij, D Janzing, M Grosse-Wentrup, and B Sch├Člkopf.
  Causal consistency of structural equation models. In 33rd Conference on Uncertainty in Arti’¼ücial
  Intelligence (UAI 2017), pp. 808ŌĆō817. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. 22
Donald B Rubin. Causal inference using potential outcomes: Design, modeling, decisions. Journal
  of the American Statistical Association, 100(469):322ŌĆō331, 2005. 23
Jakob Runge. Modern causal inference approaches to investigate biodiversity-ecosystem functioning
  relationships. nature communications, 14(1):1917, 2023. 35
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust neu-
  ral networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generalization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.08731, 2019. 1, 2, 8, 27, 28, 29, 43
Jonathan M Samet, Francesca Dominici, Frank C Curriero, Ivan Coursac, and Scott L Zeger. Fine
  particulate air pollution and mortality in 20 us cities, 1987ŌĆō1994. New England journal of
  medicine, 343(24):1742ŌĆō1749, 2000. 35
Bernhard Sch├Člkopf, Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Nan Rosemary Ke, Nal Kalchbrenner,
  Anirudh Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Toward causal representation learning. Proceedings of
  the IEEE, 109(5):612ŌĆō634, 2021. 1, 29
Maximilian Seitzer, Bernhard Sch├Člkopf, and Georg Martius. Causal in’¼éuence detection for improv-
 ing ef’¼üciency in reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
 22905ŌĆō22918, 2021. 1
Chandler Squires, Anna Seigal, Salil S. Bhate, and Caroline Uhler. Linear causal disentanglement
  via interventions. In International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202, pp. 32540ŌĆō
  32560. PMLR, 2023. 3, 5, 7, 21, 24, 25, 28, 39
N├║ria Armengol Urp├Ł, Marco Bagatella, Marin Vlastelica, and Georg Martius. Causal action in’¼éu-
  ence aware counterfactual data augmentation. Forty-’¼ürst International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2024. 1
Egbert H Van Nes, Marten Scheffer, Victor Brovkin, Timothy M Lenton, Hao Ye, Ethan Deyle, and
  George Sugihara. Causal feedbacks in climate change. Nature Climate Change, 5(5):445ŌĆō448,
  2015. 35


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Burak Varici, Emre Acarturk, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, Abhishek Kumar, and Ali Tajer. Score-
  based causal representation learning with interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08230, 2023.
  3, 4, 7, 24, 25, 28, 30, 34, 40

Burak Varici, Emre Acart├╝rk, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, and Ali Tajer. General identi’¼üability and
  achievability for causal representation learning. In International Conference on Arti’¼ücial Intelli-
  gence and Statistics, pp. 2314ŌĆō2322. PMLR, 2024a. 1, 3, 4, 7, 8, 20, 21, 24, 25, 29, 30, 40

Burak Varici, Emre Acart├╝rk, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, and Ali Tajer. Linear causal representation
  learning from unknown multi-node interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05937, 2024b. 4, 5,
  7, 20, 24, 28, 30, 40, 41

Hemanth Venkateswara, Jose Eusebio, Shayok Chakraborty, and Sethuraman Panchanathan. Deep
  hashing network for unsupervised domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5018ŌĆō5027, 2017. 27

Ricardo Vig├Īrio, Veikko Jousm├żki, Matti H├żm├żl├żinen, Riitta Hari, and Erkki Oja. Independent com-
  ponent analysis for identi’¼ücation of artifacts in magnetoencephalographic recordings. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 10, 1997. 1

Julius von K├╝gelgen, Yash Sharma, Luigi Gresele, Wieland Brendel, Bernhard Sch├Člkopf, Michel
  Besserve, and Francesco Locatello. Self-supervised learning with data augmentations provably
  isolates content from style. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:16451ŌĆō16467,
  2021. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 21, 23, 24, 41

Julius von K├╝gelgen, Michel Besserve, Liang Wendong, Luigi Gresele, Armin Kekic╠ü, Elias Barein-
  boim, David Blei, and Bernhard Sch├Člkopf. Nonparametric identi’¼üability of causal represen-
  tations from unknown interventions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
  2024. 1, 3, 4, 7, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 29, 30, 41

Liang Wendong, Armin Kekic╠ü, Julius von K├╝gelgen, Simon Buchholz, Michel Besserve, Luigi Gre-
  sele, and Bernhard Sch├Člkopf. Causal component analysis. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024. 4, 7, 29, 30, 41

Danru Xu, Dingling Yao, S├®bastien Lachapelle, Perouz Taslakian, Julius von K├╝gelgen, Francesco
  Locatello, and Sara Magliacane. A sparsity principle for partially observable causal representation
  learning. Forty-’¼ürst International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. 6, 29

Dingling Yao, Danru Xu, Sebastien Lachapelle, Sara Magliacane, Perouz Taslakian, Georg Martius,
  Julius von K├╝gelgen, and Francesco Locatello. Multi-view causal representation learning with
  partial observability. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
  4, 5, 6, 7, 21, 23, 42

Dingling Yao, Caroline Muller, and Francesco Locatello. Marrying causal representation learning
  with dynamical systems for science. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37,
  2024. 36

Weiran Yao, Guangyi Chen, and Kun Zhang. Temporally disentangled representation learning. Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:26492ŌĆō26503, 2022a. 8, 25, 26

Weiran Yao, Yuewen Sun, Alex Ho, Changyin Sun, and Kun Zhang. Learning temporally causal
 latent processes from general temporal data. International Conference on Learning Representa-
 tions, 2022b. 8, 25, 26

Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond empirical
  risk minimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09412, 2017. 27, 28

Jiaqi Zhang, Kristjan Greenewald, Chandler Squires, Akash Srivastava, Karthikeyan Shanmugam,
   and Caroline Uhler. Identi’¼üability guarantees for causal disentanglement from soft interventions.
   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024a. 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 20, 21, 24,
   25, 28, 34, 41


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K Zhang and A Hyv├żrinen. On the identi’¼üability of the post-nonlinear causal model. In 25th
  Conference on Uncertainty in Arti’¼ücial Intelligence (UAI 2009), pp. 647ŌĆō655. AUAI Press, 2009.
  22
Kun Zhang and Aapo Hyv├żrinen. Distinguishing causes from effects using nonlinear acyclic causal
  models. In Causality: Objectives and Assessment, pp. 157ŌĆō164. PMLR, 2010. 21
Kun Zhang, Shaoan Xie, Ignavier Ng, and Yujia Zheng. Causal representation learning from multi-
  ple distributions: A general setting. Internatinal Conference on Machine Learning, 2024b. 29
Yu Zhang and Qiang Yang. An overview of multi-task learning. National Science Review, 5(1):
  30ŌĆō43, 2018. 26
Yuli Zhang, Huaiyu Wu, and Lei Cheng. Some new deformation formulas about variance and
  covariance. In 2012 proceedings of international conference on modelling, identi’¼ücation and
  control, pp. 987ŌĆō992. IEEE, 2012. 29
Yujia Zheng, Ignavier Ng, and Kun Zhang. On the identi’¼üability of nonlinear ica: Sparsity and
  beyond. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:16411ŌĆō16422, 2022. 6, 29
Kaiyang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, Yu Qiao, Tao Xiang, and Chen Change Loy. Domain generalization:
  A survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45(4):4396ŌĆō4415,
  2022. 28
Jinguo Zhu, Xizhou Zhu, Wenhai Wang, Xiaohua Wang, Hongsheng Li, Xiaogang Wang, and Jifeng
   Dai. Uni-perceiver-moe: Learning sparse generalist models with conditional moes. Advances in
   Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:2664ŌĆō2678, 2022. 26
Roland S Zimmermann, Yash Sharma, Steffen Schneider, Matthias Bethge, and Wieland Brendel.
  Contrastive learning inverts the data generating process. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 12979ŌĆō12990. PMLR, 2021. 5


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix
Table of Contents
      A Notation and Terminology                                                                    18

      B Preliminaries                                                                               19

      C Identi’¼üability Theory                                                                       19
        C.1 On the granularity of latent variable identi’¼ücation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
        C.2 Identifying the causal graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    21

      D Related Works                                                                               22
        D.1 Multiview CRL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       23
        D.2 Interventional CRL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      24
        D.3 Temporal CRL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      25
        D.4 Multi-task CRL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      26
        D.5 Domain Generalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       27
        D.6 Further Explanations for Tab. 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     28
        D.7 Notable Cases Not Directly Covered by the Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        29

      E Proofs                                                                                      30
        E.1 Assumption Justi’¼ücation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     30
        E.2 Proof for Thm. 3.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    31
        E.3 Proofs for Generalization of Variant Latents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    32
        E.4 Proofs for Granularity of Latent Variable Identi’¼ücation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     33
        E.5 Proof for Cor. D.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    34

      F Implementation Details                                                                      34
        F.1 Case Study: ISTAnt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      35
        F.2 Synthetic Ablation with ŌĆ£Ninterventions" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      36

      G Further Discussions and Connections to Other Fields                                         36
        G.1 Representational Alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      37
        G.2 Environment Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       38
        G.3 Geometric Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       38



A    N OTATION AND T ERMINOLOGY
This section provides a glossary of symbols and notations used throughout the paper.



f       Mixing function
g       Smooth encoder
x       Entangled observables
z       Ground truth latent variables
D       Dimensionality of observable x
N       Dimensionality of latents z
Sx      A set of observables
Sz      A set of latent vectors
A       Subset of latent indices with invariance properties (A ŌŖå [N ])
╬╣       Invariance property


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ōł╝╬╣      The latent equivalence relation
I       A set of invariance properties
X       Support of a set of observables Sx
Z       Support of a set of latent vectors Sz
G       A set of smooth encoders
╬”       A set of selectors
G       Ground truth causal graph
TC      Transitive closure

B    P RELIMINARIES
In this subsection, we revisit the common de’¼ünitions and assumptions in identi’¼üability works from
CRL that are needed for subsequent theoretical analysis. We begin with the de’¼ünition of a latent
structural causal model:
De’¼ünition B.1 (Latent SCM (von K├╝gelgen et al., 2024)). Let z = {z1 , . . . , zN } denote a set of
causal ŌĆ£endogenous" variables with each zi taking values in R, and let u = {u1 , . . . , uN } denotes
a set of mutually independent ŌĆ£exogenous" random variables. The latent SCM consists of a set of
structural equations
                                     {zi := mi (zpa(i) ), ui }N
                                                              i=1 ,                            (B.1)
where zpa(i) are the causal parents of zi and mi are the deterministic functions that are termed
ŌĆ£causal mechanisms". We indicate with Pu the joint distribution of the exogenous random variables,
which, due to the independence hypothesis, is the product of the probability measures of the individ-
ual variables. The associated causal diagram G is a directed graph with vertices z and edges zi ŌåÆ zj
iff. zi Ōłł zpa(j) ; we assume the graph G to be acyclic.
The latent SCM induces a unique distribution Pz over the endogenous variables z as a pushforward
of Pu via eq. (B.1). Its density pz follows the causal Markov factorization:

                                                Y
                                                N
                                     pz (z) =         pi (zi | zpa(i) ).                       (B.2)
                                                i=1

Instead of directly observing the endogenous and exogenous variables z and u, we only have access
to some ŌĆ£entangled" measurements x of z generated through a nonlinear mixing function:
De’¼ünition B.2 (Mixing function). A deterministic smooth function f : RN ŌåÆ RD mapping the
latent vector z Ōłł RN to its observable x Ōłł RD , where D Ōēź N denotes the dimensionality of the
observational space.
Assumption B.1 (Diffeomorphism). The mixing function f is diffeomorphic onto its image, i.e. f
is C Ōł× , f is injective and f ŌłÆ1 |Im(f ) : Im(f ) ŌåÆ RD is also C Ōł× .

Remark: Settings with noisy observations (x = f (z) + ŽĄ, z ŌŖź ŽĄ) can be easily reduced to our de-
noised version by applying a standard deconvolution argument as a pre-processing step, as indicated
by Lachapelle et al. (2022); Buchholz et al. (2024).

C    I DENTIFIABILITY T HEORY
In addition to the general results for latent variable identi’¼ücation presented in ┬¦ 3, we compare
in App. C.1 different granularity of latent variable identi’¼ücation and show their transitions through
certain assumptions on the causal model or mixing function. Afterward, App. C.2 discusses the
identi’¼ücation level of a causal graph depending on the granularity of latent variable identi’¼ücation
under certain structural assumptions. Proofs are deferred to App. E.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Relations between different identi’¼ücation classes (Defns. 3.1 and C.1 to C.3). Some CRL
works proposed a more ’¼üne-grained classi’¼ücation of identi’¼üability concepts with slightly different
terminology, which we omit here for readability.


C.1 O N THE GRANULARITY OF LATENT VARIABLE IDENTIFICATION
Different levels of identi’¼ücation can be achieved depending on the degree of underlying invariance
and data symmetry. Below, we present three standard identi’¼üability de’¼ünitions from the CRL litera-
ture, each providing a stronger identi’¼ücation result than block-identi’¼üability (Defn. 3.1).
De’¼ünition C.1 (Block af’¼üne-identi’¼üability). Let z╠é be the learned representation, for a subset A ŌŖå
[N ] it satis’¼ües that:
                                    z╠éŽĆ(A) = D ┬Ę zA + b,                                      (C.1)
where D Ōłł R|A|├Ś|A| is an invertible matrix, ŽĆ(A) denotes the index permutation of A, then zA is
block af’¼üne-identi’¼üed by z╠éŽĆ(A) .
De’¼ünition C.2 (Element-identi’¼üability). The learned representation z╠é Ōłł RN satis’¼ües that:
                                           z╠é = PŽĆ ┬Ę h(z),                                         (C.2)
               N ├ŚN
where PŽĆ Ōłł R       is a permutation matrix, h(z) := (h1 (z1 ), . . . hN (zN )) Ōłł R     N
                                                                                           is an element-
wise diffeomorphism.
De’¼ünition C.3 (Af’¼üne-identi’¼üability). The learned representation z╠é Ōłł RN satis’¼ües that:
                                        z╠é = ╬ø ┬Ę PŽĆ ┬Ę z + b,                                       (C.3)
               N ├ŚN                                    N ├ŚN
where PŽĆ Ōłł R          is a permutation matrix, ╬ø Ōłł R          is a diagonal matrix with nonzero diagonal
entries.

 Remark: Block af’¼üne-identi’¼üability (Defn. C.1) is de’¼üned by Ahuja et al. (2023), stating that a
 subset of the learned representation z╠éŽĆ(A) is related to the ground truth partition zA through some
 af’¼üne transformation. Defn. C.2 indicates element-wise identi’¼ücation of latent variables up to
 individual diffeomorphisms. Element-identi’¼üability for the latent variable identi’¼ücation together
 with the graph identi’¼üability (Defn. C.4) is de’¼üned as Ōł╝CRL -identi’¼üability (von K├╝gelgen
 et al., 2024, Defn. 2.6), perfect identi’¼üability (Varici et al., 2024a, Defn. 3). Af’¼üne identi’¼üabil-
 ity (Defn. C.3) describes when the ground truth latent variables are identi’¼üed up to permutation,
 shift, and linear scaling. In many CRL works, af’¼üne identi’¼üability (Defn. C.3) is also termed
 as follows: perfect identi’¼üability under linear transformation (Varici et al., 2024b, Defn. 1), CD-
 equivalence (Zhang et al., 2024a, Defn. 1), disentanglement (Lachapelle et al., 2022, Defn. 3).
Proposition C.1 (Granularity of identi’¼ücation). Af’¼üne-identi’¼üability (Defn. C.3) implies element-
identi’¼üability (Defn. C.2) and block af’¼üne-identi’¼üability (Defn. C.1) while element-identi’¼üability
and block af’¼üne-identi’¼üability implies block-identi’¼üability (Defn. 3.1).
Proposition C.2 (Transition between identi’¼ücation levels). The transition between different levels
of latent variable identi’¼ücation (Fig. 2) can be summarized as follows:
     (i) Element- identi’¼üability (Defns. C.2 and C.3) can be obtained from block-wise identi’¼üabil-
         ity (Defns. 3.1 and C.1) when each individual latent constitutes an invariant block;
    (ii) Identi’¼üability up to an af’¼üne transformation (Defns. C.1 and C.3) can be obtained from
         general identi’¼üability on arbitrary diffeomorphism (Defns. 3.1 and C.2) by additionally
         assuming that both the ground truth mixing function and decoder are ’¼ünite degree polyno-
         mials of the same degree.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Discussion. We note that the granularity of identi’¼üability results is primarily determined by
 the strength of invariance and parametric assumptions (such as those on mixing functions or
 causal models) rather than by the speci’¼üc algorithmic choice. For example, for settings that
 can achieve element-identi’¼üability (von K├╝gelgen et al., 2024), af’¼üne-identi’¼üability results
 can be obtained by additionally assuming ’¼ünite degree polynomial mixing function (proof
 see App. E.4). Similarly, element-identi’¼üability can be achieved from block-identi’¼üability by
 enforcing invariance properties on each latent component (Yao et al., 2023, Thm. 3.8) instead of
 having only one multivariate invariant block (von K├╝gelgen et al., 2021). In summary, existing
 CRL algorithms are capable of achieving different identi’¼üability de’¼ünitions depending on the
 additional (e.g., parametric) assumptions without requiring separate proofs for each case. Tab. 4
 provides an overview of recent identi’¼üability results along with their corresponding invariance
 and parametric assumptions, illustrating the direct relationship between these assumptions and
 the level of identi’¼üability they achieve.

C.2   I DENTIFYING THE CAUSAL GRAPH
In addition to latent variable identi’¼ücation, another goal of CRL is to infer the underlying latent
dependency, namely the causal graph structure. Revisiting the literature on causal graph identi’¼ü-
cation highlights a key distinction: While graph discovery often depends on causal assumptions
like interventions or graphical constraints, identifying causal variables can proceed by leveraging
only the invariance relations without requiring these additional assumptions, e.g., distributional
invariance that does not necessarily arise from valid interventions. We begin with restating the
standard de’¼ünition of graph identi’¼üability in CRL.
De’¼ünition C.4 (Graph-ident’¼üability). The estimated graph G╠é is isomorphic to the ground truth graph
G through a bijection h : V (G) ŌåÆ V (G╠é) in the sense that two vertices zi , zj Ōłł V (G) are adjacent in
G if and only if h(zi ), h(zj ) Ōłł V (G╠é) are adjacent in G╠é.
We remark that the ŌĆ£faithfulness" assumption (Pearl, 2009, Defn. 2.4.1) is a standard assumption in
the CRL literature, commonly required for graph discovery. We restate it as follows:
Assumption C.1 (Faithfulness (or Stability)). Pz is a faithful distribution induced by the la-
tent SCM (Defn. B.1) in the sense that Pz contains no extraneous conditional independence;
in other words, the only conditional independence relations satis’¼üed by Pz are those given by
{zi ŌŖź znd(i) | zpa(i) } where znd(i) denotes the non-descends of zi .
As indicated by Defn. C.4, the preliminary condition of identifying the causal graph is to have an
element-wise correspondence between the vertices in the ground truth graph G (i.e., the ground truth
latents) and the vertices of the estimated graph. Therefore, the following assumes that the learned
encoders G (Defn. 3.2) achieve element-identi’¼üability (Defn. C.2), that is, for each zi Ōłł z, we have
a diffeomorphism hi : R ŌåÆ R such that z╠éi = hi (zi ). However, additional assumptions are needed
to identify the graph structure: either on the source of invariance or on the parametric form of the
latent causal model.
Graph identi’¼ücation via interventions. Under the element-identi’¼üability (Defn. C.2) of the latent
variables z, the causal graph structure G can be identi’¼üed up to its isomorphism (Defn. C.4), given
multi-environment data from paired perfect interventions per-node (von K├╝gelgen et al., 2024;
Varici et al., 2024a). Using data generated from imperfect interventions is generally insuf’¼ücient
to identify the direct edges in the causal graph. It can only identify the ancestral relations, i.e.,
up to the transitive closure of G (Brehmer et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2024a). Unfortunately, even
imposing the linear assumption on the latent SCM does not provide a solution (Squires et al., 2023).
Nevertheless, by adding sparsity assumptions on the causal graph G and polynomial assumption on
the mixing function f , Zhang et al. (2024a) has shown isomorphic graph identi’¼üability (Defn. C.4)
under imperfect intervention per node. In general, access to the interventions is necessary for graph
identi’¼ücation if alternative parametric assumptions are not imposed. Conveniently, in this setting,
the graph identi’¼üability is linked with that of the variables since the latter leverages the invariance
induced by the intervention.
Graph identi’¼ücation via parametric assumptions. In this work, we focus exclusively on the post-
nonlinear additive noise model (Zhang & Hyv├żrinen, 2010, Sec. 2) because it provides a suf’¼üciently
general framework that subsumes other parametric instances (such as the standard additive noise


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and the location-scale models) while offering greater ’¼éexibility in modeling complex causal mecha-
nisms.
De’¼ünition C.5 (Post-nonlinear acyclic causal model). The following causal mechanism describes a
post-nonlinear acyclic causal model:
                                     zi = ╬│i (mi (zpa(i) ) + ui ),                               (C.4)
where ╬│i : R ŌåÆ R is a diffeomorphism and mi is a non-constant causal mechanism, and ui is an
exogenous noise term.
Note that this model reduces to the standard additive noise model (Hoyer et al., 2008) with ╬│i = id
and to the location-scale form when ╬│i is af’¼üne (i.e., ╬│i (x) = ╬øi x + ╬▓i with an invertible matrix ╬øi
and bias ╬▓i ).
We assume that the ground truth latent SCM (Defn. B.1) is a post-nonlinear acyclic causal model as
speci’¼üed in Defn. C.5. Given that each latent variable zi is element-wise identi’¼üed via a diffeomor-
phism hi : R ŌåÆ R for all i Ōłł [N ], we de’¼üne the estimated causal parents as
                                     z╠épa(i) := {z╠éj : zj Ōłł zpa(i) }.
It then follows that the learned representations z╠éi also obey a postnonlinear acyclic model:

                           z╠éi = hi (zi ) = hi ╬│i mi (zpa(i) ) + ui

                               = hi ╬│i mi {hŌłÆ1  j (z╠éj ) : zj Ōłł zpa(i) + ui
                                                                                                 (C.5)
                               = hi ╬│i m╠āi (z╠épa(i) ) + ui

                               = hi ŌŚ” ╬│i m╠āi (z╠épa(i) ) + ui ,
where we de’¼üne
                            m╠āi (z╠épa(i) ) := mi {hŌłÆ1
                                                   j (z╠éj ) : zj Ōłł zpa(i) .

Since the composition hi ŌŚ” ╬│i is a diffeomorphism, the conditional dependencies among the latents
are preserved. Thus, following the approach in Zhang & Hyv├żrinen (2009, Sec. 4), the underlying
causal graph G can be identi’¼üed up to an isomorphism as de’¼üned in Defn. C.4.
What happens if variables are identi’¼üed in blocks? Consider the case where the latent variables
cannot be identi’¼üed up to element-wise diffeomorphism; instead, one can only obtain a coarse-
grained version of the variables (e.g., as a mixing of a block of variables (Defn. 3.1)). Nevertheless,
certain causal links between these coarse-grained block variables are of interest. These block
variables and their causal relations in between form a ŌĆ£macro" level of the original latent SCM,
which is shown to be causally consistent under mild structural assumptions (Rubenstein et al., 2017,
Thm. 11). In particular, the macro-level model can be obtained from the micro-level model through
an exact transformation (Beckers & Halpern, 2019, Defn. 3.4) and thus produces the same causal
effect as the original micro-level model under the same type of interventions, providing useful
knowledge for downstream causal analysis. More formal connections are beyond the scope of this
paper. Still, we see this concept of coarse-grained identi’¼ücation on both causal variables and graphs
as an interesting avenue for future research.

D    R ELATED W ORKS
This section reviews related CRL and domain generalization works and frames them as speci’¼üc
instances of our theory (┬¦ 3). These CRL works were initially categorized into various types
(multiview, interventional, multi-task, and temporal CRL) based on the level of invariance in the
data-generating process, leading to varying degrees of identi’¼üability results (App. C.1). While the
implementation of individual works may vary, the methodological principle of aligning represen-
tation with known data symmetries remains consistent, as shown in ┬¦ 3. We begin with revisiting
the data-generating process of each category and explain how they can be viewed as speci’¼üc cases
of the proposed invariance framework (┬¦ 2). We then present individual identi’¼ücation algorithms
from existing literature as particular applications of our theorems based on the implementation
choices needed to satisfy the invariance and suf’¼üciency constraints (Constraints 3.1 and 3.2). A
more detailed overview of the individual works is provided in Tab. 4.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.1    M ULTIVIEW CRL
High-level overview. The multiview setting in CRL (Daunhawer et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023)
considers multiple observables that are concurrently generated by an overlapping subset of latent
variables. Multiview scenarios are often found in a partially observable setup. For example, mul-
tiple devices on a robot measure different modalities, jointly monitoring the environment through
these real-time measurements. While each device measures a distinct subset of latent variables, these
subsets probably still overlap as they are measuring the same system at the same time. In addition
to partial observability, another way to obtain multiple views is to perform an ŌĆ£intervention/pertur-
bation" (Locatello et al., 2020; von K├╝gelgen et al., 2021; Ahuja et al., 2022b; Brehmer et al., 2022)
and collect both pre-action and post-action views on the same sample. This setting is often improp-
erly termed ŌĆ£counterfactual"1 in the CRL literature, and this type of data is termed ŌĆ£paired data".
From another perspective, the paired setting can be cast in the partial observability scenario by con-
sidering the same latent before and after an action (mathematically modeled as an intervention) as
two separate latent nodes in the causal graph, as shown by von K├╝gelgen et al. (2021, Fig. 1). Thus,
both pre-action and post-action views are partial because neither of them can observe pre-action and
post-action latents simultaneously. These works assume the latents that are not affected by the ac-
tion remain constant, an assumption that is relaxed in temporal CRL works. See App. D.3 for more
discussion on temporal CRL.
Data generating process. In the following, we introduce the data-generating process of a multiview
setting in the ’¼éavor of the invariance principle as introduced in ┬¦ 2. We consider a set of views
{xk }kŌłł[K] with each view xk Ōłł X k generated from some latents zk Ōłł Z k . Let Sk ŌŖå [N ] be the
index set of generating factors for the view xk , we de’¼üne zkj = 0 for all j Ōłł [N ] \ Sk to represent
the uninvolved partition of latents. Each entangled view xk is generated by a view-speci’¼üc mixing
function fk : Z k ŌåÆ X k :
                                       xk = fk (zk ) ŌłĆk Ōłł [K]                                     (D.1)
                                               T
De’¼üne the joint overlapping index set A := kŌłł[K] Sk , and assume A ŌŖå [N ] is a non-empty subset
of [N ]. Then the value of the sharing partition zA remain invariant for all observables {xk }kŌłł[K]
on a sample level. By considering the joint intersection A, we have one single invariance property
╬╣ : R|A| ŌåÆ R|A| in the invariance set I; and this invariance property ╬╣ emerges as the identity
                                                    ŌĆ▓                      ŌĆ▓
map id on R|A| in the sense that id(zkA ) = id(zkA ) and thus zkA Ōł╝╬╣ zkA for all k, k ŌĆ▓ Ōłł [K]. Note
that Defn. 2.1 (ii) is satis’¼üed because any transformation hk that involves other components zq with
qŌłł/ A violates the equality introduced by the identity map. For a subset of observations
                                                                                T             Vi ŌŖå [K]
with at least two elements |Vi | > 1, we de’¼üne the latent intersection as Ai := kŌłłVi Sk ŌŖå [N ], then
for each non-empty intersection Ai , there is a corresponding invariance property ╬╣i : R|Ai | ŌåÆ R|Ai |
which is the identity map speci’¼üed on the subspace R|Ai | . By considering all these subsets V :=
{Vi ŌŖå [K] : |Vi | > 1, |Ai | > 0}, we obtain a set of invariance properties I := {╬╣i : R|Ai | ŌåÆ R|Ai | }
that satisfy Asm. 2.1.
Identi’¼ücation algorithms. Many multiview works (von K├╝gelgen et al., 2021; Daunhawer et al.,
2023; Yao et al., 2023) employ the L2 loss as a regularizer to enforce sample-level invariance on
the invariant partition, cooperated with some suf’¼üciency regularizer to preserve suf’¼ücient informa-
tion about the observables (Constraint 3.2). Aligned with our theory (Thm. 3.1), these works have
shown block-identi’¼üability on the invariant partition of the latents across different views. Follow-
ing the same principle, there are certain variations in the implementations to enforce the invariance
principle, e.g. Locatello et al. (2020) directly average the learned representations from paired data
g(x1 ), g(x2 ) on the shared coordinates before forwarding them to the decoder; Ahuja et al. (2022b)
enforces L2 alignment up to a learnable sparse perturbation ╬┤. As each latent component constitutes
a single invariant block in the training data, these two works element-identi’¼ües (Defn. C.2) the latent
variables, as explained by Proposition C.2.

    1
      Traditionally, counterfactual in causality refers to non-observable outcomes that are ŌĆ£counter to the
factŌĆØ (Rubin, 2005). The works we refer to here represent pre- and post-actions that affect some latent vari-
ables but not all. This can be mathematically expressed as a counterfactual in an SCM but is conceptually
different as both pre- and post-action outcomes are realized (Liu et al., 2023). The ŌĆ£counterfactualŌĆØ terminol-
ogy silently implies that this is a strong assumption, but nuance is needed and it can in fact be much weaker
than an intervention.


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2 I NTERVENTIONAL CRL
High-level overview. Interventional/Multi-environment CRL considers data generated from multi-
ple environments with different data distributions. In the scope of CRL, multi-environment data
is often instantiated through interventions on the latent structured causal model (von K├╝gelgen
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2024a; Buchholz et al., 2024; Squires et al., 2023; Varici et al., 2023;
2024b;a). Recently, Ahuja et al. (2024) provides a more general identi’¼üability statement where
multi-environment data is not necessarily originated from interventions; instead, they can be indi-
vidual data distributions that preserve certain symmetries such as marginal invariance or support
invariance.
Data generating process The following presents the data generating process described in most
interventional CRL works. Formally, we consider a set of observables {Pxk }kŌłł[K] that are collected
from multiple environments (indexed by k Ōłł [K]) with a shared latent SCM (Defn. B.1) and a
shared mixing function f : xk = f (zk ) (Defn. B.2) satisfying Asm. B.1. Let k = 0 denote the
non-intervened environment and Ik ŌŖå [N ] denotes the set of intervened nodes in k-th environment,
the latent distribution Pzk is associated with the density
                                      Y                     Y
                         pzk (z k ) =     p╠ā(zjk | zpa(j)
                                                    k
                                                          )   p(zjk | zpa(j)
                                                                       k
                                                                             ),               (D.2)
                                   jŌłłIk                  jŌłł[N ]\Ik
where we denote by p the original density and by p╠ā the intervened density. Interventions natu-
rally introduce various distributional invariances that can be utilized for latent variable identi’¼üca-
tion: Under the intervention Ik in the k-th environment, we observe that both (1) the marginal
distribution of zA with A := [N ] \ TC(Ik ), with TC denoting the transitive closure and (2) the
score [S(zk )]AŌĆ▓ := Ōłćzk ŌĆ▓ log pzk on the subset of latent components AŌĆ▓ := [N ] \ pa(Ik ) with
                        A
pa(Ik ) := {j : j Ōłł Ik Ōł¬ pa(Ik )} remain invariant across the observational and the k-th interven-
tional environment. Formally, under intervention Ik , we have
ŌĆó Marginal invariance:
                                  0
                            pz0 (zA           k
                                    ) = pzk (zA )        A := [N ] \ TC(Ik );                   (D.3)

ŌĆó Score invariance:
                           [S(z0 )]AŌĆ▓ = [S(zk )]AŌĆ▓        AŌĆ▓ := [N ] \ pa(Ik ).                 (D.4)
According to our theory Thm. 3.1, we can block-identify both zA , zAŌĆ▓ using these invariance princi-
ples (eqs. (D.3) and (D.4)). Since most interventional CRL works assume at least one intervention
per node (Squires et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024a; von K├╝gelgen et al., 2024; Varici et al., 2024a;
2023; Buchholz et al., 2024; Ahuja et al., 2023), more ’¼üne-grained variable identi’¼ücation results,
such as element-wise identi’¼ücation (Defn. C.2) or af’¼üne-identi’¼ücation (Defn. C.3), can be achieved
by combining multiple invariances from these per-node interventions, as we elaborate below.
Identi’¼üability with one intervention per node. By invoking Thm. 3.1, we establish that, in non-
parametric settings, latent causal variables z can be identi’¼üed up to an element-wise diffeomorphism
(see Defn. C.2) using single-node imperfect interventions for each node. This result addresses an
open conjecture posed by von K├╝gelgen et al. (2024). We assume:
Assumption D.1 (Topologically ordered interventional targets). Specifying Asm. 2.1 in the inter-
ventional setting, we assume there are exactly N environments {k1 , . . . , kN } ŌŖå [K] where each
node j Ōłł [N ] undergoes one imperfect intervention in the environment kj Ōłł [K]. The interven-
tional targets 1 Ō¬» ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę Ō¬» N preserve the topological order, meaning that i Ō¬» j only if there is a
directed path from node i to node j in the underlying causal graph G.
Remark: Asm. D.1 is directly implied by Asm. 2.1 as we need to know which environments fall into
the same equivalence class. We believe that identifying the topological order is another subproblem
orthogonal to identifying the latent variables, which is often termed ŌĆ£uncoupled/non-aligned prob-
lem" (Varici et al., 2024a; von K├╝gelgen et al., 2024). As described by Zhang et al. (2024a), the
topological order of unknown interventional targets can be recovered from single-node imperfect
intervention by iteratively identifying the interventions that target the source nodes. This iterative
identi’¼ücation process may require additional assumptions on the mixing functions (Zhang et al.,
2024a; Ahuja et al., 2023; Varici et al., 2023; 2024b; Squires et al., 2023) and the latent structured
causal model (Buchholz et al., 2024; Squires et al., 2023), or on the interventions, such paired per-
fect interventions per node (von K├╝gelgen et al., 2024; Varici et al., 2024a).


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Corollary D.1 (Identi’¼üability from single node imperfect intervention per node). Given N envi-
ronments {k1 , . . . , kN } ŌŖå [K] satisfying Asm. D.1, the ground truth latent variables z can be
identi’¼üed up to element-wise diffeomorphism (Defn. C.2) by combining both marginal and score
invariances (eqs. (D.3) and (D.4)) under our framework (Thm. 3.1).
The proof for Cor. D.1 is included in App. E.5. Upon element-wise identi’¼ücation from single-node
intervention per node, existing works often provide more ’¼üne-grained identi’¼üability results by in-
corporating other parametric assumptions on the mixing functions (Varici et al., 2023; Ahuja et al.,
2023; Zhang et al., 2024a; Squires et al., 2023). This perspective is elaborated in Proposition C.2, as
element-wise identi’¼ücation can be re’¼üned to af’¼üne-identi’¼ücation (Defn. C.3) given additional para-
metric assumptions on the mixing functions. However, note that under the milder setting of imper-
fect intervention per node, the full graph is not identi’¼üable without further assumptions. See (Zhang
et al., 2024a) for more details.
Identi’¼üability with two interventions per node Current literature in interventional CRL targeting
the general nonparametric setting (Varici et al., 2024a; von K├╝gelgen et al., 2024) typically assumed
a pair of suf’¼üciently different perfect interventions per node. Thus, any latent variable zj , j Ōłł [N ],
as an interventional target, is uniquely shared by a pair of interventional environment k, k ŌĆ▓ Ōłł [K],
forming an invariant partition Ai = {j} constituting of individual latent node j Ōłł [N ]. Formally,
we write
                                         Ik = IkŌĆ▓ = Ai = {j}                                      (D.5)
where Ik represent the interventional target for the k-th environment. Note that this invariance
property implies the following distributional property:
                                     ŌĆ▓
                     [S(zk ) ŌłÆ S(zk )]j ╠Ė= 0       only if      Ik = IkŌĆ▓ = {j}.                   (D.6)
According to Thm. 3.1, each latent variable can thus be identi’¼üed separately, giving rise to element-
wise identi’¼ücation, as shown by (Varici et al., 2024a; von K├╝gelgen et al., 2024).
Identi’¼üability under multiple distributions. More recently, Ahuja et al. (2024) explains previous
interventional identi’¼üability results from a general weak distributional invariance perspective. In a
nutshell, a set of variables zA can be block-identi’¼üed if certain invariant distributional properties
hold: The invariant partition zA can be block-identi’¼üed (Defn. 3.1) from the rest by utilizing the
marginal distributional invariance or invariance on the support, mean or variance. Ahuja et al.
(2024) additionally assume the mixing function to be ’¼ünite degree polynomial, which leads to block-
af’¼üne identi’¼ücation (Defn. C.1), whereas we can also consider a general nonparametric setting; they
consider one single invariance set, which is a special case of Thm. 3.1 with one joint ╬╣-property.
Identi’¼ücation algorithms. Instead of iteratively enforcing the invariance constraint across the
majority of environments as described in Cor. D.1, most single-node interventional works develop
equivalent constraints between pairs of environments to optimize. For example, the marginal
invariance (eq. (D.3)) implies the marginal of the source node is changed only if it is intervened
upon, which is utilized by Zhang et al. (2024a) to identify latent variables and the ancestral relations
simultaneously. In practice, Zhang et al. (2024a) propose a regularized loss that includes Maximum
Mean Discrepancy(MMD) between the reconstructed "counterfactual" data distribution and the
interventional distribution, enforcing the distributional discrepancy that reveals graphical structure
(e.g., detecting the source node). Similarly, by enforcing sparsity on the score change matrix,
Varici et al. (2023) restricts only score changes from the intervened node and its parents. In the
nonparametric case, von K├╝gelgen et al. (2024) optimize for the invariant (aligned) interventional
targets through model selection, whereas Varici et al. (2024a) directly solve the constrained
optimization problem formulated using score differences. Considering a more general setup, Ahuja
et al. (2024) provides various invariance-based regularizers as plug-and-play components for any
losses that enforce a suf’¼ücient representation (Constraint 3.2).
D.3 T EMPORAL CRL
High-level overview. Temporal CRL (Lippe et al., 2022a; 2023; 2022b; Yao et al., 2022a;b;
Lachapelle et al., 2022; 2024; Li et al., 2024a;b) focuses on retrieving latent causal structures from
time series data, where the latent causal structure is typically modeled as a Dynamic Bayesian Net-
work (DBN) (Dean & Kanazawa, 1989; Murphy, 2002). Existing temporal CRL literature has devel-
oped identi’¼üability results under varying sets of assumptions. A common overarching assumption
is to require the Dynamic Bayesian Network to be ’¼ürst-order Markovian, allowing only causal links


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


from tŌłÆ1 to t, eliminating longer dependencies (Lippe et al., 2022b; 2023; 2022a; Yao et al., 2022b).
While many works assume that there is no instantaneous effect, restricting the latent components of
zt to be mutually dependent (Lippe et al., 2022b; Yao et al., 2022b; Lippe et al., 2023), some ap-
proaches have lifted this assumption and prove identi’¼üability allowing for instantaneous links among
the latent components at the same timestep (Lippe et al. (2022a)).
Data generating process. We present the data generating process followed by most temporal causal
representation works and explain the underlying latent invariance and data symmetries. Let zt Ōłł RN
denotes the latent vector at time t and xt = f (zt ) Ōłł RD the corresponding entangled observable
with f : RN ŌåÆ RD the shared mixing function (Defn. B.2) satisfying Asm. B.1. The actions at with
cardinality |at | = N mostly only target a subset of latent variables while keeping the rest untouched,
following its default dynamics (Lippe et al., 2022b; 2023; Lachapelle et al., 2022; 2024). Intuitively,
these actions at can be interpreted as a component-wise indicator for each latent variable ztj , j Ōłł [N ]
stating whether ztj follows the default dynamics p(ztj | ztŌłÆ1 ) or the modi’¼üed dynamics induced by
the action atj . From this perspective, the non-intervened causal variables at time t can be considered
the invariant partition under our formulation, denoted by ztAt with the index set At de’¼üned as At :=
{j : aj = 0}. Note that this invariance can be considered as a generalization of the multiview case
because the realizations zjt , zjtŌłÆ1 are not exactly identical (as in the multiview case) but are related
via a default transition mechanism p(ztj | ztŌłÆ1 ). To formalize this intuition, we de’¼üne z╠āt := zt | at
as the conditional random vector conditioning on the action at at time t. For the non-intervened
partition At ŌŖå [N ] that follows the default dynamics, the transition model should be invariant:
                                    p(ztAt | ztŌłÆ1 ) = p(z╠ātAt | ztŌłÆ1 ),                               (D.7)
which gives rise to a non-trivial distributional invariance property (Defn. 2.1). Note that the
invariance partition At could vary across different time steps, providing a set of invariance
properties I := {╬╣t : R|At | ŌåÆ Mt }Tt=1 , indexed by time t. Given by Thm. 3.1, all invariant
partitions ztAt can be block-identi’¼üed; furthermore, as shown in Proposition 3.3, the complementary
variant partition can also be identi’¼üed under an invertible encoder and mutual independence within
zt (here conditioning on the previous time step ztŌłÆ1 ). This result aligns with the identi’¼ücation
results without instantaneous effect, i.e. there is no causal link between variables at the same
time step (Lippe et al., 2022b; Yao et al., 2022b; Lachapelle et al., 2022; 2024). On the other
hand, temporal causal variables with instantaneous effects are shown to be identi’¼üable only if
ŌĆ£instantaneous parentsŌĆØ (i.e., nodes affecting other nodes instantaneously) are cut by actions (Lippe
et al., 2022a), reducing to the setting without instantaneous effect where the latent components
at t are mutually independent. Upon invariance, more ’¼üne-grained latent variable identi’¼ücation
results, such as element-wise identi’¼üability, can be obtained by incorporating additional technical
assumptions, such as the sparse mechanism shift (Lachapelle et al., 2022; 2024; Li et al., 2024b)
and parametric latent causal model (Yao et al., 2022b; Klindt et al., 2021; Khemakhem et al., 2020).
Identi’¼ücation algorithms. From a high level, the distributional invariance (eq. (D.7)) indicates
full explainability and predictability of ztAt from its previous time step ztŌłÆ1 , regardless of the
action at . In principle, this invariance principle can be enforced by directly maximizing the
information content of the proposed default transition density between the learned representation
p(z╠étAt | z╠étŌłÆ1 ) (Lippe et al., 2022a;b). In practice, the invariance regularization is often incorporated
together with the predictability of the variant partition conditioning on actions, implemented
as a KL divergence between the observational posterior q(z╠ét | xt ) and the transitional prior
p(z╠ét | z╠étŌłÆ1 , at ) (Lachapelle et al., 2022; 2024; Klindt et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2022a;b; Lippe et al.,
2023), estimated using variational Bayes (Kingma & Welling, 2013) or normalizing ’¼éow (Rezende
& Mohamed, 2015).
D.4 M ULTI - TASK CRL
High-level overview. Multi-task CRL aims to identify latent causal variables via external supervi-
sion, in this case, the label information of the same instance for various tasks. Previously, multi-task
learning (Caruana, 1997; Zhang & Yang, 2018) has been mostly studied outside the scope of
identi’¼üability, mainly focusing on domain adaptation and out-of-distribution generalization. One
of the popular ideas that was extensively used in the context of multi-task learning is to leverage
interactions between different tasks to construct a generalist model that is capable of solving all
classi’¼ücation tasks and potentially better generalizes to unseen tasks (Zhu et al., 2022; Bai et al.,


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2022). Recently, Lachapelle et al. (2023); Fumero et al. (2024) systematically studied under which
conditions the latent variables can be identi’¼üed in the multi-task scenario and correspondingly
provided identi’¼ücation algorithms.
Data generating process. Multi-task CRL considers a supervised setup: Given a latent SCM
as de’¼üned in Defn. B.1, we generate the observable x Ōłł RD through some mixing function
f : RN ŌåÆ RD satisfying Asm. B.1. Consider a set of task T = {T1 , . . . , Tk } with corresponding
task labels yk Ōłł Yk , we assume each task only depends on a subset of latent variables Sk ŌŖå [N ].
In other words, the label yk can be expressed as a function that contains all and only information
about the latent variable zSk :
                                         yk = rk (zSk ),                                     (D.8)
where r : R|Sk | ŌåÆ Yk is some deterministic function which maps the latent subspace R|Sk | to the
task-speci’¼üc label space Yk , which is often assumed to be linear and implemented using a linear
readout in practice (Lachapelle et al., 2023; Fumero et al., 2024). For each task tk , k Ōłł [K], we
observe the associated data distribution Px,yk . Consider two different tasks Tk , TkŌĆ▓ with k, k ŌĆ▓ Ōłł [K],
                                         ŌĆ▓
the corresponding data x, yk and x, yk are invariant in the intersection of task-related features zA
with A = Sk Ōł® SkŌĆ▓ . To ease the notation, let zTk := zSk represent the task-related latents for task
Tk . Formally, it holds that
                                                     T
                                             zTAk = zAkŌĆ▓ ,                                          (D.9)
showing alignment on the shared partition of the task-related latents. In the ideal case, each latent
component j Ōłł [N ] is uniquely shared by a subset of tasks, all factors of variation can be fully disen-
tangled, which aligns with the theoretical claims by Lachapelle et al. (2023); Fumero et al. (2024).
Identi’¼ücation algorithms. We remark that the sharing mechanism in the context of multi-task
learning fundamentally differs from that of multiview setup, thus resulting in different learning
algorithms. Regarding learning, the shared partition of task-related latents is enforced to align
up to the linear equivalence class (given a linear readout) instead of sample level L2 alignment.
Intuitively, this invariance principle can be interpreted as a soft version of the that in the multiview
case. In practice, under the constraint of perfect classi’¼ücation, one employs (1) a sparsity constraint
on the linear readout weights to enforce the encoder to allocate the correct task-speci’¼üc latents
and (2) an information-sharing term to encourage reusing latents across various tasks. Equilibrium
can be obtained between these two terms only when the shared task-speci’¼üc latent is element-wise
identi’¼üed (Defn. C.2). Thus, this soft invariance principle is jointly implemented by the sparsity
constraint and information sharing regularization (Fumero et al., 2024, Sec. 2.1).
D.5 D OMAIN G ENERALIZATION
High-level overview. Domain generalization aims at out-of-distribution performance. That is,
learning an optimal encoder and predictor that performs well at some unseen test domain that
preserves the same data symmetries as in the training data. At a high level, domain generaliza-
tion (Sagawa et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2017; Ganin et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2020; Krueger
et al., 2021) considers a similar framework as introduced for interventional CRL, i.e., having access
to multiple environment with different data distributions, but additionally incorporated with external
supervision and focusing more on model robustness perspective. While interventional CRL aims
to identify the true latent factors of variations (up to some transformation), domain generalization
learning focuses directly on out-of-distribution prediction, relying on some invariance properties
preserved under the distributional shifts. Due to the non-causal objective, new methodologies are
motivated and tested on real-world benchmarks (e.g., VLCS (Fang et al., 2013), PACS (Li et al.,
2017), Of’¼üce-Home (Venkateswara et al., 2017), Terra Incognita (Beery et al., 2018), DomainNet
(Peng et al., 2019)) and could inspire future real-world applicability of CRL approaches.
Data generating process. The problem of domain generalizations is an extension of supervised
learning where training data from multiple environments are available (Blanchard et al., 2011). An
environment is a dataset of i.i.d. observations from a joint distribution Pxk ,yk of the observables
xk Ōłł RD and the label yk Ōłł R. The label yk Ōłł Rm only depends on the invariant latents zkA Ōłł R|A|
through a linear regression structural equation model (Ahuja et al., 2022a, Assmp. 1), described as
follows:
                                     yk = wŌłŚ zkA + ŽĄk , zkA ŌŖź ŽĄk
                                                                                              (D.10)
                                     xk = f (zk )

                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where wŌłŚ Ōłł RD├Śm represents the ground truth relationship between the label yk and the invariant
latents zkA . ŽĄk is some white noise with bounded variance and f : RN ŌåÆ RD denotes the
shared mixing function for all k Ōłł [K] satisfying Asm. B.1. The set of environment distributions
{Pxk ,yk }kŌłł[K] generally differ from each other because of interventions or other distributional
shifts such as covariates shift and concept shift. However, as the relationship between the invariant
latents and the labels wŌłŚ and the mixing mechanism f are shared across different environments, the
risk on optimal weights remain invariant:
                                                                 ŌĆ▓     ŌĆ▓
                                 RŌłŚk (wŌłŚ zkA , yk ) = RŌłŚkŌĆ▓ (wŌłŚ zkA , yk )                       (D.11)

where wŌłŚ denotes the ground truth relation between the invariant latents zkA and the labels yk .
Identi’¼ücation algorithms. Different distributional invariance are enforced by interpolating and
extrapolating across various environments. Among the countless contribution to the literature,
mixup (Zhang et al., 2017) linearly interpolates observations from different environments as a robust
data augmentation procedure, Domain-Adversarial Neural Networks (Ganin et al., 2016) support
the main learning task discouraging learning domain-discriminant features, Distributionally Robust
Optimization (DRO) (Sagawa et al., 2019) replaces the vanilla Empirical Risk objective minimizing
only with respect to the worst modeled environment, Invariant Risk Minimization (Arjovsky et al.,
2020) combines the Empirical Risk objective with an invariance constraint on the gradient, and
Variance Risk Extrapolation (Krueger et al., 2021, V-REx), similar in spirit combines the empirical
risk objective with an invariance constraint using the variance among environments. For a more
comprehensive review of domain generalization algorithms, see Zhou et al. (2022).
D.6 F URTHER E XPLANATIONS FOR TAB . 4
General clari’¼ücation. Tab. 4 summarizes special cases of our invariance framework. For each
work, we present their technical assumptions, the type of invariance, the implementation for the
invariance and the suf’¼üciency regularizers (to satisfy Constraints 3.1 and 3.2), and the type of
identi’¼üability they achieve. Note that this table is by no means exhaustive. Also, we omit some
additional results and technical assumptions of individual papers for readability. A list of paragraphs
is provided below for further clari’¼ücation, as referenced in Tab. 4.
(a) Single-node intervention and parametric assumptions. Many existing CRL works that
consider single node intervention per node require additional parametric assumptions, either on the
mixing function (Varici et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024a) or the latent causal model (Buchholz et al.,
2024) or both (Squires et al., 2023), thus achieving (at least) element-wise identi’¼üability (Defn. C.2).
We conjecture these additional parametric assumptions serve two purposes: (1) to identify valid
topological order of the interventional targets, as required by Asm. D.1 for Cor. D.1 (2) to get a
more ’¼üne-grained identi’¼ücation level of af’¼üne transformation, as explained by Proposition C.2.
In the following, we restate the de’¼ünition of linear latent SCM for reference:
De’¼ünition D.1 (Linear latent SCM (Squires et al., 2023; Buchholz et al., 2024)). The latent variables
z follows a linear SCM with Gaussian noise in the sense that
                                           z = Az + ╬ō1/2 ŽĄ,                                     (D.12)
where ╬ō is a diagonal matrix with positive entries, A encodes the underlying causal graph G and the
ŽĄ is the standard Gaussian noise. For the sake of simplicity, we often de’¼üne B := ╬ōŌłÆ1/2 (Id ŌłÆ A)
such that z = B ŌłÆ1 ŽĄ to explicitly map from the exogenous noise ŽĄ to the latent variables z. We use
Bk to denote this matrix for the domain k.
(b) Multi-node intervention and linear mixing. Recently, Varici et al. (2024b) extends previous
interventional CRL works to unknown multi-node interventions and achieves identi’¼üability
under the assumption of a linearly independent intervention signature matrix Mint Ōłł {0, 1}N ├ŚK
with each column k represents the intervened node in this environment k. The row-wise linear
independence of Mint implies that each latent variable must have been intervened at least once.
Let M Ōłł {0, 1}N ├ŚN represent a submatrix of Mint with linearly independent columns. By
multiplying M with its adjoint transpose adjŌŖ║ (M ), one obtains a matrix where each column has
only one non-zero component. Applying the same transformation to the score change, this problem
is reduced to a similar setting as a single node intervention per node, which can be intuitively
explained using the same distributional invariance principle introduced earlier (App. D.2).


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(c) Paired single-node intervention per node under nonparametric assumptions. In the
nonparametric settings, several works (von K├╝gelgen et al., 2024; Varici et al., 2024a) have shown
element-wise latent variable identi’¼ücation under suf’¼üciently different paired perfect intervention
per node. By having two suf’¼üciently different interventions per node, one introduces invariance on
the interventional target across these paired interventional environments. This invariance property
can be enforced using the score differences (Varici et al., 2024a) or algorithmically by performing
model selection (von K├╝gelgen et al., 2024), as elaborated in App. D.2.
(d) Variant latents identi’¼ücation under independence. While some papers states main identi’¼ü-
cation results on the variant partition, it can be explained by Thm. 3.1 and Proposition 3.3 stating
that the variant block can be identi’¼üed under independence and invertible encoder. For example,
Wendong et al. (2024, Thm. 4.5) shows block-identi’¼üability on the intervened (variant) latents
under (Wendong et al., 2024, Assumption 4.4) of block-wise independence between the invariant
and variant blocks.
(e) Invariance regularizers in multitask CRL. Under the assumption of knowing the number
of latent variables, Lachapelle et al. (2023) solves a bi-level optimization problem, enforcing L2,1
sparsity on individual task readouts in the inner problem. Coupled with a backbone shared across
all tasks, this implicitly encourages discovering the ground truth overlapping partition of task sup-
port. Fumero et al. (2024) lifted the constraint of assuming the known number of latents by incorpo-
rating an additional information-sharing regularizer, as explained in (Fumero et al., 2024, Sec. 2.1).
(f) Invariance regularizers in domain generalization. While Sagawa et al. (2019) directly opti-
mize for the worst-case risk, a link can be drawn between this objective and the risk invariance:
Given a pair of linear head w and encoder g shared across [K] domains, let the order of risks be
RŽĆ1 Ōēź RŽĆ2 . . . RŽĆK . Since RŽĆ1 is lower bounded by RŽĆ2 , the minimum of the training objective
in Sagawa et al. (2019) (maxkŌłł[K] Rk (w, g)) is obtained when RŽĆ1 = RŽĆ2 . Then we have RŽĆ1 =
RŽĆ2 Ōēź ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę Ōēź RŽĆK , and the next minimum will be obtained when RŽĆ1 = RŽĆ2 = RŽĆ3 , and so on so
forth. The optimization procedure stops when the risks are equally minimized across all domains.
 (Krueger et al., 2021) minimizes variance between domain risks to enforce the risk invariance. We
formally show these two are equivalent in the following. Note that the invariance principle for risk
alignment can be formulated as
                                           (Rk ŌłÆ RkŌĆ▓ )2                                      (D.13)
According to Zhang et al. (2012), variance can be equivalently expressed as pair-wise distances
between the samples. Hence, we can reformulate the risk variance term in (Sagawa et al., 2019) as
follows:
                                       1   X 1                  2
                          Var [R] = 2              (Rk ŌłÆ RkŌĆ▓ ) ,
                                      K     ŌĆ▓
                                                 2
                                             k,k Ōłł[K]

showing that the variance regularization in (Krueger et al., 2021) enforces risk invariance.

D.7   N OTABLE C ASES N OT D IRECTLY C OVERED BY THE T HEORY
Some works not listed in Tab. 4 cannot yet be directly explained by our invariance frameworks but
are rather loosely connected. One representative line of work (Lachapelle et al., 2022; Zheng et al.,
2022; Xu et al., 2024; Lachapelle et al., 2024) relies on the sparsity assumption in the latent de-
pendency to achieve latent variable and graph identi’¼ücation. This assumption is closely related to
the sparse mechanism shift hypothesis in CRL (Sch├Člkopf et al., 2021), stating small distributional
changes should not affect all causal variables but only a small subset of these. Note that the sparsity
constraint is often formulated as the estimator (either for the graph (Lachapelle et al., 2023; 2024)
or of the latents (Xu et al., 2024)) should be at least sparse as the ground truth one, maximizing
the cardinality of the unaffected (invariant) part. Some theoretical results do not rely on multiple
data pockets that share certain invariance properties but directly employ speci’¼üc properties within
the observational data, such as independent support (Ahuja et al., 2023), or shared cluster mem-
bership (Khemakhem et al., 2020; Kivva et al., 2022). Some works (Zhang et al., 2024b) follow
an orthogonal proof technique originating from the nonlinear ICA with auxiliary variable line of
work (Hyvarinen et al., 2019). Their proofs often rely on linear independence derived from the sta-
tistical diversity of various underlying data distributions instead of shared invariance properties. Our
framework thus does not trivially include them.


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    P ROOFS
This section includes formal proofs for the theoretical statements of the paper.
E.1 A SSUMPTION J USTIFICATION
We justify the Defn. 2.1 (ii) by showing negative results under violation of this assumption, i.e.,
trivially invariant latent variables are not identi’¼üable.
Proposition E.1 (General non-identi’¼üability of trivially invariant latent variables). Consider the
setup in Thm. 3.1, w.l.o.g we assume I = {╬╣} and ╬╣ is trivial in the sense that assumption (ii)
in Defn. 2.1 is violated. Then, the corresponding invariant partition zkA is not identi’¼üable for any
k Ōłł [K].

Proof. We provide a counter example as follows: De’¼üne a trivial ╬╣-property as ŌĆ£if the ’¼ürst compo-
nent is greater than zero on A = {1} of some two dimensional latents z". Formally,
                                          ╬╣(z1 ) = 1[z1 > 0].
Consider a mixing function f = id and an invertible encoder g(x) = g(f (z)) = [z1 + z2 , z2 ]
satisfying the suf’¼üciency constraint (Constraint 3.2). De’¼üne h1 = h2 = [g ŌŚ” f ]A . Then for some
realizations z, z╠ā with z1 + z2 > 0 and z╠ā1 + z╠ā2 > 0 we have ╬╣(h(z)) = ╬╣(h(z╠ā)). However, h1 , h2 can
not disentangle z1 , showing non-identi’¼üability for the invariant partition zA .

Link between Defn. 2.1 (ii) and interventional discrepancy. In the following, we elaborate
how Defn. 2.1 (ii) resembles the most common assumption in interventional CRL, the interven-
tional discrepancy (Wendong et al., 2024; Varici et al., 2024a). Note that this assumption may
termed differently as suf’¼ücient variability (von K├╝gelgen et al., 2024; Lippe et al., 2022b), interven-
tional regularity (Varici et al., 2023; 2024b), but the mathematical formulation remain the same. We
begin with restating this assumption:
Assumption E.1 (Interventional discrepancy (Wendong et al., 2024)). Given k Ōłł [K], let ptk denote
the causal mechanism of the intervened variable ztk with tk Ōłł [N ]. We say a stochastic intervention
p╠āk satis’¼ües interventional discrepancy if
           Ōłé log ptk                      Ōłé log p╠ātk
                     (ztk | zpa(tk ) ) ╠Ė=            (ztk | zpa(tk ) ) almost everywhere (a.e.).
             Ōłéztk                           Ōłéztk

Proof. We show that any cases violating the interventional discrepancy assumption also vio-
lates Defn. 2.1 (ii) and vice versa. Suppose for a contradiction that there exists tk Ōłł [N ] that is
intervened in environment k Ōłł [K], and there is a non-empty interior U ŌŖé R with non-zero measure
where the interventional discrepancy is violated, i.e., for all ztk Ōłł U , it holds
                          Ōłé log ptk                     Ōłé log p╠ātk
                                    (ztk | zpa(tk ) ) =            (ztk | zpa(tk ) )           (E.1)
                            Ōłéztk                          Ōłéztk

Under a single node imperfect intervention, the complementary set of the transitive closure of tk ,
i.e., A := [N ] \ TC(tk ) remain marginally invariant:
                                         ╬╣(zA ) = pzA = p╠āzA .

W.l.o.g, we assume A = {1, . . . , tk ŌłÆ 1}, de’¼üne a function h : RN ŌåÆ R|A| with
                                     h(z) = [z1 , . . . , ztk ŌłÆ2 , ztk ]
that omits the tk ŌłÆ1-th component of z but includes the variant component tk . Note that the marginal
of ztk after intervention remains invariant within U because
                    Z
         p(ztk ) = ptk (ztk | zpa(tk ) )p(zpa(tk ) )dzpa(tk )   pa(tk ) Ōłł A
                    Z
                 = ptk (ztk | zpa(tk ) )p╠ā(zpa(tk ) )dzpa(tk )   eq. (E.1) and both pk , p╠āk pdfs
                    Z
                 = p╠ātk (ztk | zpa(tk ) )p╠ā(zpa(tk ) )dzpa(tk )

                = p╠ā(ztk ).

                                                    30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore, we have ╬╣(h(z)) = ╬╣(h(z╠ā)) (with z╠ā noting the latent vectors under intervention) contra-
dicting Defn. 2.1 (ii). The other direction (violating Defn. 2.1 (ii) implies violating Asm. E.1) can
be proved using the same example.



E.2 P ROOF FOR T HM . 3.1
Our proof consists of the following steps:
      1. We construct the optimal encoders GŌłŚ (Defn. 3.2) and selectors ╬”ŌłŚ (Defn. 3.4) that solves
         the constrained optimization problem in Thm. 3.1.
      2. We show that, for any invariance property ╬╣i Ōłł I and any observation xk in the correspond-
         ing ╬╣i -equivalent subset xVi , the selected representation ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś gk (xk ) cannot contain any
         other information than the invariant partition zkAi .
      3. Lastly, we prove that selected representation ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś gk (xk ) relates to the ground truth
         invariant partition zkAi through a diffeomorphism hik : R|Ai | ŌåÆ R|Ai | for all invariance
         property ╬╣i Ōłł I and for any observable xk from the ╬╣i -equivalent subset xVi ; in other
         words, ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś gk (xk ) block-identi’¼ües zkAi in the sense of Defn. 3.1.
Lemma E.1 (Existence of optimal encoders and selectors). Consider a set of observables Sx =
{x1 , x2 , . . . , xK } Ōłł X generated from ┬¦ 2 satisfying Asm. 2.1, then there exists optimal encoders
GŌłŚ (Defn. 3.2) and selectors ╬”ŌłŚ (Defn. 3.4) which satisfy both Constraints 3.1 and 3.2.

Proof. The optimal encoders can be constructed as the set of the inverse of the ground truth mixing
functions:
                                      GŌłŚ = {fkŌłÆ1 }kŌłł[K] ,                                     (E.2)
fkŌłÆ1 is smooth and invertible following Asm. B.1. By de’¼ünition, for each k Ōłł [K], we have:
                                           fkŌłÆ1 (xk ) = zk Ōłł Z k .                                 (E.3)
                                           ŌłŚ
Next, we de’¼üne the optimal selector ╬” = {ŽĢ          }iŌłł[|I|],kŌłł[K] such that for all i Ōłł |I|, k Ōłł [K], it
                                                    (i,k)

holds
                                         ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś zk = zkAi .                                      (E.4)
Thus, the invariance constraint (Constraint 3.1) is trivially satis’¼üed as given by ┬¦ 2. The optimal en-
coder fkŌłÆ1 is smooth and invertible following Asm. B.1 so the suf’¼üciency constraint (Constraint 3.2)
is also satis’¼üed. Hence, we have shown the optimum of the constrained optimization problem
in Thm. 3.1 exists.

Lemma E.2 (Invariant component isolation). Consider the same set of observables Sx as intro-
duced in Lemma E.1, then for any set of smooth encoders G (Defn. 3.2), ╬” (Defn. 3.4) that satisfy
the invariance condition (Constraint 3.1), the learned representation ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś gk (xk ) can only be
dependent on the invariant latent variables zkAi := {zkj : j Ōłł Ai }, not any non-invariant variables
zkq with q Ōłł Aci := [N ] \ Ai .

Proof. This proof directly follows Defn. 2.1 (ii). De’¼üne
                                   hik := ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś gk ŌŚ” fk          k Ōłł [K].                       (E.5)
By Constraint 3.1, for all ╬╣i Ōłł I, we have
                                                    ŌĆ▓
                        ╬╣i (hik (zk )) = ╬╣i (hikŌĆ▓ (zk ))     a.s.     ŌłĆk ╠Ė= k ŌĆ▓ Ōłł [K].             (E.6)
According to Defn. 2.1 (ii), for all i Ōłł [|I|], k Ōłł Vi , hik cannot depend on any other latent component
zq with q Ōłł
          / Ai . Therefore, we have shown that hik is a function of zkAi , for all i Ōłł [|I|], k Ōłł Vi .

Theorem 3.1 (Identi’¼üability of multiple invariant blocks). Consider a set of observables Sx =
{x1 , x2 , . . . , xK } Ōłł X generated from ┬¦ 2 satisfying Asm. 2.1. Let G, ╬” be the set of smooth
encoders (Defn. 3.2) and selectors (Defn. 3.4) that satisfy Constraints 3.1 and 3.2, then the invariant
component zkAi is block-identi’¼üed (Defn. 3.1) by ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś gk for all ╬╣i Ōłł I, k Ōłł [K].


                                                        31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Lem. E.1 veri’¼ües that there exists such optimum which satis’¼ües both invariance and suf’¼ü-
ciency conditions (Constraints 3.1 and 3.2). Following Lem. E.2, the composition ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś gk can
only encode information related to the invariant latent subset Ai speci’¼üed by the invariance property
╬╣i Ōłł I for all k Ōłł Vi . As given by Constraint 3.2, ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś gk contain all information the ground
truth invariant latents zAi for i with k Ōłł Vi . Therefore, the selected representation ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś gk (xk )
relates to the ground truth invariant partition zAi through some diffeomorphism, i.e., zAi is blocked-
identi’¼üed by ŽĢ(i,k) ŌŖś gk (xk ) for all invariance property ╬╣i Ōłł I and observable k Ōłł Vi , .

E.3    P ROOFS FOR G ENERALIZATION OF VARIANT L ATENTS
Proposition 3.2 (General
                     S       non-identi’¼üability of variant latent variables). Consider the setup
in Thm. 3.1, let A := iŌłł[|I|] Ai denote the union of block-identi’¼üed latent indices and Ac := [N ]\A
the complementary set where no ╬╣-invariance ╬╣ Ōłł I applies, then the variant latents zAc cannot be
identi’¼üed.

Proof. We provide a simple counter example with two latent variables z = [z1 , z2 ], with the mixing
function f being the identity map id. W.l.o.g. we assume the invariant partition to be A = {1}.
According to Thm. 3.1, the invariant latent variable can be identi’¼üed up to a certain bijection h :
R ŌåÆ R. Let z╠é be the estimated representation:
                                         z╠é = [h(z1 ), z2 ŌłÆ z1 ]                                  (E.7)
with the estimated mixing function f╦å : R2 ŌåÆ R2 :
                                  f╦å(z╠é) = [hŌłÆ1 (z╠é1 ), z╠é2 + hŌłÆ1 (z╠é1 )],                        (E.8)
then we obtain the same observations f╦å(z╠é) = f (z) whereas z╠é2 consists of a mixing of z1 and z2 ,
showing the variant latent variable z2 can not be identi’¼üed.

Proposition 3.3 (Identi’¼üability of variant latent under independence). Consider an optimal encoder
g Ōłł GŌłŚ and optimal selector ŽĢ Ōłł ╬”ŌłŚ from Thm. 3.1 that jointly identify an invariant block zA (we
omit subscriptions k, i for simplicity), then zAc (Ac := [N ] \ A) can be identi’¼üed by the complemen-
tary encoding partition (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g only if
      (i) g is invertible in the sense that I(x, g(x)) = H(x);
      (ii) zAc is independent on zA .

Proof. (ŌćÉ): We start by showing the suf’¼üciency of conditions (i) and (ii). The mutual information
between the observation x Ōłł Sx and the optimal encoder g Ōłł GŌłŚ from Thm. 3.1 writes:
                                 I(x, g(x)) = H(x) ŌłÆ H(x | g(x)),
following condition (i) in Proposition 3.3, the second term (conditional entropy) must equal zero:
H(x | g(x)) = 0.
Writing the x = f (zA , zAc ), we have
                    H(x | g(x)) = H(f (zA , zAc ) | g(x)) = H(zA , zAc | g(x)),
because the mixing function f is deterministic as given by Defn. B.2.
Note that g(x) can be decomposed into two separate partitions: ŽĢ ŌŖś g(x), (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g(x); thus we
can write the conditional entropy as


  H(x | g(x)) = H(zA , zAc | ŽĢ ŌŖś g(x), (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g(x))
              = H(zAc | zA , ŽĢ ŌŖś g(x), (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g(x)) + H(zA | ŽĢ ŌŖś g(x), (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g(x))

Given that ŽĢ ŌŖś g(x) block identi’¼ües zA , (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g(x)) cannot contain any information about zA ,
hence we can simplify the second term as
                                           H(zA | ŽĢ ŌŖś g(x))


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Using the additional mutual independence assumption between zA and zAc (Proposition 3.3 (ii)),
we can rewrite the ’¼ürst term as
                                   H(zAc | (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g(x)).

As a result, the condition entropy H(x | g(x)) can be decomposed as
                H(x | g(x)) = H(zA | ŽĢ ŌŖś g(x)) + H(zAc | (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g(x)) = 0.
Since H(zA | ŽĢ ŌŖś g(x)) = 0 following Constraint 3.2, the second term also must be zero, i.e.,
H(zAc | (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g(x)) = 0, which is satis’¼üed only if (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g(x) is a invertible function of
zAc . That is, (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g(x) block-identi’¼ües zAc .
(ŌćÆ): We show that block-identi’¼üability of zAc by (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g implies both conditions (i) and (ii).
For condition (i) To show g is invertible in the sense that I(x, g(x)) = H(x), it is equivalent to
show that H(x | g(x)) = 0 because
                                I(x, g(x)) = H(x) ŌłÆ H(x | g(x))
Writing x = f (zA , zAc ), we have
                   H(x | g(x)) = H(f (zA , zAc ) | g(x)) = H(zA , zAc | g(x)),
because the mixing function f is a diffeomorphism as given by Defn. B.2.
Given that ŽĢ ŌŖś g(x) = h(zA ) (indicated by Thm. 3.1) and (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g(x) = hc (zAc ) for some
diffeomorphisms h : ZA ŌåÆ ZA and hc : ZAc ŌåÆ ZAc , we can further decompose the conditional
entropy H(x | g(x)) into two separate terms
   H(x | g(x)) = H(zA , zAc | ŽĢ ŌŖś g(x), (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g(x))
               = H(zAc | zA , ŽĢ ŌŖś g(x), (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g(x)) + H(zA | ŽĢ ŌŖś g(x), (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g(x))
               = H(zAc | zA , h(zA ), hc (zAc )) + H(zA | h(zA ), hc (zAc )))
Since both h, hc are diffeomorphisms (meaning h(zA ), hc (zAc ) fully determines zA , zAc , respec-
tively), both conditional entropy terms are zero; thus H(x | g(x)) = 0. Hence, we have shown that
g is invertible in the sense that I(x, g(x)) = H(x).
For condition (ii) Given that ŽĢ ŌŖś g(x) block identi’¼ües zA , (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g(x) cannot contain any
information about zA (Defn. 3.1), i.e.,
                                     I(zA | (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g(x)) = 0

Writing (1 ŌłÆ ŽĢ) ŌŖś g(x) = hc (zAc ), we have
                               I(zA | hc (zAc )) = I(zA | zAc ) = 0,
as mutual information is invariant under invertible transformations and hc is invertible. Therefore,
we have shown that zAc is independent on zA .
To this end, we have shown both condition (i) and (ii) and necessary and suf’¼ücient conditions for the
block-identi’¼üability of zAc which completes the proof.



E.4 P ROOFS FOR G RANULARITY OF L ATENT VARIABLE I DENTIFICATION
Proposition C.1 (Granularity of identi’¼ücation). Af’¼üne-identi’¼üability (Defn. C.3) implies element-
identi’¼üability (Defn. C.2) and block af’¼üne-identi’¼üability (Defn. C.1) while element-identi’¼üability
and block af’¼üne-identi’¼üability implies block-identi’¼üability (Defn. 3.1).

Proof. The diagonal matrix ╬ø in eq. (C.3) is invertible and thus also a diffeomorphism h (eq. (C.2)).
Hence, af’¼üne-identi’¼üability implies element-identi’¼üability. Af’¼üne-identi’¼üability provides identi’¼ü-
cation results with block-size one thus implies block af’¼üne-identi’¼üability. On the other hand, block
af’¼üne-identi’¼üability is block-identi’¼üability with af’¼üne bijection h and element-identi’¼üability de’¼ünes
a special case of block-identi’¼üability where each latent component zi is an individual block.


                                                 33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition C.2 (Transition between identi’¼ücation levels). The transition between different levels
of latent variable identi’¼ücation (Fig. 2) can be summarized as follows:
      (i) Element- identi’¼üability (Defns. C.2 and C.3) can be obtained from block-wise identi’¼üabil-
          ity (Defns. 3.1 and C.1) when each individual latent constitutes an invariant block;
      (ii) Identi’¼üability up to an af’¼üne transformation (Defns. C.1 and C.3) can be obtained from
           general identi’¼üability on arbitrary diffeomorphism (Defns. 3.1 and C.2) by additionally
           assuming that both the ground truth mixing function and decoder are ’¼ünite degree polyno-
           mials of the same degree.


Proof. The proof for (i) is trivial in the sense that identi’¼ücation of block with size one boils down to
the identi’¼ücation on the element level. (ii) directly follows Ahuja et al. (2023, Thm. 4.4) and Zhang
et al. (2024a, Lem. 1), stating that when both ground truth mixing function and decoder are ’¼ünite
degree polynomials of the same degree, the invertible encoder learns a representation that is af’¼üne
linear to the ground truth latents, i.e., z╠é = L ┬Ę z + b with L Ōłł RN ├ŚN .


E.5    P ROOF FOR C OR . D.1
Corollary D.1 (Identi’¼üability from single node imperfect intervention per node). Given N envi-
ronments {k1 , . . . , kN } ŌŖå [K] satisfying Asm. D.1, the ground truth latent variables z can be
identi’¼üed up to element-wise diffeomorphism (Defn. C.2) by combining both marginal and score
invariances (eqs. (D.3) and (D.4)) under our framework (Thm. 3.1).


Proof. We consider a coarse-grained version of the underlying causal graph consisting of a block-
node z[N ŌłÆ1] := {z1 , . . . , zN ŌłÆ1 } and the leaf node zN with z[N ŌłÆ1] causing zN (i.e., z[N ŌłÆ1] ŌåÆ zN ).
We ’¼ürst select a pair of environments V = {0, kN } consisting of the observational environment and
the environment where the leaf node zN is intervened upon. According to eq. (D.3), the marginal
invariance holds for the partition A = [N ŌłÆ 1], implying identi’¼ücation on z[N ŌłÆ1] from Thm. 3.1.
At the same time, when considering the set of environments V ŌĆ▓ = {0, k1 , . . . , kN ŌłÆ1 }, the leaf node
N is the only component that satisfy score invariance across all environments V ŌĆ▓ , because N is not
the parent of any intervened node (also see (Varici et al., 2023, Lemma 4)). So here we have another
invariant partition AŌĆ▓ = {N }, implying identi’¼ücation on zN (Thm. 3.1). By jointly enforcing the
marginal and score invariance on A and AŌĆ▓ under a suf’¼ücient encoder (Constraint 3.2), we identify
both z[N ŌłÆ1] as a block and zN as a single element. Formally, for the parental block z[N ŌłÆ1] , we have:

                           z╠ék[N ŌłÆ1] = g:N ŌłÆ1 (xk )        ŌłĆk Ōłł {0, k1 , . . . , kN }              (E.9)

where g:N ŌłÆ1 (xk ) := [g(xk )]:N ŌłÆ1 relates to the ground truth z[N ŌłÆ1] through some diffeomorphism
h[N ŌłÆ1] : RN ŌłÆ1 ŌåÆ RN ŌłÆ1 (Defn. 3.1). Now, we can remove the leaf node N as follows: For each
environment k Ōłł {0, k1 , . . . , kN ŌłÆ1 }, we compute the pushforward of Pxk using the learned encoder
g:N ŌłÆ1 : X k ŌåÆ RN ŌłÆ1 :
                                          Pz╠ék  = g:N ŌłÆ1# (Pxk )
                                           [N ŌłÆ1]


Note that the estimated representations Pz╠ék       can be seen as a new observed data distribution for
                                            [N ŌłÆ1]
each environment k that is generated from the subgraph GŌłÆN without the leaf node N . Using an
iterative argument, we can identify all latent variables element-wise (Defn. C.2).


F     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
This section provides further details about the experiment settings of ┬¦ 5, including a formal in-
troduction to the ISTAnt dataset, highlighted open challenges (App. F.1), and additional training
settings for reproducibility (App. F.2).


                                                      34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 T

      S                       X           Y


                 W

                                                       (a) Grooming (blue to focal)   (b) No Action
Figure 3: Causal Model for generic partially an-
notated scienti’¼üc experiment: T treatment, W Figure 4: Examples of high-dimensional obser-
experimental settings, X high-dimensional ob- vations X with corresponding annotated social
servation, Y outcome, S annotation ’¼éag. Fig- behaviour Y (grooming). Figure and caption
ure and caption adapted from (Cadei et al., 2024, adapted from (Cadei et al., 2024, Fig. 2)
Fig. 1)


F.1   C ASE S TUDY: ISTA NT
Problem. Despite the majority of CRL algorithms being designed to enforce the identi’¼üability
of some latent factors and tested on controlled synthetic benchmarks, there are a plethora of real-
world applications across scienti’¼üc disciplines requiring representation learning to answer causal
questions (Robins et al., 2000; Samet et al., 2000; Van Nes et al., 2015; Runge, 2023). Recently,
Cadei et al. (2024) introduced ISTAnt, the ’¼ürst real-world representation learning benchmark with a
real causal downstream task (treatment effect estimation). This benchmark highlights different chal-
lenges (sources of biases) that could arise from machine learning pipelines even in the simplest pos-
sible setting of a randomized controlled trial. Videos of ants triplets are recorded, and a per-frame
representation has to be extracted for supervised behavior classi’¼ücation to estimate the Average
Treatment Effect of an intervention (exposure to a chemical substance). Beyond desirable identi’¼ü-
cation result on the latent factors (implying that the causal variables are recovered without bias), no
clear algorithm has been proposed yet on minimizing the Treatment Effect Bias (TEB) (Cadei et al.,
2024). One of the challenges highlighted by Cadei et al. (2024) is that in practice, there is both
covariate and concept shifts due to the effect modi’¼ücation from training on a non-random subset of
the RCT because, for example, ecologists do not label individual frames but whole video recordings.
Figs. 3 and 4 shows the underlying causal graph and example input.

Solution. Relying on our framework, we can explicitly aim for low TEB by leveraging known data
symmetries from the experimental protocol. In fact, the causal mechanism (P (Y e |do(X e = x))
stays invariant among the different experiment settings (i.e., individual videos or position of the
petri dish). This condition can be easily enforced by existing domain generalization algorithms. For
exemplary purposes, we choose Variance Risk Extrapolation (Krueger et al., 2021, V-REx), which
directly enforces both the invariance suf’¼üciency constraints (Constraints 3.1 and 3.2) by minimizing
the Empirical Risk together with the risk variance inter-environments.

Implementation details All training settings follow the best-performing settings from (Cadei et al.,
2024), which we restate in Tab. 2 for reference.

Discussion. Interestingly, Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz (2020) empirically demonstrated that no do-
main generalization algorithm consistently outperforms Empirical Risk Minimization in out-of-
distribution prediction. However, in this application, our goal is not to achieve high out-of-
distribution accuracy but rather to identify a representation that is invariant to the effect modi’¼üers
introduced by the data labeling process. This experiment serves as a clear example of the paradigm
shift of CRL via the invariance principle. While existing CRL approaches design algorithms based
on speci’¼üc assumptions that are often challenging to align with real-world applications, our approach
begins from the application perspective. It allows for the speci’¼ücation of known data symmetries
and desired properties of the learned representation, followed by selecting an appropriate implemen-
tation for the distance function (potentially from existing methods). Ultimately, identi’¼üability hinges
on the guarantee of asymptotic consistency in the estimates.


                                                  35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Model/Hyper-parameters                 Value(s)
             Encoder                                DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023)
             Encoder (token)                        class
             MLP (head): hidden layers              1
             MLP (head): hidden nodes               256
             MLP (head): activation function        ReLU + Sigmoid output
             Tass                                   or
             Dropout                                No
             Regularization                         No
             Loss                                   BCELoss
                                                    P
                                                            (with positive weighting)
                                                       ns
                                                             1ŌłÆYi
             Loss: Positive Weight                    P
                                                      i=1
                                                        ns
                                                         i=1 Yi
             Learning Rate                          0.0005
             Optimizer                              Adam (╬▓1 = 0.9, ╬▓2 = 0.9, ŽĄ = 10ŌłÆ8 )
             Batch Size                             128
             Epochs                                 15
             Seeds                                  range(20)


Table 2: Model and training details for the case study on ISTAnt (┬¦ 5.1). Table adapted from (Cadei
et al., 2024, Tab. 4)


F.2 S YNTHETIC A BLATION WITH ŌĆ£N INTERVENTIONS "
The numerical data is generated using a linear Gaussian additive noise model as follows:
                                 p(z1 ) = N (┬Ą1 , Žā12 )
                                 p(z2 | z1 ) = N (╬▒1 ┬Ę z1 + ╬▓1 , Žā22 )
                                                                                                (F.1)
                                 p(z3 | z2 ) = N (╬▒2 ┬Ę z2 + ╬▓2 , Žā32 )
                                 p╠ā(z2 ) = N (┬Ą╠ā2 , Žā╠ā22 )
We choose ┬Ą1 = 10.5, Žā1 = 0.8, ╬▒1 = 0.02, ╬▓1 = 0, Žā2 = 0.5, ╬▒2 = 1, ╬▓2 = 3, Žā3 = 1, Žā╠ā2 =
0.02. We sample three independent ┬Ą╠ā2 according to a uniform distribution Unif[2, 5] to validate the
consistency of the identi’¼ücation results.
For the training, we employ a simple auto-encoder architecture implementing both encoder and
decoder as 3-Layer MLP. We enforce the marginal invariance using the Max Mean Discrepancy loss
(MMD) on the ’¼ürst and last component z╠é1 , z╠é3 . Formally, the objective function writes

                                     2                       2
             ╦å           ╦å                     ╦å
       L(g, f ) = Ex,x╠ā f (g(x)) ŌłÆ x + f (g(x╠ā)) ŌłÆ x             + MMD(g(x)[1,3] , g(x╠ā)[1,3] ),
                                          2                         2

where x, x╠ā denote the observational and ninterventional data, respectively.
Further training details are summarized in Tab. 3

G    F URTHER D ISCUSSIONS AND C ONNECTIONS TO OTHER F IELDS
In this paper, we take a closer look at the wide range of CRL methods. Interestingly, we ’¼ünd that the
differences between them may often be more related to ŌĆ£semantics" than to fundamental method-
ological distinctions. We identi’¼üed two components involved in identi’¼üability results: preserving
information of the data and a set of known invariances. Our results have two immediate implications.
First, they provide new insights into the ŌĆ£CRL problem," particularly clarifying the role of causal
assumptions. We have shown that while learning the graph requires traditional causal assumptions
such as additive noise models or access to interventions, identifying the causal variables may not.
This is an important result, as access to causal variables is standalone useful for downstream tasks,
e.g., for training robust downstream predictors or even extracting pre-treatment covariates for treat-
ment effect estimation (Yao et al., 2024), even without knowledge of the full causal graph. Second,
we have exempli’¼üed how causal representation can lead to successful applications in practice. We


                                                    36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Table 3: Training setup for synthetic ablations in ┬¦ 5.2.

                                 Parameter                Value
                                 Mixing function          3-layer MLP
                                 Encoder                  3-layer MLP
                                 Decoder                  3-layer MLP
                                 Hidden dim               128
                                 Activation               Leaky-ReLU
                                 Optimizer                Adam
                                 Adam: learning rate      1e-4
                                 Adam: beta1              0.9
                                 Adam: beta2              0.999
                                 Adam: epsilon            1e-8
                                 Batch size               4000
                                 Sample size              200,000
                                 # Epochs                 500


moved the goal post from a characterization of speci’¼üc assumptions that lead to identi’¼üability, which
often do not align with real-world data, to a general recipe that allow practitioners to specify known
invariances in their problem and learn representations that align with them. In the domain generaliza-
tion literature, it has been widely observed that invariant training methods often do not consistently
outperform empirical risk minimization (ERM). In our experiments, instead, we have demonstrated
that the speci’¼üc invariance enforced by V-REx (Krueger et al., 2021) entails good performance in
our causal downstream task (┬¦ 5.1). Our paper leaves out certain settings concerning identi’¼üability
that may be interesting for future work, such as discrete variables and ’¼ünite samples guarantees.
One question the reader may ask, then, is ŌĆ£so what is exactly causal in CRL?ŌĆØ. We have shown that
the identi’¼üability results in typical CRL are primarily based on invariance assumptions, which do not
necessarily pertain to causality. We hope this insight will broaden the applicability of these methods.
At the same time, we used causality as a language describing the ŌĆ£parameterizationŌĆØ of the system
in terms of latent causal variables with associated known symmetries. De’¼üning the symmetries at
the level of these causal variables gives the identi’¼üed representation a causal meaning, important
when incorporating a graph discovery step or some other causal downstream task like treatment
effect estimation. Ultimately, our representations and latent causal models can be ŌĆ£trueŌĆØ in the sense
of (Peters et al., 2014) when they allow us to predict ŌĆ£causal effects that one observes in practiceŌĆØ.
Overall, our view also aligns with ŌĆ£phenomenologicalŌĆØ accounts of causality (Janzing & Mejia,
2024), that de’¼üne causal variables from a set of elementary interventions. In our setting too, the
identi’¼üed latent variables or blocks thereof are directly de’¼üned by the invariances at hand. From
the methodological perspective, all is needed to learn causal variables is for the symmetries de’¼üned
over the causal latent variables to entail some statistical footprint across pockets of data. If variables
are available, learning the graph has a rich literature (Peters et al., 2017), with assumptions that are
often compatible with learning the variables themselves. Our general characterization of the variable
learning problem opens new frontiers for research in representation learning:

G.1    R EPRESENTATIONAL A LIGNMENT
Several works (Li et al. (2015); Moschella et al. (2022); Kornblith et al. (2019); Huh et al. (2024))
have highlighted the emergence of similar representations in neural models trained independently.
In Huh et al. (2024) is hypothesized that neural networks, trained with different objectives on various
data and modalities, are converging toward a shared statistical model of reality within their represen-
tation spaces. To support this hypothesis, they measure the alignment of representations proposing
to use a mutual nearest-neighbor metric, which measures the mean intersection of the k-nearest
neighbor sets induced by two kernels de’¼üned on the two spaces, normalized by k. This metric can
be an instance to the distance function in our formulation in Thm. 3.1. Despite not being optimized
directly, several models in multiple settings (different objectives, data and modalities) seem to be
aligned, hinting at the fact that their individual training objectives may be respecting some unknwon
symmetries. A precise formalization of the latent causal model and identi’¼üability in the context of
foundational models remains open and will be objective for future research.


                                                   37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.2 E NVIRONMENT D ISCOVERY
Domain generalization methods generalize to distributions potentially far away from the training,
distribution, via learning representations invariant across distinct environments. However this can
be costly as it requires to have label information informing on the partition of the data into environ-
ments. Automatic environment discovery (Creager et al. (2021); Are’¼ün et al. (2024); Pezeshki et al.
(2024)) attempts to solve this problem by learning to recover the environment partition. This is an in-
teresting new frontier for CRL, discovering data symmetries as opposed to only enforcing them. For
example, this would correspond to having access to multiple interventional distributions but without
knowing which samples belong to the same interventional or observational distribution. Discovering
that a data set is a mixture of distributions, each being a different intervention on the same causal
model, could help increase applicability of causal representations to large obeservational data sets.
We expect this to be particularly relevant to downstream tasks were biases to certain experimental
settings are undesirable, as in our case study on treatment effect estimation from high-dimensional
recordings of a randomized controlled trial.
G.3 G EOMETRIC D EEP L EARNING
Geometric deep learning (GDL) (Bronstein et al. (2017; 2021)) is a well estabilished learning
paradigm which involves encoding a geometric understanding of data as an inductive bias in deep
learning models, in order to obtain more robust models and improve performance. One fundamental
direction for these priors is to encode symmetries and invariances to different types of transfor-
mations of the input data, e.g. rotations or group actions (Cohen & Welling (2016); Cohen et al.
(2018)), in representational space. Our work can be fundamentally related with this direction, with
the difference that we donŌĆÖt aim to model explicitly the transformations of the input space, but the
invariances de’¼üned at the latent level. While an initial connection has been developed for disentan-
glement Fumero et al. (2021); Higgins et al. (2018), a precise connection between GDL and CRL
remains a open direction. We expect this to bene’¼üt the two communities in both directions: (i) by
injecting geometric priors in order to craft better CRL algorithms and (ii) by incorporating causality
into successful GDL frameworks, which have been fundamentally advancing challenging real-world
problems, such as protein folding (Jumper et al. (2021)).


                                                  38
     Table 4: A non-exhaustive summary of existing identi’¼üability results for Causal Representation Learning. All of the listed works assume injectivity of the
     mixing function and causal suf’¼üciency (Markovianity) for the causal latent variables. Many listed papers depend on further technical assumptions and could yield
     additional results which we omitted for clarity; see references for details. In the table, ŌĆ£not assigned" means that the practical method did not directly enforce the
     invariance principle but considered other algorithmic designs that still implicitly preserve the data symmetries.


                       Causal       Mixing                             Source of invari-
          Work                                  Invariance                                    Invariance reg.                      Suf’¼üciency reg.                   Identi’¼üability   Expl.
                       Model        Function                           ance, Inv. subset A
                                                                   I NTERVENTIONAL /M ULTI - ENVIRONMENT CRL

                                                                                                                   !
          Squires                                                                             rank(H ŌŖ║ Ōłåk H)=1   for
                                                                                                                                                                     af’¼üne-id. and
          et     al.                                                                          source nodes; linear
                                                                       perfect interven-                                           g  invertible by assump-          partial order
          (2023,       linear       linear      distributional                                encoder g(x)=Hx, where                                                                  (a)
                                                                       tion per node                     ŌŖ║         ŌŖ║               tion                              preserving
          Thms. 1                                                                             Ōłåk :=Bk Bk ŌłÆB0 B0 ,z=
                                                                                               ŌłÆ1                                                                    graph-id.
          & 2)                                                                                Bk  ŽĄ
                                                                                              P          P
          Ahuja                                                                                   k,kŌĆ▓       jŌłłA
                                                                                                                                                                                              Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    ’¼ünite-                             single-node imper-
          et     al.                                                                                            k      ŌĆ▓           P                                 block af’¼üne-
                       nonparam.    deg.        marginal               fect interventions         MMD(pk
                                                                                                       [g(x)] ,p[g(x)] )               k E xk   Ōłźf╦å(g(xk ))ŌłÆxk Ōłź22                    -
          (2024,                                                                                                   j           j                                     id.


39
                                    poly.                              on variant latents
          Thm. 2)
                                                                                              P          P
          Ahuja                                                                                   k,kŌĆ▓       jŌłłA
                                    ’¼ünite-                             multi-node imper-
          et     al.                                                                                            k      ŌĆ▓           P                                 block af’¼üne-
                       nonparam.    deg.        marginal               fect interventions         MMD(pk
                                                                                                       [g(x)] ,p[g(x)] )               k E xk   Ōłźf╦å(g(xk ))ŌłÆxk Ōłź22                    -
          (2024,                                                                                                   j           j                                     id.
                                    poly.                              on variant latents
          Thm. 3)
                                                                                              P          P
          Ahuja                                                                                   k,kŌĆ▓       jŌłłA
                                    ’¼ünite-                             imperfect interven-
          et     al.                                                                                                       ŌĆ▓   2   P                                 block af’¼üne-
                       nonparam.    deg.        marginal support       tions on variant la-         bnd(Z╠éjk )ŌłÆbnd(Z╠éjk )              k E xk   Ōłźf╦å(g(xk ))ŌłÆxk Ōłź22                    -
          (2024,                                                                                                               2                                     id.
                                    poly.                              tents
          Thm. 4)

          Buchholz
                       linear                                          perfect interven-      ŌłÆElŌł╝U ({0,k}) Exl

                                                                                                                                   ElŌł╝U ({0,k}) Exl
                                                                                                                                                                     af’¼üne id. +
          et     al.                nonparam.   marginal                                                    l                               l                                         (a)
                       Gaussian                                        tion per node          ln e1l=k gk (x )                     ln egk (x ) +1                    graph id.
          (2024)
                  Causal      Mixing                       Source of invari-
     Work                                 Invariance                               Invariance reg.                              Suf’¼üciency reg.            Identi’¼üability   Expl.
                  Model       Function                     ance, Inv. subset A

                                                                                   ŌłźŌłåsx (U ŌŖ║ )Ōłź0 .           For all
                                                                                   j,kŌłł[N ],      its        element
     Varici                                                                              ŌŖ║
                                                                                   [Ōłås
                                                                                     x (U )]j,k =
     et     al.                                            perfect interven-                                                    g  invertible by assump-   af’¼üne-id.   +
                  nonparam.   linear      distributional                                                                                                                    (a)
     (2023,                                                tion per node                             P 0,k
                                                                                                      x
                                                                                                                                tion                       graph-id.
     Thm. 16)                                                                      1([U ŌŖ║ S(x0 )]j      ╠Ė=   [U ŌŖ║ S(xk )]j ),

                                                                                   g(x):=U + x

                                                                                   ŌłźŌłåsx (U ŌŖ║ )Ōłź0 .           For all
                                                                                   j,kŌłł[N ],      its        element
     Varici                                                                              ŌŖ║
                                                                                   [Ōłås
                                                                                     x (U )]j,k =                                                          block af’¼üne-
     et     al.                                            imperfect interven-                                                  g  invertible by assump-
                  nonparam.   linear      distributional                                                                                                   id. + graph-     (a)
     (2023,                                                tion per node                             P 0,k
                                                                                                      x
                                                                                                                                tion
                                                                                   1([U ŌŖ║ S(x0 )]j      ╠Ė=   [U ŌŖ║ S(xk )]j ),                              id.
     Thm. 13)
                                                                                   g(x):=U + x
                                                                                                                                                                                    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Varici
                                                                                   minŌłźŌłås (g)Ōłź0         s.t. it is


40
     et     al.                           interventional   paired perfect inter-                                                g  invertible by assump-   element-id. +
                  nonparam.   nonparam.                                            diagonal.
                                                                                    h
                                                                                                  Ōłås (g)j,k =
                                                                                                              i
                                                                                                                                                                            (c)
     (2024a,                              target           vention per node                      k    ŌĆ▓                         tion                       graph-id.
                                                                                   E |[S(g(x ))ŌłÆS(g(xk ))]j |
     Thm. 3)
                                                                                   Linear encoder g(x)=Hx,
                                                                                                          ŌłŚ
                                                                                   HiŌłŚ Ōłłim(Ōłåsx wi )\span(H[iŌłÆ1] )
     Varici                                                linearly indepen-
     et     al.                                            dent    multi-node      such that the dim of                         g  invertible by assump-   af’¼üne id. +
                  nonparam.   linear      distributional                                                                                                                    (b)
     (2024b,                                               perfect interven-                                                    tion                       graph id.
                                                                                   proj                   im(ŌłåS
     Thm. 1)                                               tion                                                   x wi )
                                                                                          null H ŌłŚ
                                                                                                [iŌłÆ1]


                                                                                   equals one.
                  Causal      Mixing                            Source of invari-
     Work                                 Invariance                                    Invariance reg.                         Suf’¼üciency reg.                         Identi’¼üability   Expl.
                  Model       Function                          ance, Inv. subset A

                                                                                        Linear encoder g(x)=Hx,
                                                                                                               ŌłŚ
                                                                                        HiŌłŚ Ōłłim(Ōłåsx wi )\span(H[iŌłÆ1] )
     Varici                                                     linearly indepen-
                                                                                                                                                                        block af’¼üne-
     et     al.                                                 dent    multinode       such that the dim of                    g  invertible by assump-
                  nonparam.   linear      distributional                                                                                                                id. + graph      (b)
     (2024b,                                                    imperfect interven-                                             tion
                                                                                        proj                   im(ŌłåS
                                                                                                                       x wi )
                                                                                                                                                                        id.
     Thm. 2)                                                    tion                           null H ŌłŚ
                                                                                                     [iŌłÆ1]


                                                                                        equals one.
                                                                                            P
                                                                                        ŌłÆ       k MMD(qx╠āk ,pxk )
     Zhang                    ’¼ünite-
                                                                imperfect interven-     where x╠āk the generated                     P                    k              af’¼üne-id.   +
     et    al.    nonparam.   deg.        distributional                                                                        ŌłÆ       k Exk log p(x        |g(xk ))                    (a)
                                                                tion per node           ŌĆ£counterfactual"   pair                                                         graph id.
     (2024a)                  poly.
                                                                                        through VAE
                                                                marginal    invari-
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                ance from multiple
     Wendong                                                    fat-hand interven-


41
                                                                                                                                                                        block-id.
     et     al.                                                 tions on the same                                                   P          k   k
                  nonparam.   nonparam.   marginal                                      model selection                         ŌłÆ       k log p╬Ė (x )                   (known           (d)
     (2024,                                                     set of interven-
                                                                                                                                                                        graph)
     Thm. 4.5)                                                  tional targets I ,
                                                                invariant partition
                                                                A:=[N ]\I

     von
     K├╝gel-
                                          interventional        paired perfect inter-                                               P          k   k                    element-id. +
     gen et al.   nonparam.   nonparam.                                                 model selection                         ŌłÆ       k log p╬Ė (x ))                                   (c)
                                          target                vention per node                                                                                        graph-id
     (2024,
     Thm. 4.1)
                                                                            M ULTIVIEW CRL

     von
     K├╝gel-                               sample level on all   one imperfect fat-                                                  P             k
                  nonparam.   nonparam.                    k                            Ōłźg(x1 )A╠é ŌłÆg(x2 )A╠é Ōłź2                  ŌłÆ       k H(g(x       )A╠é ), kŌłł{1,2}    block-id.        -
     gen et al.                           realizations of zA    hand intervention
     (2021)
                  Causal      Mixing                             Source of invari-
     Work                                 Invariance                                     Invariance reg.                      Suf’¼üciency reg.                                Identi’¼üability   Expl.
                  Model       Function                           ance, Inv. subset A

     Daunhawer                                                                                                                    P               k
                                          sample level on all    one imperfect fat-                                           ŌłÆ       k H(gk (x       )A╠é ),
     et     al.   nonparam.   nonparam.                    k                             Ōłźg1 (x1 )A╠é ŌłÆg2 (x2 )A╠é Ōłź2                                                          block-id.        -
                                          realizations of zA     hand intervention,                                           kŌłł{1,2}
     (2023)
     Ahuja                                                                                                                        P                      k
                                          sample level on all    one imperfect fat-                                           ŌłÆ       k Exk log p(x          |g(xk )),
     et    al.    nonparam.   nonparam.                    k                             Ōłźg(x1 )A╠é ŌłÆg(x2 )A╠é +╬┤Ōłź2                                                            block-id.        -
                                          realizations of zA     hand intervention                                            kŌłł{1,2}
     (2022b)
     Locatello                                                                                                                    P                      k
                                                                 one imperfect fat-                                           ŌłÆ       k Exk log p(x          |g(xk ))    ,
     et     al.   nonparam.   nonparam.   sample level                                   avg. encoding                                                                       block-id.        -
                                                                 hand intervention                                            kŌłł{1,2}
     (2020)
     Yao et al.                                                                          P
                                          sample level on all    partial observabil-         k,kŌĆ▓ Ōłł[K]                            P
     (2023,       nonparam.   nonparam.                    k                                                                  ŌłÆ       kŌłł[K] H(gk (x)A╠é )                     block-id.        -
                                          realizations of zA     ity                     Ōłźgk (x)A╠é ŌłÆgkŌĆ▓ (x╠ā)A╠é Ōłź2
     Thm. 3.2)
                                                                                         P
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                             k,kŌĆ▓ ŌłłVi
     Yao et al.
                                          sample level on all    partial observabil-                                              P


42
     (2023,       nonparam.   nonparam.                    k                              gk (x) (i,k) ŌłÆgkŌĆ▓ (x╠ā) (i,kŌĆ▓ )
                                                                                                A╠é
                                                                                                                              ŌłÆ       kŌłł[K] H(tk ŌŚ”gk (x))                    block-id         -
                                          realizations of zA     ity, kŌłłVi                                      A╠é       2
     Thm. 3.8)                                               i


     Brehmer                                                                                                                      P
                                                                 perfect interven-       DKL (q(I,z╠é1,2 | x1,2 )Ōłźp(I,z╠é1,2 )) ŌłÆ k Exk log p(xk |g(xk )),
     et     al.   nonparam.   nonparam.   sample level                                                                                                                       element-id.      -
                                                                 tion per node           where z╠ék :=g(xk ),kŌłł{1,2}           kŌłł{1,2}
     (2022)
                                                                            T EMPORAL CRL

                                                                 known-target inter-
     Lippe                                transitional invari-
                                                                 ventions It , invari-   ŌłÆH(z╠ét t       |   z╠étŌłÆ1 )   where
     et    al.    nonparam.   nonparam.   ance on a distribu-                                   A╠é                            ŌłÆp(xt |xtŌłÆ1 ,It )                              block-id.        -
                                                                 ant partition A:=       z╠ét :=g(xt )
     (2022b)                              tional level
                                                                 [N ]\It

                                                                 known-target, par-
     Lippe                                transitional invari-   tially perfect inter-
                                                                                         ŌłÆH(z╠ét t       |   z╠étŌłÆ1 )   where
     et    al.    nonparam.   nonparam.   ance on a distribu-    ventions It , invari-          A╠é                            ŌłÆp(xt |xtŌłÆ1 ,It )                              block-id.        -
                                                                                         z╠ét :=g(xt )
     (2022a)                              tional level           ant partition A:=
                                                                 [N ]\It
                  Causal      Mixing                             Source of invari-
     Work                                 Invariance                                    Invariance reg.                             Suf’¼üciency reg.                  Identi’¼üability   Expl.
                  Model       Function                           ance, Inv. subset A

                                                                 binary   interven-
     Lippe                                transitional invari-                          DKL (q(z╠ét | xt ) Ōłź p(z╠ét | z╠étŌłÆ1 ,rt )),
                                                                 tions   (interven-
     et     al.   nonparam.   nonparam.   ance on a distribu-                           rt observed regime vari-                    ŌłÆ log p(xt |z╠ét )                block-id.        -
                                                                 tional      target
     (2023)                               tional level                                  able
                                                                 unknown)
                                                                           M ULTITASK CRL

                                                                 task distribution,
     Lachapelle                                                  overlapping task               P                                           P            (t)
     et     al.   nonparam.   nonparam.   task support           supports, number                   t   Ōłźw╠é(t) Ōłź2,1                             t R(w╠é         ŌŚ”g)   af’¼üne-id.        (e)
     (2023)                                                      of causal variables
                                                                 known

     Fumero                                                      task distribution,                                                         P
                                                                                                         P                                               (t)
     et     al.   nonparam.   nonparam.   task support           overlapping task            H(w╠ā)+                                             t R(w╠é         ŌŚ”g)   element-id.      (e)
                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                                                                                                              Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                 Ōłźw╠é(t) Ōłź1
     (2024)                                                      supports


43
                                                                     D OMAIN G ENERALIZATION

                                                                 invariant      rela-
                                                                 tionship between
     Sagawa
                                                                 label and invariant
     et     al.   nonparam.   nonparam.   risk                                              maxkŌłł[K] Rk (wŌŚ”g)                           maxkŌłł[K] Rk (wŌŚ”g)            NA               (f)
                                                                 features, preserved
     (2019)
                                                                 under     covariate
                                                                 shift
                                                                 invariant      rela-
                                                                 tionship between
     Arjovsky
                                                                 label and invariant                                                      P              k
     et     al.   nonparam.   nonparam.   risk                                             ŌłźŌłćw,w=1 Rk (wŌŚ”g)Ōłź2                                 kŌłł[K] R        (wŌŚ”g)   NA               -
                                                                 features, preserved
     (2020)
                                                                 under     covariate
                                                                 shift
                  Causal      Mixing                   Source of invari-
     Work                                 Invariance                          Invariance reg.           Suf’¼üciency reg.                  Identi’¼üability   Expl.
                  Model       Function                 ance, Inv. subset A

                                                       invariant      rela-
                                                       tionship between
     Krueger
                                                       label and invariant                                   P              k
     et     al.   nonparam.   nonparam.   risk                                  Var({Rk (wŌŚ”g)}kŌłł[K] )            kŌłł[K] R        (wŌŚ”g)    NA               (f)
                                                       features, preserved
     (2021)
                                                       under     covariate
                                                       shift
                                                       invariant      rela-
                                                       tionship between
     Ahuja
                                                       label and invariant                              P             k
     et    al.    nonparam.   nonparam.   risk                                  ŌłźŌłćw,w=1 Rk (wŌŚ”g)Ōłź2          kŌłł[K] R       (wŌŚ”g)+Var(R)   NA               -
                                                       features, preserved
     (2022a)
                                                       under     covariate
                                                       shift
                                                                                                                                                                  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


44
