Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B RINGING N E RF S TO THE L ATENT S PACE :
I NVERSE G RAPHICS AUTOENCODER
 Antoine Schnepf * 1,2 , Karim Kassab* 1,3 , Jean-Yves Franceschi1 , Laurent Caraffa3 ,
 Flavian Vasile1 , Jeremie Mary1 , Andrew Comport† 2 , Valérie Gouet-Brunet† 3
 *†
    Equal contribution
 1
   Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France
 2
   Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, I3S, France
 3
   LASTIG, Université Gustave Eiffel, IGN-ENSG, F-94160 Saint-Mandé



                                                  A BSTRACT

        While pre-trained image autoencoders are increasingly utilized in computer vision,
        the application of inverse graphics in 2D latent spaces has been under-explored. Yet,
        besides reducing the training and rendering complexity, applying inverse graphics
        in the latent space enables a valuable interoperability with other latent-based 2D
        methods. The major challenge is that inverse graphics cannot be directly applied
        to such image latent spaces because they lack an underlying 3D geometry. In
        this paper, we propose an Inverse Graphics Autoencoder (IG-AE) that specifically
        addresses this issue. To this end, we regularize an image autoencoder with 3D-
        geometry by aligning its latent space with jointly trained latent 3D scenes. We
        utilize the trained IG-AE to bring NeRFs to the latent space with a latent NeRF
        training pipeline, which we implement in an open-source extension of the Nerfstu-
        dio framework, thereby unlocking latent scene learning for its supported methods.
        We experimentally confirm that Latent NeRFs trained with IG-AE present an im-
        proved quality compared to a standard autoencoder, all while exhibiting training
        and rendering accelerations with respect to NeRFs trained in the image space. Our
        project page can be found at https://ig-ae.github.io .
                                                   Inverse Graphics
                                         Render


      Image space          3D-aware
                          latent space


                                                                                                          3D-aware
                                                                          Image space       IG-AE        latent space


      underlying          underlying
       3D space         3D space (latent)

            (a) Image space analogy.                                       (b) Inverse Graphics Autoencoder (IG-AE).

Figure 1: 3D-aware latent space. We draw inspiration from the relationship between the 3D space
and image space and introduce the concept of a 3D-aware latent space. We propose an Inverse
Graphics Autoencoder (IG-AE) that encodes images into 3D-aware latent images, hence preserving
3D-consistency. We use these latents to train scene representations in the 3D-aware latent space.


                                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1   I NTRODUCTION

Latent image representations are increasingly used in computer vision tasks. Most recent methods
utilize latent representations for various tasks such as image generation (Rombach et al., 2022; Esser
et al., 2021), and image segmentation (Long et al., 2015; Ohgushi et al., 2020), as they allow to
represent images in a compact form which reduces their representation complexity.
Similarly to 2D computer vision, leveraging latent image representations for 3D tasks would bring nu-
merous advantages. First, training NeRFs on lower-resolution latent images would enable significant
speed-ups in both rendering and training times. While efforts towards NeRF speed improvements
have traditionally focused on working directly on NeRF architectures, this approach would instead
tackle the space in which NeRF models are trained. This means that it would offer a broader impact
across various NeRF models, extending beyond a single specific NeRF improvement. Second, latent
NeRFs unlock an inter-operability between NeRFs and pre-trained latent-based methods. For in-
stance, previous works have enabled this inter-operability in a task-specific, ad-hoc manner to unlock
applications like scene editing (Park et al., 2024) and generation (Metzer et al., 2023).
Despite the potential of latent NeRFs, the adoption of latent image representations for 3D tasks, such
as Novel View Synthesis (NVS), remains limited due to the inherent incompatibilities between image
latent spaces and 3D modeling methods. These incompatibilities stem from the lack of an underlying
3D geometry in latent spaces on the one hand, and the necessity of 3D-consistency among images
for solving the inverse graphics problem on the other hand. In practice, encoding two 3D-consistent
views of an object does not lead to 3D-consistent latent representations; instead, it produces latent
images with features that vary inconsistently across views. This prohibits the direct application of
scene learning methods such as NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2020) on such representations.
To sidestep these incompatibilities, the aforementioned methods have resorted to the ad-hoc imple-
mentation of custom, scene-dependent “adapters” (Khalid et al., 2023) or “refinement layers” (Park
et al., 2024). However, these solutions are only workarounds and do not address the root cause of the
problem: the need for a universal “3D-aware” latent space induced by an image autoencoder that
preserves 3D-consistency. Such an autoencoder would enable a broader compatibility between image
autoencoders and NeRFs, unlocking the potential of latent NeRFs. In this paper, we explore this
direction for the first time.
We start by proposing a technique that enables learning NeRF models in the latent space. Our
training pipeline comprises two stages: Latent Supervision supervises NeRFs with latent image
representations, and RGB Alignment aligns the learned latent scene with the RGB space. Yet, its
application in a standard latent space results in sub-optimal latent NeRFs, due to their aforementioned
incompatibilities. To address this, we draw inspiration from the relationship between the image space
and 3D space (Fig. 1a) and introduce 3D-aware latent spaces, which augment regular image latent
spaces by incorporating an underlying 3D geometry. We present an Inverse Graphics Autoencoder
(IG-AE) that embeds a 3D-aware latent space (Fig. 1b). To achieve this, we apply 3D regularization
on the latent space of an autoencoder by jointly training it with a synthetic set of latent 3D scenes.
During this process, we align the encoded views with the renderings of the latent 3D scenes, which
enforces 3D-consistency. Additionally, we propose an autoencoder preservation process that simul-
taneously autoencodes real and synthetic data while performing our training, which allows us to
conserve the reconstructive performance of the autoencoder.
We propose an open-source extension of Nerfstudio (Tancik et al., 2023) that enables learning its
supported NeRF models in latent spaces, thereby unlocking a streamlined approach for latent NeRF
learning. This enables us to evaluate various current NeRF architectures on the task of learning
scenes in latent spaces. Our results highlight the effectiveness of our IG-AE in latent scene learning
as compared to a standard AE. We consider this work to be the first milestone towards foundation
inverse graphics autoencoders, and aspire that our open-source Nerfstudio extension promotes further
research in this direction.
An overview of our contributions is given below.

       • We introduce the concept of 3D-aware latent spaces that are compatible with 3D tasks,
       • We present an Inverse Graphics Autoencoder (IG-AE) that maps images to a 3D-aware
         latent space, all while preserving autoencoder performances,


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • We propose a standardized method to train NeRF architectures in latent spaces,
       • We propose an open-source extension of Nerfstudio that support training supported NeRF
         models in the latent space, in an effort to streamline future work involving latent NeRFs.
       • We experimentally show that IG-AE enables improved latent NeRF quality with respect to
         the baseline AE and decreased training times with respect to regular NeRFs.

2   R ELATED W ORK

Latent NeRFs. While NeRFs (Mildenhall et al., 2020) were originally conceived to work in the
image space, they have also been extended to work in other feature spaces (Tschernezki et al., 2022;
Kobayashi et al., 2022). Notably, Latent NeRFs are extensions of NeRFs to the latent spaces of image
autoencoders. They have been particularly explored in works targeting applications such as scene
editing (Park et al., 2024; Khalid et al., 2023) and text-to-3D generation (Metzer et al., 2023), which
are not directly feasible with regular NeRFs. To circumvent the incompatibilities between NeRFs and
latent spaces, these works have resorted to special adapter layers that correct NeRF renderings into
standard latent image representations. For novel view synthesis, Aumentado-Armstrong et al. (2023)
employ hybrid NeRFs that are trained to simultaneously render both RGB and latent components.
This is done to supervise the NeRF geometry during training, while only keeping latent components
at inference, which enables good NVS performances and rendering speed-ups. In this work, we aim
to train NeRFs that operate fully within the latent space. We address the incompatibility between
NeRFs and latent spaces by tackling its root cause: the need for an inverse graphics autoencoder that
preserves 3D consistency, or in other words, the need for a 3D-aware latent space.

Scene embeddings. While methods like Latent NeRFs and other feature fields modify the NeRF
rendering space by replacing scene images with “feature images”, other approaches embed the entire
scene information into a “scene embedding”. Recent works (Wang et al., 2023; Kosiorek et al., 2021;
Sajjadi et al., 2022; Lan et al., 2024) focus on training encoders to transform scene information (e.g.
images or text) into embeddings that fully encapsulate the 3D scene. NeRFs can then be obtained
directly (without training) from such scene embeddings. In contrast, our approach aligns more closely
with feature field methods (Tschernezki et al., 2022; Kobayashi et al., 2022), where NeRFs are
trained to render “feature images” derived from scene images (e.g. DINO or CLIP features), enabling
applications such as segmentation and object retrieval. However, we train NeRFs to render latent
image representations obtained from an autoencoder fine-tuned for 3D tasks, to tackle the task of 3D
reconstruction. For an elaborate distinction across recent works, we refer the reader to Appendix A.

Nerfstudio. Subsequent to the introduction of NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2020), a multitude of NeRF
models emerged to improve upon the original architecture by accelerating training times (Müller
et al., 2022; Kerbl et al., 2023), improving rendering quality (Barron et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022),
as well as targeting other limitations (Fridovich-Keil et al., 2023; Martin-Brualla et al., 2021; Yu
et al., 2021). With the escalation of NeRF methods, Nerfstudio (Tancik et al., 2023) emerged as
a unified PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) framework in which NeRF models are implemented using
standardized implementations, making it straightforward for researchers and practitioners to integrate
various NeRF models into their projects. Today, most well-known NeRF techniques are implemented
in Nerfstudio (Müller et al., 2022; Barron et al., 2021; Mildenhall et al., 2020; Kerbl et al., 2023),
thus allowing for a friction-free experience when testing and comparing novel techniques. While
Nerfstudio currently provides a streamlined approach for NeRFs, it limits the representation of 3D
scenes to the natural color space, hence limiting both the research and development of Latent NeRFs.
In this work, we propose an open-source extension of the Nerfstudio framework that enables training
supported NeRF methods in a custom latent space, thus facilitating our current as well as future
research in this area. Furthermore, we integrate our IG-AE into this extension, which enables us to
evaluate various current NeRF architectures on the task of latent scene learning.

3   L ATENT N E RF

In this section, we start by presenting latent NeRFs. Then, we propose a general latent NeRF training
method, which will later serve to train NeRFs in the latent space of our IG-AE. Provided an encoder


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         AE               IG-AE                  AE               IG-AE           Ground Truth

            (a) Latent images.                        (b) Decoded latent NeRF renderings.

Figure 2: Comparison of IG-AE and a standard AE. Encoding 3D-consistent images using an
AE leads to 3D-inconsistent latent images. When trained on such latents, NeRF renderings present
artifacts when decoded. IG-AE presents a 3D-aware latent space with 3D-consistent latent images.
Latent NeRFs trained with IG-AE eliminate these artifacts and more closely match the ground truth.


Eϕ and decoder Dψ , our method can train any NeRF architecture in a latent space via two stages.
Latent Supervision is an adaptation of the standard NeRF training framework to the latent space
which replaces RGB images with latent images. RGB Alignment fine-tunes the decoder to align the
learned latent scene with the RGB space, which our experiments proved to be essential for strong
NVS performances in the RGB space.

3.1   D EFINITION

Latent NeRFs are conceptually similar to standard NeRFs, with the primary difference being that
they model scenes in the latent space of an autoencoder as opposed to the RGB space. As such, latent
NeRFs are simple extensions of standard NeRF methods, where the rendering resolution and the
number of output channels are modified in accordance with the latent space dimensions. Let Fθ be
a latent NeRF method with trainable parameters θ, where Fθ ∈ {Vanilla-NeRF (Mildenhall et al.,
2020), Instant-NGP (Müller et al., 2022), TensoRF (Chen et al., 2022), K-Planes (Fridovich-Keil
et al., 2023)}. For conciseness, we consider Fθ to be a generic NeRF method and abstract from
method-specific nuances. Given a camera pose p, one can render a novel view as such:

                         z̃p = Fθ (p) ,                       x̃p = Dψ (z̃p ) ,                  (1)

where z̃p is the rendered latent image of shape (h, w, c), and x̃p is the decoded RGB image of shape
(H, W, 3). We define l > 1 as the resolution downscale factor when going from the RGB space to the
latent space: (h, w) = (H/l, W/l). As NeRF rendering pipelines implement classic volume rendering
(Kajiya & Von Herzen, 1984) where pixels are independently rendered, latent NeRFs reduce the
rendering complexity by a factor of l2 as compared to standard NeRFs. This makes latent NeRFs
highly attractive, as they alleviate a key bottleneck in NeRF training, while maintaining the same
target resolution after decoding.

3.2   T RAINING

Our latent NeRF training scheme consists of two stages, as illustrated in Fig. 3.

Latent Supervision. In this stage, we consider the direct adaptation of NeRF training in the latent
space, i.e. training NeRF on latent image representations rather than RGB images. Let LFθ be the
training loss corresponding to the NeRF method Fθ . LFθ comprises of a pixel-level reconstructive
objective that matches the NeRF renderings to ground truth views, as well as other method-specific


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Latent NeRF Training Pipeline
              Encoding                           Latent NeRF Inference Pipeline

                                            NeRF Method


                                               Field,
                                            Ray Sampler,
                                             Renderer,
                                                etc.



     Stage 1: Latent Supervision

     Stage 2: RGB Alignment



Figure 3: Latent NeRF Training. We train a Latent NeRF in two stages. First, we train the chosen
NeRF method Fθ on posed encoded latent images using its proprietary loss LFθ that matches rendered
latents z̃p and encoded latents zp . Subsequently, we align with the scene in the RGB space by adding
decoder fine-tuning via Lalign that matches ground truth images xp and decoded renderings x̃p .


regularization terms. Latent Supervision consists of minimizing the following objective:
                                             X
                                  LLS (θ) =       LFθ (θ; zp , z̃p ) ,                            (2)
                                              p∈P

where zp and z̃p are respectively the encoded latent representation of the RGB ground truth and
the rendered latent image, with pose p. P denotes the set of training camera poses. Note that, to
avoid redundantly encoding training views, we start this stage by encoding all the training images
X = {xp }p∈P into latent image representations Z = {zp }p∈P , and then caching them.

RGB alignment. While Latent Supervision effectively captures a 3D structure in the latent space,
even minor inaccuracies in latent NeRF renderings can be magnified during the decoding process.
These inaccuracies stem from various sources of error within the pipeline, mainly: errors originating
from the latent space and autoencoding performances (i.e. imperfect AE), and errors associated with
3D modeling (i.e. imperfect NeRF). Hence, in order to alleviate the effect of these errors, we finish
our latent NeRF training by an RGB alignment process, where we fine-tune the decoder Dψ and the
latent scene Fθ to align with the RGB space. In practice, we minimize the following objective:
                                                  X
                                  Lalign (θ, ψ) =    ∥xp − x̃p ∥22 ,                               (3)
                                                  p∈P

where xp is the RGB ground truth, and x̃p = Dψ (z̃p ) is the decoded latent NeRF rendering.
Consequently, the latent NeRF not only exhibits good NVS performances in the latent space, but also
when decoding its renderings to the RGB space.
Overall, we divide latent NeRF training into Latent Supervision and RGB Alignment. Latent
Supervision is an accelerated approach that learns 3D structures in the latent space thanks to reduced
image resolutions, and RGB alignment enhances NVS quality in the RGB space by using RGB
supervision and a decoder fine-tuning, while still rendering the NeRF in the latent space. Fig. 2 (AE
columns) illustrates the results of our latent NeRF training method when applied in a standard latent
space. Latent NeRFs trained in a standard latent space with our method learn a coarse geometry.
However, due to the aforementioned incompatibilities between latent spaces and NeRFs, the decoded
renderings present artifacts in the RGB space. To address this, we shift our focus to resolving
these incompatibilities in the next section, and present an inverse graphics autoencoder embedding a
3D-aware latent that is compatible with learning latent NeRFs.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                    3D Regularization
      Learnable Latent Scenes

               ...         ...         Tri-Planes
                                       Renderer


s,p
      RGB Scenes

               ...         ...          Mesh
                                       Renderer


      Real Images

                     ...         ...


                                                    AE Preservation

Figure 4: IG-AE Training. We jointly learn a set of latent synthetic scenes Tτ and supervise the
latent images zs,p of an autoencoder with rendered 3D-consistent latents z̃s,p using Llatent . We match
decoded latent renderings x̃s,p with the ground truth scene renderings xs,p using LRGB . We preserve
                                                                               (synth)        (real)
autoencoder performances on synthetic and real data respectively through Lae           and Lae .


4     I NVERSE G RAPHICS AUTOENCODER
We present IG-AE, an autoencoder that encodes 3D-consistent images into 3D-consistent latent
representations. To attain such an autoencoder, it is necessary that its latent space encodes the
RGB space while also retaining an underlying 3D geometry. In this section, we start by defining
3D-consistency (Section 4.1), and then elaborate on how we train an IG-AE: we utilize synthetic data
to construct a learnable set of latent scenes which aims to supervise the latent space of an AE with
3D-consistent latents (Section 4.2), all while preserving autoencoding performances (Section 4.3).
Fig. 4 presents an overview of our method.

4.1    3D-C ONSISTENCY

The notion of 3D consistency ensures that corresponding points or features in different images
represent the same point or object in the scene, despite variations in viewpoint, lighting or occlusion.
We denote the posed images as X = {xp | p ∈ SE(3)}, where SE(3) is the Special Euclidean group
containing all camera poses in 3D. X are posed 3D-consistent images if and only if there exists a 3D
model M such that:
                                ∀p ∈ SE(3), Render(M, p) = xp .                                      (4)
Note that a NeRF model inherently produces 3D-consistent images as it is an implicit model M
rendered via classic volume rendering (Kajiya & Von Herzen, 1984). Also note that while 3D
consistency is natural for posed images X = {xp }p∈P obtained from a scene in the image space, it
does not naturally extend to the latent space, as latent representations of two 3D-consistent images
are not necessarily 3D consistent. Our 3D-aware latent space is designed to mitigate this discrepancy.

4.2    3D-R EGULARIZATION

To achieve 3D-consistency in the latent space, we learn an IG-AE by aligning the latent encodings of
3D-consistent images with reference 3D-consistent latent images. However, this cannot be directly
achieved as such 3D-consistent latent images are not available. To this end, we learn a set of 3D latent


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


scenes with NeRFs from which 3D-consistent latents can be easily rendered. In fact, while NeRFs
cannot replicate 3D-inconsistent latents from a given autoencoder, training them via LFθ (which
typically employs an MSE reconstructive objective) leads to a convergence towards a common coarse
geometry that most satisfies the inputs, while maintaining 3D-consistency. We utilize this property in
our approach to obtain 3D-consistent latent images with which we supervise our autoencoder. To
learn our latent scenes in practice, we adopt Tri-Plane representations (Chan et al., 2022), as their
simple architecture ensures a low memory footprint and a fast training.
Let M = {M1 , ..., MN } be a dataset of 3D scenes, and Xs = {xs,p }p∈P be the set of renderings of
a scene Ms ∈ M from an array of training views P. We denote the set of latent scenes as the set of
Tri-Planes Tτ = {T1 , ..., TN }, where τ comprises both scene-specific trainable parameters, as well
as shared parameters present in the feature decoder of our common Tri-Plane renderer RT .
Before training our IG-AE, we start by encoding views of our scenes M into standard (i.e. 3D-
inconsistent) latent views, and training our Tri-Planes on these latents. Subsequently, we proceed to
train our IG-AE while continuing to jointly train our Tri-Planes. For each scene Ms , we encode each
view xs,p into a latent image zs,p , and render the corresponding 3D-aware latent image z̃s,p from the
latent scene Ts as follows:
                       zs,p = Eϕ (xs,p ) ,                             z̃s,p = RT (Ts , p) ,               (5)
where Eϕ is the encoder with trainable parameters ϕ. We then define a loss function Llatent that
aligns these latent representations:
                                 Llatent (ϕ, τ ; zs,p , z̃s,p ) = ∥zs,p − z̃s,p ∥22 .                      (6)
This loss function updates both the encoder parameters ϕ and the latent scene parameters τ to
minimize the distance between the latent representations. This means that, on the one hand, the latent
scene Ts is updated to align with the 3D-inconsistent latent images zs,p , and hence learn a coarse
geometry common among all latent images of Ms . On the other hand, the encoder parameters ϕ are
updated to produce latent images that more closely reassemble the latent scene renderings z̃s,p , or in
other words, produce 3D-consistent images.
We additionally define LRGB as a loss function that mirrors Llatent in the RGB space:
                                 LRGB (ψ, τ ; xs,p , x̃s,p ) = ∥xs,p − x̃s,p ∥22 ,                         (7)
where x̃s,p = Dψ (z̃s,p ) is the decoded latent scene rendering. LRGB updates both the decoder
parameters ψ and the latent scene parameters τ so that the latent scene aligns with the RGB scene
when decoded. This is to ensure the optimal decoding of 3D-consistent latents as well as NVS
performances in the RGB space.
Therefore, our 3D regularization objective minimizes the following loss:
                        X
       L3D (ϕ, ψ, τ ) =    [λlatent Llatent (ϕ, τ ; zs,p , z̃s,p ) + λRGB LRGB (ψ, τ ; xs,p , x̃s,p )] ,   (8)
                           s,p

where λlatent and λRGB are hyper-parameters.
Overall, our IG-AE is trained by aligning the latent space of an autoencoder with the space of latent
images that is inferable via Tri-Planes, while also ensuring the proper mapping from the latent space
to the RGB space. In practice, we use synthetic scenes from Objaverse (Deitke et al., 2023) to
learn 3D structure in the latent space, as they present well-defined geometry and error-free camera
parameters. Fig. 2 illustrates a comparison between a standard AE latent space and our 3D-aware
latent space. While latent NeRFs trained with an AE present artifacts when decoding their renderings,
those trained in the latent space of our IG-AE do not exhibit such artifacts. Yet, our experiments show
that solely applying our 3D-regularization optimization objective leads to a degradation of the AE’s
generalization capabilities and autoencoding performances. On that account, we present in the next
section additional components of our training that target a reconstructive objective.

4.3   AUTOENCODER P RESERVATION

As 3D regularization does not incorporate autoencoder reconstruction, this section focuses on
preserving the autoencoding performance of the AE on both synthetic and real data. To this end, we


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


additionally jointly learn a reconstructive objective. First, we add an autoencoder loss to align the
ground truth RGB views with the reconstructed views after encoding and decoding:
                                  L(synth)
                                   ae      (ϕ, ψ; xs,p , x̂s,p ) = ∥xs,p − x̂s,p ∥22 ,                  (9)
where x̂s,p = Dψ (zs,p ) is the reconstruction of the ground truth image. This ensures that the
autoencoder still reconstructs images from the scenes.
To avoid overfitting on synthetic data, we additionally inject real images from Imagenet (Deng et al.,
2009) into our training pipeline, on which we also define a reconstructive objective. We denote
I = {I1 , ..., IL } the dataset of real images. We define the reconstructive loss on an image Ij ∈ I as:

                   L(real)
                    ae     (ϕ, ψ; Ij , Iˆj ) = ∥Ij − Iˆj ∥22 + λp Lp (Ij , Iˆj ) + λTV LTV (kj ) ,     (10)

where λp and λTV are hyper-parameters, Iˆj = Dψ (kj ) is the reconstruction of Ij , and kj = Eϕ (Ij )
is the encoding of Ij . Lp is a perceptual loss that refines the autoencoder reconstructions by aligning
the reconstructed and original images in the feature space of a pre-trained network. LTV is a total
variation loss that acts as a regularization term to encourage spatial smoothness by penalizing high-
frequency variations in the latent images. We found that it leads to latent images that more closely
reassemble our 3D-consistent latents. This is done to prevent the IG-AE from converging towards a
dual-mode solution, where it is only 3D-consistent for synthetic scenes while functioning as a normal
AE for real scenes. More details about TV are present in Appendix C.
Therefore, our autoencoder preservation loss is defined as follows:
                          X                                            X
    Lae (ϕ, ψ) = λ(synth)
                    ae        L(synth)
                               ae      (ϕ, ψ; xs,p , x̂s,p ) + λ(real)
                                                                ae       L(real)
                                                                          ae     (ϕ, ψ; Ij , Iˆj ) ,   (11)
                                  s,p                                           j

         (synth)        (real)
where λae          and λae       are hyper-parameters.

4.4   IG-AE T RAINING O BJECTIVE

Overall, we present a joint objective for IG-AE that regularizes its latent space with 3D geometry
while preserving autoencoding performances. The objective minimizes the following loss:
                                 LIG−AE (ϕ, ψ, τ ) = L3D (ϕ, ψ, τ ) + Lae (ϕ, ψ) .                     (12)
In summary, our training strategy exploits the well-defined geometry of synthetic data and utilizes
L3D to learn latent scenes and regularize the latent space of an AE with 3D geometry, all while
maintaining the reconstruction performance of the AE via Lae and real data.

5     E XPERIMENTS
We start by training an IG-AE on synthetic scenes from Objaverse, as described in Section 4.
Subsequently, we train Nerfstudio models in our 3D-aware latent space on scenes from out-of-
distribution datasets, as well as held-out scenes from Objaverse. To evaluate our method, we compare
the novel view synthesis performance of the Nerfstudio models when trained in our 3D-aware
latent space (IG-AE), a standard latent space (AE), and the RGB space. Moreover, we evaluate the
auto-encoding performances of our IG-AE on held-out real images. Finally, we assess our design
choices by presenting an ablation study of our method, where we omit either our 3D-regularization
components or our AE preservation components. The details of our Nerfstudio extension, as well as
IG-AE and latent NeRF trainings, are available in Appendix B.

5.1   DATASETS

For 3D-regularization, we adopt Objaverse (Deitke et al., 2023), a synthetic dataset which is standard
when large-scale and diverse 3D data is needed (Liu et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2024).
Objaverse provides meshes of synthetic objects, and thus presents no artifact in its scenes and no
approximation errors in camera parameters. We utilize N = 500 objects from Objaverse. Each object
is rendered from V = 300 views at a 128 × 128 resolution.


                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     AE     IG-AE                      AE        IG-AE                         AE      IG-AE

  Vanilla-NeRF
                                          GT                                       GT                               GT

      Instant-NGP


         TensoRF


         K-Planes


Figure 5: Qualitative results. Visualization of decoded latent NeRF renderings trained with a
standard AE and an IG-AE on scenes from three out-of-distribution datasets. Latent NeRFs trained
with an AE exhibit artifacts in decoded renderings that are not present in those trained with IG-AE.

Table 1: Main Results on ShapeNet datasets. All results are obtained by training NeRFs with our
Latent NeRF Training Pipeline, and are averaged over 4 scenes from each dataset. Our 3D-aware
latent space generalizes to out-of-distribution datasets and is more suited for latent NeRF training.

                                    Bags dataset                        Hats dataset                    Vases dataset
                            PSNR       SSIM    LPIPS            PSNR      SSIM      LPIPS           PSNR    SSIM    LPIPS
                     AE     28.81      0.954   0.046            28.75      0.960       0.032        32.00   0.968   0.023
 Vanilla-NeRF
                    IG-AE   29.57      0.960   0.044            29.31      0.967       0.033        33.06   0.973   0.021
                     AE     24.29      0.892   0.113            23.48      0.893       0.096        26.49   0.917   0.081
 Instant-NGP
                    IG-AE   25.90      0.923   0.062            25.30      0.925       0.048        28.44   0.942   0.043
                     AE     26.19      0.930   0.060            25.90      0.932       0.044        29.16   0.948   0.038
 TensoRF
                    IG-AE   28.40      0.953   0.038            28.09      0.957       0.029        31.45   0.966   0.021
                     AE     28.00      0.946   0.041            27.68      0.951       0.031        31.56   0.964   0.023
 K-Planes
                    IG-AE   29.22      0.957   0.038            28.81      0.962       0.027        32.79   0.971   0.019



For AE preservation, we adopt Imagenet (Deng et al., 2009), a large dataset of diverse real images.
We utilize L = 40 000 images, which we pre-process by doing a square cropping followed by a
downscaling to a 128 × 128 resolution that matches our rendered scenes.
For NeRF evaluations, we utilize synthetic, object-level data as it aligns with the training domain.
As such, we train NeRFs on held-out scenes from Objaverse, and on scenes from three out-of-
distribution datasets: Shapenet Hats, Bags, and Vases (Chang et al., 2015). Note that, due to the
challenges latent NeRFs face with simple object-level scenes, our evaluation focuses on such scenes,
and excludes more complex or real scenes. We discuss this in Section 5.4.

5.2     R ESULTS

We report for each experiment the PSNR (↑), the SSIM (↑), and the LPIPS (↓) (Zhang et al., 2018).
Quantitative and qualitative results can be found in Table 1 and Fig. 5, where we utilize our latent
NeRF training pipeline to train various Nerfstudio models on out-of-distribution datasets from
ShapeNet, both using our IG-AE and a standard AE. Models trained with IG-AE showcase superior
NVS performance compared to those trained with a standard AE. This shows that IG-AE embeds a
3D-aware latent space better suited for NeRF training and capable of generalizing to new datasets.
Additional results on held-out Objaverse scenes can be found in Appendix D.3. To further support this,
Table 6 presents latent NVS metrics computed on latent images. Latent NeRFs showcase significantly
better latent NVS performance with IG-AE, further confirming its 3D-awareness. Table 4 presents the
NVS performance in the two stage of Latent NeRF training. In Table 8, we provide a comparison of
latent NeRF training with classical RGB training. Latent NeRF training showcases speedups both in
terms of training and rendering times, but lower NVS performance, which we discuss in Section 5.4.


                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Ablations. Comparison between IG-AE and the baseline AE on two tasks. First, we
compare their NVS performances when used to train a latent Vanilla-NeRF. Second, we compare
their reconstruction performances when auto-encoding held-out images from ImageNet. Our method
presents both strong NVS and reconstruction performances as compared to its ablations, validating
our design choices. The bold and underlined entries indicate the best and second-best results.

                                            NVS
                                                                                  Reconstruction
                            Cake                          Figurine
                  PSNR     SSIM     LPIPS         PSNR     SSIM      LPIPS   PSNR     SSIM    LPIPS
 AE                33.18   0.962    0.053         31.46    0.972     0.017   27.69    0.856    0.023
 IG-AE (no 3D)     32.09   0.951    0.063         30.94    0.965     0.021   29.83    0.898    0.013
 IG-AE (no Pr)     33.87   0.966    0.050         33.73    0.982     0.012   17.66    0.410    0.279
 IG-AE             34.38   0.966    0.051         33.17    0.979     0.012   29.57    0.887    0.015



5.3   A BLATIONS

To justify our design choices, we conduct an ablation study in which we alternatively omit our 3D
regularization pipeline and our AE preservation components. Ablation results on held-out Objaverse
scenes for Vanilla NeRF can be found in Table 2. “IG-AE (no Pr)” removes the AE preservation
components from our training by deactivating Lae . “IG-AE (no 3D)” omits our 3D regularizatiom
by deactivating L3D . As illustrated, IG-AE (no Pr) presents deteriorated autoencoding performance
due to overfitting on the task of 3D-regularization. IG-AE (no 3D) showcases good autoencoding
performances, but lower NVS performances, as the latent space here is not 3D-aware due to the
lack of 3D-regularization. Our method (IG-AE) demonstrates both good NVS and autoencoding
reconstruction performances as compared to its ablations, thereby justifying the components of
our pipeline. Note that ablating both our 3D regularization components and our AE preservation
components leads back to the case of a standard autoencoder (AE). Additional ablations done with
other NeRF models can be found in Table 5 in Appendix D.2.


5.4   L IMITATION

Table 8 compares latent NeRF training with classical RGB training. Despite speedups both in terms of
training and rendering times, latent NeRFs have a lower NVS performance. This is due to a limitation
in the representation of high frequencies in latent NeRFs. We speculate that this issue arises because
enforcing 3D consistency in the latent space tends to prioritize regularizing low-frequency structures
over high-frequency details. This leads to the loss of high-frequency details when decoding latent
NeRF renderings back to the RGB space, as it can be seen in Fig. 5. Furthermore, this currently
hinders the applicability of latent NeRFs on complex scenes with abundant high-frequency details,
such as real-world scenes. We leave this to future work, as our approach is the first to propose a
3D-aware latent space via an image autoencoder, and is compatible with various NeRF architectures.


6     C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose IG-AE, the first image autoencoder embedding a 3D-aware latent space.
Moreover, we present a latent NeRF training pipeline that brings NeRF architectures to the latent
space. We integrate our pipeline into an open-source extension of Nerfstudio, thereby enabling latent
NeRF training for its supported architectures. Extensive experiments show the notable improvements
our 3D-aware latent space brings as compared to training NeRFs in a standard latent space, as well as
the efficiency improvements it brings with respect to training NeRFs in the RGB space. In concluding
this paper, several directions of future work arise, as we consider this work to be the first milestone
towards foundation inverse graphics autoencoders. This includes, for instance, the exploration of
approaches improving the representation of high-frequency details when decoding latent NeRFs. We
hope that our proposed Nerfstudio extension, as well as our open-source codebase, will promote
further research in this direction.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Tristan Aumentado-Armstrong, Ashkan Mirzaei, Marcus A Brubaker, Jonathan Kelly, Alex Levin-
  shtein, Konstantinos G Derpanis, and Igor Gilitschenski. Reconstructive Latent-Space Neural
  Radiance Fields for Efficient 3D Scene Representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17880, 2023.

Jonathan T. Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Peter Hedman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and
  Pratul P. Srinivasan. Mip-NeRF: A Multiscale Representation for Anti-Aliasing Neural Radiance
  Fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp.
  5855–5864, October 2021.

Jaret Burkett. Ostris VAE - KL-f8-d16.       https://huggingface.co/ostris/
  vae-kl-f8-d16, 2024. Accessed: 2024-09-25.

Eric R. Chan, Connor Z. Lin, Matthew A. Chan, Koki Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini De Mello, Orazio
  Gallo, Leonidas J. Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis, Tero Karras, and Gordon Wetzstein.
  Efficient Geometry-Aware 3D Generative Adversarial Networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 16123–16133, June 2022.

Angel X. Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, Leonidas Guibas, Pat Hanrahan, Qixing Huang, Zimo Li,
  Silvio Savarese, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song, Hao Su, et al. ShapeNet: An Information-Rich 3D
  Model Repository. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012, 2015.

Anpei Chen, Zexiang Xu, Andreas Geiger, Jingyi Yu, and Hao Su. TensoRF: Tensorial Radiance
  Fields. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022.

Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig
 Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse: A Universe of
 Annotated 3D Objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 13142–13153, June 2023.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A Large-Scale
   Hierarchical Image Database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.

Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming Transformers for High-Resolution
  Image Synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 12873–12883, June 2021.

Sara Fridovich-Keil, Alex Yu, Matthew Tancik, Qinhong Chen, Benjamin Recht, and Angjoo
  Kanazawa. Plenoxels: Radiance Fields Without Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5501–5510, June 2022.

Sara Fridovich-Keil, Giacomo Meanti, Frederik Rahbæk Warburg, Benjamin Recht, and Angjoo
  Kanazawa. K-Planes: Explicit Radiance Fields in Space, Time, and Appearance. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 12479–12488,
  June 2023.

Jiatao Gu, Lingjie Liu, Peng Wang, and Christian Theobalt. StyleneRF: A style-based 3d aware gener-
   ator for high-resolution image synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
   2022.

James T. Kajiya and Brian P. Von Herzen. Ray Tracing Volume Densities. SIGGRAPH Comput.
  Graph., 18(3):165—-174, January 1984. doi: 10.1145/964965.808594.

Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 3D Gaussian
  Splatting for Real-Time Radiance Field Rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 42(4), July
  2023.

Justin Kerr, Chung Min Kim, Ken Goldberg, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Matthew Tancik. LERF:
  Language Embedded Radiance Fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
  on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 19729–19739, October 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Umar Khalid, Hasan Iqbal, Nazmul Karim, Jing Hua, and Chen Chen. LatentEditor: Text Driven
 Local Editing of 3D Scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09313, 2023.
Sosuke Kobayashi, Eiichi Matsumoto, and Vincent Sitzmann. Decomposing NeRF for Editing via
  Feature Field Distillation. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 23311–23330. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2022.
Adam R Kosiorek, Heiko Strathmann, Daniel Zoran, Pol Moreno, Rosalia Schneider, Sona Mokra,
  and Danilo Jimenez Rezende. NeRF-VAE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model.
  In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on
 Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5742–5752.
  PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021.
Yushi Lan, Fangzhou Hong, Shuai Yang, Shangchen Zhou, Xuyi Meng, Bo Dai, Xingang Pan, and
  Chen Change Loy. LN3Diff: Scalable Latent Neural Fields Diffusion for Speedy 3D Generation.
  In ECCV, 2024.
Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick.
  Zero-1-to-3: Zero-shot one image to 3d object. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 9298–9309, October 2023.
Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell. Fully Convolutional Networks for Semantic
  Segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), June 2015.
Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Noha Radwan, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Jonathan T. Barron, Alexey Dosovitskiy,
  and Daniel Duckworth. NeRF in the Wild: Neural Radiance Fields for Unconstrained Photo
  Collections. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 7210–7219, June 2021.
Gal Metzer, Elad Richardson, Or Patashnik, Raja Giryes, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Latent-NeRF for
  Shape-Guided Generation of 3D Shapes and Textures. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 12663–12673, June 2023.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. NeRF: Representing Scenes as Neural Radiance Fields for View Synthesis. In ECCV,
  2020.
Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. Instant Neural Graphics
  Primitives with a Multiresolution Hash Encoding. ACM Trans. Graph., 41(4):102:1–102:15, July
  2022. doi: 10.1145/3528223.3530127.
Toshiaki Ohgushi, Kenji Horiguchi, and Masao Yamanaka. Road Obstacle Detection Method Based
  on an Autoencoder with Semantic Segmentation. In Proceedings of the Asian Conference on
  Computer Vision (ACCV), November 2020.
JangHo Park, Gihyun Kwon, and Jong Chul Ye. ED-NeRF: Efficient Text-Guided Editing of 3D Scene
  With Latent Space NeRF. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
 Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance
  Deep Learning Library. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox,
  and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran
 Associates, Inc., 2019.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  Resolution Image Synthesis With Latent Diffusion Models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10684–10695, June 2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Leonid I. Rudin, Stanley Osher, and Emad Fatemi. Nonlinear Total Variation Based Noise Removal
  Algorithms. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 60(1):259–268, 1992. ISSN 0167-2789. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-2789(92)90242-F.
Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Henning Meyer, Etienne Pot, Urs Bergmann, Klaus Greff, Noha Radwan,
 Suhani Vora, Mario Lučić, Daniel Duckworth, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Jakob Uszkoreit, Thomas
 Funkhouser, and Andrea Tagliasacchi. Scene Representation Transformer: Geometry-Free Novel
 View Synthesis Through Set-Latent Scene Representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 6229–6238, June 2022.
Yichun Shi, Peng Wang, Jianglong Ye, Long Mai, Kejie Li, and Xiao Yang. MVDream: Multi-view
  diffusion for 3d generation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024.
Matthew Tancik, Ethan Weber, Evonne Ng, Ruilong Li, Brent Yi, Justin Kerr, Terrance Wang,
 Alexander Kristoffersen, Jake Austin, Kamyar Salahi, Abhik Ahuja, David McAllister, and Angjoo
 Kanazawa. Nerfstudio: A Modular Framework for Neural Radiance Field Development. In ACM
 SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings, SIGGRAPH ’23, 2023.
V. Tschernezki, I. Laina, D. Larlus, and A. Vedaldi. Neural Feature Fusion Fields: 3D Distillation
   of Self-Supervised 2D Image Representations. In 2022 International Conference on 3D Vision
  (3DV), pp. 443–453, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, sep 2022. IEEE Computer Society. doi: 10.1109/
   3DV57658.2022.00056.
Tengfei Wang, Bo Zhang, Ting Zhang, Shuyang Gu, Jianmin Bao, Tadas Baltrusaitis, Jingjing Shen,
  Dong Chen, Fang Wen, Qifeng Chen, and Baining Guo. RODIN: A Generative Model for Sculpting
  3D Digital Avatars Using Diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 4563–4573, June 2023.
Alex Yu, Vickie Ye, Matthew Tancik, and Angjoo Kanazawa. pixelNeRF: Neural Radiance Fields
  From One or Few Images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 4578–4587, June 2021.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A. Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The Unreasonable
  Effectiveness of Deep Features as a Perceptual Metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2018.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    R ELATED W ORK

Table 3: Comparison with related work. Our work is the first to train various NeRF architectures
in the latent space of an autoencoder, where NeRFs are able to render images that match AE latent,
thanks to the 3D-aware latent space of our IG-AE.

                                               3D alignment
 Method           Rendering space              of rendering and   NeRF Repr.            Task
                                               reference spaces
 NeRF-VAE         RGB                          yes (RGB)          Vanilla-NeRF          Generation
 Rodin            RGB                          yes (RGB)          Tri-Planes            Generation
 LN3Diff          RGB                          yes (RGB)          Tri-Planes            Generation
 StyleNeRF        Feature                      —                  Vanilla-NeRF          Generation
                  VAE Latent (Train)
 Latent-NeRF                                   yes (RGB)          I-NGP                 Generation
                  RGB (Inference)
 LERF             RGB & CLIP                   yes (RGB)          Vanilla-NeRF          3D Distillation
 N3F              RGB & DINO                   no (DINO)          Tri-Planes            3D Distillation
 Latent-Editor    VAE Latent                   no (VAE)           Vanilla-NeRF          3D Editing
 ED-NeRF          VAE Latent                   no (VAE)           TensoRF               3D Editing
                  RGB & VAE Latent (Train)
 RLS                                           no (VAE)           Vanilla-NeRF          Reconstruction
                  VAE Latent (Inference)
                                                                  Vanilla-NeRF,
 Ours             IG-AE Latent (3D-aware)      yes (IG-AE)        K-Planes, TensoRF,    Reconstruction
                                                                  Instant-NGP


This section is dedicated to compare some recent works utilizing NeRFs with scene embeddings and
feature images. Table 3 summarizes this section.
As discussed in the related work (Section 2), some methods encode scene information (e.g. images,
text) into a scene embedding that then serves to produce a NeRF. Such works do not tackle changing
the RGB rendering space of NeRFs.

        • NeRF-VAE (Kosiorek et al., 2021) trains a VAE to encode scene images into a scene
          embedding. This embedding is then used to condition a NeRF model. They can additionally
          sample such embeddings in the VAE latent space, which allows for scene generation.
        • Rodin (Wang et al., 2023) enables scene generation with an optional conditioning via images
          and/or text. They encode the input image and/or textual prompt into a scene embedding,
          which is then used to condition a diffusion model that generates a Tri-Plane representing the
          scene.
        • LN3Diff (Lan et al., 2024) enables fast text/single-image-to-3D generation. For single-
          image-to-3D, the image is encoded into a scene embedding, which is used to condition a
          DiT transformer that generates a Tri-Plane representing the scene.

Other works do change the rendering space of NeRFs, which makes them more closely related to our
work, with still some key differences.

        • StyleNeRF (Gu et al., 2022) proposes a high-resolution generative model with multi-view
          consistency. They achieve style-based generation via NeRFs that render feature images
          followed by a decoder. However, these features can only be obtained via the NeRF rendering
          procedure.
        • Latent-NeRF (Metzer et al., 2023) tackles text-to-3D object generation. It trains latent
          NeRFs such that their renderings match the posterior distribution of Stable Diffusion (Rom-
          bach et al., 2022) under a descriptive text prompt. After this optimization, the latent NeRF is
          converted into an RGB NeRF to resolve the issues arising from training NeRFs in a standard
          latent space.
        • LERF (Kerr et al., 2023) distills CLIP features in NeRFs while simultaneously learning the
          RGB components of the scene, which allows for language queries in 3D.


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • N3F (Tschernezki et al., 2022) distills DINO features into a NeRF representation, while
         simultaneously learning the RGB components of the scene. This allows to apply image-level
         tasks (e.g. scene editing, object segmentation) on NeRF renderings. The DINO features
         rendered by NeRFs represent a 3D-consistent version of the original DINO features.
       • Latent-Editor (Khalid et al., 2023) and ED-NeRF (Park et al., 2024) achieve scene editing
         by training NeRFs in a VAE latent space. To make this possible, they implement special
         layers (“adapter” and “refinement layer”) that correct the NeRF renderings to match latent
         images.
       • RLS (Aumentado-Armstrong et al., 2023) is the closest to our work. It employs hybrid
         NeRFs that are trained to simultaneously render both RGB and latent components of a scene,
         where the latent components are learned via a VAE decoder. At inference, it exclusively
         renders the latent components. However, due to the lack of a 3D-aware latent space, it still
         requires RGB components at training time to supervise the geometry of the scene.

The presented methods either tackle a different task or use a different rendering space, which makes
them not directly comparable with our work. This means that our work is the first to propose
training purely latent NeRFs, where no RGB components are utilized, for the reconstructive task.


B     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

B.1   N ERFSTUDIO E XTENSION

We extend Nerfstudio to support latent scene learning. Specifically, we incorporate our latent NeRF
training pipeline as well as IG-AE in Nerfstudio while adhering to its coding conventions, thereby
enabling the training of any Nerfstudio model in our 3D-aware latent space. We modify the ray
batching process to make it correspond to full images, where the default behavior uses randomly
sampled pixels. This is necessary to be able to decode the rendered images without breaking
the gradient flow. Beyond reproducibility purposes for this paper, we hope the proposed generic
extension will facilitate research on latent NeRFs and their applications. Our code is open-source and
available on the following GitHub repository: https://github.com/AntoineSchnepf/
latent-nerfstudio .

B.2   N ERFSTUDIO M ODELS T RAINING D ETAILS

We test the following models from Nerfstudio: Vanilla-NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2020), Instant-NGP
(Müller et al., 2022), TensoRF (Chen et al., 2022), and K-Planes (Fridovich-Keil et al., 2023). For
each method, the Nerfstudio framework provides a proprietary loss Fθ , as well as a custom training
procedure that includes specific optimizers, schedulers and other method-specific components. To
train a latent NeRF in Nerfstudio, we first train the chosen model for 10 000 iterations to minimize
LLS using the method-specific optimization process. Subsequently, we continue the training with
15 000 iterations of RGB alignment by minimizing Lalign . To account for the change of image
representations, we modulate the learning rate of each method by a factor of ξLS in latent supervision,
and a factor ξalign for RGB alignment. Appendix F.2 details the hyper-parameters we used in
Nerfstudio, including the values of these factors for each method.

B.3   IG-AE T RAINING D ETAILS

We adopt the pre-trained “Ostris KL-f8-d16” VAE (Burkett, 2024) from Hugging Face, which has a
downscale factor l = 8, and c = 16 feature channels in the latent space. We apply a Total Variation
(TV) regularization on our Tri-Planes with a factor λ3DTV which prevents overfitting on train views
(we exclude it from Eq. (8) for clarity). Analogously, we also apply TV regularization on encoded
real images kj . A detailed presentation of TV and its benefits for NVS can be found in Appendix C.
Training IG-AE takes 60 hours on 4× NVIDIA L4 GPUs. Our detailed hyper-parameter settings can
be found in Appendix F.1. The training code for IG-AE is open-source and available on the following
GitHub repository: https://github.com/k-kassab/igae .


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     T RI -P LANE R EPRESENTATIONS
Tri-Plane representations (Chan et al., 2022) are explicit-implicit scene representations enabling
scene modeling in three axis-aligned orthogonal feature planes, each of resolution K × K with
feature dimension F . To query a 3D point x ∈ R3 , it is projected onto each of the three planes to
retrieve bilineraly interpolated feature vectors Fxy , Fxz and Fyz . These feature vectors are then
aggregated via summation and passed into a small neural network to retrieve the corresponding color
and density, which are then used for volume rendering (Kajiya & Von Herzen, 1984). We adopt
Tri-Plane representations for our set of latent scenes for their lightweight architectures and relatively
fast training times.

TV regularization.      Total variation measures the spatial variation of images. It can act as a
regularisation term to denoise images or ensure spatial smoothness. Total variation on images is
expressed as follows:
                                 1 X
                    LT V (I) =          [∥Ii,j − Ii−1,j ∥qp + ∥Ii,j − Ii,j−1 ∥qp ] ,         (13)
                                HW i,j
          q
where ∥·∥p is the lp norm to the power q.
Total variation regularization was adapted for inverse graphics to promote spatial smoothness in
implicit-explicit NeRF representation (Fridovich-Keil et al., 2023; 2022; Chen et al., 2022). Accord-
ingly, we regularize our Tri-Planes with total variation, which we write below:
                                                 X
                                    L3D
                                     T V (T ) =       LT V (T (c) ) ,                            (14)
                                                   c
         (c)
wherePT represents the feature plane of index c in T . In practice, we add the regularization term
λ3D
  TV
            3D                                                           3D
        i LT V (Ti ) to our 3D regularization loss L3D (Eq. (8)), where λTV is a hyperparameter. While
this TV regularization is done on plane features, it effectively translates to the latent 3D scene, as
latents are obtained from decoding these regularized features. This leads to smooth latent renderings
and smooth gradients, as we utilize TV regularization here with (p, q) = (2, 2), which discourages
high frequency variations in features.
Additionally, we use total variation in our AE preservation loss LAE (Eq. (10)) with (p, q) = (2, 1) to
discourage our autoencoder from producing latents with high frequency variations, while conserving
sharp edges (Rudin et al., 1992). In fact, we noticed during our experiments that solely using an
l2 reconstructive objective on an autoencoder leads to latents with high frequencies. These high
frequencies are inconsistent across latent encodings of the same 3D-consistent object. Hence, to
                               (real)
ensure the compatibility of Lae with the 3D regularization term L3D , we add a TV regularization
on encoded latents.

D     S UPPLEMENTARY R ESULTS
D.1    I MPORTANCE OF RGB A LIGNMENT

We show in Table 4 the importance of the second stage of RGB Alignment in the Latent NeRF
Training Pipeline, where NVS performances in the RGB space improves after aligning latent scenes
with the RGB views.

D.2    A DDITIONAL Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

Tables 5 and 10 to 14 illustrate additional quantitative evaluations of various NeRF architectures
trained in a standard AE latent space and our IG-AE 3D-aware latent space on held-out Objaverse
scenes, using our latent NeRF training pipeline. These results further support our conclusions.
Additionally, Table 5 also includes our ablations.
Table 6 compares the NVS performance of latent NeRF methods on latent images. Specifically, it
compares NeRF-rendered latent images with encoded latent images. Methods trained in the latent
space of our IG-AE exhibit significantly better latent NVS performance, confirming its 3D-awareness.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7 compares the autoencoding performance of our IG-AE and the baseline AE when used on
images from held-out Objaverse scenes and OOD Shapenet scenes. Our IG-AE showcases better
PSNR and SSIM metrics but slightly worse LPIPS metrics, which indicates a minor loss in high
frequency details.
Table 8 compares RGB NeRFs and Latent NeRFs using IG-AE, on various Nerfstudio methods, in
terms of NVS performance as well as training and rendering times.

D.3    A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

Figs. 6 to 8 compares the renderings of NeRFs respectively trained on the Cake, House and Figurine
scene from Objaverse using our ablated models as well as our full model. Latent NeRFs trained with
IG-AE (no 3D) present artifacts when decoding their renderings to the RGB space, as the latent space
is not 3D-aware. IG-AE (no Pr) and IG-AE both have 3D-aware latent space and present no artifacts,
as previously illustrated. IG-AE (no Pr) demonstrates degraded auto-encoding performances.
Fig. 9 illustrates real images that are auto-encoded using all IG-AE ablations.
Figs. 10 to 14 showcase additional qualitative results on held-out objaverse scenes.
Novel view synthesis consistency is better visualized in video format, which showcases frame-
to-frame consistency. We provide such visualizations on our project page: https://ig-ae.
github.io .

E     C HOICE OF AUTOENCODER
Table 9 compares autoencoders with various latent resolutions. For this comparison, we adopt the
autoencoders “kl-f4”, “kl-f8”, “kl-f16” from (Rombach et al., 2022), exhibiting downscale factors of
4, 8, and 16 respectively. Note that the compared autoencoders are not trained into inverse graphics
autoencoders to conduct this study. As the table presents, NVS performances are directly correlated
with latent resolution. We speculate that this comes from the fact that a higher resolution latent
space encourages a more local dependency between the RGB image and its latent representation,
which is more advantageous in the context of 3D-awareness. As a baseline for IG-AE, we select an
autoencoder with a downscale factor of 8 as a compromise between latent resolution and rendering
speed.

F     H YPERPARAMETERS
This section details our hyperparameter settings for both our IG-AE training and our Latent NeRF
training in Nerfstudio.

F.1   IG-AE T RAINING S ETTINGS

Table 15 details the hyperparameters taken to train our IG-AE.

F.2   N ERFSTUDIO T RAINING S ETTINGS

Table 16 details the hyperparameters taken to train NeRF models in Nerfstudio.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: RGB alignment value. We show our NVS performances after latent supervision and RGB
alignment when training NeRF models with IG-AE. NVS has better performances in the RGB space
after doing our stage 2 of RGB alignment. All results are obtained on the Cake scene from the
Objaverse dataset.

                                        Latent Supervision                      RGB Alignment
                                  PSNR           SSIM      LPIPS        PSNR         SSIM      LPIPS
                Vanilla-NeRF       24.34         0.870     0.175         34.68       0.967      0.050
                Instant-NGP        22.08         0.826     0.182         28.41       0.917      0.063
                TensoRF            24.12         0.862     0.175         33.06       0.962      0.043
                K-Planes           22.68         0.842     0.200         33.20       0.962      0.053


Table 5: Supplementary evaluations. Quantitative NVS results on held-out scenes from Objaverse.
This table extends Table 2 by conducting our ablations on all our adopted representations.

                                          Cake                          House                         Figurine
                                PSNR     SSIM      LPIPS        PSNR    SSIM     LPIPS        PSNR      SSIM     LPIPS
                    AE          33.18    0.962     0.053        31.71   0.946     0.031       31.46      0.972   0.017
                IG-AE (no Pr)   33.87    0.966     0.050        34,08   0,961     0,022       33.73     0.9821   0.012
 Vanilla-NeRF
                IG-AE (no 3D)   32.09    0.951     0.063        30,56   0,923     0,046       30.94     0.9650   0.021
                   IG-AE        34.68    0.967     0.050        33,10   0,954     0,027       33.10      0.979   0.013
                    AE          24.69    0.860     0.122        22.67   0.784     0.196       24.62      0.908   0.086
                IG-AE (no Pr)   28.04    0.917     0.052        27,22   0,882     0,055       26.46     0.9297   0.043
 Instant-NGP
                IG-AE (no 3D)   27.17    0.904     0.087        23,34   0,805     0,189       24.48     0.9078   0.091
                   IG-AE        28.41    0.917     0.063        27,04   0,882     0,064       27.20      0.941   0.040
                    AE          28.79    0.928     0.046        27.31   0.904     0.066       27.60      0.949   0.037
                IG-AE (no Pr)   34.30    0.966     0.041        32,92   0,952     0,025       32.86     0.9780   0.012
 TensoRF
                IG-AE (no 3D)   29.56    0.936     0.094        27,99   0,891     0,083       28.89     0.9515   0.034
                   IG-AE        33.06    0.962     0.043        31,78   0,951     0,026       31.36      0.972   0.018
                    AE          31.82    0.954     0.056        30.06   0.927     0.038       30.45      0.965   0.021
                IG-AE (no Pr)   34.75    0.966     0.049        33,22   0,949     0,026       33.67     0.9796   0.011
 K-Planes
                IG-AE (no 3D)   29.47    0.935     0.103        29,75   0,902     0,088       30.20     0.9602   0.027
                   IG-AE        33.53    0.963     0.052        31,73   0,940     0,031       32.44     0.9751   0.014



Table 6: Latent NVS performance. Quantitative evaluation of NVS performance of NeRF methods
on latent images. The metrics compare NeRF-rendered latent images with encoded latent images.
Methods trained in the latent space of our IG-AE exhibit significantly better latent NVS performance,
confirming its 3D-awareness.

                                                    Objaverse (cake)             Shapenet (vase)
                                                    PSNR        SSIM             PSNR        SSIM
                                         AE         38.36       0.854            38.48       0.841
                   Vanilla-NeRF
                                        IG-AE       50.31       0.989            48.20       0.979
                                         AE         35.87       0.768            35.94       0.734
                   Instant-NGP
                                        IG-AE       44.11       0.967            43.84       0.955
                                         AE         36.79       0.817            36.56       0.780
                   TensoRF
                                        IG-AE       47.37       0.983            46.34       0.967
                                         AE         36.85       0.798            36.53       0.755
                   K-Planes
                                        IG-AE       44.74       0.969            44.26       0.949


                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Synthetic reconstruction. Comparison of autoencoding performances of IG-AE and the
baseline autoencoder (AE) on images from Objaverse held-out scenes and Shapenet OOD scenes. In
each dataset, the metrics are averaged over the images of all the test scenes.

                                   Objaverse                             Shapenet
                           PSNR       SSIM         LPIPS       PSNR       SSIM      LPIPS
                 AE        36.47      0.975        0.005        34.78     0.985      0.007
                 IG-AE     37.92      0.980        0.011        37.16     0.989      0.009


Table 8: Comparison with RGB training. Bringing NeRFs to the IG-AE latent space entails
significantly lower training and rendering times for most methods. Rendering times represent an
average over 1000 image renderings. RGB methods render images at a 128 × 128 resolution, whereas
latent methods render at 16 × 16. Note that for latent NeRF methods, decoding takes an additional 6.7
ms for each method to obtain the final 128 × 128 images. Training and rendering time is measured
using a single NVIDIA L4 GPU. As for rendering quality (NVS), some methods are more compatible
with training in latent spaces than others, which we see as a direction of future improvements. NVS
metrics are averaged over three Objaverse scenes: Cake, House and Figurine.

                          Training      Training           Rendering                NVS
                           Space       Time (min)          Time (ms)     PSNR       SSIM     LPIPS
                            RGB              637             1201        40.78      0.993    0.003
         Vanilla NeRF
                           IG-AE              28             19.7        33.60      0.966    0.030
                            RGB               6              11.3        37.78      0.985    0.006
         Instant NGP
                           IG-AE              19              7.3        27.47      0.913    0.056
                            RGB               92             101.4       40.65      0.992    0.003
         TensoRF
                           IG-AE              20              10.4       32.04      0.961    0.029
                            RGB               88             63.3        32.98      0.964    0.027
         K-Planes
                           IG-AE              29             11.3        32.36      0.958    0.033


Table 9: Autoencoder choice. Comparison of the performance of autoencoders with various
downscale factors on the task of latent NeRF training. We choose an autoencoder with an intermediate
downscale factor of 8 as a compromise between latent NVS performance and training time.

                          kl-f16                             kl-f8                           kl-f4
                 PSNR     SSIM     LPIPS           PSNR      SSIM      LPIPS        PSNR     SSIM    LPIPS
 Vanilla-NeRF    29.58    0.941      0.047         32.22     0.962     0.027        35.38    0.978   0.013
 Instant-NGP     23.54    0.844      0.117         26.16     0.900     0.084        30.03    0.948   0.036
 TensoRF         25.91    0.891      0.080         28.46     0.934     0.042        33.56    0.972   0.014
 K-Planes        27.59    0.917      0.060         30.06     0.943     0.032        33.42    0.966   0.017


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          IG-AE        IG-AE
                 AE          IG-AE                                  RGB
                                          (no 3D)      (no Pr)

Vanilla-NeRF


                                                                                    GT

 Instant-NGP


    TensoRF


    K-Planes



     Figure 6: Qualitative comparison. NeRF renderings of the Cake scene from Objaverse.


                                          IG-AE        IG-AE
                 AE          IG-AE                                  RGB
                                          (no 3D)      (no Pr)

Vanilla-NeRF


                                                                                    GT

 Instant-NGP


    TensoRF


    K-Planes


    Figure 7: Qualitative comparison. NeRF renderings of the House scene from Objaverse.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          IG-AE        IG-AE
                 AE          IG-AE                                  RGB
                                          (no 3D)      (no Pr)

Vanilla-NeRF


                                                                                     GT

 Instant-NGP


    TensoRF


    K-Planes


   Figure 8: Qualitative comparison. NeRF renderings of the Figurine scene from Objaverse.


                   IG-AE        IG-AE
                                               IG-AE     AE           GT
                   (no Pr)     (no 3D)


Figure 9: Qualitative comparison of reconstruction quality when autoencoding. IG-AE (no Pr)
presents artifacts when auto-encoding images. IG-AE (no 3D) omits these artifacts but does not
embed a 3D-aware latent space. IG-AE omits the artifacts present in IG-AE (no Pr), while still
integrating a 3D-aware latent space.


                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 10: Supplementary evaluations. Quantitative NVS results on held-out scenes from Objaverse.

                                Helmet                        Book                       Burger
                        PSNR    SSIM     LPIPS        PSNR    SSIM    LPIPS     PSNR     SSIM     LPIPS
                 AE     32.42   0.973    0.024        30.55   0.967    0.044    33.21    0.968    0.037
 Vanilla-NeRF
                IG-AE   33.24   0.977    0.021        32.02   0.973    0.039    34.23    0.972    0.037
                 AE     24.63   0.918    0.087        23.61   0.904    0.144    23.52    0.862    0.123
 Instant-NGP
                IG-AE   28.27   0.951    0.035        27.22   0.950    0.058    27.48    0.922    0.044
                 AE     28.45   0.954    0.040        26.79   0.947    0.070    27.55    0.931    0.038
 TensoRF
                IG-AE   32.27   0.972    0.021        30.36   0.968    0.041    31.70    0.962    0.022
                 AE     31.14   0.966    0.027        28.90   0.959    0.051    31.91    0.958    0.040
 K-Planes
                IG-AE   33.27   0.975    0.019        31.42   0.970    0.039    33.53    0.968    0.037


                AE       IG-AE                   AE      IG-AE                 AE       IG-AE

Vanilla-NeRF


       INGP                         GT                                GT                          GT



    TensoRF


    K-Planes


Figure 10: Supplementary evaluations. Qualitative NVS results on held-out scenes from Objaverse.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 11: Supplementary evaluations. Quantitative NVS results on held-out scenes from Objaverse.

                                Cartoon                        Dragon                      Flower
                        PSNR    SSIM      LPIPS        PSNR    SSIM     LPIPS     PSNR     SSIM     LPIPS
                 AE     29.54   0.974     0.017        32.20   0.981     0.022    35.59    0.984    0.014
 Vanilla-NeRF
                IG-AE   30.99   0.981     0.012        33.99   0.987     0.015    37.62    0.989    0.010
                 AE     22.58   0.906     0.104        25.32   0.932     0.108    27.66    0.925    0.091
 Instant-NGP
                IG-AE   25.68   0.949     0.038        28.42   0.961     0.044    31.07    0.963    0.035
                 AE     25.44   0.946     0.045        28.53   0.964     0.044    30.62    0.962    0.038
 TensoRF
                IG-AE   29.29   0.973     0.017        32.65   0.983     0.017    35.44    0.985    0.013
                 AE     28.22   0.967     0.021        31.09   0.976     0.027    33.77    0.978    0.023
 K-Planes
                IG-AE   30.57   0.979     0.012        33.24   0.984     0.016    37.26    0.988    0.011


                AE       IG-AE                    AE      IG-AE                  AE       IG-AE

Vanilla-NeRF


       INGP                         GT                                  GT                          GT



    TensoRF


    K-Planes


Figure 11: Supplementary evaluations. Qualitative NVS results on held-out scenes from Objaverse.


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 12: Supplementary evaluations. Quantitative NVS results on held-out scenes from Objaverse.

                                Gravestone                        Hut                       Painting
                        PSNR      SSIM       LPIPS        PSNR    SSIM    LPIPS     PSNR     SSIM      LPIPS
                 AE     31.64     0.973      0.034        30.33   0.963    0.030    36.07    0.984     0.018
 Vanilla-NeRF
                IG-AE   32.63     0.978      0.029        30.70   0.964    0.027    37.79    0.989     0.013
                 AE     22.95     0.885      0.169        22.64   0.881    0.154    27.02    0.930     0.089
 Instant-NGP
                IG-AE   26.68     0.941      0.073        26.04   0.933    0.066    34.34    0.980     0.020
                 AE     26.65     0.944      0.076        26.89   0.943    0.058    31.51    0.967     0.037
 TensoRF
                IG-AE   31.15     0.974      0.032        30.00   0.963    0.030    37.75    0.989     0.012
                 AE     28.72     0.960      0.053        28.68   0.955    0.038    34.79    0.982     0.020
 K-Planes
                IG-AE   31.25     0.973      0.031        30.19   0.961    0.029    38.28    0.990     0.012


                AE       IG-AE                       AE      IG-AE                 AE       IG-AE

Vanilla-NeRF


       INGP                           GT                                  GT                           GT



    TensoRF


    K-Planes


Figure 12: Supplementary evaluations. Qualitative NVS results on held-out scenes from Objaverse.


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 13: Supplementary evaluations. Quantitative NVS results on held-out scenes from Objaverse.

                                 Pig                          Ringer                      Robot
                        PSNR    SSIM     LPIPS        PSNR    SSIM     LPIPS     PSNR     SSIM    LPIPS
                 AE     33.21   0.981    0.029        32.14   0.975     0.024    29.94    0.962   0.028
 Vanilla-NeRF
                IG-AE   34.34   0.987    0.019        33.70   0.982     0.015    31.76    0.973   0.019
                 AE     24.61   0.913    0.140        24.68   0.901     0.119    23.49    0.884   0.107
 Instant-NGP
                IG-AE   28.35   0.956    0.067        28.24   0.951     0.042    26.01    0.923   0.049
                 AE     28.61   0.959    0.060        27.71   0.947     0.057    26.43    0.933   0.042
 TensoRF
                IG-AE   32.58   0.981    0.027        32.03   0.976     0.019    29.96    0.963   0.024
                 AE     31.03   0.972    0.044        30.61   0.964     0.032    29.08    0.954   0.031
 K-Planes
                IG-AE   33.12   0.981    0.026        32.99   0.975     0.020    31.10    0.967   0.022


                AE       IG-AE                   AE      IG-AE                  AE       IG-AE

Vanilla-NeRF


       INGP                         GT                                 GT                         GT



    TensoRF


    K-Planes


Figure 13: Supplementary evaluations. Qualitative NVS results on held-out scenes from Objaverse.


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 14: Supplementary evaluations. Quantitative NVS results on held-out scenes from Objaverse.

                                Coffin                        Table                      Villa
                        PSNR    SSIM     LPIPS        PSNR    SSIM    LPIPS     PSNR     SSIM    LPIPS
                 AE     30.61   0.968    0.042        33.06   0.978    0.024    30.72    0.970   0.033
 Vanilla-NeRF
                IG-AE   33.17   0.976    0.032        34.96   0.983    0.019    32.18    0.977   0.024
                 AE     21.67   0.876    0.211        23.29   0.873    0.161    24.21    0.903   0.138
 Instant-NGP
                IG-AE   27.25   0.941    0.071        29.19   0.956    0.042    26.18    0.935   0.084
                 AE     27.35   0.946    0.076        27.16   0.943    0.071    26.86    0.943   0.065
 TensoRF
                IG-AE   31.87   0.973    0.034        33.20   0.979    0.020    30.59    0.971   0.031
                 AE     29.30   0.960    0.053        30.72   0.965    0.036    28.86    0.957   0.048
 K-Planes
                IG-AE   31.56   0.971    0.036        33.25   0.976    0.023    31.66    0.972   0.027


                AE       IG-AE                   AE      IG-AE                 AE       IG-AE

Vanilla-NeRF


       INGP                         GT                                GT                         GT



    TensoRF


    K-Planes


Figure 14: Supplementary evaluations. Qualitative NVS results on held-out scenes from Objaverse.


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 15: IG-AE hyperparameters. Hyperparameters used for our IG-AE training. More detailed
information can be found in the configuration files of our open-source code.

                        Parameter                          Value
                                            General
                        Number of scenes N                  500
                        Pretraining epochs                  50
                        Training epochs                     75
                                               Loss
                        λlatent                               1
                        λRGB                                  1
                        λ3D
                         TV                               1 × 10−4
                         (synth)
                        λae                                  0.1
                         (real)
                        λae                                  0.1
                        λp                                   0.1
                        λTV                               1 × 10−4
                                         Optimization
                        Optimizer                           Adam
                        Batch size (scene views)              12
                        Batch size (real images)               3
                        Learning rate (encoder)           5 × 10−5
                        Learning rate (decoder)           5 × 10−5
                        Learning rate (Tri-Planes)        1 × 10−4
                        Scheduler                     Exponential Decay
                        Decay factor                        0.988


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 16: Latent NeRF training hyperparameters. Hyperparameters taken to train our Latent
NeRFs in Nerfstudio. More detailed information can be found in the configuration files of our
open-source Nerfstudio extension.

               NeRF model      Parameter                             Value
                               Latent Supervision iterations        10 000
                               RGB Alignment iterations             15 000
                               Batch size                              4
                               NeRF learning rate              Nerfstudio default
                               NeRF optimizer                  Nerfstudio default
               Any
                               NeRF scheduler                  Nerfstudio default
                               Decoder learning rate               1 × 10−4
                               Decoder optimizer                     Adam
                               Decoder scheduler               Exponential decay
                               Decoder decay factor                 0.9996
                               ξLS                                    0.1
               Vanilla NeRF
                               ξalign                                  1
                               ξLS                                   0.001
               Instant-NGP
                               ξalign                                 0.1
                               ξLS                                   0.01
               TensoRF
                               ξalign                                 0.1
                               ξLS                                    0.1
               K-Planes
                               ξalign                                 0.1


                                               28
