Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T OKEN S TATISTICS T RANSFORMER : L INEAR -T IME
ATTENTION VIA VARIATIONAL R ATE R EDUCTION
 Ziyang Wu              Tianjiao DingÔłŚ      Yifu LuÔłŚ       Druv Pai         Jingyuan Zhang
 UC Berkeley            UPenn               UMich          UC Berkeley      THU & TranscEngram

 Weida Wang                  Yaodong Yu         Yi Ma                        Benjamin D. Haeffele
 Tsinghua SIGS               UC Berkeley        UC Berkeley & HKU            JHU & UPenn



                                               A BSTRACT

             The attention operator is arguably the key distinguishing factor of transformer
             architectures, which have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance on a vari-
             ety of tasks. However, transformer attention operators often impose a significant
             computational burden, with the computational complexity scaling quadratically
             with the number of tokens. In this work, we propose a novel transformer atten-
             tion operator whose computational complexity scales linearly with the number
             of tokens. We derive our network architecture by extending prior work which
             has shown that a transformer style architecture naturally arises by ÔÇťwhite-boxÔÇŁ
             architecture design, where each layer of the network is designed to implement
             an incremental optimization step of a maximal coding rate reduction objective
             (MCR2 ). Specifically, we derive a novel variational form of the MCR2 objec-
             tive and show that the architecture that results from unrolled gradient descent of
             this variational objective leads to a new attention module called Token Statis-
             tics Self-Attention (TSSA). TSSA has linear computational and memory com-
             plexity and radically departs from the typical attention architecture that com-
             putes pairwise similarities between tokens. Experiments on vision, language, and
             long sequence tasks show that simply swapping TSSA for standard self-attention,
             which we refer to as the Token Statistics Transformer (T O ST), achieves compet-
             itive performance with conventional transformers while being significantly more
             computationally efficient and interpretable. Our results also somewhat call into
             question the conventional wisdom that pairwise similarity style attention mecha-
             nisms are critical to the success of transformer architectures. Code is available at
             https://github.com/RobinWu218/ToST.


1       M OTIVATION
Transformer architectures have led to state-of-the-art performance across many applications in ma-
chine learning, computer vision, natural language processing, and elsewhere (Vaswani et al., 2017;
Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). Arguably,
the defining component of transformers is the attention operator, which was originally motivated
to allow for handling long-range interactions among data tokens (e.g., image patches, words, video
frames). Attention can come in a variety of forms, but transformer architectures typically employ
self-attention (Vaswani et al., 2017). In particular, the core aspect of the self-attention operator is
scaled dot product attention, which generates output tokens as weighted averages of input tokens,
with weights computed as a ÔÇťsimilarityÔÇŁ between pairs of input tokens, i.e., the scaled dot product
between pairs of tokens after multiplication by the ÔÇťkeyÔÇŁ and ÔÇťqueryÔÇŁ parameter matrices.
While the success of transformers (and by extension self-attention) in a wide variety of applica-
tions demonstrates the utility of the approach, it comes with a potentially significant drawback: it
requires one to compute a similarity between all pairs of input tokens, which results in its compu-
tation and memory complexity scaling quadratically with the number of input tokens. Indeed, the
computational demands of self-attention operators are well-noted in the literature, and a number of
    ÔłŚ
        Equal contribution


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


techniques have been proposed to allow for more efficient computation1 . Examples include parti-
tioning the tokens into blocks and having each attention head only compute with one subset of the
tokens (Qiu et al., 2020), computing attention over various sliding windows of tokens (Beltagy et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2021), finding a suitable low-rank projection of the tokens (Wang et al., 2020), or
approximating the pairwise attention computation via the Nystrom extension (Xiong et al., 2021).
Likewise, Ali et al. (2021) propose to calculate scaled dot products between feature channels rather
than between tokens, noting relationships between the eigenspaces of Gram matrices and correlation
matrices, and dub their method the cross-covariance transformer (XCiT). In this paper, we will also
propose an efficient attention operator, but we will derive our method from a radically different ap-
proach which suggests that computing (or approximating) pairwise similarities between tokens may
not be necessary at all. To build an intuition for this notion it is useful to consider the core operation
of the attention operator, which has been noted by multiple authors in the literature (Chaudhari et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Vidal, 2022) as performing a form of kernel regression (Nadaraya, 1964;
Watson, 1964) with close connections to classical denoising techniques such as non-local means or
block-matching and 3D filtering (BM3D) (Buades et al., 2005; Dabov et al., 2006). Namely, output
tokens are formed by taking a weighted average of input tokens which are deemed to be ÔÇťsimilarÔÇŁ
(as measured by the learned scaled dot product metric). More abstractly, this suggests that the self-
attention operator is a particular case of a more general class of operators which produces outputs
based on statistics computed from the input tokens. In other words, in the case of self-attention we
compute weighted averages based on the learned scaled dot product metric, but one could envision
producing outputs based on other statistics of the input tokens which are more efficiently computed.
Here, to derive our proposed method


                                                                               Peak GPU Memory (GB)
                                                             ViT                   10.0
                                              Inference Time (ms)


we will leverage ÔÇťwhite-boxÔÇŁ archi-
tecture design (also referred to as al-          100.0       ToST
gorithmic unrolling), which takes the                                               1.0
philosophy that the operations of the
layers of a neural network can be                 10.0                              0.1
interpreted as performing incremen-                  0K     5K      10K      15K      0K     5K      10K       15K
tal updates to optimize an objective                     Number of Tokens (n)             Number of Tokens (n)
function (Gregor & LeCun (2010);
cf. Monga et al. (2021) and its ref- Figure 1: Our T O ST          2
                                                                      architecture, from unrolling a novel varia-
erences). In particular, the structure tional form of MCR , is faster and uses less memory than stan-
of the architecture is defined by the dard transformer architectures such as ViT (note the log-scale y-
                                             axes) and is based on a dramatically different notion of attention.
form of an update that a specific opti-
mization method (e.g., gradient descent/ascent) employs, but the parameters of the resulting update
are still left to be learned2 . Notably, recent work (Yu et al., 2023; 2024) has argued that transformer-
style architectures arise naturally from white-box design when incrementally updating an objective
function based on the principle of maximum coding rate reduction (MCR2 ). While this provides in-
teresting interpretations of transformer architectures, the resulting white-box architecture is largely
identical to a transformer, so it still suffers from the same computational challenges described above.
Nevertheless, here we draw inspiration from this prior work and make the following contributions:
1. We provide a novel variational form for the MCR2 objective that additionally allows one to
   upper-bound certain spectral functions of large matrices, which may be of independent interest.
2. Using white-box architecture design to derive an incremental optimization of our variational
   objective, we propose a novel attention operator which is highly efficient and only requires linear
   complexity to compute (see Figure 1 comparing our method with ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020)).
3. Our resulting architecture is radically different from standard transformers in that it does not
   compute/approximate pairwise similarities between input tokens. Instead, it only computes a
   data-dependent low-rank projection based on an empirical second moment statistic of the input
   token features. This leads us to name it the Token Statistics Transformer (T O ST) (see Figure 3).
4. We validate our approach experimentally and show that our proposed architecture achieves com-
   parable performance to standard transformer architectures while having a significantly reduced
   computation and memory footprint, particularly for large numbers of high-dimensional tokens.

   1
   See App. B.1 for discussion on related efficient models such as linear attention and state-space models.
   2
   Note that the objective function used to derive the architecture and the training objective used to learn the
model parameters need not be the same.


                                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Notably, replacing self-attention with our attention operator typically at least maintains perfor-
    mance on benchmark tasks and often improves performance for tasks with large token lengths.

2     BACKGROUND AND P RELIMINARIES
Notation. We define a few notations that will be used throughout the rest of the paper. For a
                            .
positive integer n, let [n] = {1, 2, . . . , n}. Let 0 (resp. 1) be the vector/matrix of all zeros (resp. all
ones). Let I be the identity matrix. For 0, 1, and I, the dimension is inferred unambiguously from
context. For a matrix A Ôłł Rm├Śn , we denote by ai Ôłł Rm the ith column of A, and by Aij Ôłł R the
(i, j)th entry of A. For a vector v Ôłł Rn , let Diag(v) Ôłł Rn├Śn be a diagonal matrix with the entries
of v along the diagonal. For a matrix A Ôłł Rm├Śn we denote by AÔŐÖ2 Ôłł Rm├Śn the element-wise
square of A. For a vector v Ôłł Rn and a function f : R Ôćĺ R, let f [v] Ôłł Rn be the element-wise
application of f to the entries of v. For m Ôëą n, we denote by O(m, n) ÔŐć Rm├Śn the set of m ├Ś n
                                                                               .
matrices with orthonormal columns; consequently, we denote by O(n) = O(n, n) the set of n ├Ś n
orthogonal matrices. We denote by PSD(n) ÔŐć Rn├Śn the set of n ├Ś n positive semi-definite (PSD)
matrices. For M Ôłł PSD(n) and i Ôłł [n], we denote by ╬╗i (M) the ith largest eigenvalue of M.

2.1   R EPRESENTATION L EARNING VIA M AXIMAL C ODING R ATE R EDUCTION
Before presenting the development of our attention operator, we first review core ideas that lead to
its derivation. Real data, such as images, videos, and text, are often assumed to be realizations of
some random variable X drawn from some high-dimensional probability distribution which has an
underlying rich low-dimensional structure (Fefferman et al., 2016; Wright & Ma, 2022). Commonly,
preprocessing methods tokenize the data, converting each sample into a list of vectors (i.e. tokens)
which typically represent a small and local part of the data (e.g., a word or piece of a word, a patch
of an image). As a result, for applications involving transformers, X = [x1 , . . . , xn ] Ôłł RD├Śn is
typically a matrix-valued variable, and the transformer seeks to find a representation mapping, or a
mapping of the tokens ¤Ľ : RD├Śn Ôćĺ Rd├Śn such that the features Z = ¤Ľ(X) = [z1 , . . . , zn ] Ôłł Rd├Śn
are appropriate for the task at hand3 . While many works focus primarily on how well Z can be
used to solve a particular task (e.g., classification or segmentation), recent work (Yu et al., 2020;
Chan et al., 2022; Ding et al., 2023; Chu et al., 2024) has proposed a more task-agnostic approach
to learning a suitable representation which, rather than focusing on a task-specific metric, instead
seeks to find the underlying low-dimensional structure in the data via an objective based on the
principle of maximal coding rate reduction (MCR2 ). More specifically, the tokens are assumed to
belong to an underlying set of K groups, which may (for example) represent different modes within
the population of tokens, and the MCR2 objective seeks to find token features of each group which
are compressed within a group while the set of all token features is as expansive as possible. In
particular, let ╬á = [¤Ç1 , . . . , ¤ÇK ] Ôłł Rn├ŚK be a stochastic ÔÇťgroup assignmentÔÇŁ matrix (i.e., ╬á1 = 1
and ╬áik Ôëą 0, ÔłÇ(i, k) Ôłł [n] ├Ś [K] ) that assigns a group membership probability to each token (i.e.,
the ith row of ╬á is a probability vector for group membership for the ith token). Then, letting ¤Á > 0
          .
and nk = ÔčĘ¤Çk , 1Ôčę for each k Ôłł [K], the MCR2 objective, denoted as ÔłćR(Z, ╬á), is:
                                                     K
                . 1                   d 1         1 X nk                  d 1
   ÔłćR(Z, ╬á) = log det I + 2 ZZÔŐĄ Ôłĺ                           log det I + 2      ZDiag(¤Çk )ZÔŐĄ . (1)
                  2                  ¤Á n          2      n                ¤Á nk
                  |               {z          } | k=1
                               .=R(Z)                                .
                                                                        {z                      }
                                                                     =R (Z,╬á) c


Intuitively, the R(Z) term measures the volume of all the features, so maximizing it w.r.t. Z would
promote that the features spread out (hence, we call it the ÔÇťexpansion termÔÇŁ). The Rc (Z, ╬á) term
measures the sum of volumes of features from each of the K groups encoded by ╬á, so minimizing
it (or maximizing ÔłĺRc ) w.r.t. Z would push features in each group to be close (hence we call it the
ÔÇťcompression termÔÇŁ). (Yu et al., 2020) showed that learning a representation by maximizing equa-
tion 1 under suitable normalization constraints leads to the features being compressed, linearized,
and discriminative: features from the same group lie in a low-dimensional subspace corresponding
to the intrinsic low-dimensionality of the token data, and the subspaces they form are orthogonal to
each other. See Figure 2 for a visualization.
   3
     Here, with some abuse of notation, we will use Z to refer to the the token features at some intermediate
layer (or point) within the network, not necessarily just the final features at the output of the network. We also
pack the tokens into the columns of a matrix, rather than the rows as is often done in the transformer literature,
as we believe it leads to a cleaner presentation.


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              data                            high-dimensional tokens                    structured representations

                           value + position                             representation
                              embedding                                    map


Figure 2: Tokenization and representation for image data. Data (images) are split up into tokens (patches)
X, which share semantics with other tokens from the same or different samples. Tokens with similar semantics
may belong to the same geometric structures in the original space and be grouped together by ╬á. A learned
mapping ¤Ľ converts these tokens into features which are compressed, linearized, and discriminative.

2.2   B UILDING W HITE -B OX D EEP N ETWORKS VIA U NROLLED O PTIMIZATION
Having introduced the MCR2 objective, we now discuss the principle of designing network archi-
tectures in a ÔÇťwhite-boxÔÇŁ manner (i.e., where the structure of the architecture is well motivated and
interpretable) via algorithmic unrolling (Gregor & LeCun (2010); Yu et al. (2024); see also the re-
view Monga et al. (2021) and references therein). Algorithmic unrolling constructs each layer of
the network to (approximately) implement a step of an optimization algorithm for our represen-
tation learning objective, where the network architecture is defined by the structure of an update
step from an optimization algorithm (e.g., gradient ascent/descent) but the parameters of the update
are not fixed at their analytical values (e.g., the computed gradient for a gradient step) but param-
eterized and learned through model training. Notably, Yu et al. (2024) argue that by unrolling a
slightly modified MCR2 objective, which additionally adds a Ôäô0 sparsity penalty on Z to promote
axis-aligned solutions, and uses a modified compression term R╠äc (Z), one arrives at an architecture
which is almost identical to a standard transformer (with the primary difference being the query, key,
and value parameter matrices are all equal in the self-attention operator). In particular, a gradient
step on the compression term, i.e., Z+ = Z Ôłĺ ¤ä ÔłçZ R╠äc (Z), approximates a multi-head self-attention
operator with weight sharing, plus a residual connection. That is, incremental optimization of the
compression term yields a self-attention operator. Further, a proximal gradient step on the remain-
ing terms R(Z) Ôłĺ ÔłąZÔłą0 gives a soft thresholding operation which has a similar functional form to
a two-layer perceptron with ReLU activation. Taken together, these resulting operations closely ap-
proximate a layer of a standard transformer (self-attention followed by a two-layer perceptron). The
transformer-like network constructed by concatenating these layers is named CRATE, and performs
comparably to the empirically engineered ViT architecture (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). However, as
the attention mechanism in CRATE is largely identical to standard self-attention, it still has time
and memory complexity that scales quadratically with n, the number of tokens. This quadratic
complexity presents a large barrier to scaling up transformer-like models both within and without
the CRATE paradigm. In the sequel, inspired by how CRATE derives a self attention-like operation
as a gradient step on a compression term similar to Rc , we will construct a new attention mechanism
as a gradient step on a novel variational reformulation of Rc .

3     P ROPOSED ATTENTION F ORMULATION
We now describe our new proposed attention mechanism, which we will derive by unrolled opti-
mization of a novel variational form of the compression term within the MCR2 objective.

3.1   A N EW VARIATIONAL F ORM FOR C ODING R ATES
To begin, we consider a general form of MCR2 -like objectives based on concave functions of the
spectrum of a matrix. Namely, for a given PSD matrix M Ôłł PSD(d) and any scalar c Ôëą 0 we have
                         Pd
that log det(I + cM) = i=1 log(1 + c╬╗i (M)) where (recall) ╬╗i (M) is the ith largest eigenvalue of
M. Further note that log(1 + c¤â) is a concave non-decreasing function of ¤â. Thus, we describe our
results in terms of a more general form of MCR2 based on general spectral functions of PSD matrices
                         Pd
of the form F (M) =         i=1 f (╬╗i (M)), where f is concave and non-decreasing. In particular,
recall from our above discussion that the attention mechanism arises from unrolling the compression
component of MCR2 , so we consider a more general MCR2 -style compression function:


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           K
                                    . 1 X nk                1              ÔŐĄ
                        Rc,f (Z, ╬á) =        F                 ZDiag(¤Çk )Z     .                  (2)
                                      2   n                 nk
                                          k=1
For objectives of this form, we now note the following result:
Theorem 1. Let f : [0, Ôł×) Ôćĺ R be non-decreasing, concave, and obey f (0) = 0, and let
                                              Pd
F : PSD(d) Ôćĺ R have the form F (M) =             i=1 f (╬╗i (M)). Then for each M Ôłł PSD(d) and
Q Ôłł O(d), we have                            d
                                            X
                                                f (QÔŐĄ MQ)ii .

                                  F (M) ÔëĄ                                                  (3)
                                              i=1
Further, the inequality in equation 3 is achieved with equality for any Q which diagonalizes M, and
if f is strictly concave then the inequality in equation 3 is achieved with equality if and only if Q
diagonalizes M.
Theorem 1 is a straightforward corollary of Theorem 2, which is stated and proved in Appendix A.
Theorem 1 allows us to upper-bound a function of large matrices via just computing a scalar function
of the diagonals of a matrix product, and if we know the spectral structure of the input matrix then
we can craft orthogonal matrices for which this upper bound is made tight. This is a powerful tool
and may be of independent interest.
3.2 E FFICIENT D EEP A RCHITECTURE VIA U NROLLING THE VARIATIONAL F ORM
Using the above result, we can replace equation 2 with an equivalent variational objective with form
                                         K       d
            var                     . 1 X nk X           1    ÔŐĄ                ÔŐĄ
           Rc,f (Z, ╬á | {Uk }Kk=1 ) =               f      (U   ZDiag(¤Ç   k )Z   U k ) ii   ,     (4)
                                      2      n i=1      nk k
                                        k=1
where the equivalence is in the sense that for an optimal choice of {Uk Ôłł O(d)}K     k=1 matrices as
described in Theorem 1 (i.e., orthogonal matrices which diagonalize each ZDiag(¤Çk )ZÔŐĄ ) we will
                               var
achieve a tight bound with Rc,f    (Z, ╬á | {Uk }Kk=1 ) = Rc,f (Z, ╬á). Note that in general, achieving
this bound would require selecting, for each sampled instance of Z, a new optimal set of Uk pa-
rameter matrices which diagonalize each ZDiag(¤Çk )ZÔŐĄ , which is clearly impractical for a network
architecture. Instead, as an alternative viewpoint, rather than considering the data (Z) as fixed and
trying to optimize the Uk parameters to achieve the tight variational bound, we can instead take
the algorithmic unrolling design principle described above and design an operator to perturb Z to
                            var
incrementally minimize Rc,f     (┬Ě | {Uk }K
                                          k=1 ). To make this point explicit, each variational bound
becomes tight when the eigenspaces of ZDiag(¤Çk )ZÔŐĄ align with the columns of Uk , so by rotating
the appropriate columns of Z (namely, those which correspond to large entries in ¤Çk ) to align with
Uk we can approach a tight variational bound. That is, instead of rotating Uk to align with the data
for each instance of Z, we can instead rotate the token features in each Z to align with Uk .
                                                                   var
Following this approach, we compute a gradient descent step on Rc,f    w.r.t. Z. To begin this com-
                          n
putation, first let ¤Ç Ôłł R be any element-wise non-negative vector. Then we have
                           d
                        1X
                    ÔłçZ        f ((ZDiag(¤Ç)ZÔŐĄ )ii ) = Diag(Ôłçf [ZÔŐÖ2 ¤Ç])ZDiag(¤Ç),                   (5)
                        2 i=1
where Ôłçf is the gradient of f , and (recall) Ôłçf [┬Ě] applies Ôłçf to each element of the vector in the
bracket. In particular, for f (x) = log(1 + (d/¤Á2 )x), Ôłçf (x) = (d/¤Á2 )(1 + (d/¤Á2 )x)Ôłĺ1 is simply a
                                                                              var
non-linear activation. Also, (recall) nk = ÔčĘ¤Çk , 1Ôčę. Thus, the gradient of Rc,f   w.r.t. Z is:
                                      K
                                   1X                                  ¤Çk
        var
  ÔłçZ Rc,f   (Z, ╬á | {Uk }Kk=1 ) =        Uk Diag Ôłçf (UÔŐĄ      k Z)
                                                                  ÔŐÖ2
                                                                                  UÔŐĄk ZDiag(¤Çk ). (6)
                                   n                                 ÔčĘ¤Çk , 1Ôčę
                                     k=1    |                {z                 }
                                                        .
                                                       =D(Z,¤Ç |U ) k   k

(Note that the 1/n constant arises from a (nk /n) ┬Ě (1/nk ) = 1/n constant in each term of the sum.)
If we now consider a gradient step w.r.t. the j th token zj , we arrive at our proposed incremental
compression operator, i.e., our surrogate for a self attention + residual operator:
                                                               K
                                                            ¤ä X
       z+
        j  =  z j Ôłĺ ¤ä Ôłç   R var
                        zj c,f  (Z, ╬á | {U  }K
                                           k k=1 ) =  z j Ôłĺ       ╬ájk Uk D(Z, ¤Çk | Uk )UÔŐĄk zj    (7)
                                                            n
                                                                 k=1
for each j Ôłł [n], where ¤ä > 0 is a step size parameter for the incremental optimization.

                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Output Tokens

                  +                        .Ôäô%
                                                 6
                                                     Ôőů   Diagonal Attention (Head 1)
                MLP
                              +Ôäô     ; heads                                            1 Membership Aggregate     +Ôäô5%
                                              6
            LayerNorm                      .Ôäô7 Ôőů         Diagonal Attention (Head K)

                  +
           Token Statistics                                                                           Complexity
            Self Attention                                                                            ?(@) Space
                                                                                                      ?(@A) Time
            LayerNorm              Projected Tokens       Token Statistics         Updated Tokens
                                          6 Ôäô
                                    .Ôäô/    + Ôłł ÔäŁ;├Ś=      Diagonal Attention

            Input Tokens


Figure 3: One layer Ôäô of the proposed Token Statistics Transformer (T O ST). Notably, the self-attention
of T O ST transforms tokens ZÔäô efficiently to ZÔäô+1 , via multiplying each row of the projected token by only
a scalar. This leads to reduced complexity of the attention (cf. Table 1): it has O(p) space and O(pn) time
complexity, where p is the dimension of the projected tokens of each head, and n is the number of tokens.

Model interpretation. Given the proposed attention operator in equation 7, first recall that the
rows of ╬á are non-negative and sum to 1 , so our operator takes a weighted average of K ÔÇťattention
                                                                               PK
headÔÇŁ-esque operators and then adds a residual connection. Using that k=1 ╬ájk = 1, we can
rewrite equation 7 as:
                              K
                             X        h       ¤ä                       ÔŐĄ
                                                                             i
                       z+j =     ╬á jk   z j Ôłĺ   U k D(Z, ¤Ç k | U k )U k  z j   .               (8)
                             k=1            | n        {z              }
                                                             action of one attention head

That is, we can view each attention head as first projecting the token features onto the basis Uk
via multiplying by UÔŐĄ  k , multiplying by the diagonal matrix D(Z, ¤Çk | Uk ) (abbreviated as Dk ),
projecting back into the standard basis via multiplying by Uk , and subtracting this from the original
token features via the residual connection. The core aspect of our attention layer is the computation
of Dk . Namely, ╬ájk Ôëą 0, so ¤Çk /ÔčĘ¤Çk , 1Ôčę Ôłł Rn forms a probability distribution over which tokens
belong to the k th group. As a result, (UÔŐĄk Z)
                                               ÔŐÖ2
                                                  ¤Çk /ÔčĘ¤Çk , 1Ôčę estimates the second moment of UÔŐĄ  kZ
under the distribution given by ¤Çk /ÔčĘ¤Çk , 1Ôčę. Further, since f is a concave non-decreasing function,
Ôłçf (x) monotonically decreases towards 0 as x increases, so the entries of Dk (which have form
Ôłçf (x)) achieve their maximum at x = 0 and decay monotonically to 0 as x increases.
From this, we arrive at the core interpretation of our attention head + residual operators [I Ôłĺ
(¤ä /n)Uk Dk UÔŐĄ  k ]. Namely, this operator does an approximate low-rank data-dependent projection,
where directions which have a large amount of ÔÇťpowerÔÇŁ after the projection UÔŐĄ       k Z (i.e., directions
which have a large second moment (UÔŐĄ     k Z) ÔŐÖ2
                                                 ¤Çk /ÔčĘ¤Çk , 1Ôčę) are preserved, while directions  which do
not are suppressed. To see this, recall that the entries of Dk decrease monotonically to 0 as the
second moment increases, so for directions with large second moments the attention + residual op-
erator acts largely as the identity operator. Conversely, for directions with a small second moment
our operator subtracts a projection of the tokens along those directions, resulting in those directions
being suppressed. Compared to the standard self-attention operator, our method clearly does not
compute any pairwise similarities between tokens. Rather, the interactions between the tokens in Z
impact the operator solely through their contribution to the second moment statistic used to construct
the Dk ÔÇÖs. Nevertheless, similar to the standard self-attention operator, our method still has a clear
interpretation as performing a form of compression towards a data-dependent low-rank structure, in
the sense that it performs an approximate low-rank projection, where the specific directions which
are suppressed are those which are not strongly aligned with other tokens in the group.

3.3   P RACTICAL I MPLEMENTATION C ONSIDERATIONS
Having introduced our proposed attention operator, we now discuss further practical considerations.
First, until this point in the presentation we have avoided discussion of how tokens are ÔÇťgroupedÔÇŁ
into various attention heads via the ╬á matrix, but clearly a means of constructing ╬á is needed to
implement our method. Additionally, our variational form in Theorem 1 requires the U matrices to
be square and orthogonal, but one would ideally like to use smaller matrices (i.e., reduce the number
of columns in U) for efficiency as well as drop the orthogonality constraints.


                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Time and space complexity for attention operators in different transformer architectures: ViT
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), CRATE (Yu et al., 2024), XCiT (Ali et al., 2021), and the proposed T O ST.
                                               ViT         CRATE     XCiT       T O ST (ours)
                Compute time complexity        O(pn2 )     O(pn2 )   O(p2 n)    O(pn)
                Memory complexity              O(n2 )      O(n2 )    O(p2 )     O(p)


In practice, we do not enforce the orthogonality constraints. To reduce the number of columns in
the U matrices, we note that similar to CRATE (Yu et al., 2024), if we assume the features Z within
group k are (approximately) clustered around a low-dimensional subspace ÔÇö say of dimension p ÔÇö
then the within-group-k covariance ZDiag(¤Çk )ZÔŐĄ is low-rank, where recall that Yu et al. (2020)
shows that the optimal geometry of Z will be for each group to be a low-rank subspace, orthogonal
to the other groups. We can thus explicitly find a low-dimensional orthonormal basis for the image
of this covariance, i.e., the linear span of the data in group k. If the dimension is p ÔëĄ d, the
basis can be represented by a d ├Ś p orthogonal matrix Uk Ôłł O(d, p). In this case, we can more
efficiently upper-bound Rc using these low-rank orthogonal basis matrices. To show this, we use a
more general version of Theorem 1 (see Theorem 2 in Appendix A) to yield the following corollary.
Corollary 1. Let f : [0, Ôł×) Ôćĺ R be non-decreasing,
                                             Pp            concave, and obey f (0) = 0, and let
F : PSD(p) Ôćĺ R have the form F (M) =            i=1 f (╬╗i (M)). Let Z, ╬á be fixed. Then, for all
U1 , . . . , UK Ôłł O(d, p) such that image(ZDiag(¤Çk )ZÔŐĄ ) ÔŐć image(Uk ) for all k Ôłł [K], we have
                                                var
                                 Rc,f (Z, ╬á) ÔëĄ Rc,f (Z, ╬á | {Uk }K
                                                                 k=1 ),                                   (9)
        var
where Rc,f  is formally defined in equation 4. Equality holds if Uk diagonalizes ZDiag(¤Çk )ZÔŐĄ for
each k Ôłł [K], and if f is strongly concave then this equality condition becomes an ÔÇťif and only if.ÔÇŁ

The final step to define our attention operator is to estimate the group membership ╬á. For this we
posit a simple model of how each feature zj deviates from its supporting subspace and then find
the optimal subspace assignment. Yu et al. (2024) show that if we independently model each zj
as belonging to a low-dimensional Gaussian mixture model, where each Gaussian has a covariance
matrix with identical spectrum and is supported on a subspace with orthonormal basis Uk , plus
independent Gaussian noise with covariance ╬ĚI, then the posterior probability that each token zj
belongs to each subspace is given by the assignment matrix ╬á = ╬á(Z | {Uk }K   k=1 ) as follows:

                       ÔŐĄ
      ´ú«                  ´ú╣                                         ´úź ´ú« ÔŐĄ 2 ´ú╣´úÂ
     ╬Ż(z1 | {Uk }K
                 k=1 )                                                  ÔłąU1 zj Ôłą2
             ..                                    K     .         ´úČ1 ´ú»    ..
 ╬á=´ú░                     ´ú╗,      where ╬Ż(zj | {Uk }k=1 ) = softmax ´úş ´ú░            ´ú╗´úŞ ,          ÔłÇj Ôłł [n], (10)
   ´ú»                     ´ú║                                                        ´ú║´úĚ
              .                                                     2╬Ě      .
                       ÔŐĄ
    ╬Ż(zn | {Uk }Kk=1 )                                                 ÔłąUÔŐĄ      2
                                                                          K zj Ôłą2

where ╬Ě becomes a learnable temperature parameter. Thus, given an input feature Z, we estimate
╬á using equation 10 then compute the attention operator. Combining the construction of ╬á in
equation 10 with equation 7, we obtain the Token Statistics Self-Attention (TSSA) operator:
                                             K
                                     . ¤ä X
               TSSA(Z | {Uk }K k=1 ) =  Ôłĺ       Uk D(Z, ¤Çk | Uk )UÔŐĄ    k ZDiag(¤Çk ),        (11)
                                          n
                                                 k=1

where ¤Çk are the columns of ╬á = ╬á(Z | {Uk }K      k=1 ), defined in equation 10, and D is defined in
equation 6. We use this TSSA operator to construct an architecture, the Token Statistics Transformer
(T O ST). Namely, our focus is to construct an alternative attention mechanism, so to obtain T O ST
we replace the attention operator in XCiT (Ali et al., 2021) with the TSSA operator (with f (x) =
log(1 + (d/¤Á2 )x) as in Section 3.1), along with other changes detailed in Section 4 which serve to
simplify the architecture. We visualize one layer of T O ST in Figure 3, and provide pseudocode for
the model in Appendix E.

Complexity analysis. Table 1 gives a comparison of computational complexity between each at-
tention head of the TSSA operator in our proposed T O ST architecture and those of attention mech-
anisms in other existing transformers. As we see, the TSSA attention head is asymptotically less
complex than alternatives in either n or p for both compute time and memory requirements. This
is confirmed in real computation metrics shown in Figure 1 for T O ST and ViT (with 12 attention
layers, d = 384, and K = 8); we present more computation metrics for all models in Appendix D.2.

                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                    Measure coding rate across layers
                                          110


            Rc,varf (Z , ) [TSSA block]
                                          108

                                          106

                                          104

                                          102

                                          100   train
                                          98
                                                val
                                                2        4       6           8     10       12
                                                             Layer index -
                                                                 (a)                             (b)
                                                     var
Figure 4:   (Left) The variational compression term Rc,f (ZÔäô , ╬áÔäô ) of the TSSA outputs ZÔäô and estimated
                   Ôäô
memberships ╬á at different layers Ôäô of the T O ST-S model. (Right) Visualization of estimated ╬á for
several images. For an image with N tokens ÔłÜ (patches),
                                                  ÔłÜ     we visualize each row of the membership matrix ╬á
in the TSSA layer by reshaping it into a N ├Ś N matrix. Here we visualize membership matrices ╬á in
T O ST-S, estimated in layer 9, of each input image.


4    E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct experiments to verify and study the properties and performance of our
proposed Token Statistics Transformer (T O ST) on real-world datasets and tasks. As detailed in
Section 3, we design our white-box attention operator by following the principle of MCR2 and un-
rolling the compression objective defined in equation 4. We thus adopt a simplistic implementation
as close to our theoretical derivation as possible. Hence, it is not the goal of this work to show the
current implementation of T O ST can outperform existing highly engineered architectures. Instead,
our empirical studies aim to provide answers and evidence for the following questions:
1. Does our proposed TSSA attention operator optimize the compression objective 4 in practice?
2. If we simply replace standard self-attention with our TSSA attention operator, leaving the rest of
   the architecture largely unchanged, do we maintain (or improve) task performance?
We provide positive answers to both questions. First, since our TSSA attention operator is mathemat-
ically derived via algorithmic unrolling, it should optimize a quantitative objective of the representa-
tion, which we show occurs layer-by-layer. Second, we demonstrate that our proposed T O ST model,
despite its simplicity and efficiency, already performs competitively on real-world large datasets
when compared to architectures which use conventional self-attention mechanisms.
Model architecture. Since our main focus is the proposed TSSA operator as explained in Sec-
tion 3, we follow a minimalist approach of architecture design by directly replacing attention layers
in existing transformer architectures with the TSSA operator. Concretely, our realization of T O ST
inherits most other design choices from XCiT (Ali et al., 2021)4 and GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) for
vision and language tasks, respectively. We also test different model sizes by varying the number of
attention heads K, the token dimension d, and number of layers L. For supervised classification, we
also follow XCiT by inserting a learnable [CLS] token that aggregates features from image patches
via a global class attention layer. More details on implementation and model configurations are
provided in Appendix C.
Datasets and optimization. For vision experiments, we pre-train the proposed T O ST models on
the ImageNet-1k (Deng et al., 2009) dataset. We also use these pre-trained networks as initialization
and fine-tune them on smaller datasets including CIFAR10/100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), Oxford
Flowers (Nilsback & Zisserman, 2008), Oxford-IIT-Pets (Parkhi et al., 2012) for transfer learning
evaluations. We also adopt the Long-Range Arena (Tay et al., 2021) benchmark to analyze the long
sequence modeling capability of T O ST. For causal language modeling, we train T O ST autoregres-
sively on the OpenWebText dataset(Gokaslan et al., 2019) and test the trained model on its test split
as well as other datasets as shown in (Radford et al., 2019). Details on training and optimization are
provided in Appendix C.3.
   4
     To align with our theoretical formulation, we remove the Local Patch Interaction (LPI) module from XCiT.
See details in Appendix C.2.


                                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Top 1 accuracy of T O ST on various datasets with different model sizes when pre-trained on
ImageNet. For ImageNet/ImageNetReaL, we directly evaluate the top-1 accuracy. For other datasets, we pre-
train the model on ImageNet and then evaluate the transfer learning performance via fine-tuning.
  Datasets               T O ST-T(iny)   T O ST-S(mall)   T O ST-M(edium)   XCiT-S   XCiT-M   ViT-S   ViT-B(ase)
  # parameters              5.8M            22.6M             68.1M         24.9M    80.2M    22.1M    86.6 M
  ImageNet                   67.3            77.9              80.3          80.5     81.5    79.8       81.8
  ImageNet ReaL              72.2            84.1              85.6          85.6     85.9    85.6       86.7
  CIFAR10                    95.5            96.5              97.5          98.1     98.3     98.6      98.8
  CIFAR100                   78.3            82.7              84.5          86.1     87.6     88.8      89.3
  Oxford Flowers-102         88.6            92.8              94.2          93.9     94.0     94.0      95.7
  Oxford-IIIT-Pets           85.6            91.1              92.8          92.9     94.0     92.8      94.1



                 Input



                 ToST



                 XCiT



                 ViT


Figure 5: Comparison of [CLS] token attention map visualization. We take the last head in the penultimate
global class attention layer for visualization from T O ST-S,XCiT-S, and ViT-S, respectively.


4.1    L AYER - WISE A NALYSIS OF THE TSSA O PERATOR
In this sub-section, we aim to answer the first question by providing both qualitative and quantitative
results that demonstrate each layer of the proposed T O ST attention operator indeed optimizes its
designed objective. This layer-wise analysis is possible due to the white-box design of the TSSA
operator, similar to studies conducted for CRATE, but different from most black-box models.
Do T O ST attention layers achieve their design goals? As detailed in Section 3, the T O ST atten-
                                                                     var
tion operator aims to optimize the variational compression term Rc,f     (Z, ╬á) defined in Equation (4).
In order to understand whether the learned attention operator indeed performs such optimization, we
                                                 var
explicitly measure and plot the objective value Rc,f (ZÔäô , ╬áÔäô ) of the outputs ZÔäô and group estimations
   Ôäô         Ôäô     Ôäô K
╬á = ╬á(Z | {Uk }k=1 ) of each layer Ôäô. We measure this term on both training and validation set
of the ImageNet-1k dataset by taking 500 samples from each. We plot our observations in Figure 4a.
The compression term mostly decreases by layer, aligning with the design goal.
Visualizing membership assignment ╬á in T O ST. At each layer Ôäô, the estimated membership
matrix ╬áÔäô has the interpretation that each column ¤ÇkÔäô Ôłł RN represents the estimated probabilities
for each of the N tokens to be assigned to the k th subspace. Hence, the ╬á matrix represents a soft
clustering of the N tokens to K clusters, or subspaces, via the K attention heads. In Figure 4b, we
visualize the clustering at a selected layer, and observe that foreground image patches are clustered
in the same subspace, confirming our interpretation. See Figure 9 for more results.

4.2    E VALUATION ON R EAL -W ORLD V ISUAL DATASETS
We now provide evaluations and analysis of T O ST models on vision classification tasks, along with
comparison against other state-of-the-art vision transformer architectures.
ImageNet-1k performance and transfer learning results. In Table 2, we report the top-1 accu-
racy of T O ST on the ImageNet-1k dataset as well as their transfer learning performance on several
smaller datasets. We observe that the proposed T O ST models achieve comparable ImageNet-1k
and transfer learning performance as other empirically engineered architectures, while being sig-
nificantly more efficient and interpretable with fewer parameters. Notably, we identify promising
scaling behavior, where our models consistently improve and the performance gap between T O ST
and other networks decreases as we scale up the model sizes.

                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                        Table 3: Long-Range Arena (LRA) performance comparison.
          Model              ListOps          Text        Retrieval      Image        Pathfinder         Avg
          Reformer                37.27       56.10        53.40         38.07          68.50           50.56
          BigBird                 36.05       64.02        59.29         40.83          74.87           54.17
          LinFormer               16.13       65.90        53.09         42.34          75.30           50.46
          Performer               18.01       65.40        53.82         42.77          77.05           51.18
          Transformer             37.11       65.21        79.14         42.94          71.83           59.24
          T O ST (ours)           37.25       66.75        79.46         46.62          69.41           59.90
          S4                      59.60       86.82        90.90         88.65          94.20           84.03
Table 4: Causal language modeling performance. (Left) We report zero-shot cross entropy loss of GPT2-
Base compared with T O ST of varying model sizes on the test set of the datasets (lower is better). (Right)
Relative time and memory usage for base models.
Model           # params   OWT      Lambada    Wikitext    PTB     Avg Ôćô Model            Length 4k             Length 8k
GPT2-Base        124M      2.84       4.32       4.13      5.75    4.26                Time     Memory     Time      Memory
T O ST-Base      110M      3.20       4.98       4.77      6.39    4.84
T O ST-Medium    304M      2.88       4.45       4.30      5.64    4.32 GPT2-Base       1├Ś        1├Ś        1├Ś         1├Ś
T O ST-Large     655M      2.72       4.32       3.99      5.03    4.02 T O ST-Base   0.60├Ś     0.41├Ś     0.46├Ś       0.24├Ś


Visualizing attention maps of T O ST We can gain additional understanding of the features
learned by T O ST based on visualization of the self-attention maps. For the global class attention
layers, we extract and visualize the attention map between [CLS] token and image patch tokens for
each head using the widely adopted approach from (Caron et al., 2021). In Figure 5, we visualize
the attention maps in the penultimate layer, for T O ST-S, XCiT-S, and ViT-S models. Based on the
results, T O ST autonomously learns to perform segmentation and clustering without the need for
complex self-supervised training techniques or segmentation-related annotations. Compared to the
XCiT (Ali et al., 2021) and ViT (Touvron et al., 2021) models, T O ST demonstrates more meaningful
segmentation results. Figure 10 contains more attention map visualization for each model.

4.3 E VALUATION ON L ANGUAGE AND L ONG S EQUENCE TASKS
Long sequence modeling. To assess the performance of T O ST on long sequence tasks, we use the
Long-Range Arena (LRA) benchmark (Tay et al., 2021) and compare T O ST against the transformer
and its efficient variants (Kitaev et al., 2020; Zaheer et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Choromanski
et al., 2021). The results are reported in Table 3. These results demonstrate promising long-range
modeling capability of T O ST which outperforms other transformer-based methods on average. We
note that this benchmark is currently dominated by state-space models (SSMs) rather than trans-
former models, but among transformer-based models ToST has highly competitive performance,
demonstrating the utility of our TSSA attention operator even for long sequence lengths. For com-
pleteness, we also include performance results for S4 (Gu et al., 2022), a representative SSM.
Scalability of ToST for causal language modeling. We can naturally extend the T O ST architec-
ture to perform next-token prediction by introducing a simple causal variant of the TSSA operator,
as detailed in Appendix B. We present our results in Table 4. We observe that performance of
T O ST on various text datasets steadily improve as we scale up the size of the model, demonstrating
promising scaling behavior. Due to computational constraints, we did not systematically sweep hy-
perparameters for training T O ST for this task and employed the same set as GPT2-Base for training
all our models. Still, we find that swapping our TSSA attention operator for self-attention largely
preserves model performance, despite self-attention largely being heralded as the key component
of transformer performance for language modeling tasks. Figure 8 shows that the causal version of
T O ST is also faster and uses less memory than standard transformers for autoregressive prediction.

5    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we propose a novel attention operator based on white-box design by unrolled optimiza-
tion of a novel variational form of the MCR2 objective. Our resulting architecture (T O ST) is unique
among attention operators in that it does not require computing pairwise interactions between to-
kens and instead is constructed from a second moment statistic of projected token features. This
results in our operator being significantly more efficient than standard attention operators, while still
achieving similar performance to comparable transformers. We believe that this work provides an
initial demonstration of the tremendous potential in designing novel and efficient deep architectures
from mathematical principles.


                                                            10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by NIH grant R21AI169363, ARO MURI W911NF-17-1-0304,
NSF grant 2031985, the Northrop Grumman Mission Systems Research in Applications for Learn-
ing Machines (REALM) initiative, and a UC Berkeley College of Engineering Fellowship. Ziyang
Wu and Yi Ma acknowledge support from the joint Simons Foundation-NSF DMS grant #2031899,
the ONR grant N00014-22-1-2102, the NSF grant #2402951, and Yi Ma also acknowledges partial
support from TBSI, InnoHK, and the University of Hong Kong.

R EFERENCES
Alaaeldin Ali, Hugo Touvron, Mathilde Caron, Piotr Bojanowski, Matthijs Douze, Armand Joulin,
  Ivan Laptev, Natalia Neverova, Gabriel Synnaeve, Jakob Verbeek, et al. Xcit: Cross-covariance
  image transformers. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:20014ÔÇô20027, 2021.

Iz Beltagy, Matthew E Peters, and Arman Cohan. Longformer: The long-document transformer.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05150, 2020.

Antoni Buades, Bartomeu Coll, and J-M Morel. A non-local algorithm for image denoising. In
  2005 IEEE computer society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPRÔÇÖ05),
  volume 2, pp. 60ÔÇô65. Ieee, 2005.

Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Herve╠ü Je╠ügou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 9650ÔÇô9660, 2021.

Kwan Ho Ryan Chan, Yaodong Yu, Chong You, Haozhi Qi, John Wright, and Yi Ma. Redunet:
 A white-box deep network from the principle of maximizing rate reduction. Journal of machine
 learning research, 23(114):1ÔÇô103, 2022.

Sneha Chaudhari, Varun Mithal, Gungor Polatkan, and Rohan Ramanath. An attentive survey of
  attention models. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST), 12(5):1ÔÇô32,
  2021.

Mark Chen, Alec Radford, Rewon Child, Jeffrey Wu, Heewoo Jun, David Luan, and Ilya Sutskever.
 Generative pretraining from pixels. In Proceedings of the 37th international conference on ma-
 chine learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of machine learning research, pp. 1691ÔÇô1703. PMLR,
 July 2020.

Krzysztof Choromanski, Valerii Likhosherstov, David Dohan, Xingyou Song, Andreea Gane, Tamas
  Sarlos, Peter Hawkins, Jared Davis, Afroz Mohiuddin, Lukasz Kaiser, David Belanger, Lucy
  Colwell, and Adrian Weller. Rethinking attention with performers. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2021.

Tianzhe Chu, Shengbang Tong, Tianjiao Ding, Xili Dai, Benjamin David Haeffele, Rene Vidal, and
  Yi Ma. Image clustering via the principle of rate reduction in the age of pretrained models. In
  The twelfth international conference on learning representations, 2024.

Kostadin Dabov, Alessandro Foi, Vladimir Katkovnik, and Karen Egiazarian. Image denoising with
  block-matching and 3d filtering. In Image processing: algorithms and systems, neural networks,
  and machine learning, volume 6064, pp. 354ÔÇô365. SPIE, 2006.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248ÔÇô255. Ieee, 2009.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of Deep
  Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
  of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
  guage Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171ÔÇô4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota,
  June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tianjiao Ding, Shengbang Tong, Kwan Ho Ryan Chan, Xili Dai, Yi Ma, and Benjamin D Haeffele.
  Unsupervised Manifold Linearizing and Clustering. In International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 5450ÔÇô5461, October 2023.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Charles Fefferman, Sanjoy Mitter, and Hariharan Narayanan. Testing the manifold hypothesis.
  Journal of the American Mathematical Society, 29(4):983ÔÇô1049, 2016.
Aaron Gokaslan, Vanya Cohen, Ellie Pavlick, and Stefanie Tellex. Openwebtext corpus. http:
  //Skylion007.github.io/OpenWebTextCorpus, 2019.
Karol Gregor and Yann LeCun. Learning fast approximations of sparse coding. In Proceedings of
  the 27th international conference on international conference on machine learning, pp. 399ÔÇô406,
  2010.
Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher Re╠ü. Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured
  state spaces. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Andrej Karpathy. NanoGPT. https://github.com/karpathy/nanoGPT, 2022.
Nikita Kitaev, Lukasz Kaiser, and Anselm Levskaya. Reformer: The efficient transformer. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Drew Linsley, Junkyung Kim, Vijay Veerabadran, Charles Windolf, and Thomas Serre. Learning
  long-range spatial dependencies with horizontal gated recurrent units. Advances in neural infor-
  mation processing systems, 31, 2018.
Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 10012ÔÇô10022, 2021.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization, 2019.
Andrew Maas, Raymond E Daly, Peter T Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y Ng, and Christopher Potts.
  Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th annual meeting of the
  association for computational linguistics: Human language technologies, pp. 142ÔÇô150, 2011.
Vishal Monga, Yuelong Li, and Yonina C. Eldar. Algorithm Unrolling: Interpretable, Efficient
  Deep Learning for Signal and Image Processing. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 38(2):18ÔÇô
  44, March 2021. ISSN 1558-0792. doi: 10.1109/MSP.2020.3016905. Conference Name: IEEE
  Signal Processing Magazine.
Elizbar A Nadaraya. On estimating regression. Theory of Probability & Its Applications, 9(1):
  141ÔÇô142, 1964.
Nikita Nangia and Samuel R Bowman. Listops: A diagnostic dataset for latent tree learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1804.06028, 2018.
Maria-Elena Nilsback and Andrew Zisserman. Automated flower classification over a large number
 of classes. Indian Conference on Computer Vision, Graphics and Image Processing, 2008.
O. M. Parkhi, A. Vedaldi, A. Zisserman, and C. V. Jawahar. Cats and dogs. In IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2012.
Jiezhong Qiu, Hao Ma, Omer Levy, Wen-tau Yih, Sinong Wang, and Jie Tang. Blockwise self-
   attention for long document understanding. In Trevor Cohn, Yulan He, and Yang Liu (eds.),
   Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pp. 2555ÔÇô2565,
   Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.
   findings-emnlp.232.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dragomir R Radev, Pradeep Muthukrishnan, Vahed Qazvinian, and Amjad Abu-Jbara. The acl
  anthology network corpus. Language Resources and Evaluation, 47:919ÔÇô944, 2013.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language under-
  standing by generative pre-training. 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Samira Abnar, Yikang Shen, Dara Bahri, Philip Pham, Jinfeng Rao,
  Liu Yang, Sebastian Ruder, and Donald Metzler. Long range arena : A benchmark for efficient
  transformers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Hugo Touvron, Matthieu Cord, Matthijs Douze, Francisco Massa, Alexandre Sablayrolles, and
  Herve╠ü Je╠ügou. Training data-efficient image transformers & distillation through attention. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 10347ÔÇô10357. PMLR, 2021.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  ┼üukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information
  processing systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
Rene Vidal. Attention: Self-expression is all you need, 2022.
Ke Alexander Wang, Jiaxin Shi, and Emily B Fox. Test-time regression: a unifying framework for
  designing sequence models with associative memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12352, 2025.
Sinong Wang, Belinda Z Li, Madian Khabsa, Han Fang, and Hao Ma. Linformer: Self-attention
  with linear complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04768, 2020.
Geoffrey S Watson. Smooth regression analysis. Sankhya╠ä: The Indian Journal of Statistics, Series
  A, pp. 359ÔÇô372, 1964.
John Wright and Yi Ma. High-dimensional data analysis with low-dimensional models: Principles,
  computation, and applications. Cambridge University Press, 2022.
Yunyang Xiong, Zhanpeng Zeng, Rudrasis Chakraborty, Mingxing Tan, Glenn Fung, Yin Li, and
  Vikas Singh. Nystro╠łmformer: A nystro╠łm-based algorithm for approximating self-attention. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 14138ÔÇô14148,
  2021.
Songlin Yang, Bailin Wang, Yu Zhang, Yikang Shen, and Yoon Kim. Parallelizing linear transform-
  ers with the delta rule over sequence length. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  37:115491ÔÇô115522, 2025.
Yaodong Yu, Kwan Ho Ryan Chan, Chong You, Chaobing Song, and Yi Ma. Learning diverse and
  discriminative representations via the principle of maximal coding rate reduction. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:9422ÔÇô9434, 2020.
Yaodong Yu, Sam Buchanan, Druv Pai, Tianzhe Chu, Ziyang Wu, Shengbang Tong, Hao Bai, Yuexi-
  ang Zhai, Benjamin D. Haeffele, and Yi Ma. White-Box Transformers via Sparse Rate Reduction:
  Compression Is All There Is?, November 2023. arXiv:2311.13110 [cs].
Yaodong Yu, Sam Buchanan, Druv Pai, Tianzhe Chu, Ziyang Wu, Shengbang Tong, Benjamin Ha-
  effele, and Yi Ma. White-box transformers via sparse rate reduction. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Manzil Zaheer, Guru Guruganesh, Avinava Dubey, Joshua Ainslie, Chris Alberti, Santiago Ontan╠âo╠ün,
 Philip Pham, Anirudh Ravula, Qifan Wang, Li Yang, and Amr Ahmed. Big bird: Transformers
 for longer sequences. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Aston Zhang, Zachary C Lipton, Mu Li, and Alexander J Smola. Dive into deep learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2106.11342, 2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    P ROOFS OF THE T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
Below we present a more refined version of Theorem 1, which easily proves Theorem 1 by taking
p = d, and also is sufficient to prove Corollary 1.
Theorem 2. Let f : [0, Ôł×) Ôćĺ R be non-decreasing, concave, and obey f (0) = 0, and let
F : PSD(d) Ôćĺ R have the form
                                        d
                                        X
                            F (M) =           f (╬╗i (M)),        ÔłÇM Ôłł PSD(d).                              (12)
                                        i=1

Then, for all M Ôłł PSD(d) and all Q Ôłł O(d, p) with p ÔëĄ d such that image(M) ÔŐć image(Q), we
have
                                        Xp
                               F (M) ÔëĄ      f ((QÔŐĄ MQ)ii ).                          (13)
                                                  i=1
The inequality in equation 13 is achieved with equality for any Q which diagonalizes M, i.e.,
QÔŐĄ MQ is diagonal. Moreover, if f is strictly concave, then the inequality in equation 13 is achieved
with equality if and only if Q diagonalizes M.

Proof. First, we have that rank(M) ÔëĄ rank(Q) = p. Thus, let M = U╬ŤUÔŐĄ be a spectral
decomposition of M, where ╬Ť Ôłł Rd├Śd is diagonal with non-negative entries ╬╗i (M) for i Ôłł [d], and
U Ôłł O(d). In particular, we can write

                                     ╬Ťp 0
                              ╬Ť=            ,   U = Up U╠â                                   (14)
                                      0 0
where ╬Ťp Ôłł Rp├Śp is a diagonal matrix with non-negative entries ╬╗i (M) for i Ôłł [p], Up Ôłł O(d, p)
and U╠âp Ôłł O(d, d Ôłĺ p), such that image(Q) = image(Up ), so that image(M) ÔŐć image(Up ) and
image(Q) is orthogonal (in the sense of linear subspaces) to image(U╠â).
We begin by noting the simple fact that if Q diagonalizes M, then we have QÔŐĄ MQ = PÔŐĄ ╬Ťp P for
some permutation matrix P Ôłł O(p). This gives
          p
          X                           p
                                      X                          p
                                                                 X                      p
                                                                                        X
                 f ((QÔŐĄ MQ)ii ) =           f ((PÔŐĄ ╬Ťp P)ii ) =         f ((╬Ťp )ii ) =         f (╬╗i (M))   (15)
           i=1                        i=1                        i=1                    i=1
                                      d
                                      X
                                  =         f (╬╗i (M)) = F (M),                                            (16)
                                      i=1

showing that the inequality equation 13 is met with equality for a Q which diagonalizes M.
We now show that the inequality holds for a general Q Ôłł O(d, p) such that image(M) ÔŐć image(Q).
Define W = UÔŐĄ Q Ôłł Rd├Śp . Then we have
                                          ÔŐĄ            ÔŐĄ     ÔŐĄ
                                          Up          Up Q        Up Q
                        W = UÔŐĄ Q =           ÔŐĄ Q  =          =            .                (17)
                                          U╠â          U╠âÔŐĄ Q         0
Now we have
                        WÔŐĄ W = QÔŐĄ UUÔŐĄ Q = QÔŐĄ IQ = QÔŐĄ Q = I,                                      (18)
so that W has orthonormal columns, i.e., W Ôłł O(d, p). In particular, writing this in a different way,
                                        UÔŐĄ

                  ÔŐĄ                         Q
                                                = Q ÔŐĄ Up UÔŐĄ            ÔŐĄ     ÔŐĄ     ÔŐĄ
                           ÔŐĄ              p
           I = W W = Q Up 0                                 p Q = (Up Q) (Up Q),                 (19)
                                          0
so that UÔŐĄ
         p Q Ôłł O(p).

Now note that we have
           (QÔŐĄ MQ)ii = ((UW)ÔŐĄ M(UW))ii = (WÔŐĄ UÔŐĄ MUW)ii = (WÔŐĄ ╬ŤW)ii                                         (20)
                            d
                            X
                                         2
                        =         ╬╗j (M)Wji .                                                              (21)
                            j=1



                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                   Pd
Since W has orthonormal columns, j=1 Wji      2
                                                 = 1. Thus (QÔŐĄ MQ)ii is a convex combination of
the eigenvalues of M, including some zeros. Using the concavity of f , this yields
                                        ´úź                  ´úÂ
             Xp                   Xp      X d
                 f ((QÔŐĄ MQ)ii ) =     f´úş        ╬╗j (M)Wji2 ´úŞ
                                                                                           (22)
             i=1                      i=1       j=1
                                      p X
                                      X d
                                                 2
                                  Ôëą             Wji f (╬╗j (M))                                          (23)
                                      i=1 j=1
                                      d
                                      X                  p
                                                         X               p
                                                                         X                  p
                                                                                            X
                                                                  2                                2
                                  =         f (╬╗j (M))           Wji =         f (╬╗j (M))         Wji   (24)
                                      j=1                i=1             j=1                i=1
                                      Xp                 Xp
                                  =         f (╬╗j (M))           (UÔŐĄ   2
                                                                   p Q)ji                               (25)
                                      j=1                  i=1
                                      p
                                      X                      d
                                                             X
                                  =         f (╬╗j (M)) =           f (╬╗j (M)) = F (M).                  (26)
                                      j=1                    j=1
              Pp
In particular, i=1 (UÔŐĄ    2                   ÔŐĄ
                     p Q)ji = 1 because Up Q is an orthogonal matrix, thus having unit-norm
rows and columns. This proves the inequality equation 13.
Regarding the equality case, we note that the only inequality used to derive equation 13 is the
concavity condition on f . If f is strictly concave, then this inequality is met with equality if and
                                               Pd
only if, for each i, there exists j Ôőć such that j=1 ╬╗j (M)Wji   2
                                                                  = ╬╗j Ôőć (M). Namely, the inequality
is met with equality if and only if for each i, if Wj1 i ╠Ş= 0 and Wj2 i ╠Ş= 0 then ╬╗j1 (M) = ╬╗j2 (M).
For example, if M has distinct eigenvalues then W is a truncated permutation matrix. In general,
however, a W with these properties implies that Q = UW diagonalizes M. This shows that if f is
strictly concave then the inequality in equation 13 is met with equality if and only if Q diagonalizes
M.


B    E XTENSION TO C AUSAL T O ST ATTENTION

To enable auto-regressive training / inference similar to GPT, the T O ST attention mechanism illus-
trated in the main text needs to be adapted to a causal version. Namely, for the t-th token, it can
only attend to tokens from earlier timesteps {1, . . . , t Ôłĺ 1}.
In conventional self-attention mechanism, such operation can be achieved by applying a causal mask
on the attention matrix A Ôłł RT ├ŚT , where T is the total number of tokens. The causal mask M is a
T -by-T lower-triangular matrix of binary values (i.e. 0 or 1). The resulting causal attention matrix
M ÔŐÖ A is therefore also lower-triangular and prevents any token from attending to future tokens.
In T O ST attention, such operation however requires some tweaking. Let us first revisit the formula-
tion of the T O ST attention mechanism:
                           K
                       ¤ä X                          ÔŐĄ   ÔŐÖ2   ¤Çk
            +
           zj = zj Ôłĺ         ╬áj,k Uk Diag Ôłçf (Uk Z)                    UÔŐĄ
                                                                        k zj ,   ÔłÇj Ôłł [n].       (27)
                       n                                   ÔčĘ¤Çk , 1Ôčę
                          k=1

To enforce causality between tokens, the key is to make sure for generating token z+      j , we should
only rely on statistics computed from tokens {z1 , . . . , zj }. Assume we have already computed ╬á5 ,
the causal version of T O ST becomes:
                      K
                  ¤ä X                          ÔŐĄ     ÔŐÖ2         Ij,n ¤Çk
     z+
      j  =  z j Ôłĺ        ╬á    U
                           j,k k Diag   Ôłçf  (U k Z)        ┬Ě                  UÔŐĄ
                                                                               k zj , ÔłÇj Ôłł [n].    (28)
                  j                                          ÔčĘIj,n ¤Çk , 1Ôčę
                    k=1

   5
     Note ╬á itself may be causal depending on how it is computed. For now, just assume we have computed ╬á
and we will explain how to handle ╬á with a more complex initialization scheme in the next section.


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where we define
                                    Ij,n = Diag(1, . . . , 1, 0, . . . , 0).                          (29)
                                                | {z } | {z }
                                                        j         nÔłĺj
Notice here we have effectively restricted the attention operator to only use the first j tokens, pre-
venting influence from future tokens. This mechanism, named Causal-T O ST, could be efficiently
implemented in practice with a cumulative sum (i.e. cumsum) operation. This is an intuitive way to
encode causality into our attention mechanism, in contrast to the XCA opeartor in XCiT, which does
not have a direct way of implementing causal attention. We will introduce more technical details on
the implementation of this causal variant in the next section.

B.1   C ONNECTION TO OTHER E FFICIENT A RCHITECTURES

It is worth noting that there exist other works on efficient alternatives to self-attention. In particular,
recent works on deep state-space models (Gu et al., 2022) or variants of linear attention (Yang et al.,
2025) have become increasingly popular and similarly enjoy linear computational complexity. In
this subsection, we address connections and distinctions of our work to these methods. First, SSMs
and linear attention variants turn out to be deeply related and they can be viewed under a unified
framework of test-time regression (Wang et al., 2025). From this perspective, these methods can
be similarly viewed as algorithmic unrolling: these operators are obtained via optimization (e.g.
gradient descent) from some learning objectives. The fundamental differences between T O ST and
these efficient alternatives thus primarily lie in the modeling assumption and objective functions.
SSMs, for example, are primarily derived from the state-space representation modeled by some
first-order (continuous) differential equations. This choice entails distinct design choices for SSM
architectures such as discretization and efficient convolution operators. On the other hand, ToST is
derived from a compression-based objective on the space of discrete tokens. Similar to self-attention,
our resulting operator acts on tokens by aggregating token-level information (but without direct
pairwise interaction). Hence, our work doesnÔÇÖt share many design choices of SSMs and is placed
much closer to transformers. Consequently, we conduct empirical studies by directly swapping the
attention module of standard transformers with our derived ToST attention. Nevertheless, we believe
it is an interesting direction to explore how related these two formulations are, but this is beyond the
scope of this paper and we leave a deeper exploration of their connections to future work.

C     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
Here we present additional settings and results for our implementation and experiments.

C.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

For ease of optimization and implementation, below we make a few modifications to the conceptual
architecture presented in Section 3.

Overparameterization in TSSA.   First notice we can express the TSSA term in Equation (11) as:
                                                      D(Z, ¤Ç1 | U1 )UÔŐĄ
                                                    ´ú«                               ´ú╣
                                                                       1 ZDiag(¤Ç1 )
                                ¤ä                                   ..
         TSSA(Z | {Uk }K
                       k=1 ) = Ôłĺ [U1 , . . . , UK ] ´ú░                               ´ú╗,   (30)
                                                    ´ú»                               ´ú║
                                n                                    .
                                                                       ÔŐĄ
                                                     D(Z, ¤ÇK | UK )UK ZDiag(¤ÇK )
where D is defined in equation 6.              Following Yu et al. (2024), we replace the term
(¤ä /n) [U1 , . . . , UK ] with a learnable matrix W Ôłł Rd├ŚpK . Expanding the definition of D, the
TSSA operator becomes:
                                          Diag(Ôłçf [(UÔŐĄ    ÔŐÖ2
                                                             ¤Ç1 /ÔčĘ¤Ç1 , 1Ôčę])UÔŐĄ
                                       ´ú«                                                 ´ú╣
                                                      1 Z)                  1 ZDiag(¤Ç1 )
      TSSA(Z | {Uk }K                                            ..
                          k=1 ) = ÔłĺW ´ú░                                                   ´ú╗. (31)
                                       ´ú»                                                 ´ú║
                                                                  .
                                                     ÔŐĄ   ÔŐÖ2                 ÔŐĄ
                                         Diag(Ôłçf [(UK Z) ¤ÇK /ÔčĘ¤ÇK , 1Ôčę])UK ZDiag(¤ÇK )

Absorbing constant coefficients. We absorb the coefficients d/¤Á2 in Ôłçf (x) = (d/¤Á2 )(1 +
(d/¤Á2 )x)Ôłĺ1 in Equation (11) into the trainable parameter {Uk }K
                                                               k=1 . Therefore, the non-linear acti-
vation function becomes Ôłçf (x) = (1 + x)Ôłĺ1 .


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Estimating membership ╬á. When estimating ╬á as in Equation (10), we perform Ôäô2 normaliza-
tion on the projected tokens UÔŐĄ kZ Ôłł R
                                          p├Śn
                                              along each feature dimension, for each head. That is,
we restrict the norm of each row of the projected tokens to be 1. This normalization scheme is only
applied to tokens in the computation of ╬á and does not impact anything else in Equation (11). We
found this design to substantially improve and stabilize the training of T O ST models. To express
the aforementioned normalization, denote the i-th row of UÔŐĄ            ÔŐĄ
                                                             k Z as (Uk Z)i,: . Then define
                                 1/Ôłą(UÔŐĄ
                               ´ú«                  ´ú╣
                                       k Z)1,: Ôłą2
                                        ..                    .
                         yk = ´ú░                   ´ú╗,     ujk = UÔŐĄ k zj ÔŐÖ y k .                 (32)
                               ´ú»                  ´ú║
                                         .
                                  1/Ôłą(UÔŐĄ
                                       k Z)p,: Ôłą2
Then,
                                              ÔŐĄ
                              ´ú«                 ´ú╣
                            ╬Ż(z1 | {Uk }K
                                        k=1 )
                        ╬á=´ú░         ..
                                                ´ú╗,                                                    (33)
                          ´ú»                     ´ú║
                                     .
                                                  ÔŐĄ
                                ╬Ż(zn | {Uk }K
                                            k=1 )
                                                          Ôłąuj1 Ôłą22
                                                         ´úź     ´ú«   ´ú╣´úÂ
                                          .         ´úČ 1 ´ú» .. ´ú║´úĚ
               where    ╬Ż(zj | {Uk }K
                                    k=1 ) = softmax ´úş    ´ú░ . ´ú╗´úŞ ,                ÔłÇj Ôłł [n].            (34)
                                                      2╬Ě
                                                          ÔłąujK Ôłą22

In the causal variant of TSSA operator as previously introduced (Appendix B), this normalization
scheme means that, each token has its own corresponding group assignment matrix ╬á that only relies
on earlier tokens for normalization. Denote ╬áj Ôłł Rp├Śj a group assignment matrix corresponding
to the j-th token. Define
            1/Ôłą(Ij,n ┬Ě UÔŐĄ
          ´ú«                   Ôäô
                                        ´ú╣
                          k Z )1,: Ôłą2
   ykj = ´ú░             ..
                                        ´ú╗,     where (recall) Ij,n = Diag(1, . . . , 1, 0, . . . , 0). (35)
          ´ú»                             ´ú║
                        .                                                 | {z } | {z }
           1/Ôłą(Ij,n ┬Ě UÔŐĄ  k Z Ôäô
                                )    Ôłą
                                  p,: 2                                        j           nÔłĺj

Then,
                                                    ÔŐĄ
                            ´ú« j                       ´ú╣
                             ╬Ż (z1 | {Uk }K   k=1 )
                   ╬áj = ´ú░                  ..
                                                      ´ú╗,                                               (36)
                            ´ú»                         ´ú║
                                            .
                                                ÔŐĄ
                            ╬Ż j (zj | {Uk }K
                                           k=1 )
                                                                        j 2 ´ú╣´úÂ
                                                            ÔłąUÔŐĄ
                                                    ´úź      ´ú«
                                                                1 zi ÔŐÖ y1 Ôłą2
                                         .          ´úČ1 ´ú»            ..
          where ╬Ż j (zi | {Uk }K   k=1 ) = softmax ´úş                         ´ú╗´úŞ , ÔłÇj Ôłł [n].      (37)
                                                                             ´ú║´úĚ
                                                       2╬Ě
                                                          ´ú░          .
                                                               ÔŐĄ        j 2
                                                            ÔłąUK zi ÔŐÖ yK Ôłą2
Similar to our analysis in Appendix B, this normalization scheme can be implemented using the
cumsum operation. However, one can notice that a naive implementation would require an entirely
different ╬áj to be computed every time a new token arrives at time step t, as each column k ÔëĄ
t Ôłĺ 1 corresponding to earlier time steps needs to be recomputed. This would lead to quadratic
computational and memory complexity. In practice, instead of recomputing earlier columns, we find
that using a zero-initialized learnable additive bias along both the head and the sequence dimensions
before the softmax operator is sufficient. Denote the bias bjk for k-th head and j-th token. Then,
                                         ÔŐĄ
                    ´ú«                      ´ú╣
                      ╬Ż(z1 | {Uk }K k=1 )
              ╬á=´ú░               ..
                                           ´ú╗,                                                    (38)
                    ´ú»                      ´ú║
                                 .
                                      ÔŐĄ
                     ╬Ż(zn | {Uk }K
                                 k=1 )
                                                                   j 2  j ´ú╣´úÂ
                                                    ÔłąUÔŐĄ
                                              ´úź     ´ú«
                                                        1 zj ÔŐÖ y1 Ôłą2 + b1
                                .           ´úČ1 ´ú»               ..
    where ╬Ż(zj | {Uk }K   k=1 ) = softmax ´úş                               ´ú╗´úŞ ,         ÔłÇj Ôłł [n].      (39)
                                                                          ´ú║´úĚ
                                              2╬Ě
                                                 ´ú░              .
                                                       ÔŐĄ          j 2   j
                                                   ÔłąUK zj ÔŐÖ yK Ôłą2 + bK
Therefore, we still have Equation (28) as the causal variant of T O ST.
We provide a PyTorch-style pseudocode in Appendix E that reflects the architecture modifications
introduced above. In particular, Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 implement the TSSA attention layer
and its causal variant, respectively.


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Table 5: Configurations for the transformer models in image classification experiments.

                             T O ST-T        T O ST-S      T O ST-M     XCiT-S    XCiT-M         ViT-S   ViT-B
 # parameters                  5.8M           22.6M         68.1M       24.9M      80.2M         22.1M   86.6 M
 # attention heads K             4               8              8          8         8              6      12
 # layers L                      12             12             24         12         24            12      12
 # feature dimension d          192             384           512        384        512           384     768
 # head dimension p              48             48             64         48         64            64      64


               Table 6: Configurations for T O ST models in language modeling experiments.

                                                   T O ST-Base    T O ST-Medium   T O ST-Large
                         # parameters                 110M             304M           655M
                         # attention heads K             12             16             20
                         # layers L                      12             24             36
                         # feature dimension d          768            1024           1280
                         # head dimension p              64             64             64


C.2    M ODEL C ONFIGURATIONS

In the visual classification experiments conducted in Section 4, we focus on three types of models:
the proposed T O ST, XCiT, and ViT models. As detailed in the main text, our implementation
of T O ST inherits choices of other non-attention layers from XCiT. One important modification
we make is the removal of Local Patch Interaction (LPI) module, which is designed to encourage
explicit between-token interactions and does not align with our theoretical derivation. Therefore,
we prevent any form of explicit interactions among tokens by removing the LPI block. We remove
this module for XCiT as well for fair comparison. Hence, we train all T O ST and XCiT models
reported in this paper. One notable design choice of XCiT is the addition of two class attention
layers after the last XCiT block. The goal of these layers is to aggregate features from the processed
patch tokens and then write to a learnable [CLS] token via conventional self-attention. These
layers perform attention only between the [CLS] token and patch tokens, thus incurring O(n)
computational complexity. For ViT models, we directly use the checkpoints and results reported in
Touvron et al. (2021). Specifically, we use the ViT-S(mall) and ViT-B(ase) models, as they contain
parameters of similar size as XCiT-S(mall) and XCiT-M(edium), respectively. To summarize, we
present details about the configurations of these models in Table 5.
In the causal language modeling experiments, we train the causal variant of T O ST of three different
sizes and closely follow GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) family of models. We present their config-
urations in Table 6. Please see Appendix C.3 for other training details. One thing to note is that
we adopt the same hyperparameters as in (Karpathy, 2022) for all sizes due to the limitation of
computing resources. A more careful tuning certainly could lead to better performance for T O ST.


C.3    T RAINING S ETUP

Pre-training on ImageNet-1k. We train our models using the AdamW optimizer with a learning
rate of 2├Ś10Ôłĺ4 for 400 epochs throughout our pre-training experiments. We configure our batch size
to be 2048 for all our training experiments. All images are reshaped into resolutions of 224 ├Ś 224
and we tokenize each patch of size 16 ├Ś 16 into patch embeddings. For the other hyperparameters
including data augmentation strategies, we adopt the exact same recipe as in (Ali et al., 2021). Please
refer to this prior work for details. We conduct all pre-training experiments on 128 NVIDIA V100
GPUs.

Fine-tuning. We conduct transfer learning experiments by using the pretrained T O ST, XCiT, and
ViT models as initialization and fine-tuning them on the following target datasets: CIFAR10/100,
Oxford Flowers-102, Oxford-IIIT-Pets. We use batch size of 256 throughout our fine-tuning exper-
iments. For other settings, we adopt the same hyperparameter setup and pipeline as in (Yu et al.,
2024). Regarding computational resources, we conducted experiments on two NVIDIA RTX 4090
GPUs.


                                                             18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Table 7: Configurations for our T O ST models in experiments on the Long Range Arena benchmark.

             # layers   feature dim.   # heads                          batch   learning             weight    total   warmup   learning
Task                                             MLP dim.   pre-norm                       dropout
                L            d            K                              size     rate               decay     iter.   iter.    rate decay
ListOps         6           512          8         2048      True        64        1e-4      0.1      1e-2     90000    3000    inverse sqrt.
Text            4           256          4         1024      True        32        1e-4      0.1      1e-2     25000   10000       linear
Retrieval       6           128          4          512      True        64        1e-4      0.1      4e-2     91960   10000       linear
Image           8            64          8          128      True        64        1e-4      0.0      2e-2    180000    9000       linear
Pathfinder      2            64          2          128      False      256        2e-4      0.1       0      200000    312        linear



Table 8: Model ablation. Test accuracy on CIFAR10 after 400 epochs for a ToST-S base model with various
combinations of Ôäô2 normalization and non-attention blocks.

                                          Normalization        Non-Attention Block             Acc.
                                                 Yes                        MLP                91.2
                                                 Yes                        ISTA               87.4
                                                 No                         MLP                85.2
                                                 No                         ISTA               80.6



Long-Range Arena (LRA) Benchmark. We implement T O ST on top of an off-the-shelf PyTorch
version6 of the LRA benchmark and assess T O ST on tasks of long list operations (ListOps; Nan-
gia & Bowman, 2018) , byte-level text classification (Text; Maas et al., 2011), document retrieval
(Retrieval; Radev et al., 2013), image classification (Image; Krizhevsky et al., 2009), Pathfinder
(Linsley et al., 2018), and its extremely long version (Path-X; Tay et al. 2021). Due to the reported
issues7 with the Pathfinder task, we use a different Pytorch implementation8 of LRA to evaluate
T O ST on the task of Pathfinder. The hyperparameters of T O ST are summarized in Table 7.

Causal Language Modeling. We autoregressively train T O ST models of sizes corresponding to
GPT2-Base, Medium and Large following Radford et al. (2019), by substituting the self-attention
operator with our proposed causal version of TOST, with the same pre-processing and post-
processing steps, on the OpenWebText dataset (Gokaslan et al., 2019). Our implementation is based
on Karpathy (2022). We use a context length of 1024, and optimize the models using AdamW opti-
mizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) for 600,000 iterations, with batch size 480. We set the learning
rate to 0.0006 with 2000 warm up iterations and cosine decay, weight decay to 0.1. For more details,
we refer readers to Radford et al. (2019); Karpathy (2022).


D          A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

D.1        A BLATION S TUDIES ON M ODEL D ESIGN C HOICES .

Recall that we have made a few design choices for our implementation of T O ST as detailed in Ap-
pendix C.1. Additionally, differently from CRATE (Yu et al., 2024), we use a generic two-layer
MLP instead of the sparsity-promoting ISTA block in our implementation. In particular, we find the
following two components to have a non-trivial impact on the performance of our proposed model:

           1. Ôäô2 normalization when computing the membership matrix ╬á;
           2. MLP (as adopted in ViT, XCiT, etc) instead of ISTA (as adopted in CRATE).

We study how these choices affect our model performance and present our observations in Table 8.
Specifically, we vary these design choices and train each model variant on CIFAR10 for 400 epochs.
Our results demonstrate the necessity of each component in our model design.

       6
         https://github.com/facebookresearch/mega
       7
         https://github.com/facebookresearch/mega/issues/3
       8
         https://github.com/pkuzengqi/Skyformer


                                                                       19
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                                              100.0
                       10.0                                                           ViT                            ViT                                                                                          ViT                              ViT
                                                                                                                                                    1.0
                                                                                      CRATE                          CRATE                                                                                        CRATE                            CRATE

Peak GPU Memory (GB)


                                                                                                                             Peak GPU Memory (GB)
                                                                                100.0 XCiT                           XCiT                                                                                         XCiT


                                                          Inference Time (ms)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   XCiT


                                                                                                                                                                                        Inference Time (ms)
                                                                                      ToST                           ToST                                                                                         ToST                             ToST
                        1.0


                                                                                                                                                    0.1
                        0.1                                                     10.0                                                                                                                          10.0

                          0K    5K        10K       15K                            0K      5K        10K       15K                                   256   384 512 768 1024 1536 2048                            256   384 512 768 1024 15362048
                               Number of Tokens (n)                                       Number of Tokens (n)                                               Feature Dimension (d)                                       Feature Dimension (d)


   Figure 6: Memory usage and inference time of attention operators of different transformer architec-
   tures: ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), CRATE (Yu et al., 2023), XCiT (Ali et al., 2021), and T O ST (ours).
   (Left) Each model has K = 8 heads and d = 384 feature dimensions at every layer with varying number n of
   input tokens. (Right) Each model has n = 4096 tokens and K = 8 heads at every layer with varying feature
   dimension d. The y-axes are in log-scale.



    D.2                        A DDITIONAL C OMPARISON OF M EMORY AND T IME C OMPLEXITY OF ATTENTION
                               O PERATORS

   Beyond the theoretical comparison of the memory and time complexity of attention operators of
   different architectures in Table 1, we further conduct experiments to provide empirical evidence by
   evaluating real world memory cost and inference speed on an NVIDIA H800 GPU. Specifically, we
   measure inference time and memory footprint for 12 attention layers for each of the tested archi-
   tectures with batch size of 1. For each configuration we take 1 warm-up forward pass and then run
   1000 forward passes to record the average inference time.


   Smaller models with K = 8 heads. Figure 6 reports the memory and inference time of attention
   operators of different transformers, where the y-axes are in log scale for better readability. The two
   subplots on the left are the setting shown in Figure 1, where we fix feature dimension d = 384 and
   vary the number n of tokens, while for the two subplots on the right, we fix n = 4096 tokens and
   vary the feature dimension d. Notably, in all cases, our T O STÔÇÖs attention operator has a much lower
   computational and memory footprint than the attention of other transformers, which includes the
   common ViT transformers as well as the reduced-complexity XCiT transformers. Indeed, for 10k
   tokens, Figure 6 (Left) shows that T O ST is nearly 10 times faster than ViT for inference and uses
   roughly 100 times less GPU memory. This aligns well with our theoretical comparison in Table 1.


   Larger models with K = 32 heads. We now move to larger models, where we fix K = 32 heads
   and d = 4096 feature dimensions, and vary the number n of tokens. Figure 7 presents the memory
   and inference time of attention operators of different transformers, where again the y-axes are in log
   scale. It can be seen that the same trend (as in the smaller models case) shows up, and T O ST uses
   lower memory and inference time than ViT, CRATE, and XCiT.


   Causal-T O ST vs GPT. Here we compare the memory and time complexity of different architec-
   tures on GPT-like auto-regressive generation (i.e. next token prediction) tasks. Following the config
   of GPT2-base, we fix K = 12 heads and d = 768 feature dimensions, and vary the number n of
   tokens for both architectures. Figure 8 presents the memory and inference time of Causal-T O ST
   and GPT-2. Similarly, T O ST uses lower memory and inference time than GPT-2.


    D.3                        A DDITIONAL V ISUALIZATION OF M EMBERSHIP M ATRIX AND ATTENTION M APS

   We here visualize the membership matrix ╬á learned in T O ST-S in different layers in Figure 9, as
   well as the [CLS] attention maps from T O ST-S, XCiT-S (Ali et al., 2021), and ViT-S (Touvron
   et al., 2021) in Figure 10 for better interpretation of the semantic clustering property of T O ST, as
   discussed in Section 4.1.


                                                                                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                               ViT                                      1000.0                                                                               ViT
                                                                                                                               CRATE                                                                                                                         CRATE
Peak GPU Memory (GB)   10.0                                                                                                    XCiT                                                                                                                          XCiT


                                                                                                                                          Inference Time (ms)
                                                                                                                               ToST                                                                                                                          ToST
                                                                                                                                                                                  100.0
                        1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                        10.0
                          0K                                                   5K        10K       15K                                                                                     0K            5K        10K       15K
                                                                              Number of Tokens (n)                                                                                                      Number of Tokens (n)

Figure 7: Memory usage and inference time of attention operators of different transformer architectures
with varying numbers n of input tokens. Each model has K = 32 heads and d = 4096 feature dimension at
every layer. The y-axes are in log-scale.


                                                                                        *37
                           3HDN *38 0HPRU\  *%


                                                                                    7267                                              ,QIHUHQFH 7LPH  PV


                                                                             .       .                   .              .                                                         .          .                 .               .
                                                                                       1XPEHU RI 7RNHQV  Q                                                                             1XPEHU RI 7RNHQV  Q

Figure 8: Causal version of our T O ST architecture is also faster and uses less memory than standard trans-
former architectures (e.g. GPT-2) on auto-regressive generation tasks. We adopt the Base model size for both
architectures.


Figure 9: Visualization of membership matrices ╬á from T O ST-S, estimated in layer 5 (left) and 9 (right)
of each input image.


                                                                                                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Comparison of [CLS] token attention map visualization in the penultimate layer from
T O ST-S (left), XCiT-S (Ali et al., 2021) (middle), and ViT-S (Touvron et al., 2021) (right). Each row is
a different image and each column is a different head. Note that the ViT-S model has K = 6 heads instead of
K = 8.


D.4    V ISUALIZING L AYER - WISE S UBSPACES IN TSSA:

As detailed in Section 3.3, we do not, in practice, strictly enforce the orthogonality of the U columns
or require the direct sum of the subspaces defined by U[K] to cover the entire Rp space. Instead,
we make these projection matrices learnable via backprop for some target tasks (e.g. image clas-
sification). We now visualize the learned UÔäô[K] matrices of different layers in the TSSA block of a
trained T O ST-S model on ImageNet-1k. In Figure 11, we first normalize the columns in each UÔäôk ,
then we visualize [UÔäô1 , . . . , UÔäôK ]ÔŐĄ [UÔäô1 , . . . , UÔäôK ] Ôłł RpK├ŚpK . The (i, j)th block in each sub-figure
corresponds to (UÔäôi )ÔŐĄ UÔäôj for i, j Ôłł [K] at a particular layer Ôäô. For better visual clarity, we visualize
each block by randomly picking 4 directions for each subspace Ui . We observe that the learned
UÔäô[K] are indeed approximately incoherent, which aligns well with our assumptions.


            Figure 11: Visualization of learned subspaces in TSSA blocks at different layers.

E     P SEUDOCODE OF T O ST A RCHITECTURES
See Algorithms 1, 3 and 4 on the following pages.


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1: TSSA Attention Layer of T O ST in PyTorch
class Attention(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim, num_heads = 8, qkv_bias=False):
        self.heads = num_heads
        self.attend = nn.Softmax(dim = 1)
        self.qkv = nn.Linear(dim, dim, bias=qkv_bias)
        self.temp = nn.Parameter(torch.ones(num_heads, 1))
        self.to_out = nn.Sequential(
            nn.Linear(dim, dim)
        )

     def forward(self, x):
         w = rearrange(self.qkv(x), 'b n (h d) -> b h n d', h =
         ,Ôćĺ  self.heads)
         b, h, N, d = w.shape
         w_normed = torch.nn.functional.normalize(w, dim=-2)
         # Denoising against union of Gaussians
         Pi = self.attend(torch.sum(w_normed ** 2, dim=-1) * self.temp)
         dots = torch.matmul((Pi / (Pi.sum(dim=-1, keepdim=True) +
         ,Ôćĺ  1e-8)).unsqueeze(-2), w ** 2)
         attn = 1. / (1 + dots)
         out = - torch.mul(w.mul(Pi.unsqueeze(-1)), attn)
         out = rearrange(out, 'b h n d -> b n (h d)')
         return self.to_out(out)


Algorithm 2: Causal Variant of TSSA Attention in PyTorch
class Attention(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim, num_heads = 8, max_position_embeddings =
    ,Ôćĺ  1024, qkv_bias=False):
        self.heads = num_heads
        self.attend = nn.Softmax(dim = 1)
        self.qkv = nn.Linear(dim, dim, bias=qkv_bias)
        self.temp = nn.Parameter(torch.ones(num_heads, 1))
        self.to_out = nn.Sequential(
            nn.Linear(dim, dim)
        )
        self.bias = nn.Parameter(torch.zeros(n_head,
        ,Ôćĺ  max_position_embeddings,1))
    def forward(self, x):
        w = rearrange(self.qkv(x), 'b n (h d) -> b h n d', h =
        ,Ôćĺ  self.heads)
        b, h, N, d = w.shape
        w_sq = w ** 2
        w_sq_normed = (w_sq / torch.cumsum(w_sq,dim=-2)) +
        ,Ôćĺ  self.bias[:,:N,:]
        # Denoising against union of Gaussians
        Pi = self.attend(torch.sum(w_sq_normed, dim=-1) * self.temp)
        dots = torch.cumsum(w_sq * Pi.unsqueeze(-1), dim=-2) /
        ,Ôćĺ  (Pi.cumsum(dim=-1)).unsqueeze(-1)
        attn = 1. / (1 + dots)
        out = - torch.mul(w.mul(Pi.unsqueeze(-1)), attn)
        out = rearrange(out, 'b h n d -> b n (h d)')
        return self.to_out(out)


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3: MLP Layer of T O ST in PyTorch
class MLP(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, in_features, hidden_features=None,
    ,Ôćĺ  out_features=None, act_layer=nn.GELU):
        super().__init__()
        out_features = out_features or in_features
        hidden_features = hidden_features or in_features
        self.fc1 = nn.Linear(in_features, hidden_features)
        self.act = act_layer()
        self.fc2 = nn.Linear(hidden_features, out_features)

     def forward(self, x):
         x = self.fc1(x)
         x = self.act(x)
         x = self.fc2(x)
         return x


Algorithm 4: Transformer Block of T O ST in PyTorch
class Transformer(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim, depth, heads, dim_head):
        super().__init__()
        self.layers = nn.ModuleList([])
        self.heads = heads
        self.depth = depth
        self.dim = dim
        for _ in range(depth):
            self.layers.append(nn.ModuleList([
                PreNorm(dim, Attention(dim, heads = heads, dim_head =
                ,Ôćĺ  dim_head)),
                PreNorm(dim, Mlp(in_features=dim,
                ,Ôćĺ  hidden_features=int(dim * 4.0),
                ,Ôćĺ  act_layer=nn.GELU))
            ]))

     def forward(self, x):
         depth = 0
         for attn, ff in self.layers:
             grad_x = attn(x) + x
             x = ff(grad_x) + grad_x
         return x


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F    L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE D IRECTIONS
Due to limitations in computational resources and time, we have only tested and compared the new
architecture up to medium sizes on the ImageNet 1K dataset. Although our T O ST architecture
enjoys higher computational efficiency, which is increasingly crucial at larger scales, it remains to
verify in the future whether its accuracy remains competitive against other architectures in very large
scale applications. Finally, the focus of this work is on improving the efficiency and scalability of
the attention block of the transformer, so we have kept the MLP block unchanged. Preliminary
ablation studies in Table 8 suggest that the vanilla ISTA block used in CRATE might not be optimal
for T O ST. We leave the study of designing a more effective, efficient, and white-box replacement
for the MLP block for future.


                                                  25
