Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P REDICATE H IERARCHIES I MPROVE
F EW-S HOT S TATE C LASSIFICATION
 Emily Jin∗                                   Joy Hsu∗                                    Jiajun Wu
 Stanford University                          Stanford University                         Stanford University



                                                      A BSTRACT

             State classification of objects and their relations is core to many long-horizon
             tasks, particularly in robot planning and manipulation. However, the combinatorial
             explosion of possible object-predicate combinations, coupled with the need to adapt
             to novel real-world environments, makes it a desideratum for state classification
             models to generalize to novel queries with few examples. To this end, we propose
             PHIER, which leverages predicate hierarchies to generalize effectively in few-shot
             scenarios. PHIER uses an object-centric scene encoder, self-supervised losses that
             infer semantic relations between predicates, and a hyperbolic distance metric that
             captures hierarchical structure; it learns a structured latent space of image-predicate
             pairs that guides reasoning over state classification queries. We evaluate PHIER
             in the CALVIN and BEHAVIOR robotic environments and show that PHIER
             significantly outperforms existing methods in few-shot, out-of-distribution state
             classification, and demonstrates strong zero- and few-shot generalization from
             simulated to real-world tasks. Our results demonstrate that leveraging predicate
             hierarchies improves performance on state classification tasks with limited data.


1       I NTRODUCTION

State classification of objects and relations is essential for a plethora of tasks, from scene understand-
ing to robot planning and manipulation (Migimatsu & Bohg, 2022; Chen et al., 2024). Many such
long-horizon tasks require accurate and varied state predictions for entities in scenes. For example,
planning for “setting up the table” requires classifying whether the cup is NextTo the plate,
whether the utensils are OnTop of the table, and whether the microwave is Open. The
goal of state classification is to precisely answer such queries about specific entities in an image, and
determine whether they satisfy particular conditions across a range of attributes and relations.
However, the combinatorial space of objects (e.g., cup, plate, microwave) and predicates (e.g.,
NextTo, OnTop, Open) gives rise to an explosion of possible object-predicate combinations that
is intractable to obtain corresponding training data for. In addition, real-world systems operating
in dynamic environments must generalize to queries with novel predicates, often with only a few
examples (Bendale & Boult, 2015; Joseph et al., 2021; Ha & Song, 2022). For instance, we may
    ∗
        Equal contribution

 Training state classification                       Inferring                            Few-shot novel predicate generalization
                                                Predicate Hierarchy
    NextTo                        Open
                                   Open    Closed
                                            Closed         Touching
                                                            Touching                        OnRight
 (cup, plate)                                                                             (cup, bottle)                       No



                                 Inside
                                  Inside   Contains    NextTo
                                                        NextTo     OnTop
                                                                    OnTop   Under
                                                                            Under   Yes

                                      Learned                                                Closed                           Yes
                                      Novel      OnLeft
                                                  OnLeft     OnRight
                                                              OnRight                       (cabinet)



Figure 1: PHIER improves few-shot state classification, by encoding a predicate hierarchy in joint
image-predicate latent space. By encouraging such structured representations to emerge, PHIER
enables strong few-shot generalization to novel predicates with few examples.
                                                               1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


not only want to classify our trained query of whether the cup is NextTo the plate, but more
specifically, whether the cup is OnRight of the bottle, and whether the cabinet is Closed
(See Figure 1). Hence, an essential but difficult consideration for state classification models is to
quickly learn to adapt to out-of-distribution queries. However, current supervised methods struggle
with few-shot state classification, and pretrained large vision language models fail to accurately
answer challenging spatial relationship queries in robotics environments.
To this end, we propose PHIER, a state classification model that leverages the hierarchical structure be-
tween predicates to few-shot generalize to novel queries. At the core of PHIER is an image-predicate
latent space trained to encode the relationship between pairwise predicates (See Figure 1). Let us
consider the predicates, OnRight and OnLeft—while they describe opposite spatial relationships
between objects, they are closely related semantically, as assessing them relies on the same underlying
features. PHIER enforces image-predicate representations conditioned on these predicates to lie
closer to one another. In addition, there exist predicate pairs with more complex relationships, such
as OnRight and NextTo. We see that OnRight is a more specific case of NextTo—verifying
OnRight involves recognizing whether the objects are NextTo each other. Features relevant to the
higher-level predicate NextTo are therefore useful for reasoning about the lower-level predicate
OnRight. PHIER encodes this predicate hierarchy to allow generalizable state classification.
Such a predicate hierarchy can be used to quickly adapt to unseen object-predicate pairs. For example,
when combining a learned predicate NextTo with the objects apple and microwave, PHIER
uses a learned embedding of the predicate to control the features extracted from the image depicting
an apple and microwave. Notably, for a more challenging state with a novel predicate, such as
OnRight, the model can still adapt by drawing on its relationship to OnLeft and NextTo to
learn relevant features from limited data. PHIER leverages pairwise hierarchical relations between
predicates to efficiently generalize to out-of-distribution predicates with few examples.
To perform state classification, PHIER first localizes relevant objects in the input image based on
a given query, then leverages an inferred predicate hierarchy to structure its reasoning over the
scene. PHIER processes objects and predicates separately, learning to map object representations
conditioned on the predicate into an image-predicate latent space. The hierarchical structure of
predicates is learned through self-supervised losses based on the relationships between predicates
(e.g., OnRight and NextTo). We use a large language model (LLM) to infer the pairwise predicate
relations from language. However, explicit hierarchies inherently assume some discretization over
predicates, which does not align with the continuous nature of representations used in deep learning
(Nickel & Kiela, 2017; Ganea et al., 2018). To address this, we propose using a hyperbolic distance
metric to encode the hierarchical structure of predicates in a continuous manner, enabling PHIER to
effectively incorporate tree-like structure.
We evaluate PHIER on the state classification task in two robotics environments, CALVIN (Mees
et al., 2022) and BEHAVIOR (Li et al., 2023a). Beyond the standard test settings, we focus on few-
shot, out-of-distribution tasks involving unseen object-predicate combinations and novel predicates.
Our results show that PHIER significantly outperforms existing methods, including both supervised
approaches trained on the same amount of data and inference-only vision-language models (VLMs)
trained on large corpora of real-world examples. PHIER improves upon the top-performing prior work
in out-of-distribution tasks by 22.5 percent points on CALVIN and 8.3 percent points on BEHAVIOR.
Notably, trained solely on simulated data, PHIER also outperforms supervised baselines on zero- and
few-shot generalization to real-world state classification tasks by 7 percent points and 10 percent
points respectively. Overall, we see PHIER as a promising solution to few-shot state classification,
enabling generalization by leveraging representations grounded in predicate hierarchies.
In summary, our contributions are the following:
      • We introduce PHIER, a state classification model that encodes inferred predicate hierarchies
        in its latent space, enabling generalization to unseen object-predicate combinations and
        novel predicates with few examples.
      • We propose learning the predicate hierarchy through an object-centric scene encoder, self-
        supervised losses that encourage pairwise predicate relations, and a hyperbolic distance
        metric to model the hierarchical nature of predicates in continuous space.
      • We validate PHIER’s performance in few-shot, out-of-distribution generalization, and
        zero- and few-shot real-world transfer across three state classification datasets. PHIER
        significantly outperforms both supervised baselines and large pretrained VLMs.

                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2    R ELATED W ORK
State classification. The ability to understand object states and relationships is essential for a wide
range of tasks in computer vision and robotics, including scene understanding, robotic manipulation,
and high-level planning (Yao et al., 2018; Yuan et al., 2022). Earlier works that focus on a similar
task of visual relationship detection learn to extract object-centric representations from raw images
and make predictions based on them (Gkioxari et al., 2018; Yao et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2022; Yuan
et al., 2022). A more recent approach by Yuan et al. (2022) specifically addresses state classification
by extracting object-centric embeddings from RGB images and feeding them into trained networks to
classify a set of predefined predicates. However, their approach relies on input images of the objects
of interest and is limited to predicates seen during training, as it requires a separate network for each
predicate. In contrast, our method can few-shot generalize to unseen predicates given only the input
scene and query, without any additional annotations or specific object images.
Recent advancements in robotics simulators have additionally enabled scalable training of state
classification in simulation and subsequent transfer to real-world settings. Simulators such as
CALVIN (Mees et al., 2022) and BEHAVIOR (Li et al., 2023a) offer varying levels of realism and
are widely used in the robotics community to generate large and diverse datasets, supporting data
generation across a broad range of states (Ge et al., 2024). We train our model on such simulators
and show that, compared to prior works, PHIER is significantly more effective at zero- and few-shot
generalization to real-world state classification tasks.
Question-answering approaches. Several key advancements in visual question answering (VQA)
have been driven by the development of pretrained large vision-language models (VLMs). These
models are trained on extensive image and text data, leading to a unified visual-language represen-
tation that can be applied to perform various downstream tasks (Shen et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023b;
OpenAI, 2023). Approaches such as Viper-GPT (Surı́s et al., 2023) further leverage the power of
foundation models by composing LLMs to generate programs that pretrained VLMs can execute.
However, despite their strong general-purpose capabilities, these models still struggle with questions
involving visual and spatial relationships (Tong et al., 2024).
On the other hand, a separate class of VQA methods are models trained directly for the VQA task.
These approaches follow a general framework of extracting visual and textual features, combining
them into a multimodal representation, and learning to predict the answer. Convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) and transformers are widely used for feature extraction, with various techniques
for fusing the features. FiLM (Perez et al., 2018) is an early, modular approach that applies a feature-
wise transformation to condition the image features on the text features, while BUTD (Anderson
et al., 2018) and Re-Attention (Guo et al., 2020) are representative attention-based methods that
localize important regions based on the question. Furthermore, many approaches, including modular,
graph-based, or neurosymbolic approaches, introduce more explicit reasoning to better model the
relationships and interactions between objects (Andreas et al., 2016; Yi et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2022;
Nguyen et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023). Our work lies in this latter class of methods, designed and
trained for state classification. In contrast to prior works, we not only encode visual features and
textual features of predicates but also learn to capture the inherent predicate hierarchy in a joint
image-predicate latent space.
Hyperbolic representations for hierarchy. In recent years, several works have explored the
benefits of using hyperbolic space to model hierarchical relationships, as it is particularly well-
suited for capturing hierarchical structures (Ganea et al., 2018; Nickel & Kiela, 2018). In computer
vision, prior works have focused on learning hyperbolic representations for image embeddings,
demonstrating their effectiveness across various tasks such as semantic segmentation and object
recognition (Khrulkov et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020; Atigh et al., 2022; Ermolov et al., 2022; Ge et al.,
2023). Hyperbolic embeddings allow models to naturally represent hierarchical relationships between
various entities, such as objects and scenes or different categories, leading to improved performance
and generalization in such tasks (Weng et al., 2021; Ge et al., 2023). Several approaches further
incorporate self-supervised learning to learn the underlying hierarchical structure without the need
for explicit labels, instead leveraging proxy tasks such as contrastive learning (Hsu et al., 2021; Ge
et al., 2023; Yue et al., 2023). Recently, Desai et al. (2023) proposed a contrastive method to learn
joint representations of vision and language in hyperbolic space, yielding a representation space that
captures the underlying structure between images and text. Inspired by these works, PHIER learns a
predicate hierarchy in hyperbolic space informed by language and the pairwise relations between
predicates, and uses it to conduct few-shot generalization to unseen state classification queries.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Image and Predicate Encoder   Image-Predicate Space on Poincaré Ball         Self-Supervised Losses
                                                                                        Predicate Triplet Loss
           NextTo      Predicate                                                                                               Negative
                                                                                         Anchor             Positive
                       Encoder
 NextTo                                                Predicate                        NextTo              OnLeft              Inside
 (cup,                                                 Hierarchy                                        d = 0.4
 plate)    O=(cup,                                                                                                         d = 0.9
             plate)                                                              LLM                                                           Yes
                                                NextTo
                                                                   Inside
                        Image              OnLeft
                                                                                        Norm Regularization Loss
                       Encoder
                                                                                         NextTo             Inside              OnLeft
                                                                                         ||⋅|| = 0.65   <   ||⋅|| = 0.80   <    ||⋅|| = 0.99


Figure 2: PHIER consists of three main components. The first are disentangled image and predicate
encoders, which separately extract features based on the objects and predicates in the state classi-
fication query. The second is a self-supervised learning process that injects explicit knowledge of
pairwise predicate relations into the image-predicate latent space. The third is the use of a hyperbolic
distance metric and encoder to encourage encoding of the inferred predicate hierarchy. Together, these
components enable few-shot generalization to unseen object-predicate pairs and novel predicates.


3     M ETHOD

In this section, we describe PHIER, our model for generalizable state classification. We define
PHIER’s task as a binary state classification problem: given a 2D RGB image and a text query
describing a state (e.g., NextTo(cup, plate), the goal is to predict whether the predicate
NextTo holds True or False for the objects, cup and plate, in the input image. PHIER enables
efficient generalization to unseen predicates, by way of inferring a structured latent space of image-
predicate pairs to perform reasoning over (See Figure 2). At the core of our method is a predicate
hierarchy that captures the semantic relationships between predicates. This hierarchical structure is
inferred through three key components:

      1. An object-centric scene encoder that localizes regions corresponding to relevant objects;
      2. Self-supervised losses that inject pairwise relations of predicates into the latent space;
      3. A hyperbolic distance metric and an encoder that model hierarchical representations.

In Section 3.1, we describe PHIER’s base architecture of object and predicate conditioning. In
Section 3.2, we introduce self-supervised losses that encourage representations to cluster based on
pairwise predicate relationships. In Section 3.3, we detail how PHIER learns hierarchical representa-
tions by embedding representations in hyperbolic space.

3.1   O BJECT-C ENTRIC I MAGE E NCODER

PHIER extracts an object-centric scene representation by conditioning the input image I on the
query. Assume the input query is NextTo(cup, plate). PHIER first parses it into its objects
O = {cup, plate} and predicate P = NextTo. Then, PHIER separately conditions the latent
space on both of these components (See Figure 2). By disentangling the full state classification query,
we ensure that PHIER faithfully identifies the relevant entities; it then learns to focus on their key
features for the given predicate’s classification.
Object conditioning. The goal of object conditioning is to localize regions of the image that
correspond to the relevant objects in the query. This allows PHIER to focus on the objects of interest
for predicting the downstream predicate condition. To encode an input image I on the objects O, our
encoder Eimg generates an object-conditioned image mask M(I, O) that highlights image regions
based on the relevant entities, following Zhou et al. (2022). At a high level, we extract features
for the image and object texts, align the image features with each object text’s features to generate
individual object masks, and then encode the image based on these masks. Concretely, for each object
o ∈ O, we use a CLIP image encoder V and text encoder T (Radford et al., 2021) to obtain image
features V(I) ∈ RD                                       D
                   1 and object text features T (o) ∈ R2 , where D1 , D2 correspond to the visual and
language embedding dimensions, respectively.


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To align the image and text features, we first project the image features into the same space as the
text features. In order to preserve the spatial structure of the image features, we initialize a 1 × 1
convolution layer C with weights from the last linear layer of the CLIP attention pooling mechanism
and apply this to the image features. Then, we apply a convolution ⊗ on the image features, using the
text features as filters. This directly aligns image regions with the object text, highlighting the parts
of the image that are the most relevant to the query. Our resulting object mask M(I, o) is defined as
                                     M(I, o) = C(V(I)) ⊗ T (o).

To obtain the final image mask, we upsample each object mask to the original image dimensions,
normalize the values to the range [0, 1], and take the element-wise max across the individual object
masks. We then apply the final mask to our image using a Hadamard product ⊙ and subsequently
encode the masked image using a pretrained vision transformer (ViT) encoder (Dosovitskiy, 2020)
EViT as follows:
                     Eimg (I, O) = EViT (I ⊙ max(norm(upsample(M(I, o))))).
                                              o∈O
This ensures that the representation encodes all relevant regions based on the specified objects.
Predicate conditioning. Next, PHIER conditions the latent representation Eimg (I, O) on the text
predicate P, to focus on features essential to the downstream classification task. To do so, we encode
the predicate text P using a pre-trained BERT encoder Etext (Devlin, 2018) and concatenate this with
the masked image, resulting in a final object-centric scene representation:
                             E(I, O, P) = concat(Eimg (I, O), Etext (P)),
which incorporates both object features and context relevant to the predicate.

3.2   S ELF -S UPERVISED L EARNING

PHIER learns a joint image-predicate space that encodes an inferred predicate hierarchy with self-
supervised losses. In particular, a specific predicate such as OnLeft is encouraged to be close to a
related, more general predicate such as NextTo, as features important to closer predicates tend to be
more alike. At the same time, OnLeft should have a larger norm than NextTo, to reflect its lower
position in the hierarchy. This ensures that the features that are learned to be relevant to higher-level
predicates remain useful when reasoning about their lower-level children.
We introduce two self-supervised losses to encourage such pairwise relationships: a predicate triplet
loss based on the similarity between predicates and a norm regularization loss based on the hierarchy
between predicates. For both losses, we sample triplets with unique corresponding predicates and then
extract knowledge from an LLM to determine the underlying relationships between the predicates.
Predicate triplet loss. Given a predicate triplet with an anchor a, positive p, and negative n sample,
the triplet loss encourages the distance between the anchor and negative predicate to be at least some
margin λ greater than the distance between the anchor and positive predicate. In Figure 2, we see
that NextTo is the anchor predicate, OnLeft is the positive sample, and Inside is the negative
sample. The proper assignment of the samples is critical, as it directly affects how faithfully the
model learns the relationship between predicate pairs. To determine the anchor, positive, and negative
sample for any given predicate triplet, we query an LLM based on the semantic meanings and scene
details described by each query. More concretely, for each triplet, we prompt the LLM to assess the
underlying relationships between the predicates. One predicate in the triplet is randomly chosen as
the anchor. The LLM is asked to determine which of the other two predicates is more similar to the
anchor. The anchor and the more similar predicate form a positive pair, while the anchor and the less
similar predicate form a negative pair. We provide the prompt template provided in Appendix D. By
extracting knowledge from an LLM, we leverage the LLM’s explicit and extensive understanding of
predicate relationships to produce meaningful triplets and guide the model toward a semantically rich
image-predicate latent space.
Our formulation of the triplet loss is based on the distance between representations:
                         Ltriplet,λ (a, p, n) := max(0, d(a, p) − d(a, n) + λ),
where d is the distance metric used in the latent space. We describe our choice of a hyperbolic
distance metric in the following section. With this loss and chosen distance metric, the resulting
representation space captures the similarity between predicates via their distance in the latent space.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Norm regularization loss. While the triplet loss enforces similarity between related predicates,
the norm regularization term introduces hierarchical structure to the latent space. We leverage the
LLM’s strong semantic understanding of predicates to infer the hierarchy among a triplet, by ranking
the predicates based on specificity. Specificity depends on several factors, including the variety
and number of objects required by the state, the important features of the objects and relationships
between the objects, the level of detail required by the state, and the semantic meaning of each
description. The prompt template is provided in Appendix D.
Given a ranking of three predicates a, b, c from least to most specific, the regularization loss encour-
ages the norm to increase by at least some margin γ as the specificity increases:

                Lreg,γ (a, b, c) := max(0, ||b|| − ||a|| + γ + max(0, ||c|| − ||b|| + γ).

Intuitively, the regularization loss ensures that the norms of the representations reflect the implicit
hierarchy between predicates.
Together, the predicate triplet loss and norm regularization loss encourage a semantically rich and
structured representation space. The predicate triplet loss captures the similarity between predicates by
enforcing appropriate distances between related predicates, while the norm regularization loss ensures
that the hierarchical relationships are reflected in the norm of the representations. By leveraging
the explicit knowledge of an LLM to infer both the triplet assignments and hierarchy ranking, our
approach ensures that PHIER’s learned representations align with the underlying predicate ontology.


3.3   H YPERBOLIC I MAGE -P REDICATE L ATENT S PACE

Finally, PHIER effectively learns this inferred hierarchy of predicates through hyperbolic repre-
sentations. While PHIER’s self-supervised losses inject semantic knowledge of predicates into its
representations, PHIER further encodes the hierarchical nature of the predicates in hyperbolic space.
In hyperbolic space, we can more easily visualize these relationships forming a natural predicate
hierarchy. In Figure 2, we visualize a learned predicate hierarchy in PHIER’s latent space.
Hyperbolic space is a non-Euclidean space characterized by constant negative curvature, which
allows hierarchical structure to be easily embedded. Due to hyperbolic space’s curvature, the area of
a disc increases exponentially with its radius, analogous to the exponential branching of trees. This
property makes hyperbolic space well-suited for modeling hierarchies, as it provides a continuous
representation of discrete trees. Furthermore, hyperbolic space is differentiable, making it easy to
integrate with our model. Hence, we propose using a hyperbolic distance metric for our predicate
triplet loss and norm regularization loss to more effectively encode the predicate hierarchy. These
hierarchical representations enable PHIER to generalize effectively to novel predicates, by inferring
their representations based on their relationships to learned predicates in the hyperbolic latent space.
Poincaré ball model. In this work, we use the Poincaré ball model of hyperbolic space. The Poincaré
ball is an open d-dimensional ball of radius 1, equipped with the metric tensor gp = (λx )2 ge . Here,
                                         2
|| · || is the Euclidean norm, λx = 1−||x|| 2 is the conformal factor, and ge is the Euclidean metric

tensor (i.e., the Euclidean dot product). This induces the distance dp between two points x, y on the
Poincaré ball as
                                                            ||x − y||2

                         dp (x, y) = cosh−1 1 + 2                                 .
                                                     (1 − ||x||2 )(1 − ||y||2 )

On the Poincaré ball, the distance between two points captures the degree of similarity between them,
while the relative norm of two points reflects their hierarchical structure. Thus, the Poincaré ball is a
suitable space to represent the underlying predicate hierarchy, and PHIER’s self-supervised losses
use such metrics to embed image-predicates onto the Poincaré ball.
Hyperbolic encoder. To obtain the hyperbolic image-predicate representation, we use the exponential
map to lift the representation from Euclidean space onto the Poincaré ball and pass it through a small
hyperbolic linear network (Ganea et al., 2018). For more details on these functions, we refer the
reader to Appendix C.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  OnTop(pink    OnTop(blue   Inside(blue    Inside(blue
                 Open(drawer)   Open(slider)    block, table) block, table) block, slider) block, drawer)


    CALVIN


                                                 OnTop(coffee   OnTop(plate,   Inside(apple, Inside(coffee
                 Open(drawer) Open(microwave)    cup, table)       table)         cabinet)    cup, drawer)


 BEHAVIOR


                                                OnTop(bottle,   OnTop(cup,     Inside(bottle, Inside(coffee
                 Open(drawer)   Open(cabinet)       table)        table)         microwave)    cup, drawer)


    Real world


Figure 3: Examples of state classification tasks from CALVIN and BEHAVIOR. The datasets span a
range of visual realism and complexity.

3.4      T RAINING L OSS

After the hierarchical representation is learned in hyperbolic space, we apply the logarithmic map to
project it back to Euclidean space, where it is passed through a small MLP for state classification.
We train PHIER with a binary cross entropy loss based on the ground truth labels (True or False),
along with the predicate triplet loss and the norm regularization loss. Our overall loss is defined
as Ltotal := Lsup + αLtriplet,λ + βLreg,γ , where α, β are coefficients that control the strength of the
triplet and regularization losses, and λ, γ are the margins for the two losses, respectively.

4      DATASET

We evaluate PHIER on established robotics environments, with three state classification datasets
designed to test the following key aspects of performance: a faithful understanding of entities and
relations between them, few-shot generalization to out-of-distribution queries, and zero- and few-shot
transfer to a real-world setting. See Figure 3 for examples from each of the environments.
Simulator dataset generation. In order to evaluate our method’s state classification performance on
robotic environments, we generate datasets of varying levels of realism with two widely used robotics
simulators, CALVIN (Mees et al., 2022) and BEHAVIOR (Li et al., 2023a). Both are known for their
ease of use and customizability, allowing us to generate diverse data for various states with different
objects under various lighting, camera angle, and object pose conditions. As shown in Figure 3,
CALVIN is visually simplistic while BEHAVIOR is more realistic and complex. By evaluating on
data from these two simulators, we assess how well various methods understand the semantics of
different predicates.
Simulator dataset details. To evaluate the effectiveness of our inferred abstraction hierarchy, we
define sets of in-distribution and out-of-distribution states, featuring both unary and binary relations.
The out-of-distribution states involve unseen predicate-object combinations and novel predicates. See
Appendix E for the states in each dataset. We train on a balanced dataset of 200 examples (100 True,
100 False) for each in-distribution state. We then evaluate on balanced test sets of 50 examples for
each state under both in-distribution and out-of-distribution settings.
Real-world dataset. In addition, we evaluate on BEHAVIOR Vision Suite (Ge et al., 2024) (see
Figure 3), a complex real-world benchmark that consists of diverse scenes and distractor objects.
Specifically, compared to our train data, this one consists of 10 unseen combinations and 10 novel
predicates, with 337 total examples. We use this dataset to test our method’s ability to perform zero-
and few-shot real-world transfer after training on simulated datasets alone.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparison of PHIER to prior works on CALVIN and BEHAVIOR datasets. We compare
against trained models (T) and inference-only models pretrained on large-scale data (I). In this table,
we report in-distribution (ID) test accuracy, out-of-distibution (OOD) test accuracy, and the difference
in performance between the two test sets (ID-OOD). PHIER significantly outperforms prior work in
the OOD setting; it is also the only method that performs similarly in ID and OOD settings.

                                                   CALVIN                         BEHAVIOR
                                         ID ↑    OOD ↑      ID-OOD ↓      ID ↑    OOD ↑     ID-OOD ↓
 PHIER (Ours)                       T   0.945     0.899      0.046       0.859    0.820       0.039
 Re-Attention (Guo et al., 2020)    T   0.959     0.674       0.285      0.828     0.652      0.176
 CoarseFine (Nguyen et al., 2022)   T   0.878     0.624       0.254      0.766     0.636      0.130
 BUTD (Anderson et al., 2018)       T   0.898     0.585       0.313      0.808     0.712      0.096
 RelViT (Ma et al., 2022)           T   0.688     0.563       0.125      0.866     0.737      0.129
 CLIP (Shen et al., 2021)           T   0.937     0.546       0.391      0.722     0.632      0.090
 FiLM (Perez et al., 2018)          T   0.798     0.489       0.309      0.753     0.583      0.170
 SORNet (Yuan et al., 2022)         T   0.943       –           –        0.773       –          –
 GPT-4V (OpenAI, 2023)              I   0.587     0.563      0.024       0.661     0.706     −0.045
 BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023b)          I   0.553     0.556      −0.003      0.554     0.535     0.019
 ViperGPT (Surı́s et al., 2023)     I   0.466     0.475      −0.009      0.552     0.583     −0.031


5     R ESULTS

We evaluate PHIER on the three datasets and compare against 10 state-of-the art models, with our
evaluation metric as binary state classification accuracy. Our experiments show that PHIER’s learned
predicate hierarchy leads to significantly improved performance, especially in the challenging settings
of few-shot, out-of-distribution generalization as well as zero- and few-shot, real-world transfer.

5.1   I MPLEMENTATION

PHIER. For our model, we use the CLIP image encoder, CLIP text encoder, and BERT text encoder
as our image, object text, and predicate text encoders, respectively. Our hyperbolic encoder consists
of two hyperbolic linear layers with output dimensions of 256 and 128, and the final small MLP is
a single layer. We use α = 0.05 as our triplet loss coefficient, λ = 10.0 as our triplet loss margin,
β = 1.0 as our regularization loss coefficient, and γ = 0.1 as our regularization margin. We train
all models for 50 epochs using the AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 1e−4 using a gradual
warmup scheduler and cosine annealing decay. For the few-shot setting, we provide 5 examples of
each novel predicate and train for 20 epochs with the same optimizer and learning rate.
Baselines. We use 10 state-of-the-art methods as baselines, ranging from supervised methods to
pretrained large vision language models (VLMs). Of the supervised methods, RelViT (Ma et al., 2022)
and SORNet (Yuan et al., 2022) are recent methods designed with a focus on state classification, while
Re-Attention (Guo et al., 2020), Coarse-to-Fine (Nguyen et al., 2022), BUTD (Anderson et al., 2018),
finetuned CLIP (Shen et al., 2021), and FiLM (Perez et al., 2018) are top-performing general VQA
methods. The supervised models are all trained on the same data as PHIER, while the pretrained large
VLMs, BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023b), GPT-4V(OpenAI, 2023), and ViperGPT (Surı́s et al., 2023), are
run inference-only. All methods are evaluated on both in-distribution and out-of-distribution queries,
except for SORNet as its architecture does not allow classification of unseen states. Additional details
on our baselines are provided in Appendix B.

5.2   C OMPARISON TO P RIOR W ORK

Few-shot generalization accuracy. In Table 1, we show comparisons of PHIER and prior work
on CALVIN and BEHAVIOR datasets, in the 5-shot generalization setting. We split prior works
into trained supervised methods (T) and inference-only pretrained VLMs (I). While PHIER yields
comparable performance to top-performing prior works on the in-distribution test set, PHIER signifi-
cantly outperforms all methods on the out-of-distribution test set. PHIER demonstrates a 22.5 percent


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Detailed breakdown of CALVIN and BEHAVIOR out-of-distribution results with accuracy
on unseen object-predicates combinations and novel predicates.

                                  CALVIN                                   BEHAVIOR
                    All     Unseen Comb.      Novel Pred.      All     Unseen Comb.      Novel Pred.
 PHIER (Ours)      0.899        0.922            0.863       0.820         0.831            0.807
 Re-Attention      0.674         0.777           0.612        0.652        0.718            0.581
 CoarseFine        0.624         0.665           0.557        0.636        0.670            0.600
 BUTD              0.585         0.622           0.563        0.712        0.766            0.653
 RelViT            0.563         0.591           0.515        0.737        0.793            0.676
 CLIP              0.546         0.596           0.463        0.632        0.684            0.576
 FiLM              0.489         0.538           0.406        0.583        0.652            0.508

point improvement compared to the top-performing prior work in the out-of-distribution CALVIN
setting, and a 8.3 percent point improvement in the out-of-distribution BEHAVIOR setting. Notably,
PHIER sees a low drop in accuracy between in-distribution and out-of-distribution test sets, which
we hypothesize is due to PHIER’s structured representation space enabling generalization. We report
more detailed results in Table 2, specifically the out-of-distribution accuracy of few-shot unseen
object-predicate pairs and novel predicates. We see that for both categories of generalization, PHIER
significantly outperforms prior works. On CALVIN, PHIER improves upon the top-performing prior
work by 25.1 percent points in few-shot generalization to novel predicates. On BEHAVIOR, we see a
13.1 percent point improvement.
Real world zero- and few-shot transfer accuracy. In Table 3, we report the zero- and few-shot,
real-world transfer results of models trained on the simulated BEHAVIOR dataset, and tested on the
BEHAVIOR Vision Suite (Ge et al., 2024), a complex real-world benchmark. We compare PHIER
with previous supervised methods, which have seen the same amount of train data, and find that
PHIER significantly outperforms prior works on this challenging sim-to-real task across both zero-
and few-shot settings. We conjecture that this is because PHIER learns more robust features for
images—only features core to the specified state classification task are captured, and hence enables
PHIER to generalize and remain invariant to the visual details in the real world. We additionally
include results from pre-trained models, though we note that these models are our upper bound, as
they are trained on large-scale real-world datasets with vast amounts of diverse data. Hence, these
models inherently do not differentiate between in-distribution and generalization scenarios, as their
training data overlaps significantly with both. We see that PHIER outperforms ViperGPT and BLIP-2
by 6.0% and 1.4% respectively on PHIER’s zero-shot setting, showing the potential for a small model
trained on significantly less data, to reach the performance level of large pre-trained models. However,
GPT-4v outperforms PHIER by 10.4%. which we hypothesize is due to its model size and dataset
scale. In the few-shot setting using only two examples, PHIER’s performance improves significantly
and narrows the gap with GPT-4v to just 0.9%. This further demonstrates that PHIER’s inferred
predicate hierarchy enables it to generalize efficiently to novel queries.

5.3   A BLATIONS

We ablate the components of PHIER in Table 4. Specifically, we begin by reporting the out-of-
distribution results of a supervised model for state classification. We then test variants of PHIER,
progressively adding each component: our object-centric encoder, predicate triplet loss, norm
regularization, and finally the full model with the hyperbolic distance metric.
We see that each component encourages a structured and semantically relevant latent space for
out-of-distribution generalization. The object-centric encoder localizes relevant objects in the scene,
improving performance by 15.4 and 13.7 percent points on CALVIN and BEHAVIOR, respectively.
Adding the predicate triplet loss helps PHIER encode pairwise relationships between predicates,
improving performance by 13.1 and 8.2 percent point on CALVIN and BEHAVIOR. The addition of
the norm regularization loss introduces hierarchical structure into the latent space, further improving
performance by 6.5 and 4.7 percent points. Finally, we highlight the full PHIER equipped with the
hyperbolic metric, which further enforces a tree-like hierarchy to emerge in latent space and yields
the strongest generalization performance.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: We present zero- and few-shot generalization results on a real-world test set, when trained
only on the BEHAVIOR dataset. PHIER outperforms all prior supervised models.
                                 Zero-shot                                  Few-shot
                     All    Unseen Comb.      Novel Pred.        All   Unseen Comb.     Novel Pred.
 PHIER (Ours)      0.608        0.632            0.585       0.703        0.714            0.691
 Re-Attention      0.377         0.415           0.341       0.413         0.458           0.368
 CoarseFine        0.490         0.485           0.494       0.553         0.562           0.543
 BUTD              0.418         0.427           0.409       0.456         0.464           0.448
 RelViT            0.556         0.579           0.528       0.603         0.654           0.552
 CLIP              0.516         0.544           0.489       0.571         0.674           0.468
 FiLM              0.459         0.480           0.438       0.513         0.542           0.484
 GPT-4V            0.712         0.737           0.688        −−            −−              −−
 BLIP-2            0.594         0.591           0.597        −−            −−              −−
 ViperGPT          0.548         0.538           0.557        −−            −−              −−

      Table 4: Ablations of each component of PHIER and its effect on few-shot generalization.
                                                   CALVIN OOD          BEHAVIOR OOD
             Supervised model                            0.473              0.516
              + Object-centric encoder                   0.627              0.653
               + Predicate triplet loss                  0.758              0.735
                + Norm regularization loss               0.823              0.782
                 + Hyperbolic metric (PHIER)             0.899              0.830

5.4    D ISCUSSION

We propose PHIER as a framework for incorporating predicate hierarchies into the latent space of
state classification models. One important design decision is how explicitly the hierarchy should be
enforced—PHIER softly encourages this structure with self-supervised losses, but does not impose
hard constraints on the model’s forward pass. We designed PHIER in this way, in order to allow
hierarchical structure to emerge in the hyperbolic latent space based on the data, and capture more
nuanced structure than a strict, discrete predicate hierarchy could. Quantitatively, we see that PHIER
retains the ability to perform well on generalization tests, while qualitatively, we can visualize
PHIER’s learned predicate hierarchy in the latent space.
We note that PHIER is potentially limited by the accuracy of the language model in determining
pairwise predicate relations. In this paper, we assume that language itself can differentiate the
relationship between predicates, but there may be cases where visual cues from data also matter.
Empirically, on the datasets we tested, we see that the LLM’s predictions match our expectations of
what the predicate hierarchy should be. Additionally, as PHIER’s enforcement of this hierarchy is not
explicit, it is still possible for PHIER to learn from data when the language model is incorrect. As
a future direction, exploring environments where the dataset for state classification yields a unique
predicate hierarchy, which we can encode through explicit enforcement in the model’s forward
pass, would showcase the effect of an explicitly hierarchical version of PHIER in generalization.
In addition, exploring ways of training a model to infer the pairwise predicate relations with weak
supervision, instead of injecting relation priors through a language model, could potentially give rise
to a fully emergent and discovered predicate hierarchy.

6     C ONCLUSION
PHIER tackles the challenge of few-shot out-of-distribution state classification by encoding predicate
hierarchies into its latent space. Our proposed model, PHIER, learns language-informed image-
predicate representations to generalize to novel predicates with few examples. Our experiments on
CALVIN, BEHAVIOR, and a real-world test set demonstrate that PHIER significantly improves upon
existing methods, particularly in highly difficult generalization cases. We show that using predicate
hierarchies is a promising approach to enable more robust and adaptable state classification.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Weiyu Liu for providing valuable feedback. This work is in part supported by ONR
N00014-23-1-2355, ONR YIP N00014-24-1-2117, ONR MURI N00014-22-1-2740, ONR MURI
N00014-24-1-2748, NSF RI #2211258, and AFOSR YIP FA9550-23-1-0127. JH is also supported
by the Knight Hennessy Scholarship and the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship.

R EFERENCES
Peter Anderson, Xiaodong He, Chris Buehler, Damien Teney, Mark Johnson, Stephen Gould, and Lei
  Zhang. Bottom-up and Top-down Attention for Image Captioning and Visual Question Answering.
  In CVPR, 2018.
Jacob Andreas, Marcus Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and Dan Klein. Neural Module Networks. In
  CVPR, 2016.
Mina Ghadimi Atigh, Julian Schoep, Erman Acar, Nanne van Noord, and Pascal Mettes. Hyperbolic
 Image Segmentation. In CVPR, 2022.
Abhijit Bendale and Terrance Boult. Towards Open World Recognition. In CVPR, 2015.
James W Cannon, William J Floyd, Richard Kenyon, Walter R Parry, et al. Hyperbolic Geometry.
  Flavors of Geometry, 1997.
Ines Chami, Albert Gu, Vaggos Chatziafratis, and Christopher Ré. From Trees to Continuous
  Embeddings and Back: Hyperbolic Hierarchical Clustering. NeurIPS, 2020.
Boyuan Chen, Zhuo Xu, Sean Kirmani, Brain Ichter, Dorsa Sadigh, Leonidas Guibas, and Fei Xia.
  SpatialVLM: Endowing Vision-Language Models with Spatial Reasoning Capabilities. In CVPR,
  2024.
Karan Desai, Maximilian Nickel, Tanmay Rajpurohit, Justin Johnson, and Shanmukha Ramakrishna
  Vedantam. Hyperbolic Image-text Representations. In ICML, 2023.
Jacob Devlin. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Alexey Dosovitskiy. An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Anna Dyubina and Iosif Polterovich. Explicit Constructions of Universal R-Trees and Asymptotic
  Geometry of Hyperbolic Spaces. Bulletin of the London Mathematical Society, 2001.
Aleksandr Ermolov, Leyla Mirvakhabova, Valentin Khrulkov, Nicu Sebe, and Ivan Oseledets. Hyper-
  bolic Vision Transformers: Combining Improvements in Metric Learning. In CVPR, 2022.
Octavian Ganea, Gary Bécigneul, and Thomas Hofmann. Hyperbolic Neural Networks. In NeurIPS,
  2018.
Songwei Ge, Shlok Mishra, Simon Kornblith, Chun-Liang Li, and David Jacobs. Hyperbolic
  Contrastive Learning for Visual Representations Beyond Objects. In CVPR, 2023.
Yunhao Ge, Yihe Tang, Jiashu Xu, Cem Gokmen, Chengshu Li, Wensi Ai, Benjamin Jose Martinez,
  Arman Aydin, Mona Anvari, Ayush K Chakravarthy, et al. BEHAVIOR Vision Suite: Customizable
  Dataset Generation via Simulation. In CVPR, 2024.
Georgia Gkioxari, Ross Girshick, Piotr Dollár, and Kaiming He. Detecting and Recognizing Human-
  object Interactions. In CVPR, 2018.
Mikhael Gromov. Hyperbolic Groups. In Essays in group theory. Springer, 1987.
Wenya Guo, Ying Zhang, Xiaoping Wu, Jufeng Yang, Xiangrui Cai, and Xiaojie Yuan. Re-Attention
 for Visual Question Answering. In AAAI, 2020.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Huy Ha and Shuran Song. Semantic Abstraction: Open-World 3D Scene Understanding from 2D
 Vision-Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.11514, 2022.
Matthias Hamann. On the Tree-Likeness of Hyperbolic Spaces. In Mathematical proceedings of the
 cambridge philosophical society. Cambridge University Press, 2018.
Joy Hsu, Jeffrey Gu, Gong-Her Wu, Wah Chiu, and Serena Yeung. Capturing Implicit Hierarchical
  Structure in 3D Biomedical Images with Self-supervised Hyperbolic Representations, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.01644.
KJ Joseph, Salman Khan, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and Vineeth N Balasubramanian. Towards Open
  World Object Detection. In CVPR, 2021.
Aishwarya Kamath, Mannat Singh, Yann LeCun, Gabriel Synnaeve, Ishan Misra, and Nicolas Carion.
  MDETR: Modulated Detection for End-to-end Multi-modal Understanding. In ICCV, 2021.
Valentin Khrulkov, Leyla Mirvakhabova, Evgeniya Ustinova, Ivan Oseledets, and Victor Lempitsky.
  Hyperbolic Image Embeddings. In CVPR, 2020.
Max Kochurov, Rasul Karimov, and Serge Kozlukov. Geoopt: Riemannian Optimization in PyTorch,
 2020.
Chengshu Li, Ruohan Zhang, Josiah Wong, Cem Gokmen, Sanjana Srivastava, Roberto Martı́n-
  Martı́n, Chen Wang, Gabrael Levine, Michael Lingelbach, Jiankai Sun, Mona Anvari, Minjune
  Hwang, Manasi Sharma, Arman Aydin, Dhruva Bansal, Samuel Hunter, Kyu-Young Kim, Alan
  Lou, Caleb R Matthews, Ivan Villa-Renteria, Jerry Huayang Tang, Claire Tang, Fei Xia, Silvio
  Savarese, Hyowon Gweon, Karen Liu, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. BEHAVIOR-1K: A Benchmark
  for Embodied AI with 1,000 Everyday Activities and Realistic Simulation. In Karen Liu, Dana
  Kulic, and Jeff Ichnowski (eds.), PMLR, 2023a.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping Language-image
  Pre-training with Frozen Image Encoders and Large Language Models. In ICML, 2023b.
Shaoteng Liu, Jingjing Chen, Liangming Pan, Chong-Wah Ngo, Tat-Seng Chua, and Yu-Gang Jiang.
  Hyperbolic Visual Embedding Learning for Zero-shot Recognition. In CVPR, 2020.
Xiaojian Ma, Weili Nie, Zhiding Yu, Huaizu Jiang, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Song-Chun Zhu, and
  Anima Anandkumar. RelViT: Concept-guided Vision Transformer for Visual Relational Reasoning,
  2022.
Oier Mees, Lukas Hermann, Erick Rosete-Beas, and Wolfram Burgard. CALVIN: A Benchmark for
  Language-Conditioned Policy Learning for Long-Horizon Robot Manipulation Tasks. IEEE, 2022.
Toki Migimatsu and Jeannette Bohg. Grounding Predicates Through Actions. In ICRA, 2022.
Binh X. Nguyen, Tuong Do, Huy Tran, Erman Tjiputra, Quang D. Tran, and Anh Nguyen. Coarse-
  To-Fine Reasoning for Visual Question Answering. In CVPR, 2022.
Maximillian Nickel and Douwe Kiela. Poincaré Embeddings for Learning Hierarchical Representa-
 tions. NeurIPS, 2017.
Maximillian Nickel and Douwe Kiela. Learning Continuous Hierarchies in the Lorentz Model of
 Hyperbolic Geometry. In ICML, 2018.
OpenAI. ChatGPT Can Now See, Hear, and Speak.                 https://openai.com/blog/
  chatgpt-can-now-see-hear-and-speak, 2023.
Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm de Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron C. Courville. FiLM: Visual
  Reasoning with a General Conditioning Layer. In AAAI, 2018.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning Transferable Visual
  Models from Natural Language Supervision. In ICML, 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Frederic Sala, Chris De Sa, Albert Gu, and Christopher Ré. Representation Tradeoffs for Hyperbolic
  Embeddings. In ICML, 2018.
Sheng Shen, Liunian Harold Li, Hao Tan, Mohit Bansal, Anna Rohrbach, Kai-Wei Chang, Zhewei
  Yao, and Kurt Keutzer. How Much can CLIP Benefit Vision-and-language Tasks? arXiv preprint,
  2021.
Ryohei Shimizu, Yusuke Mukuta, and Tatsuya Harada. Hyperbolic Neural Networks++. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2006.08210, 2020.
Dı́dac Surı́s, Sachit Menon, and Carl Vondrick. ViperGPT: Visual Inference via Python Execution for
   Reasoning. In ICCV, 2023.
Alexandru Tifrea, Gary Bécigneul, and Octavian-Eugen Ganea. Poincare Glove: Hyperbolic Word
  Embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.06546, 2018.
Shengbang Tong, Zhuang Liu, Yuexiang Zhai, Yi Ma, Yann LeCun, and Saining Xie. Eyes Wide
  Shut? Exploring the Visual Shortcomings of Multimodal LLMs. In CVPR, 2024.
Yanan Wang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Hongyu Ren, Shinya Wada, and Jure Leskovec. VQA-GNN: Rea-
  soning with Multimodal Knowledge via Graph Neural Networks for Visual Question Answering.
  In ICCV, 2023.
Zhenzhen Weng, Mehmet Giray Ogut, Shai Limonchik, and Serena Yeung. Unsupervised discovery
  of the long-tail in instance segmentation using hierarchical self-supervision. In CVPR, 2021.
Ting Yao, Yingwei Pan, Yehao Li, and Tao Mei. Exploring Visual Relationship for Image Captioning.
  In ECCV, 2018.
Kexin Yi, Jiajun Wu, Chuang Gan, Antonio Torralba, Pushmeet Kohli, and Josh Tenenbaum. Neural-
  symbolic VQA: Disentangling Reasoning from Vision and Language Understanding. In NeurIPS,
  2018.
Zhou Yu, Jing Li, Tongan Luo, and Jun Yu. A PyTorch Implementation of Bottom-Up-Attention.
  https://github.com/MILVLG/bottom-up-attention.pytorch, 2020.
Wentao Yuan, Chris Paxton, Karthik Desingh, and Dieter Fox. SORNet: Spatial Object-centric
 Representations for Sequential Manipulation. In CoRL, 2022.
Yun Yue, Fangzhou Lin, Kazunori D Yamada, and Ziming Zhang. Hyperbolic Contrastive Learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01409, 2023.
Chong Zhou, Chen Change Loy, and Bo Dai. Extract Free Dense Labels from CLIP. In ECCV, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S UPPLEMENTARY FOR :
P REDICATE H IERARCHIES I MPROVE F EW-S HOT
S TATE C LASSIFICATION
The appendix is organized as the following. In Appendix A, we include additional PHIER results,
details, and discussion. In Appendix B, we describe implementation of baseline methods, including
supervised models, pretrained large vision language models, and ablation variants. In Appendix C,
we present preliminaries on hyperbolic geometry. In Appendix D, we detail prompts used to extract
knowledge of predicates from LLMs. Finally, in Appendix E, we list all states in our datasets, and
show examples from the BEHAVIOR Vision Suite Ge et al. (2024).


A     PHIER R ESULTS AND D ETAILS

A.1    M ODEL D ETAILS

PHIER’s image and text encoders are initialized with pretrained CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and
BERT (Devlin, 2018) weights, respectively. The hyperbolic linear layers are initialized following the
approach of Shimizu et al. (2020), with the weights drawn from a normal distribution centered at
                                         1
zero with a standard deviation (2nm)− 2 , where m and n are the input and output sizes of the layer,
and the biases set to the zero vector. The linear layer in the small MLP is initialized by the standard
Kaiming initialization. All of the parameters in PHIER are trainable and updated during training.
PHIER disentangles the conditioning of the image on the full state classification query into two
distinct ones: one that identifies the relevant objects and another that focuses on key features for
the given predicate. While we use MaskCLIP to identify the relevant entities, PHIER’s contribution
lies in the decomposition of the query into object and predicate components, enabling it to faithfully
identify the relevant entities and extract features based on the predicate.

A.2    C OMPARISON ON M ANUALLY C OLLECTED R EAL - WORLD DATASET

We collect a small real-world dataset with 100 examples, consisting of 4 examples for each of the
out-of-distribution BEHAVIOR states, to test our method’s ability to perform zero-shot real-world
transfer after training on simulated datasets alone. See Figure 4 for examples. In Table ??, we
observe similar trends as in the BEHAVIOR Vision Suite evaluation in the main text, even with a
simpler dataset. PHIER significantly outperforms prior supervised baselines. However, as expected,
pre-trained models trained on large-scale real-world data outperform PHIER.

                                             OnTop(coffee   OnTop(plate,   Inside(apple, Inside(coffee
              Open(drawer) Open(microwave)   cup, table)       table)         cabinet)    cup, drawer)


 Real world


                Figure 4: Examples from our manually collected real-world dataset.


A.3    A BLATION S TUDY ON E XAMPLE C OUNT

We study the effect of varying the number of examples used in the few-shot setting. We added
new ablation experiments with 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 10-shot generalization performance on both
CALVIN and BEHAVIOR environments. The results in Figure 5 show that PHIER consistently
outperforms prior works across all numbers of examples. Notably, in the CALVIN environment,
PHIER’s performance plateaus as the number of examples increases, indicating that the method
requires only a few examples to adapt effectively to unseen scenarios.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Few-Shot Ablation: CALVIN                                                     Few-Shot Ablation: BEHAVIOR
           1.00                                                    Ours                       1.00                                            Ours
                                                                   Re-Attention                                                               Re-Attention

           0.75                                                    CoarseFine                 0.75                                            CoarseFine
                                                                   BUTD                                                                       BUTD
Accuracy


                                                                                  Accuracy
                                                                   RelViT                                                                     RelViT
           0.50                                                                               0.50
                                                                   CLIP                                                                       CLIP
                                                                   FiLM                                                                       FiLM
           0.25                                                                               0.25



           0.00                                                                               0.00
                  0    2         4        6        8          10                                     0   2       4        6        8     10


                              Number of Examples                                                              Number of Examples


Figure 5: Ablations varying number of examples given in few-shot setting for CALVIN and BEHAV-
IOR environments.


A.4               A BLATION S TUDY WITH R EMOVED C OMPONENTS

We add an ablation study that evaluates the impact of removing individual components of PHIER to
evaluate their contributions. We compare PHIER with four variants, (1) without the object-centric
encoder, (2) without the hyperbolic latent space, (3) without the norm regularization loss, and (4)
without the predicate triplet loss. We report results in Table 5. We see that without our object-
centric design, performance drops significantly in both ID and OOD settings, emphasizing the
importance of object-centric encoders for improved representation and reasoning. In addition, we
show that removing each of the self-supervised losses leads to much weaker generalization capability.
Finally, we observe reduced generalization performance without PHIER ’s hyperbolic latent space and
hyperbolic norm regularization loss, demonstrating that the hyperbolic space facilitates better handling
of hierarchical relationships. These results validate that each component contributes meaningfully to
PHIER’s performance, particularly in improving OOD generalization.

            Table 5: Ablations of each component of PHIER and its effect on few-shot generalization.

                                                                    CALVIN                                             BEHAVIOR
                                                       ID ↑        OOD ↑                     ID-OOD ↓        ID ↑       OOD ↑          ID-OOD ↓
           PHIER (Ours)                            0.945           0.899                      0.046          0.859       0.820          0.039
           - Object-centric encoder                0.786           0.704                      0.082          0.703       0.659          0.044
           - Predicate triplet loss                0.867           0.601                      0.266          0.774       0.624          0.150
           - Norm regularization loss              0.914           0.823                      0.091          0.834       0.782          0.052
           - Hyperbolic metric                     0.903           0.784                      0.119          0.803       0.761          0.042


A.5               F EW- SHOT G ENERALIZATION TO N OVEL O BJECTS

We expand our CALVIN and BEHAVIOR experiments to evaluate accuracy on few-shot generalization
on novel objects in Table 6. The queries with these novel objects are listed in Table 7. As in our
experiments on unseen combinations and novel predicates, we observe that PHIER significantly
outperforms prior baselines on unseen objects. Specifically, PHIER improves upon the top-performing
prior work by 21.8 percent points on CALVIN and 13.5 percent point on BEHAVIOR. These results
demonstrate that PHIER improves generalization to both novel objects and predicates, further
highlighting the benefit of our object-centric encoder and inferred predicate hierarchy.

A.6               V ISUALIZATIONS ON THE I NFERRED P REDICATE H IERARCHY

In Figure 6, we visualize the joint image-predicate space for BEHAVIOR on the Poincaré disk,
highlighting the hierarchical semantic structure captured by PHIER’s embeddings. By grouping the
joint image-predicate embeddings by predicate, we uncover the inferred predicate hierarchy. For


                                                                             15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: We present novel object generalization results of PHIER and prior works on CALVIN and
BEHAVIOR environments.

                                                   CALVIN       BEHAVIOR
                             PHIER (Ours)          0.851            0.781
                             Re-Attention           0.633           0.608
                             CoarseFine             0.562           0.632
                             BUTD                   0.584           0.646
                             RelViT                 0.497           0.642
                             CLIP                   0.506           0.595
                             FiLM                   0.411           0.521

      Table 7: All states with novel objects (bolded) in the CALVIN and BEHAVIOR datasets.

                          Dataset      Predicate         Object 1       Object 2
                                       OnTop          red block           table
                                       Stacked        red block        blue block
                                       Stacked        red block        pink block
                         CALVIN
                                      TurnedOn           led                –
                                        Inside           box         bottom cabinet
                                        Inside            can        bottom cabinet
                                        OnTop           bottle       breakfast table
                                        OnTop           bottle            chair
                       BEHAVIOR
                                        OnTop            box         breakfast table
                                        OnTop           bread        breakfast table
                                        OnTop             can             chair
                                        Open         refrigerator           –



instance, we see that embeddings for NextTo are positioned closer to the origin compared to those
for OnLeft, accurately reflecting their hierarchical relationship—–OnLeft is a more specific case
of NextTo. Furthermore, embeddings for Touching are nearest to the origin, consistent with its
role as the most general predicate. For example, when one object is Inside or OnTop of another,
they are inherently Touching. Similarly, objects that are NextTo or OnLeft are also frequently
Touching. This visualization demonstrates that PHIER captures not only semantic structure but
also nuanced hierarchical relationships between predicates.
We further analyze the embeddings for novel predicates after few-shot learning with only five
examples. Notably, even with such limited data, PHIER successfully integrates these novel predicates
into the latent space and aligns them with their learned counterparts in semantically consistent regions
(e.g., OnRight is near OnLeft). By aligning these predicates in similar regions, PHIER is able to
leverage its existing knowledge of relevant features for learned predicates (e.g., OnLeft) to reason
about novel predicates (e.g., OnRight). This alignment highlights that PHIER effectively encodes
the relationships between pairwise predicates in the latent space, enabling generalization to novel
predicates with minimal examples.

A.7    I N -D ISTRIBUTION P ERFORMANCE

Here, we discuss the in-distribution performance of PHIER in Table 1 of the main text. We note
that in the in-distribution (ID) setting of CALVIN, PHIER outperforms all prior works except Re-
Attention, with only a small margin of 1.4%. In the out-of-distribution (OOD) setting, which is
our primary focus, PHIER outperforms Re-Attention by a significant 22.5%. Similarly, on ID
BEHAVIOR, PHIER performs comparably to top-performing prior works, surpassing all except
RelViT by 0.7%; however, in the OOD setting we focus on, PHIER outperforms RelViT by 8.3%.
We highlight that PHIER performs comparably to top-performing prior works in the ID setting, while
significantly improving the OOD performance. We focus on the few-shot generalization task and


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             In-Distribution Predicates                                                           Novel Predicates
                1.00                                                                          1.00


                                                                 Predicates                                                                        Predicates
                                                                   Inside                                                                            Contains
                                                                   Open                                                                              Closed
               0.50                                                                          0.50
                                                                   OnLeft                                                                            OnRight
                                                                   OnTop                                                                             Under
                                                                   NextTo


                                                                               Dimension 2
                                                                   Touching
 Dimension 2


                0.00                                                                          0.00


               -0.50                                                                         -0.50


               -1.00                                                                         -1.00
                    -1.00   -0.50      0.00        0.50   1.00                                    -1.00   -0.50        0.00          0.50   1.00
                                    Dimension 1                                                                     Dimension 1


Figure 6: Visualizations of the joint image-predicate space for BEHAVIOR on the Poincaré disk,
revealing that PHIER learns a meaningful predicate hierarchy. The novel predicate embeddings are
visualized after few-shot learning with 5 examples.


design our method to enforce bottlenecked representations (via a joint image-predicate space), while
acknowledging that this might include tradeoffs on ID performance to avoid overfitting to the train
distribution.
We also analyze specific cases where PHIER underperforms on ID examples. For instance, in
CALVIN, we hypothesize that PHIER may struggle with tasks that the baselines may memorize
due to their less constrained representations. We show an example in Figure 7, and note that for
the ID query, TurnedOn(lightbulb), Re-Attention correctly predicts True, while PHIER
predicts False. However, for the out-of-distribution query, TurnedOff(lightbulb), which is
linguistically similar but semantically opposite, PHIER generalizes successfully while Re-Attention
struggles to adapt. We conjecture that Re-Attention may predict that TurnedOn(lightbulb) is
True based solely on the existence of the bulb at the location, instead of learning that the state of
the lightbulb depends on its color (yellow is on and white is off). In contrast, we see that although
PHIER’s constrained representation may slightly limit learning capacity for ID settings, PHIER has
the potential to conduct better compositional reasoning in OOD scenarios, where PHIER significantly
outperforms baselines.

                                            In-Distribution Query                                 Out-Of-Distribution Query
                                          TurnedOn(lightbulb)                                    TurnedOff(lightbulb)


Figure 7: An example of the ID query, TurnedOn(lightbulb), and OOD query with a novel
predicate, TurnedOff(lightbulb).

A.8                    O BJECT- CENTRIC E NCODER P ERFORMANCE

We see empirically that PHIER’s object-centric encoder performs well even on environments with
significant distribution shifts, such as CALVIN. In Figure 8, we show an example of how the encoder
localizes objects in CALVIN. To adapt to environments with even larger distribution shifts where the


                                                                              17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


performance may decrease, we note that PHIER’s object-centric encoder can be finetuned with more
data as well.

                         Input                      Masked Images
                        Image              Red Block          Blue Block


             Figure 8: PHIER’s object-centric encoder in the CALVIN environment.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B       BASELINE D ETAILS

For all of our baseline methods, we preprocess our input queries by converting the states into questions
using the following templates:

         • For unary states: “Is the {object} {predicate}”
         • For binary states: “Is the {object 1} {predicate} the {object 2}”

B.1     S UPERVISED M ETHODS

We train all of the supervised baselines on the same training data as our method. Below, we describe
each baseline and provide implementation details:
BUTD (Anderson et al., 2018). BUTD uses bottom-up attention to extract image features for
important image regions and then top-down attention to focus on image regions based on the input
query. We follow the original method, using Faster R-CNN pretrained on Visual Genome to extract
bottom-up features for the top 36 image regions. For the text features, we embed the preprocessed
text queries using 300-dimension word embeddings, initialized with pretrained GloVe vectors, and a
GRU. The image and text features are then fed into model, based on the PyTorch implementation of
the BUTD model for VQA (Yu et al., 2020)* .
CLIP (Shen et al., 2021). We use pretrained CLIP vision and text encoders to extract features for
the input image and query, respectively. These features are concatenated and passed through a small
2-layer network with a hidden layer of dimension 256 for state classification.
CoarseFine (Nguyen et al., 2022). Coarse to Fine learns to reason about scenes with complex
semantic information by extracting image and text features at multiple levels of granularity. We
follow the official implementation of the Coarse to Fine reasoning framework and use Faster R-
CNN to extract image-level features and GRU with 300-dimensional GloVe embeddings to extract
question-level features, which are then fed into the model† .
FiLM (Perez et al., 2018). FiLM conditions an input image on text by applying learned transforma-
tions to the image features. We use a pretrained ViT-16 image encoder and BERT text encoder to
extract image and query features. Then, a FiLM layer is applied to condition the image features on
the query features, and the conditioned features are passed through a small 2-layer network with a
hidden layer of dimension 256 for final prediction.
Re-Attention (Guo et al., 2020). Re-Attention introduces an attention mechanism to re-attend to
objects in the images, based on the answer to the question. We follow the original implementation by
using a Faster R-CNN model pretrained on the Visual Genome dataset to extract object-level image
features, and 512-dimensional LSTM initialized with 300-dimensional GloVe embeddings to extract
query features ‡ .
RelViT (Ma et al., 2022). RelViT enhances the reasoning ability of vision transformers by introducing
a concept-feature dictionary that enables efficient image feature retrieval during training. This
supports a global task to promote relational reasoning and a local task to learn semantic object-centric
correspondences. We use the official implementation, with Faster R-CNN to extract image region
features, MCAN-Small as our VQA model, and the ImageNet1K-pretrained PVTv2b2 as our vision
backbone § .
SORNet (Yuan et al., 2022). SORNet extracts object-centric representations from input RGB images,
conditioned on a set of object queries represented as images of the objects, to enable generalization to
unseen objects on various spatial reasoning tasks. It performs state classification by training readout
networks to predict spatial relations based on the object embeddings. For a fair comparison to our
method and other baselines, we use MDETR (Kamath et al., 2021) to detect regions corresponding to
object text, resize then to 32 × 32, and then use them as the input object images to train SORNet.

    * https://github.com/MILVLG/bottom-up-attention.pytorch
    †
      https://github.com/aioz-ai/CFR VQA
    ‡
      https://github.com/gwy-nk/Re-Attention
    §
      https://github.com/NVlabs/RelViT


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We train readout networks for each training state in our dataset ¶ . Since SORNet requires training a
separate network for each predicate, we only evaluate it on in-distribution states.

B.2       P RETRAINED L ARGE V ISION L ANGUAGE M ODELS (VLM)

All of the pretrained large VLM baselines are evaluated inference-only.
BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023b). We use BLIP-2 leveraging the OPT-2.7b language model and treat VQA
as an open-ended answer generation problem. The input image is provided along with a query using
the following format: “Question: {state query as a question} Answer:”
GPT-4V (OpenAI, 2023). We provide GPT-4V with the input image and a prompt based on the
following template:

        Prompt Template For GPT-4V Inference

        Given an image of a scene, you will answer a question regarding the states
        and relationships of objects in the scene. The question is the following:
        {state query as a question}
      You need to carefully examine the image, thoughtfully consider the objects
      in the scene, and analyze their states and relationships before answering
      the question.

      Provide your answer as True or False, and strictly follow this response
      format:
      Answer: [insert your answer as True or False here]
      Reasoning: [insert your reasoning here]



                            Figure 9: Prompt template for GPT-4V experiments.

ViperGPT (Surı́s et al., 2023). We use the official ViperGPT implementation with Blip-2 Flan-T5
XXL as the pretrained model and GPT-4 for code generation. Our data is formatted according to the
ViperGPT specifications, with the input image and query as a question.

B.3       A BLATION D ETAILS

Here, we provide a clear breakdown of our ablation model architectures from Table 4 and explain
how we add each component.
Supervised model. We start with a supervised baseline model, which uses an image encoder
and text incoder initialized with CLIP and BERT weights, respectively.The embeddings from
both encoders are concatenated and passed through a small MLP with three linear layers for
classification, and the full model is trained with a binary cross-entropy loss based on the ground
truth labels (True or False). We then progressively add each component of PHIER.
+ Object-centric encoder. First, we incorporate the object-centric encoder by replacing the image
encoder, text encoder, and concatenation step with our proposed object-centric encoder, while
retaining the MLP and loss.
+ Predicate triplet loss. Next, we introduce the predicate triplet loss by adding this term to the total
loss function without changing the architecture.
+ Norm regularization loss. We further add the norm regularization loss to get the total loss function
with all components, as described in Section 3
+ Hyperbolic metric. Finally, we lift the scene representation to hyperbolic space using an exponential
map and replace the first two linear layers in the MLP with two hyperbolic linear layers of the same
size. We also use the Poincaré distance metric instead of the Euclidean metric in the self-supervised
losses, yielding our final model (PHIER).


    ¶
        https://github.com/wentaoyuan/sornet


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    H YPERBOLIC G EOMETRY P RELIMINARY
We briefly introduce the Poincaré ball model of hyperbolic space and hyperbolic neural networks.
For a more detailed explanation, we refer the reader to Cannon et al. (1997) and Ganea et al. (2018).
As discussed in the main text, the Poincaré ball is a d-dimensional ball of radius 1, Pd = {x ∈
Rn : ||x|| < 1}, where || · || is the Euclidean norm. The ball is equipped with the metric tensor
                                   2
gp = (λx )2 ge , where λx = 1−||x||   2 is the conformal factor and ge is the Euclidean metric tensor

(i.e., the Euclidean dot product). This induces the Poincaré distance dp between two points x, y ∈ Pd
as follows:
                                                             ||x − y||2

                          dp (x, y) = cosh−1 1 + 2
                                                      (1 − ||x||2 )(1 − ||y||2 )
Möbius addition. On the Poincaré ball, Euclidean operations such as addition and multiplication
have equivalents to ensure that all operations remain within the hyperbolic space and respect its
geometry. Instead of using standard Euclidean addition, Möbius addition is used, which ensures that
the sum of two points on the Poincaré ball still lies within the ball. The Möbius addition for any two
points x, y ∈ Pd is defined as:
                                     (1 + 2⟨x, y⟩ + ||y||2 )x + (1 − ||x||)2 y
                          x ⊕ y :=
                                           1 + 2⟨x, y⟩ + ||x||2 ||y||2

Exponential and logarithmic maps. To perform operations in hyperbolic space, we use exponential
and logarithmic maps to map Euclidean vectors to the hyperbolic space, and vice versa. For any point
z ∈ Pd , the closed form expression of the exponential and logarithmic maps centered around z are
defined as:
                                                       λz ||v||       v
                              expz (y) = z ⊕ tanh
                                                           2        ||v||
                                       2                            −z ⊕ y
                          logz (y) =     tanh−1 (|| − z ⊕ y||)
                                      λz                         || − z ⊕ y||
In practice, we use the maps centered at 0, exp0 and log0 , to transition between Euclidean space and
the Poincaré ball.
Hyperbolic neural networks. Ganea et al. (2018) proposes hyperbolic neural networks by defining
hyperbolic equivalents of linear maps and bias translations. The hyperbolic linear map M ⊗ : Rn →
Rm of any point x ∈ Pd on the Poincaré ball is defined as:
                                  √                            √

                                             ||M x||                         Mx
                  M ⊗ (x) = (1/ c) tanh               tanh−1

                                                                 c||x||
                                               ||x||                       ||M x||
The translation of a point x ∈ Pd by a bias b ∈ Pd as:

                                                    λ0
                                   x ⊕ b = expx        log0 (c)
                                                    λx
The hyperbolic linear layer is then defined as M ⊗ (x) ⊕ b. To build a hyperbolic neural network, one
simply has to map representations to the Poincaré ball using exp0 , apply hyperbolic linear layers,
and then map back to Euclidean space using log0 .
Disk area of hyperbolic space.
We provide further details on why the exponential growth of the disc area in hyperbolic space provides
a natural and efficient way to represent trees. Note that for a regular tree with a constant branching
factor b, the number of nodes increases exponentially with the distance from the root, as (b + 1)b↕−1 .
We can embed trees in hyperbolic space, as they mirror this exponential growth. For instance, in
a two-dimensional hyperbolic space with constant curvature K = −1, the circumference of a disc
with radiuds r is 2π sinh r while the area of a disc is 2π(cosh r − 1). Since sinh r = 12 (er − e−r )
and coshr = 12 (er + e−r ), both the circumference and area of the disc grow exponentially with the
radius.
This exponential growth allows us to efficiently embed tree structures in hyperbolic space: nodes that
are ↕ levels from the root can be placed on the hyperbolic disc with a radius proportional to its level


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


↕, while nodes less than ↕ levels within the sphere. Thus, we see how this property allows hyperbolic
space to serve as a continuous representation of discrete trees.
Connection between hyperbolic space and hierarchical structure. We highlight several prominent
prior works who have made theoretical connections between hyperbolic space and trees. Mathematical
works such as Gromov (1987), Dyubina & Polterovich (2001), and Hamann (2018) prove that any
finite tree can be embedded into a finite hyperbolic space with approximately preserved distances.
A key property of hyperbolic space is its exponentially growing distance, and they show that this
underlying property makes hyperbolic space well-suited to model hierarchical structures. Furthermore,
works such as Sala et al. (2018) and Chami et al. (2020) propose concrete approaches to embed any
tree in hyperbolic space with arbitrarily low distortion, establishing upper upper and lower bounds for
distortion and further demonstrating the effectiveness of hyperbolic space for hierarchical modeling.
Notably, Nickel & Kiela (2017) were among the first to explore learning hierarchical representations
in hyperbolic space. They found that for data with latent hierarchies, embeddings on the Poincaré ball
outperform Euclidean embeddings significantly in terms of representation capacity and generalization
ability. Since then, hyperbolic spaces have been increasingly explored for modeling hierarchies
across various domains, including NLP (Ganea et al., 2018; Nickel & Kiela, 2018; Tifrea et al.,
2018) and computer vision (Khrulkov et al., 2020; Ermolov et al., 2022), with substantial empirical
evidence supporting its efficiency and suitability for modeling hierarchical structures in comparison
to Euclidean space. We believe that these prior works provide strong theoretical justification and
empirical support for the connection between hyperbolic space and hierarchical structure, which
inspires our method.
Implementation. We implement our hyperbolic encoder using the Geoopt package (Kochurov et al.,
2020), which provides functions and optimization methods for hyperbolic space || .


    ||
         https://github.com/geoopt/geoopt


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    LLM P ROMPTS FOR S ELF -S UPERVISED L OSSES
Here, we present the prompt templates used to extract explicit knowledge of predicates from LLMs.
In Figure 10, we describe the prompt used to determine the assignment (anchor, positive predicate,
and negative negative) for a given triplet of predicates, used in the predicate triplet loss. In Figure 11,
we show the prompt used to determine the hierarchy among a predicate triplet based on specificity, for
the norm regularization loss. We query the LLM once before training starts to retrieve the predicate
triplet pairs and hierarchy, hence training is not affected by LLM queries.

    Prompt Template For Predicate Triplet Assignment

    You are given an anchor text query that describes a state of a scene. Given
    two other text queries describing the state of a scene, you will help
    determine which of the two queries is more similar to the anchor query.
    Consider the semantic meaning of the states and the specific aspects of
    the scene they describe. Additionally, think about how many objects and
    what kinds of object properties and features you would need to verify if
    evaluating these states against an image.
    The anchor query is the following:            {anchor}

    The other two queries are:
    Query 1: {query1}
    Query 2: {query2}
    You must choose one of the queries as your answer.                 Respond using the
    following format:
    Answer: [Query 1 or Query 2]



    Figure 10: Prompt template for inferring the predicate relations among a triplet with GPT-4.


    Prompt Template For Triplet Hierarchy Ranking

    You are an expert in scene understanding and state hierarchy determination.
    Given three text descriptions each outlining a potential state of a
    scene, your task is to establish a hierarchy among these descriptions by
    identifying which one is the most general, which is the most specific, and
    which lies in between.

    Consider the following when determining the hierarchy:
    - The variety and number of objects required by the state.
    - The important features of the objects and/or relationships between the
    objects.
    - The level of detail provided about the scene.
    - The semantic meaning of each description.
    Your goal is to rank these descriptions in order of specificity, from least
    specific (1) to most specific (3).
    The three descriptions are:
    1. {anchor}
    2. {query1}
    3. {query2}
    You must provide your ranking using the following format:
    Least Specific: [content of Description 1, 2, or 3]
    Intermediate Specific: [content of Description 1, 2, or 3]
    Most Specific: [content of Description 1, 2, or 3]



        Figure 11: Prompt template for inferring the hierarchy among a triplet with GPT-4.


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     DATASET D ETAILS
E.1   DATASET S TATES

In Tables 8 and 9, we provide all of the states included in the CALVIN and BEHAVIOR datasets.


                       Table 8: All states included in the CALVIN dataset.

                         State Type   Predicate         Object 1    Object 2
                            ID          Lifted         blue block        –
                            ID         OnRight            slider         –
                            ID          Open             drawer          –
                            ID        TurnedOn          lightbulb        –
                            ID          Inside         blue block     drawer
                            ID          Inside         pink block     drawer
                            ID         OnTop           blue block      table
                            ID         Stacked         blue block   pink block
                            ID         Stacked         blue block    red block
                           OOD         Closed            drawer          –
                           OOD          Lifted         pink block        –
                           OOD         OnLeft             slider         –
                           OOD        TurnedOff         lightbulb        –
                           OOD          Inside         blue block     slider
                           OOD         OnTop           pink block      table
                           OOD         Stacked         pink block   blue block
                           OOD          Under              table    blue block



E.2   BEHAVIOR V ISION S UITE V ISUALIZATIONS

We include additional examples from BEHAVIOR Vision Suite Ge et al. (2024) in Figure 12.

       Open          Under            Inside               Inside            OnTop             OnTop
    (cabinet)    (can, table)     (cup, drawer)        (cup, cabinet)   (bottle, table)   (bread, chair)


Figure 12: Visualizations of state classification tasks from the real-world BEHAVIOR Vision Suite
dataset.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Table 9: All states included in the BEHAVIOR dataset.

                  State Type   Predicate       Object 1            Object 2
                     ID          Open      bottom cabinet               –
                     ID          Open          drawer                   –
                     ID          Open        microwave                  –
                     ID          Open           oven                    –
                     ID          Open        top cabinet                –
                     ID         Inside          apple              top cabinet
                     ID         Inside     club sandwich           microwave
                     ID         Inside          pizza              microwave
                     ID         Inside          plate           bottom cabinet
                     ID         Inside          plate        bottom cabinet no top
                     ID         NextTo          apple              coffee cup
                     ID         NextTo       coffee cup            cola bottle
                     ID         NextTo        croissant            cheesecake
                     ID         NextTo          pizza              microwave
                     ID         NextTo          plate              coffee cup
                     ID         OnLeft          apple              coffee cup
                     ID         OnLeft       coffee cup            cola bottle
                     ID         OnLeft        croissant            cheesecake
                     ID         OnLeft          pizza              microwave
                     ID         OnLeft          plate              coffee cup
                     ID         OnTop           apple                 plate
                     ID         OnTop        cheesecake               plate
                     ID         OnTop        coffee cup          breakfast table
                     ID         OnTop        cola bottle           countertop
                     ID         OnTop           plate            breakfast table
                     ID        Touching         apple                 plate
                     ID        Touching      cheesecake               plate
                     ID        Touching      coffee cup          breakfast table
                     ID        Touching      cola bottle         breakfast table
                     ID        Touching       croissant               plate
                    OOD         Closed     bottom cabinet              –
                    OOD         Closed         drawer                  –
                    OOD         Closed       microwave                 –
                    OOD         Closed       top cabinet               –
                    OOD        Contains    bottom cabinet            plate
                    OOD        Contains        drawer                plate
                    OOD        Contains      top cabinet            drawer
                    OOD         Inside          apple             microwave
                    OOD         Inside       coffee cup           top cabinet
                    OOD         Inside          plate             microwave
                    OOD         NextTo          apple                plate
                    OOD         NextTo          plate             microwave
                    OOD         OnTop        coffee cup              plate
                    OOD         OnTop           apple           breakfast table
                    OOD         OnTop           apple             microwave
                    OOD         OnLeft          apple                plate
                    OOD         OnLeft       coffee cup              apple
                    OOD        OnRight          apple             coffee cup
                    OOD        OnRight       coffee cup           cola bottle
                    OOD        OnRight          plate             coffee cup
                    OOD        Touching         apple           breakfast table
                    OOD        Touching      coffee cup              plate
                    OOD         Under      breakfast table        coffee cup
                    OOD         Under      breakfast table           plate
                    OOD         Under           plate                apple


                                                 25
