Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A DAPTIVE L ENGTH I MAGE T OKENIZATION VIA
R ECURRENT A LLOCATION
 Shivam Duggal        Phillip Isola    Antonio Torralba       William T. Freeman
 MIT CSAIL



                                             A BSTRACT
         Current vision systems typically assign fixed-length representations to images,
         regardless of the information content. This contrasts with human intelligence
         —and even large language models—which allocate varying representational ca-
         pacities based on entropy, context and familiarity. Inspired by this, we propose
         an approach to learn variable-length token representations for 2D images. Our
         encoder-decoder architecture recursively processes 2D image tokens, distilling
         them into 1D latent tokens over multiple iterations of recurrent rollouts. Each
         iteration refines the 2D tokens, updates the existing 1D latent tokens, and adap-
         tively increases representational capacity by adding new tokens. This enables
         compression of images into a variable number of tokens, ranging from 32 to
         256. We validate our tokenizer using reconstruction loss and FID metrics, demon-
         strating that token count aligns with image entropy, familiarity and downstream
         task requirements. Recurrent token processing with increasing representational
         capacity in each iteration shows signs of token specialization, revealing poten-
         tial for object / part discovery. Code available at https://github.com/
         ShivamDuggal4/adaptive-length-tokenizer.

1    I NTRODUCTION
Representation learning (Bengio et al., 2013), which involves extracting meaningful and useful
information from input observations, is crucial for decision-making. An effective representation
should be compact while encoding all relevant information. However, what constitutes “relevant”
information varies based on the specific task; for example, a coarse classification task may require
a different latent representation compression factor for satisfactory performance compared to a task
demanding perfect pixel-level reconstruction, which necessitates denser representations. This notion
of a useful representation aligns closely with aspects of human intelligence (Legg & Hutter, 2007),
particularly the concept of adaptive and variable-compressible representations (Hutter, 2006). Simi-
larly, language models can describe content at various levels of abstraction depending on complexity,
context (Graves, 2016; Dehghani et al., 2018), and familiarity (Baevski & Auli, 2018). In contrast,
most current visual systems, such as VAEs, VQGANs, and ViTs (Kingma & Welling, 2022; Esser
et al., 2020; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), generate fixed-size representations for all images. In this work,
we take a step toward learning adaptive and variable-length visual representations, emphasizing that
each image requires a different representation capacity (see Sec. 4).
A common framework for learning image embeddings or representations is the encoder-decoder
approach, where an encoder compresses input data into a compact latent representation, which can
later be decoded and compared with the original image as a learning objective. While there are other
encoder-only methods, such as contrastive learning (Chen et al., 2021) and self-distillation (Caron
et al., 2021), we focus on encoder-decoder approaches because a reconstruction objective intuitively
promotes the learning of adaptive representations by capturing varying level-of-details necessary for
better reconstruction. The current state-of-the-art (transformer-based) encoder-decoder approaches
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) operate in the discrete token space, by encoding images into learned tokens
and then decoding them back to image pixels. To generate these tokens, these approaches compress
(slightly) at the input patch-level and then maintain the number of tokens (= number of patches)
throughout the encoder-decoder network depth. Thus, the representation length for all images is
fixed to the number of tokens, equivalent to the fixed patch-size decided by the human-engineer.
Moreover, by having number of tokens equal to number of patches, such approaches are tied to the
natural 2D inductive bias of images, preventing any form of adaptive representation or compression


                                                    1
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                     Recurrent Processing w/ Adaptive Token Mem.                                                                               Decoding required either for Reconstruction
                                                                                                     (looping multiple recurrent iterations)                                                                                   or Optional Dynamic Halting during Training


                                                                                                                 Latent 1D New 1D Tokens
                              New 1D Tokens


                                                                                                                                                                               Latent 1D Tokens (t=2)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                             (Initialized)
                               (Initialized)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Latent-Distillation Decoder
                                                                       Latent-Distillation Encoder


                                                                                                                                             Latent-Distillation Encoder


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15 23 … 111 77 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Factorize & Quantize



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Quantized Latent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1D Tokens
                                                                                                                                                                           …
                                                                                                                Tokens (t=1)
                                               Image 2D Tokens (t=0)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Reconstructed Image
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Reconstructed Image
              Image Encoder


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Image Decoder
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     75


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2D Tokens (t=0)
                                                                                                                                                                               2D Tokens (t=2)
Input Image


                                                                                                                 2D Tokens


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2D Tokens
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Masked
                                                                                                                   (t=1)
                                                                       Dynamic Halting: Tokens reconstructed well are masked                                                                                                     Reconstruction Loss with Image 2D Tokens (t=0)
                                                                       from further processing since latent already has info.                                                                                                      provides mask for (optional) dynamic halting.


 Figure 1: Adaptive Length Image Tokenizer (ALIT): Given an image, we first convert it into 2D
 image tokens before applying the 2D → 1D latent distillation. ALIT recurrently distills 2D image
 tokens into variable 1D latent tokens, with each iteration adding new latent tokens and processing
 them with the existing 2D image tokens and the old latent tokens. Training focuses on reconstruct-
 ing 2D image tokens through reverse distillation from latent 1D to masked 2D tokens. Based on
 token-reconstruction quality, we can optionally mask specific 2D tokens from further processing,
 enabling dynamic halting per token. Recurrent processing with Adaptive Memory leads to
  compressible representations, flexible tokenization & specialized tokens focusing on objects/parts.
 of different images. Moving away from this inductive bias and with the goal of having modality-
 agnostic architecture, Google DeepMind proposed Perceiver (Jaegle et al., 2021b;a), a transformer-
 based architecture which distills input data tokens to a set of fixed 1D tokens. This process of
 latent-token distillation refers to compressing a higher-dimensional input (e.g., 2D image tokens)
 into a more compact set of latent variables (1D tokens), capturing the most relevant features. Like
 Perceiver, we also fall into the category of latent-token distillation, where we encode 2D image
 tokens into much fewer 1D latent tokens via a self-supervised reconstruction objective. While 1D-
 tokenization of an image overcomes the patch to token constraint and allows much more efficient
 compression of the input image, a more universal tokenizer would be one which adaptively assigns
 variable tokens to each input based on content entropy, familiarity etc (Sec. 4).
 We tackle the challenge of adaptive or variable-length representation learning by auto-regressively
 distilling input visual observations into an increasing number of 1D latent tokens. To achieve this, we
 draw inspiration from foundational works on recurrent computation (Graves, 2016; Dehghani et al.,
 2018). Recurrent neural networks are often viewed as adaptive thinking modules (Schwarzschild
 et al., 2021), capable of enhancing the computational requirements of a specific input through re-
 cursive processing with the same neural network architecture. Thus, unlike the Matryoshka style
 (Kusupati et al., 2022) approach of learning multiple representations of varying lengths simultane-
 ously in one-go, we adopt a recurrent computing approach for visual representation learning. In our
 framework, recurrent computing involves recursively distilling an input image or 2D image tokens
 into 1D latent tokens through a shared encoder-decoder architecture until each image token has been
 sufficiently processed/distilled into the latent tokens. At each iteration of this recurrent rollout, we
 provide additional computational resources in the form of new learnable latent tokens, enabling the
 model to learn adaptive and variable-length representations across different iterations.
 We refer to our approach as ALIT (Adaptive Length Image Tokenizer), and train it using self-
 supervised image reconstruction objective. Credited to the increasing representational capacity, each
 recurrent update leads to the latent tokens specializing and attending to localized regions, hinting at
 object / part discovery (see, Fig. 7, Fig. 8, Appendix Fig. 15 and Fig. 16). We validate the effective-
 ness of the learned tokenizer by demonstrating comparable reconstruction metrics (L1 loss and FID)
 on multiple datasets (IN, COCO, Places, Art-dataset and even randomly selected internet images
 Fig. 20) and linear probing results on ImageNet-1K, relative to the 2D VQGAN tokenizer (Esser
 et al., 2020) and fixed-latent 1D tokenizer, Titok (Yu et al., 2024), while also allowing for flexible
 token counts per image. By utilizing variable representations per image, we introduce cumulative
 dataset representations & emphasize the key aspects of effective representations: required capacity
 aligns w/ image’s information entropy, familiarity, & knowledge of downstream tasks / models.


                                                                                                                                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



 Titok-L-32 Titok-S-128 VQGAN-256 Ours-32   Ours-128   Ours-256 Ground Truth                               Histogram of # Images vs L1 Recon. Loss


                                                                               Number of Images (IN-100)
                                                                                                                   L1 Reconstruction Loss

Figure 2: Reconstruction Analysis on ImageNet-100: Our approach outperforms all baselines in
terms of reconstruction loss (right). Comparing Row-1 (high complexity) and Row-2 (low com-
plexity) demonstrates the effectiveness of adaptive tokenization. Even with fewer tokens, our recon-
structions maintain reasonable global alignment with ground truth, with an expected loss in detail.

2    R ELATED W ORK

The goal of image tokenization is to map high-dimensional 2D images into compressed latent repre-
sentations. Modern vision systems often use self-supervised learning objectives, such as contrastive
learning, self-distillation, in-painting, and generative modeling, to achieve this. Architecturally,
these methods typically convert images into 2D feature embeddings using convolutional backbones
or transformers after splitting images into patches. However, this approach constrains and tightly
binds the processing, compression, and representation capacities to a fixed number of processing
units, down-sampling steps or patches, regardless of the input image. Several prior works have
explored such issues with different motivations, as discuss below –
Dynamic Token Processing: Several works (Bolya et al., 2023; Rao et al., 2021; Yin et al., 2022)
focus on dynamically processing tokens in the ViT architecture by pruning or merging them across
layers. Token Merging (Bolya et al., 2023) accelerates ViT by merging a fixed number of tokens
per layer, resulting in a consistent token count for each image. Inspired by ACT (Graves, 2016) and
Universal Transformers (Dehghani et al., 2018), DynamicVIT (Rao et al., 2021) and A-ViT (Yin
et al., 2022) adaptively prune tokens or dynamically halt processing for different tokens, with a focus
on classification tasks. Concurrent work (Jain et al., 2024) extends this by routing 2D image tokens
through different experts, rather than pruning or merging, for classification and image retrieval.
Tokens in these works remain tightly coupled to image patches. Our approach also involves dynamic
token processing but primarily focuses on distilling images into a variable-length compressed 1D
latent space via a self-supervised reconstruction objective, allowing each image to have flexible
representational capacity beyond patch-based tokens.
Flexible or Variable-Length Representation Learning: Each image has varying levels of de-
tail, making a single patch size insufficient for vision transformers. FlexViT (Beyer et al., 2022)
uses variable patch sizes for multiple image representations, though theoretically its capacity is still
limited by the smallest patch size and 2D token-patch bias. Matryoshka Representation Learning
(Kusupati et al., 2022) learns flexible but fixed representations (bounded by the feature dimension)
by ensuring low-dimensional subsets of a feature vector can perform classification and image re-
trieval. Concurrent works (Hu et al., 2024; Cai et al., 2024) extend this to token space, enforcing sub-
sets of tokens to support vision-language tasks. We also learn variable-length token representations,
but unlike static Matryoshka methods, which learn all the representations in one go, we focus on
recurrent processing & adaptive memory—iteratively refining & adding new latent tokens—opening
doors for longer representations (for streaming data) through longer rollouts in future. Recently
published on arXiv, ElasticTok (Yan et al., 2024)—similar to Matryoshka representations—learns
variable-length encodings for images and videos by learning a fixed, max-sized representation in
one step, then searching for a mask to sample a subset of this full-length representation.
Latent Tokens or 1D Tokenization: To overcome the 2D token-patch bias, Perceiver (Jaegle
et al., 2021b;a) distills 2D image tokens into 1D latent tokens not tied to specific patches, aim-
ing for modality-agnostic transformers. Similar approaches, such as Recurrent Interface Networks
(RIN) (Jabri et al., 2023), AdaTape (Xue et al., 2023), and Titok (Yu et al., 2024), perform 2D-to-
1D distillation or read-write operations for generation, recognition, and reconstruction, respectively.
RIN and Titok use fixed-length token representations, while AdaTape allows a one-time selection of


                                                           3
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                   Number of Latent Tokens (32, 64, 128, 192, 256)       Ground Truth                  Low Complexity Art Hypothesis



Human Predicted Image Complexity


                                                                                                    Number of Tokens
                                                                                                                       Image Complexity Human Score

  Figure 3: Compression vs. Information Entropy Hypothesis on the Out-of-Distribution People-
  Art Dataset: Adaptive tokenization enables analysis of the Low-Complexity Art Hypothesis by
  examining token requirements for images of varying complexity. The plot on the right clearly shows
  that as (human-annotated) image complexity increases, so does the need for more computational
  tokens. More complex images have higher L1 reconstruction loss at fewer token count.

  variable-length latent tokens per input image. RIN uniquely performs recurrent read-write between
  image and latent tokens. Unlike these, we integrate 2D-to-1D distillation with both recurrent pro-
  cessing and adaptive memory—iteratively refining image and existing latent tokens, and adaptively
  adding more latent tokens as new memory. We also enable optional dynamic halting for improved
  distillation in regions needing further refinement. Beyond the technical differences, we emphasize
  that each image requires unique representation depending on complexity, familiarity, downstream
  model/task (Sec. 4). Moreover, the proposed recurrent computing with adaptive memory promotes
  emergent token specialization for object/part discovery, Fig. 7, Fig. 8, Appendix Fig. 15 and Fig. 16
  Relevant works on large-language models include (Goyal et al., 2024; Herel & Mikolov, 2024)
  which allocate additional compute budget in terms of fixed additional “thinking” tokens, separate
  from input tokens. They demonstrate improved reasoning capabilities w/ thinking tokens for LLMs.


   3                               A DAPTIVE L ENGTH I MAGE T OKENIZATION

  Tokenization refers to the process of breaking down input data into discrete units or tokens, that are
  suitable for a specific downstream task. General-purpose tokenizers are usually trained with self-
  supervised objectives such as auto-encoding, next-token prediction, contrastive learning, or self-
  distillation. In the visual domain, prominent tokenizers like VAEs (Kingma & Welling, 2022), VQ-
  GAN (Esser et al., 2020), and ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) rely heavily on the 2D spatial inductive
  bias of images, treating 2D patches as tokens. This approach ties the tokenizer’s architecture closely
  to the inductive bias of the visual domain and limits its representational capacity to a fixed num-
  ber of tokens based on the number of image patches. The Perceiver line of research (Jaegle et al.,
  2021b;a) overcomes the 2D inductive bias limitation, (proposing a modality-agnositic architecture)
  while still distilling 2D image tokens into a fixed one-dimensional learned representation. In this
  work, we argue that each image is unique and warrants different number of tokens. To address
  this, we propose a novel framework that auto-regressively allocates more representational capacity
  (i.e., tokens) to an image, allowing for a variable number of tokens for each image at test time. We
  first outline the core auto-encoding modules — latent-distillation encoder and decoder — that dis-
  till 2D images into 1D tokens and back, and then introduce our approach of auto-regressive token
  allocation per image. Fig. 1 provides an overview of Adaptive Length Image Tokenizer (ALIT).

  Latent Distillation of 2D Image Tokens to 1D Tokens: We want to map an input image to 1D
  latent tokens. Focusing on the core problem of compressive / adaptive representation learning (and
  primarily for compute reasons), we first leverage an existing VQGAN image tokenizer to first map
  an input image to a set of 2D image tokens, Kt=0
                                                 2D . Credited to years of research done on quantized
  2D auto-encoders, the pre-trained VQGAN model can map a 256 × 256 image to 16 × 16 2D
  spatial tokens, without much loss of detail. Each of the 16 × 16 tokens is a pointer to one of the
  quantized codes in the trained VQGAN codebook. In this section, we distill the K2D (= 256 for 256-
  dimensional image) spatial tokens to a few K1D (≪ 256) 1D tokens. For majority of the experiments,
  we set this atomic (min. token count per image) number, K1D to 32, for ease of experimentation.


                                                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            TSC: Top-X Classification Accuracy                                                                                   TSC: Dataset Depth Error < Threshold


Min Tokens using Token Selection Criteria


                                                                                                                    Min Tokens using Token Selection Criteria


                                                                                                                                                                                                          ↑
                                             Max-Token                                                                                                             Max-Token


                                                                                                       ↑
                                             Performance                                                                                                           Performance


      (as % of max dataset tokens)


                                                                                                                          (as % of max dataset tokens)
                                                Top-1 Classification Acc. (TOI) using
                                                Top-1 Classification as TSC (TSC = TOI)


                                                    X for Top-X Classification                                                                                     Abs. Relative Depth Error Thresholds

                                   Dataset representation or cumulative token                                                                      Matching TSC w/ TOI Improves TOI performance
                                   count satisfies nice pareto w/ TSC complexity                                                                   Latent optimized for classification performs better
                                   (Top-1 requires more tokens than Top-5)                                                                         on classification than latent optimized for depth.


Figure 4: Analysing Dataset Representation Capacity: We vary tokens per image using different
Token Selection Criteria (TSC) 2 – Best Top-X Classification Accuracy (Left) and Depth Error <
Threshold (Right). We use GT class/depth maps for computing TSC classification/depth errors. We
then evaluate Classification Accuracy (Task of Interest, TOI) on the dataset reconstructed using
different TSCs. X-axis = TSC, Y-axis = Dataset Token Count, Marker-Color = TOI Perf.

2D→1D→2D Distillation –– Given K2D spatial image tokens / features, each of dimension d2D ,
we append them with K1D latent tokens along the token axis, and pass then through the latent-
distillation-encoder, Enc. K1D are initialized with learned embeddings. The distillation encoder
performs joint self-attention on all the tokens and distills K2D → K1D . Although previous works
(Jaegle et al., 2021b; Jabri et al., 2022) have experimented with cross-attention, we do not focus
on this aspect of the architecture for this work and leave it for future analysis. The distilled latent
tokens, K1D , are then passed to the distillation decoder Dec, which appends them to M2D masked
tokens and performs the reverse task of distilling the latent tokens back to the 2D spatial tokens
i.e K1D → M2D . All inputs to the distillation-encoder and distillation-decoder masked tokens are
added with positional encoding (separate ones for 2D image tokens, 1D latent tokens and 2D masked
tokens). We factorize and quantize the distilled latent tokens (output of Enc) before passing them
to the distillation-decoder, by sampling from a learned 1D codebook via closest codebook logic,
following (Yu et al., 2021; 2024). Among other techniques (Zhu et al., 2024; Huh et al., 2023), we
found factorization to be most useful for learning quantized 1D codebook.
                                                                                                                      )
                                             Kt=1   t=1
                                                                                              Kt=0

                                              2D , K1D = Enc                                   2D ; K1D
                                                                                                                                                                Latent Distillation 1st Iteration
                                                           Mt=1                               M2D ; Kt=1

                                                            2D = Dec                                 1D


K1D → K1D denotes an encoder update to map initialized latent embedding to learned distilled
embedding. Likewise, M2D → M2D denotes reverse distillation using learned latent tokens (K1D )
to map masked 2D tokens to reconstructed image tokens. t=0 to t=1 denotes one encoder update. The
main learning objective is reconstruction loss between M2D and Kt=0
                                                                  2D . [; ] denotes concatenation.

Auto-regressive Framework for Variable Tokenization: In the previous section, we explained
the core module for 2D→1D distillation module. We now describe the auto-regressive rolling of
the encoder-decoder distillation module for learning variable tokens per image, with Kt=1    1D as
the minimum tokens per image. Multiple works (Dehghani et al., 2018; Graves, 2016) in sequential
decision making and natural language processing perform recursive roll-out of the same thinking
(Schwarzschild et al., 2021) architecture to provide more computational budget to the input task. In
a similar vein, we perform recurrent processing of the input image with the objective of learning
variable-length compressed representations. With each roll-out iteration, we not only provide more
processing capacity by recursively rolling out the distillation Enc − Dec architecture, but also
provide additional computational memory in terms of new writeable tokens to better distill image
tokens into more 1D latents. We now dive into the details.
   2
     Token-Selection Criteria (TSC) Example – Selecting per-image tokens using TSC = Top-X Classification
means – identifying the minimum number of tokens for each image such that the corresponding reconstructed
image is correctly classified (by comparing against GT label) among the Top X predictions by ResNet-18.


                                                                                                                5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

                                   Reconstruction TSC


                                                                                                                                                               ↓
Min Tokens (as % of max tokens)


                                                                      ↑
  for Recon Loss < Threshold


                                                                                                                    ↓
                                     60% Max Tokens                               60% Max Tokens                              60% Max Tokens


                                  L1 Reconstruction Loss Thresholds           L1 Reconstruction Loss Thresholds            L1 Reconstruction Loss Thresholds


Figure 5: TSC–TOI Alignment determines Dataset Representation Capacity: We vary tokens
per image via “Reconstruction Loss < Threshold” as automatic Token Selection Criteria (TSC)
and evaluate multiple Tasks of Interest (TOI) on the reconstructions. Since TSC determines dataset
token count, strong TSC–TOI alignment enables desired TOI performance at compressed represen-
tations –– 60% of max-tokens (selected via Recon. TSC) achieve similar perf. on all TOIs as max
tokens perf., supporting adaptive-tokenization. Fig. 13 / 14 show classification / depth TSC plots.

At each iteration of latent distillation, we concatenate the latent tokens from the previous iteration,
Kt=T
   1D , with additional newly initialized tokens (initialized with learned embeddings), K1D . Option-
ally, to help the distillation encoder focus on image tokens that were not perfectly distilled in the
previous iteration, we apply a masking / dynamic halting operation (Mask) to the processed image
tokens from the last iteration, Kt=T2D . This mask is determined by the alignment between reconstructed
output Mt=T2D   and original image   tokens Kt=02D . The masked image tokens are then concatenated with
the latent tokens and passed through the distillation encoder-decoder, Enc − Dec. This process is
repeated across multiple iterations. As in single-step distillation, the primary training objective is
to minimize the reconstruction loss between the new reconstruction, Mt=T+1      2D , and the original image
tokens Kt=02D . At each iteration, the  distilled latent tokens are factorized and quantized using a shared
1D codebook –– tokens learned across different iterations belong to the same embedding space.

                                           Kt=T           Kt=T
                                                                                                           
                                            1D =           1D ; K1D                                        
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                          Kt=T          t=T     t=T    t=0

                            2D = Mask K2D | M2D , K2D
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                  Latent Distillation T + 1th Iteration
                  Kt=T+1  t=T+1
                                = Enc Kt=T   t=T

                   2D , K1D            2D ; K1D
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                         Mt=T+1 = Dec M2D ; Kt=T+1
                                                                                                           
                          2D                 1D


In summary, at each iteration of the recurrent rollout, the latent tokens from the previous iteration
receive residual updates, while new computational memory (additional latent tokens) is introduced.
These new tokens give the existing latent tokens the freedom to focus on specialized regions, leading
to sharper & sparser attention, as shown in Fig. 7, Fig. 8, Appendix Fig. 15 and Fig. 16.

Training Procedure: Our training follows a multi-stage approach similar to (Esser et al., 2020;
Yu et al., 2024). We begin by reconstructing pre-trained VQGAN image tokens from distilled latent
tokens, using smooth cross-entropy loss on the discrete VQGAN tokens (as explained above). Next,
we jointly optimize VQGAN encoder-decoder and the distillation Enc − Dec with an objective to
reconstruct image pixels. Following (Esser et al., 2020), we introduce GAN loss later in the training
process, once the image reconstruction quality has reached a satisfactory level across multiple repre-
sentations, to further improve photo-realism. In addition to recon. and adversarial losses, we apply
quantization losses throughout the training to facilitate the learning of 1D latent codebook. Please
refer to Appendix Sec. A.6 for more details on the training procedure & implementation details.


4                                 N OT ALL IMAGES ARE WORTH THE SAME REPRESENTATION

Each image is unique and requires a different number of tokens as representation. Additionally,
each image or observation can have multiple valid representations, echoing Epicurus’ notion of
multiple explanations. By mapping an image to various quantized latent spaces, the model learns
to sample different tokens from the training set’s codebook, optimizing the reconstruction objective
at different levels of computational capacity. In this section, we provide experimental insights into
how learning adaptive representations can help support and expand upon these concepts.

                                                                                                   6
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Depth Estimation NYUv2                        Classification Imagenet100                                 VLM LLaVA-Bench-COCO


                                                                                                  Relative Score w.r.t GPT4-o
Abs. Rel Depth Error


                                                Top-1 Accuracy (%)
                          # Latent Tokens                                 # Latent Tokens                                             # Latent Tokens

 Figure 6: Tokens vs. Model Strength: Stronger models outperform weaker ones across all token
 counts but are more sensitive to fewer-token reconstructions, showing a sharper perf. drop (∼color)
 at fewer tokens. In contrast, weaker models (lower GT perf.) can manage with fewer tokens.
 Representation Capacity or Compression Depends on Information Entropy / Complexity:
 Schmidhuber’s Low Complexity Art theory (Schmidhuber, 1996) correlates an image’s perceptual
 complexity with its compressibility—the smallest description length of an image often aligns with
 its complexity. Given that our approach generates multiple compressed representations for a given
 image, we evaluate such correlation between human-labeled complexity estimates (ranging from 0
 to 100) (Saraee et al., 2018) and the L1 reconstruction loss using our adaptive tokenizer at varying
 token capacities. Fig. 3 (left) illustrates reconstructions of completely out-of-distribution (OOD)
 images from the PeopleART dataset (Westlake et al., 2016), using between 32 and 256 tokens for
 images of different complexities. These reconstructions are produced using a model trained on
 ImageNet-100, which contains no art-related images and is significantly different from PeopleART.
 As seen, the low-complexity image (top row) is adequately reconstructed with fewer tokens, while
 the highly complex image (bottom row) requires more tokens for accurate reconstruction. Fur-
 thermore, the complexity-reconstruction correlation plot in Fig. 3 (right) perfectly highlights two
 observations: (a) as image complexity increases, reconstructions with fewer tokens result in higher
 L1 errors, necessitating a larger memory budget; and (b) at a fixed image complexity, increasing the
 computational budget (i.e., number of tokens) reduces the loss, demonstrating the efficiency of the
 adaptive representation model. See Appendix Fig. 11 and Fig. 12 for more such results.
 Representation Capacity Depends on Familiarity with the Training Set: Similar to how out-
 of-syllabus questions require more effort, reconstructing OOD images demands more computational
 tokens. By learning quantized adaptive representations, our model maps test images to adaptive
 tokens by sampling from a learned trainset codebook. This enables us to distinguish between in-
 distribution (IID) and out-of-distribution (OOD) images. IID images are more efficiently recon-
 structed with fewer tokens, as they can sample familiar representations from the trained codebook,
 whereas OOD images require more tokens. From Tab. 1, the FID gap between 64 and 256 tokens is
 smallest on in-distribution ImageNet-100 validation set (7.92), larger on less in-distribution COCO
 dataset (12.56), and largest on highly OOD Wikipedia images (23.32). In summary, while all models
 exhibit performance loss on OOD images, the loss is most pronounced with fewer tokens. However,
 training larger adaptive tokenizers on larger datasets (eg: LAION) over longer periods may close the
 distribution gap, as evidenced by improved performance on IN-1K vs IN-100 (Fig. 9 third plot).
 Representational Capacity Depends on Downstream Task: We utilize our variable-length rep-
 resentations to demonstrate how dataset representations vary across downstream tasks. To achieve
 this, we select different tokens for each image based on specific token-selection criteria (TSC) and
 analyze the minimum dataset representations required for optimal performance, plotting cumula-
 tive image token counts as a fraction of the total VQGAN tokens. By dataset representation, we
 mean cumulative token count for the dataset when different images are reconstructed using differ-
 ent token counts. For TSC=Classification 2 , we evaluate the minimum tokens needed for the best
 top-1, top-2, ..., top-X accuracy. For TSC=Depth Estimation, we determine the token count nec-
 essary to achieve per-image relative depth errors below thresholds such as 0.2, 0.4, 0.6. Likewise
 TSC=Reconstruction Loss, selects per image tokens based on L1 recon. loss < certain thresholds.
 Notably – Reconstruction Loss serves as an automatic (self-supervised) token selection criteria,
 while Classification / Depth Error as TSC requires GT class-labels / Pseudo-GT depth maps.
 In Fig. 4, we select minimum tokens based on two criteria: classification (left) and depth (right). The
 images reconstructed using selected tokens are then assessed using ResNet-18 for Classification Ac-
 curacy as the task-of-interest (TOI). The resulting Pareto curves indicate that as token-selection


                                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Mean IOU w/ GT Seg.                      57.8             56.3           53.1        47.6         39.0        25.1
  (IN-S) by thresholding
  attn. weights to keep
  Top X% of mass.

Figure 7: Visualizing Latent Token Attention Maps: The learned latent tokens effectively bind to
distinct objects, suggesting potential for object discovery as future research. This contrasts with 2D
tokenizers, where tokens are strongly biased to predefined patches (also see Appendix Fig. 15).

        Ground Truth Image                 Reconstruction    Token 5       Token 9   Token 17   Token 24   Token 31
                             Iteration 1
                             Iteration 8


Figure 8: Role of Recurrence on Latent Tokens: Credited to increasing number of tokens in
each iteration, the recurrent update on existing latent tokens makes them focus on sparser & more
localized regions, leading to improved alignment w/ GT segmentation over iterations (see Tab. 6).

criteria (TSC) increases in complexity, the representation capacity requirement also rises; for ex-
ample, achieving a depth error < 0.41 requires more tokens per image than a depth error < 1.4.
Moreover, optimal performance on task of interest occurs when tokens are selected using the same
criteria as the downstream task (i.e. TSC=TOI, Best Top-1 Accuracy is achieved when both TSC
and TOI are Classification (Fig. 4, left), compared to when TSC=Depth, TOI=Classification (Fig. 4,
right)) and (b) selecting tokens based on arbitrary thresholds for depth or reconstruction loss has
small impact on classification accuracy i.e. classification accuracy with TSC = Depth Loss < 0.41
is similar to that with TSC = Depth Loss < 1.40, suggesting that classification requires fewer tokens
(as supported by Linear Probing Experiments in Sec. 5). Thus, optimal tokens per image depends
on both token-selection criteria & the desired task.
Next, we explore the scenario where the token-selection criteria remain constant, but the task of
interest (TOI) varies. Since the TSC enables sampling different dataset representations, the optimal
compression of dataset representations for maximum TOI performance depends on the alignment
between the TSC and the TOI. In other words, dataset representations are more compressible when
optimized and tested on a similar task. This also aligns with the idea that representational capac-
ity is influenced by familiarity with the training data. For instance, in Fig. 5, we allocate variable
tokens per image using image reconstruction loss below a threshold as the token-selection criteria.
The resulting token-reconstructions are then evaluated across three tasks: classification accuracy
using ResNet-18, depth estimation accuracy using DepthAnythingV2, and FID using VGG16 fea-
tures. Approximately 60% of the total dataset representations (sampled using Reconstruction Loss
as TSC) are sufficient to achieve near-optimal performance across all tasks—classification, depth
estimation, and FID, highlighting that reconstruction loss could be a good self-supervised objective
to select tokens per-image. Appendix Fig. 14 and Fig. 13 analyze different Tasks of Interest (TOIs)
performance using Depth Error Thresholding and Best Classification Accuracy as TSC respectively.
Representational Capacity Depends on Model Strength or Current Knowledge Fig. 6 exam-
ines the relationship between downstream model strength and tokenized representations for tasks
such as depth estimation, classification, and vision-language modeling. Weaker models exhibit
smaller performance drops with reduced token counts, as shown by the color in Fig. 6, which repre-


                                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                     ImageNet100                                      COCO               Wikipedia (WIT)
    Approach
                              32      64      96       128    160     192    224    256    32# / 64     128    256    32# / 64  128    256
    Titok-L-32               11.60      -      -        -       -       -      -      -    14.18#         -      -    53.57#     -       -
    Titok-B-64                 -      8.22     -        -       -       -      -      -      9.15         -      -     42.86     -       -
    Titok-S-128                -        -      -      8.22      -       -      -      -        -        9.15     -       -     38.16     -
    VQ-GAN                     -        -      -        -       -       -      -    7.04       -          -    7.77      -       -     31.27
    Ours-S (IN1K)            22.69   14.99   11.97    10.17   9.54    8.85   8.48   8.02       -          -      -       -       -       -
    Ours-S (IN100)           22.57   16.17   13.30    11.69   10.22   9.30   8.55   8.25    22.28      14.22   9.72    61.77   47.91   38.45
    Ours-SemiLarge (IN100)   19.70   13.92   11.39    10.41   9.23    8.75   8.22   8.03       -          -      -       -       -       -

Table 1: Reconstruction FID (↓) on different evaluation datasets Our method performs com-
parably to VQGAN and Titok, despite being amortized over multiple iterations, allowing flexible
representations. Longer training on larger datasets, w/ deeper n/w could bridge the gap (see Fig. 9
for scaling laws)3 . The numbers below dataset titles are the variable token counts.
sents the perf. gap between GT and reconstructed images. For instance, fewer-token reconstructions
have minimal impact on AlexNet (Classification) and the Blip model (vision-language modeling).
Fig. 6 VLM experiments support concurrent works of Matryoshka VLMs (Hu et al., 2024; Cai et al.,
2024), further promoting recurrent and adaptive tokenization using VLMs as TSC and TOI.


5       F URTHER E XPERIMENTS & A BLATIONS
In this section, we present additional experiments to evaluate our adaptive and recursive represen-
tations. We begin with image reconstruction experiments, followed by linear probing of learned
representations for Top-1 classification. Next, we ablate the use of continuous vs. discrete tok-
enizers for reconstruction task and finally analyze the learned tokens, showcasing alignment with
GT segmentation (with tokens hinting at object discovery), and the role of recurrent processing in
achieving that. For implementation details, please refer to the Appendix Sec. A.6.
Image Reconstruction: We compare our adaptive tokenizer with the fixed-length 1D tokenizer
Titok (Yu et al., 2024) and 2D tokenizer VQGAN (Esser et al., 2020) based on L1 reconstruction
loss and FID scores on ImageNet100, COCO and Wikipedia Image-Text (WIT) datasets 3 . The re-
construction loss metrics and the number of images at different sampled reconstruction loss thresh-
olds are shown in Fig. 2 (right plot). Unlike baselines with fixed-length representations, we amortize
the learning of variable length representations using a smaller network – Titok-L-32 uses 24-layer
encoder/decoder to generate 32 tokens, while Ours-S uses the same 8-layers to learn variable (32
to 256) tokens. Despite that, as shown in Fig. 2, our method achieves slightly lower reconstruction
loss compared to baselines, maintaining significant details of the input image, while the baselines,
optimtized for realism with GAN loss, achieve slightly better FID than ours for low-token recon-
structions. Through the ablations shown in Fig. 9, we conjecture that multiple factors could enable
further improving the slight FID loss (at low tokens) when training an amortized architecture for
variable-length tokenization – larger models via both network depth and feature dimension (plot 1
& Fig. 17), training on larger dataset IN-1K vs IN-100 (plot 3 & row 5 vs row 6), longer training
(plot 3), and most significantly GAN training (Sec. 3 Training Procedure).
Linear Probing for ImageNet-1K Classification: We evaluate the learned adaptive representa-
tions on the downstream task of classification by linear probing the latent representations, following
standard practices (He et al., 2021). Specifically, we use the output of the latent-distillation encoder
(mean pooling both the processed image tokens and 1D latent tokens). Our linear probe perfor-
mance is on par with Titok models—Ours-S-32 (after 1st iteration) achieves 49.9% Top-1 Accuracy,
compared to Titok-S-32’s 48.0%, and Ours-SemiLarge achieves 59.5% compared to Titok-L-32’s
60.0%, despite our model having a much smaller network (SemiLarge = 16 layers vs. L = 24
layers). Two key observations: (a) Role of Recurrent Processing—the single iteration output of
Ours-L distillation encoder with 32 latent tokens achieves 55.6% Top-1 Accuracy, while recurrent
processing through the encoder 2–3 times improves this to 59.5%. (b) Distilling 2D tokens into 64
to 128 1D tokens is sufficient for the coarse classification task; mean pool of first 64 to 128 latent
tokens yield better linear-probing classification accuracy than pooling all (max. 256) latent tokens.
Thus, the first few tokens capture most of the information required for classification, while additional
tokens are crucial for reconstruction refinement. Thus, recurrent processing sharpens/localizes token
attention, improving both reconstruction and classification.
   3
     Unless mentioned, all experiments / visualizations were done using IN100 training of latent-distillation
modules w/ base VQGAN/VAE tokenizer trained on IN1K. The results of the INK trained model are only in
Tab. 1 and Appendix Tab. 2)


                                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                       Enc / Dec Depth & Latent Dim     Multi-Stage Training         Larger Dataset, Longer Training   Cont. vs Discrete Tokenization


    Fréchet Inception Dist. (FID) ↓


                                         Number of Latent tokens      Number of Latent tokens           Number of Latent tokens          Number of Latent tokens

Figure 9: (Plots 1-3) Ablating FID improvements w/ larger n/w, longer training, larger datasets, and
multi-stage GAN training. (Plot 4) Ablating quantized vs continuous 2D and 1D tokenizers.

Continuous vs Discrete Tokenizer: We learn adaptive representations by distilling a discrete VQ-
GAN tokenizer into quantized 1D latents. Fig. 9 (plot 4), Appendix Tab. 7 and Appendix Fig. 18
compare continuous vs discrete tokenizers at both 2D image-token and 1D latent-token hierarchies.
Using continuous 1D latents (i.e., no discrete quantization between distillation encoder/decoder)
may improve FID more than a continuous 2D base tokenizer (both VAE and VQGAN with contin-
uous 1D representations perform well). However, quantized 1D representations can achieve more
compressed encodings (32 × 12 bits per image for a 4096-size codebook) compared to continuous
embeddings (32 × 12 × 32 bits). Additionally, quantization could potentially help distinguish OOD
from IID test images (see Sec. 4, second point).
Analyzing Learned Tokens for Object Discovery: We analyze the attention maps of learned 1D
latent tokens to 2D image tokens. Fig. 7 shows attention maps corresponding to four tokens from the
7th layer of Ours-S distillation-decoder. Many latent tokens correspond to semantically meaningful
objects or parts, suggesting emergence of object discovery. This contrasts with 2D tokenizers,
where each token inductively maps to an image patch, and only single class token attention heads
(Caron et al., 2021) hold such semantic information. To further investigate this, following DINO
(Caron et al., 2021), we computed attention map alignment with ImageNet-S GT segmentation by
thresholding the top X% of attention maps as emergent seg maps. With 40% attention, we achieve
57.8 mean IOU, and by adjusting the threshold per image, we reach 71.8 mIOU. Notably, our tokens
are not optimized for segmentation. Such high-alignment with segmentation is an emergent property.
Ablating Recurrence on Latent Tokens: We ablate the effect of recurrent updates on latent to-
kens. As outlined in Sec. 3, with each iteration of recurrent and adaptive tokenization, previous
tokens receive residual updates while new tokens are added. Fig. 8 illustrates how the attention
maps of the first 32 tokens evolve after 8 iterations. Initially, under constrained memory/few token
settings, these tokens attend broadly to reconstruct the image well, but as more memory/latent tokens
are added, they focus on sparser, more meaningful regions. This sharpening, as seen in Fig. 8 token
numbers 17, 24, and 31, attending to the eyes, locket, and floor regions, demonstrates the impact of
recurrence (see Appendix Fig. 15 and Fig. 16 for more interesting and dense visualizations).

6                                     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we propose a variable-length tokenizer for 2D images that operates by recurrently pro-
cessing 2D image tokens, distilling them into 1D latent tokens, and adaptively adding new 1D tokens
as computational resources for future iterations. This recurrent processing and adaptive computa-
tion enable the learned latent tokens to correspond to semantically meaningful objects or parts in the
input image. We demonstrate comparable performance on reconstruction metrics and ImageNet-
1K linear-probing experiments. Finally, we utilize per-image learned adaptive representations (and
cumulative dataset representations) to highlight alignment of the required image representational ca-
pacity with – information entropy, familiarity with train set, knowledge of downstream tasks/models.
Future Work: We believe that recurrently learning variable-length representations could open up
intriguing directions, such as large-scale video representation learning or long-horizon video under-
standing, where simply learning fixed-length representations may not even be a feasible solution.
Other interesting avenues include exploring adaptive and recurrent nature of the proposed tokenizer
as test-time thinking units and training for tasks like vision-language & visual-abstract reasoning
(e.g.: ARC (Chollet, 2019)). Variable-token compression could speed up generative models.



                                                                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Alexei Baevski and Michael Auli. Adaptive input representations for neural language modeling.
  CoRR, abs/1809.10853, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.10853.
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Representation learning: A review and new
  perspectives. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 35(8):1798–1828,
  2013. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2013.50.
Lucas Beyer, Pavel Izmailov, Alexander Kolesnikov, Mathilde Caron, Simon Kornblith, Xiaohua
  Zhai, Matthias Minderer, Michael Tschannen, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, and Filip Pavetic. Flex-
  ivit: One model for all patch sizes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08013, 2022.
Daniel Bolya, Cheng-Yang Fu, Xiaoliang Dai, Peizhao Zhang, Christoph Feichtenhofer, and Judy
  Hoffman. Token merging: Your ViT but faster. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2023.
Mu Cai, Jianwei Yang, Jianfeng Gao, and Yong Jae Lee. Matryoshka multimodal models. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2405.17430, 2024.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of
 the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, and Kaiming He. An empirical study of training self-supervised vision
  transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.02057, 2021.
François Chollet. On the measure of intelligence, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  1911.01547.
Mostafa Dehghani, Stephan Gouws, Oriol Vinyals, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Lukasz Kaiser. Univer-
 sal transformers. ArXiv, abs/1807.03819, 2018. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
 org/CorpusID:49667762.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale. CoRR, abs/2010.11929, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929.
Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Björn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis, 2020.
Sachin Goyal, Ziwei Ji, Ankit Singh Rawat, Aditya Krishna Menon, Sanjiv Kumar, and Vaishnavh
  Nagarajan. Think before you speak: Training language models with pause tokens, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.02226.
Alex Graves. Adaptive computation time for recurrent neural networks. ArXiv, abs/1603.08983,
  2016. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:8224916.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked
  autoencoders are scalable vision learners. arXiv:2111.06377, 2021.
David Herel and Tomas Mikolov. Thinking tokens for language modeling, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2405.08644.
Wenbo Hu, Zi-Yi Dou, Liunian Harold Li, Amita Kamath, Nanyun Peng, and Kai-Wei Chang.
 Matryoshka query transformer for large vision-language models, 2024.
Minyoung Huh, Brian Cheung, Pulkit Agrawal, and Phillip Isola. Straightening out the straight-
 through estimator: Overcoming optimization challenges in vector quantized networks, 2023. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.08842.
Marcus Hutter. The hutter prize. http://prize.hutter1.net, 2006.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Allan Jabri, David Fleet, and Ting Chen. Scalable adaptive computation for iterative generation,
  2022.
Allan Jabri, David Fleet, and Ting Chen. Scalable adaptive computation for iterative generation,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.11972.
Andrew Jaegle, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Carl Doersch, Catalin Ionescu, David
  Ding, Skanda Koppula, Daniel Zoran, Andrew Brock, Evan Shelhamer, Olivier J. Hénaff,
  Matthew M. Botvinick, Andrew Zisserman, Oriol Vinyals, and João Carreira. Perceiver IO:
  A general architecture for structured inputs & outputs. CoRR, abs/2107.14795, 2021a. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.14795.
Andrew Jaegle, Felix Gimeno, Andrew Brock, Andrew Zisserman, Oriol Vinyals, and Joao Carreira.
  Perceiver: General perception with iterative attention, 2021b. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2103.03206.
Gagan Jain, Nidhi Hegde, Aditya Kusupati, Arsha Nagrani, Shyamal Buch, Prateek Jain, Anurag
  Arnab, and Sujoy Paul. Mixture of nested experts: Adaptive processing of visual tokens, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.19985.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes, 2022. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114.
Aditya Kusupati, Gantavya Bhatt, Aniket Rege, Matthew Wallingford, Aditya Sinha, Vivek Ra-
  manujan, William Howard-Snyder, Kaifeng Chen, Sham Kakade, Prateek Jain, et al. Matryoshka
  representation learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, December 2022.
Shane Legg and Marcus Hutter. Universal intelligence: A definition of machine intelligence. CoRR,
  abs/0712.3329, 2007. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/0712.3329.
Pushmeet Kohli Nathan Silberman, Derek Hoiem and Rob Fergus. Indoor segmentation and support
  inference from rgbd images. In ECCV, 2012.
Yongming Rao, Wenliang Zhao, Benlin Liu, Jiwen Lu, Jie Zhou, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Dynamicvit:
  Efficient vision transformers with dynamic token sparsification. In Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Elham Saraee, Mona Jalal, and Margrit Betke. Savoias: A diverse, multi-category visual complexity
  dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01771, 2018.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Low-complexity art. Leonardo, 30(2):97–103, 1996. doi: 10.2307/1576418.
Avi Schwarzschild, Eitan Borgnia, Arjun Gupta, Furong Huang, Uzi Vishkin, Micah Goldblum,
  and Tom Goldstein. Can you learn an algorithm? generalizing from easy to hard problems with
  recurrent networks, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.04537.
Krishna Srinivasan, Karthik Raman, Jiecao Chen, Michael Bendersky, and Marc Najork. Wit:
  Wikipedia-based image text dataset for multimodal multilingual machine learning. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
  Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’21, pp. 2443–2449, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association
  for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450380379. doi: 10.1145/3404835.3463257. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/3404835.3463257.
Tongzhou Wang and Phillip Isola. Understanding contrastive representation learning through align-
  ment and uniformity on the hypersphere, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.
  10242.
Nicholas Westlake, Hongping Cai, and Peter Hall. Detecting people in artwork with cnns. CoRR,
  abs/1610.08871, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1610.08871.
Fuzhao Xue, Valerii Likhosherstov, Anurag Arnab, Neil Houlsby, Mostafa Dehghani, and Yang You.
  Adaptive computation with elastic input sequence, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2301.13195.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wilson Yan, Matei Zaharia, Volodymyr Mnih, Pieter Abbeel, Aleksandra Faust, and Hao Liu. Elas-
 tictok: Adaptive tokenization for image and video. arXiv preprint, 2024.
Hongxu Yin, Arash Vahdat, Jose Alvarez, Arun Mallya, Jan Kautz, and Pavlo Molchanov. A-ViT:
  Adaptive tokens for efficient vision transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Jiahui Yu, Xin Li, Jing Yu Koh, Han Zhang, Ruoming Pang, James Qin, Alexander Ku, Yuanzhong
   Xu, Jason Baldridge, and Yonghui Wu. Vector-quantized image modeling with improved VQ-
   GAN. CoRR, abs/2110.04627, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.04627.
Qihang Yu, Mark Weber, Xueqing Deng, Xiaohui Shen, Daniel Cremers, and Liang-Chieh Chen.
  An image is worth 32 tokens for reconstruction and generation. arxiv: 2406.07550, 2024.
Lei Zhu, Fangyun Wei, Yanye Lu, and Dong Chen. Scaling the codebook size of vqgan to 100,000
  with a utilization rate of 99 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11837.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the Defence Science and Technology Agency, Singapore, MIT/IBM
Agreement No. W1771646, MIT/Hyundai Motor Company RD Center Agmt Dtd 2/22/23, NSF CIF
1955864 (Occlusion and Directional Resolution in Computational Imaging), NSF PHY-2019786
(The NSF AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions, http://iaifi.org/) and
the Department of the Air Force Artificial Intelligence Accelerator and was accomplished under
Cooperative Agreement Number FA8750-19-2-1000.
We would like to thank our lab members –– Ayush, Congyue, Ishaan, Jyo, Kabir, Manel, Prafull,
Shamit, Tianwei, Tianyuan, Yichen for feedback and support & Qihang Yu for questions regarding
Titok baseline.

A.2   L IST OF F IGURES
       • [Figure 1] ALIT Architecture Figure.
       • [Figure 10] ALIT Overview
       • [Figure 2] Reconstruction Comparison on Imagenet100K.
       • [Figure 3, Figure 11, Figure 12] Low Complexity Art Hypothesis.
       • [Figure 4] Dataset Representation Capacity.
       • [Figure 5] Dataset Representation Capacity using (self-supervised) Automatic TSC.
       • [Figure 13] Dataset Representation Capacity using Oracle Classification as TSC.
       • [Figure 14] Dataset Representation Capacity using Oracle Depth Map as TSC.
       • [Figure 6] Representation Capacity vs Downstream Model Strength.
       • [Figure 7] Semantic Segmentation Emergence.
       • [Figure 8, Figure 15, Figure 16] Token Visualization (notice the Object-Token Binding).
       • [Figure 9] Scaling Laws Ablation.
       • [Figure 17] Model Size Ablation.
       • [Figure 18] Discrete vs Continuous Tokenization Ablation.
       • [Figure 19] DINO vs ALIT Token Visualization.
       • [Figure 20] ALIT on Internet Images.
       • [Figure 21] ALIT vs Matryoshka-style Encoder w/ ALIT Decoder.
       • [Figure 22] Role of Recurrence on Token Codebook Utilization.

A.3   L IST OF TABLES
       • [Table 1] FID Comparison on IN100 (and IN1K) with VQGAN & Titok.
       • [Table 2] Reconstruction L1 Loss Comparison on IN100 (and IN1K) w/ VQGAN & Titok.
       • [Table 3] Dense FID-metric Table for Scaling Laws Figure 9.
       • [Table 4] FID Comparison on IN100 w/ Matryoshka & FlexVIT-style recons. baselines.
       • [Table 5] FID Comparison on OOD Coco and WIT w/ Matryoshka-style baseline.
       • [Table 6] Recurrence for token-object binding (unsupervised segmentation emergence).
       • [Table 7] FID Ablation on Continuous vs Discrete Tokenization.
       • [Table 8] Inference time comparison w/ fixed-length Titok.
       • [Table 9] Gflops comparison w/ fixed-length Titok.
       • [Table 10] Ablation of 1D Codebook sharing over recurrent timesteps.
       • [Table 11] Ablation of 1D Codebook size.
       • [Table 12] Ablating dynamic halting of well-reconstructed image tokens ( stage 1).


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Recurrent Token Allocation                                          Depth Estimation
                                                                 32 Token
                                                               Reconstruction


                                   Adaptive Length
                                   Image Tokenizer
                                                                                                      GPT4   A small black and white Shih Tzu dog with long,
                                                                                                             slightly shaggy fur, sitting on a patch of green
                                                                                                             grass. There are no additional visible objects.

                                                                                                      Depth Estimation
                                                                 96 Token
                                                               Reconstruction


                                                                                                      GPT4    A small black-and-white Shih Tzu sits on green
                                                                                                              grass with a brown leaf nearby.

    128 Token Reconstruction and Depth                   256 Token Reconstruction and Depth                            GT Image and Depth


GPT4: This bathroom features a vanity with a         GPT4: The bathroom has a vanity with               GPT4: The image shows a bathroom with a
stone countertop, a window providing                 cabinets, drawers, countertop with a sink and      vanity featuring a countertop, sink, faucet, and
natural light, a textured wall, and a raised         faucet, and a wall-mounted mirror. There’s a       soap dispenser, with cabinets and drawers
platform leading to a shower area.                   window on the right and a glass-enclosed           below. To the right is a glass-enclosed shower,
                                                     shower with a step leading in. The tiled floor     and the room has tiled flooring. A window is
                                                     completes the clean, minimal design.               near the shower.

    32 Token Reconstruction and Depth                    64 Token Reconstruction and Depth                             GT Image and Depth


GPT4: The image shows a natural setting with         GPT4: The image shows dense green foliage          GPT4: The image shows a tree in a green,
a tree, greenery, and a dirt path or open area       with a tree in the center and a dry, sandy         bushy area with a dirt or muddy ground,
in the foreground, possibly in a forest or park.     foreground with scattered branches.                suggesting a natural, forested setting.


Figure 10: Adaptive Length Image Tokenization maps an image to multiple variable-length repre-
sentations through a recurrent token allocation process, enabling task-specific sampling. We learn
the tokenizer via image reconstruction as a self-supervised objective. While a compressed represen-
tation can be optimized for specific tasks (e.g., fewer tokens for “dog”, “leaf”, “grass” may suffice
for a VLM task), reconstruction objective supports learning a universal, task-agnostic tokenizer.
A.4      A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
Low-Complexity Art Hypothesis or Representation Capacity ∼ Image Entropy Here, we pro-
vide additional experimental analysis supporting representation capacity alignment with image en-
tropy claim made in the main paper, Sec. 4. We extracted human-annotated image complexity scores
for the MSCOCO and Places2 subsets of the SAVOIAS dataset (Saraee et al., 2018). We leverage
a model trained on ImageNet-100 to study this hypothesis, though both COCO and Places may
be slightly out-of-distribution (OOD) relative to the learned codebook samples. The complexity-
reconstruction loss alignment plots in Fig. 12 and Fig. 11 reaffirm the analysis in the paper—an
increase in image complexity demands more tokens, and more tokens lead to smaller recon. loss.

Representational capacity depends on downstream tasks: In addition to Fig. 5 in the main pa-
per, where we evaluated Reconstruction Loss Thresholding as a Token Selection Criterion (TSC),
we further assess GT-oracle-based Classification and pseudo-GT-oracle-based Depth Error metrics
as TSC through Fig. 13 and Fig. 14. For Top-X Classification as TSC, an image receives 32 latent
tokens if ResNet-18’s top-X predictions from the 32-token reconstruction include the ground truth
class. Key Takeaways – Compared to depth, reconstruction loss, and FID as the tasks of interest
(TOI), the decrease in classification accuracy with a reduction in dataset representation capacity (cu-
mulative tokens per dataset) is relatively smaller due to classification being a coarser task. When
TSC ̸= TOI, using different TSCs to sample the same fraction of tokens yields similar TOI perfor-
mance. For example, FID and Reconstruction Loss at 40% of max token capacity are comparable
(compare 2nd , 3rd plots of Fig. 13 and Fig. 14), regardless of whether depth or classification was the
token-selection criterion. However, compared to Top-X classification, choosing the more granular
tasks of depth and reconstruction as TSC provide finer support for token sampling – therefore better/
diverse performance range for the TOI. Reconstruction loss serves as self-supervised TSC.


                                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Comparison with Flexible Embedding Baselines: At the time of submission, Matryoshka
(Kusupati et al., 2022) and FlexVIT-based (Beyer et al., 2022) approaches had only been explored
for classification. The application of Matryoshka to reconstruction was a concurrent ICLR 2025
work (Yan et al., 2024). We implemented FlexVIT for reconstruction by applying variable patch-
ing on VQGAN 2D image tokens and designed a Matryoshka-style model by selecting a variable
subset (either 32, 64, 128, or the full 256) of distilled 1D tokens during training with no recurrence.
Tab. 4 compares ALIT with both approaches—our experiments indicate that both Matryoshka- and
FlexVIT-based methods required larger parameter counts to match ALIT’s performance. Fig. 21
visually compares the tokens learned by ALIT and the Matryoshka-based approach. Thanks to its
recurrent nature, ALIT refines tokens over multiple iterations, leading to more specialized token
bindings. Tab. 5 compares Matryoshka-style model with ALIT on OOD Coco and WIT datasets.
Finally, some more comparison between recurrent (ALIT) and masking-based (Matryoshka) ap-
proaches: (a) Compared to the Matryoshka approach, an ALIT model with the same number of
parameters utilizes more FLOPs at test time to learn longer representations due to its recurrent na-
ture. (b) In Matryoshka and other masking-based approaches, the 256-token representation always
includes the same first 32 tokens as the 32-token representation, which may not be optimal, as a
higher token budget could allow for a more efficient utilization of those 32 tokens. (c) Combining
ALIT with both Matryoshka and FlexVIT approaches could yield a highly efficient tokenizer by
leveraging the benefits of flexible 2D patches, adaptability at each recurrent step, and the ability to
allocate more FLOPs through recurrence.
Additional Ablations: Tab. 3 and Tab. 7 specify the exact metrics used to generate the plots in
Fig. 9. Both the plots and the tables clearly indicate that longer training, larger datasets (IN-100 vs.
IN-1K), and multi-stage training are vital for achieving photo-realistic reconstructions. Furthermore,
Fig. 17 qualitatively highlights the benefits of using larger models (ALIT-L vs ALIT-B vs ALIT-
S) on image reconstruction quality. Fig. 18 visually analyses the use of continuous vs discrete
tokenization at both 2D and 1D token levels. Continuous 1D Tokenization performs best on image-
reconstruction task. That said, studying the benefits of quantization for retrieval and long-horizon
tasks like visual abstract reasoning, video question answering would be useful. Furthermore, Tab. 10
and Tab. 11 ablate the role of 1D latent token codebook sharing and codebook size on reconstruction
FID. Tab. 12 ablates dynamic halting procedure (see Fig. 1 or method section to understand where
dynamic halting is performed). Finally, Tab. 8 and Tab. 9 describe the computational needs of ALIT
in terms of inference time and gflops.

A.5 A NALYSING THE L EARNED L ATENT T OKENS
Emergent Object Binding: Compared to 2D tokenizers, where each token is bound to a patch
(other than class or global tokens), the learned 1D tokens demonstrate signs of object binding and
localization. In addition to Fig. 7 and Fig. 8, we showcase more examples of how the learned latent
tokens bind to semantically meaningful objects on COCO dataset. For instance, in Fig. 15, note the
token-zebra binding in the second example, the near-perfect segmentation of the bicycle symbol on
the lane in row 3, the segmentation of the frisbee and human into different tokens in example 4, and
the clustering of both plants (as indicated by high attention weights) in the final example.
Comparison with DINO for Emergent Object Binding: Fig. 19 visualizes the tokens learned
by DINO and ALIT. Despite being trained with different objectives on different datasets, both rep-
resentation learning systems exhibit intriguing emergent object discovery behavior. For DINO, the
number of token-attention map visualizations is fixed and determined by the number of attention
heads (=6 for DINO-S) multiplied by the number of class tokens (=1). Additionally, since DINO is
trained with a self-distillation regime that matches intra-image crop representations, it is primarily
optimized for classification. As a result, the class-token attention heads tend to focus on regions
crucial for image classification (e.g., in Fig. 19, row 4, the tokens attend either to the human or the
phone, aiding in ”selfie” classification). In contrast, ALIT employs a variable number of tokens,
leading to a flexible number of token-attention maps and enabling the discovery of multiple ob-
jects—notice, for instance, the switch segment detected on the background wall (row 4 of Fig. 19).
We believe this strong emergent behavior arises from ALIT’s reconstruction-based training objec-
tive, the discrete nature of its learned representation, and the recurrent refinement of its tokens.
Recurrent Processing of Latent Tokens: We further explore the role of recurrence in enhancing
token attention and binding to semantic objects and parts. With each iteration of the model rollout,
new tokens are added, allowing existing tokens to focus on specialized tasks rather than covering


                                                  16
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                    Number of Latent Tokens (32, 64, 128, 192, 256)        Ground Truth                      Low Complexity Art Hypothesis



 Human Predicted Image Complexity


                                                                                                      Number of Tokens
                                                                                                                             Image Complexity Human Score

   Figure 11: Compression vs. Entropy Hypothesis on the Places Dataset: Adaptive tokenization
   enables analysis of Low-Complexity Art Hypothesis by examining token requirements for images of
   varying complexity. The plot on the right clearly shows that as image complexity increases, so does
   the need for more computational tokens. These reconstructions use Imagenet100-trained model.
                                    Number of Latent Tokens (32, 64, 128, 192, 256)        Ground Truth                      Low Complexity Art Hypothesis
Human Predicted Image Complexity


                                                                                                          Number of Tokens


                                                                                                                             Image Complexity Human Score

   Figure 12: Compression vs. Information Entropy Hypothesis on the MSCOCO Objects
   Dataset: Adaptive tokenization enables analysis of Low-Complexity Art Hypothesis by examin-
   ing token requirements for images of varying complexity. The plot on the right clearly shows that
   as image complexity increases, so does the need for more computational tokens.

   the entire image. Figure 16 illustrates five examples from the COCO dataset, showing how the
   attention maps of selected tokens receive residual updates over eight recurrent iterations, leading to
   improved object binding. To quantitatively support this enhanced localization, we calculate mIOU
   segmentation metrics at different recurrent iterations in Tab. 6. These metrics reinforce the visual
   results, with mIOU consistently increasing across iterations at various attention masking percentiles.
   Analyzing the Role of Recurrence in 1D Codebook Utilization: We visualize the frequency
   with which each code in the learned codebook is sampled across 5K validation images in Fig. 22.
   As shown in the figure, at later iterations, more tokens exhibit higher sampling frequencies (x-axis:
   token sampling frequency/count, y-axis: number of tokens at that frequency). This suggests that
   with more recurrent iterations, certain specialized tokens are sampled more frequently, reinforcing
   their role in capturing emergent object representations. This aligns with the token-object binding
   visualizations presented throughout the paper.

    A.6                              E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
   Training Details In this section, we provide additional training details (see Sec. 3 for approach
   details and training procedure summary). We train ALIT in two phases – latent-distillation pre-
   training and full fine-tuning stage (with gan loss). In the latent-distillation pre-training stage,
   we leverage a pre-trained image tokenizer (VQGAN or VAE) which maps an input image to 2D
   tokens. We only train the latent-distillation encoder-decoder modules in this stage, using image
   token reconstruction loss as the core-learning objective. With VQGAN as base tokenzier, we use
   cross-entropy loss comparing predicted logits with the ground-truth VQGAN-codebook index at
   each 2D token position. We use mean-squre reconstruction loss when using VAE as the base-
   tokenizer. We unroll the recurrent token allocation procedure for 8 iterations, expanding token
   memory from 32 (in 1st iteration) to 256 (in 8th ) during training. All the recurrent rollouts are
   trained end-to-end. At each iteration, we process the image-tokens, the existing 1D latent tokens


                                                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
                                        Classification TSC


  Min Tokens (as % of max tokens) for
   Best Top-X Classification Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                        ↓
                                                                                                                  ↓
                                                                            ↓
                                               X for Top-X Classification           X for Top-X Classification            X for Top-X Classification

Figure 13: Dataset Representation Analysis as factor of TSC-TOI Alignment: We vary tokens
                                        Depth TSC-2
per image using “Best Top-X Classification” Accuracy as the Token Selection Criteria (TSC)
and evaluate different Tasks of Interest (TOI) on the reconstructions. We sample tokens per image
such that each reconstructed image is classified correctly under Top-X Classification criteria, and
then evaluate different downstream tasks of interests (TOIs) on the reconstructed dataset.
Min Tokens (as % of max tokens)


                                                                                                                                                        ↓
  for Depth Error < Threshold


                                                                            ↑


                                                                                                                  ↓
                                        Abs. Rel Depth Error Thresholds         Abs. Rel Depth Error Thresholds       Abs. Rel Depth Error Thresholds

Figure 14: Dataset Representation as a factor of TSC-TOI Alignment: We vary tokens per
image using “Depth Loss < some Threshold” as the Token Selection Criteria (TSC) and evaluate
different Tasks of Interest (TOI) on the reconstructions. Being a dense task, depth error thresholding
at several continuous thresholds provide more granular and diverse support to dataset representation
compression and TOI performance, compared to Top-X Classification (X being discrete integer).

and add new latent tokens. During this training phase, we perform dynamic halting of the image
tokens in each iteration, allowing the latent-distillation modules to focus on distilling image tokens
which cannot be reconstructed perfectly till current iterations. We use transformer backbones for
both latent-distillation encoder and decoder, performing self-attention among 2D image tokens and
latent 1D tokens. In the next training phase, we jointly fine-tune both the base image tokenizer
modules and the latent-distillation encoder-decoder modules with losses directly at the pixel-space.
The training objectives are pixel-level reconstruction and adversarial losses (gan generator and dis-
criminator losses) inspired from VQGAN (Esser et al., 2020) training procedure. We optimize for
reconstruction loss for first few epochs, later switching to both reconstruction and adversarial losses.
We recurrently map an image to variable-tokens (increasing token count by 32 in each iteration) for
8 iterations. However, unlike previous stage, we only compute loss at only iteration, thus we only
need to perform recurrent processing of the latent-distillation encoder in each training run, execut-
ing the latent-distillation decoder and the base tokenizer decoder only once. This helps speed up
the training and the compute memory requirements. No dynamic halting is performed in this phase.
Thanks to the gan losses, this phase help boost the photo-realism / FID metric of the reconstruc-
tions, specially at lower-token counts. For more low-level details, please refer to our codebase –
https://github.com/ShivamDuggal4/adaptive-length-tokenizer.
Dataset For training the adaptive tokenizer, we mainly utilize Imagenet-100 (100 classes of
ImageNet-1K as used in (Wang & Isola, 2022)) and ImageNet-1K datasets. Fig. 9 showcase the
scaling potential of training on larger datasets. For exact details of the 100 classes, please refer
to our codebase. Following are pointers to image sources used to create the paper figures and
plots –– The three images shown in Fig. 10 are from ImageNet-100 valiation set (dog image), OOD
indoor scene image is from NYUV2 dataset (Nathan Silberman & Fergus, 2012) and tree example is
from WIT dataset (Srinivasan et al., 2021). Fig. 3, Fig. 11, Fig. 12 all leverage data from SAVOIAS
dataset, which again is different from ImageNet-100 classes. Plots in Fig. 4, Fig. 5, Fig. 14, Fig. 13
all leverage ImageNet-100 validation set. Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 use ImageNet images for token visu-
alzation, Fig. 15 and Fig. 16) use COCO images. Fig. 17 and Fig. 18 showcase randomly sampled
images from ImageNet-100 validation set.



                                                                                             18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                   ImageNet100
                 Approach
                                                     32          64         96       128 160                192      224         256
                 Titok-L-32                       12.29         -             -           -        -          -        -           -
                 Titok-B-64                         -         9.72            -           -        -          -        -           -
                 Titok-S-128                        -           -           9.72          -        -          -        -           -
                 VQ-GAN                             -           -             -           -        -          -        -         7.99
                 Ours-S (IN1K)                    11.50       9.81          8.78        8.36     8.01       7.65     7.53        7.48
                 Ours-S (IN100)                   11.77      10.13          9.26        8.77     8.32       7.95     7.81        7.62
                 Ours-SemiLarge (IN100)           11.81      10.09          9.16        8.62     8.36       8.01     7.79        7.63
Table 2: Reconstruction L1 Loss (×100 ↓) evaluated on IN100 validation set. For last two rows,
our latent-distillation modules are only trained on IN100, rest everything is trained on IN1K.

       Train    Train     Train      Enc./ Dec.       Embed.                                          Number of Tokens
      Dataset   Stage    Epochs        Depth           Dim.            32          64          96       128      160   192              224     256
      IN-100    Stage1     200        small (8)            512        71.53      49.18        35.11     26.97     20.31     15.38       10.84   8.77
      IN -100   Stage1     200       base (12)             768        49.88      35.16        25.79     18.29     14.52     11.27       8.77    7.74
      IN-100    Stage1     200     semi-large (16)        1024        43.97      27.56        19.94     16.22     13.48     11.19        8.86   7.64
      IN-100    Stage1     200        small (8)           1024        53.47      35.66        27.51     21.18     16.66     12.94        9.66   7.29
      IN-100    Stage2     200        small (8)           1024        22.57      16.17        13.30     11.69     10.22      9.30        8.55   8.25
      IN-100    Stage2     200       base (12)             768        22.15      15.88        12.57     10.44      9.50      8.96        8.39   8.19
       IN-1K    Stage1     200        small (8)           1024        43.73      29.56        21.55     16.30     13.45     11.33       9.11    7.59
       IN-1K    Stage1     400        small (8)           1024        41.46      28.26        20.90     16.21     13.21     10.74       8.68    7.39
       IN-1K    Stage1     200     semi-large (16)        1024        30.84      19.56        15.72     12.87     11.90     10.11       8.76    7.78

Table 3: Image Reconstruction Ablations (FID metric): The ablations clearly highlights – longer
training, larger dataset, larger network depth helps in improving FID. GAN base-training is critical.

                                                                                                                ImageNet100
 Approach
                                                                            32           64           96         128    160              192     224    256
 Matryoshka Enc-S w/ ALIT Dec-S                                         33.11       20.08           15.10       12.84     11.45         10.51    9.90   9.50
 Matryoshka Enc-SemiLarge w/ ALIT Dec-S#                                32.12       19.25           14.52       12.48     11.23         10.11    9.48   9.14
 Matryoshka Enc-SemiLarge w/ ALIT Dec-SemiLarge                         22.85       14.51           11.63       10.13      9.23          8.83    8.42   8.11
 FlexVIT Enc-S w/ ALIT Dec-S                                            79.84       39.73              -        15.16        -            -        -    12.64
 FlexVIT Enc-SemiLarge w/ ALIT Dec-S                                    25.62       15.77              -        10.21        -            -        -     7.90
 FlexVIT Enc-SemiLarge w/ ALIT Dec-SemiLarge                            23.30       14.73              -         9.92        -            -        -     7.80
 Ours-S                                                                 22.57       16.17           13.30       11.69     10.22         9.30     8.55   8.25
 Ours-SemiLarge                                                         19.70       13.92           11.39       10.41      9.23         8.75     8.22   8.03

Table 4: Reconstruction FID (↓) comparison on ImageNet100: Matryoshka and FlexVIT were
originally proposed for classification tasks. We adapt them for dense reconstruction by employing
ALIT-style 1D token decoding. We believe that combining Matryoshka-style masking and FlexVIT-
style variable 2D patch-size approaches with the ALIT-style recurrent method could yield further
benefits. (# indicates that the GAN discriminator runs 4 times more than the generator).

                                              COCO                                                      Wikipedia (WIT)
            Approach
                             64 Tokens      128 Tokens           256 Tokens             64 Tokens        128 Tokens 256 Tokens
            Matryoshka-L         23.05         14.43                  10.66               62.02                 48.21             40.28
            Ours-S               22.28         14.22                  9.72                61.77                 47.91             38.45
            Ours-L               21.44         13.64                  9.71                60.11                 47.52             38.69
Table 5: Reconstruction FID (↓) on COCO and Wikipedia Image-Text (WIT). All models are
trained on Imagenet100. Our method (Ours-S, Ours-L) outperforms Matryoshka-L on the OOD
datasets. Here “L” = “Semi-Large”.
                Attention Threshold.                                      Recurrent Iteration
                     Percentile               1            2           3      4       5       6                       7           8
                        40%                  56.7         57.4        57.5 57.6 57.6 57.7                            57.7        57.8
                        60%                  51.5         52.4        52.5 52.7 52.8 52.9                            53.0        53.1
                        80%                  37.1         38.6        38.4 38.6 38.7 38.8                            39.0        39.0
Table 6: Recurrent Processing enhances Alignment of Token Attn Maps with GT Segments.
Note – we did not optimize for segmentation, and token attention maps binding to segments is an
emergent property. This binding improves with recurrent processing (under increasing memory
constraint). To extract a segment from a token attn map, we threshold the top X% of the attn map.


                                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Base 2D        Latent             Latent                                         Number of Tokens
      Tokenizer     Dimension          Quantization        32         64         96        128     160   192              224        256
        VAE            12                  ✓              27.90      19.62      16.07     13.95 12.50 11.16              12.62       9.95
        VAE            12                  ×              22.14      14.15      10.88     9.00    7.68   6.76             6.22       5.66
      VQGAN            12                  ✓              22.57      16.17      13.30     11.69 10.22 9.30                8.55       8.25
      VQGAN            12                  ×              21.77      10.39      8.02      7.38    7.30   7.44             7.36       7.14

Table 7: Continuous vs. Discrete Tokenization: Continuous 1D latents (without quantization) are
advantageous for image reconstruction, while quantization provides the benefit of compressed en-
coding. All token-object binding visualizations are performed using the VQGAN + latent quantiza-
tion approach, showcasing the advantages of quantization beyond compression and error bounding.

                                                                  Number of Iterations
                  Approach
                                      Iter 1    Iter 2      Iter 3 Iter 4 Iter 5 Iter 6                 Iter 7     Iter 8
                  Titok-L-32          9.54        -           -           -         -         -           -          -
                  Ours-S              6.84      10.40       14.13       18.04     22.03     25.99       30.20      34.74
Table 8: Iteration-wise Inference Time (ms) Comparison on a single H100 GPU with FP32 pre-
cision for single-image encoding. The overhead of running an additional iteration of the adaptive
tokenizer encoder is actually quite small: 4ms run time and < +30 gflops on a single H100 gpu.
Overall, +30 gflops overhead per iteration is very less for modern compute and can be further re-
duced by using techniques like KV caching previous layer attentions etc.

                                                                   Number of Iterations
         Approach
                             Iter 1       Iter 2         Iter 3     Iter 4    Iter 5    Iter 6              Iter 7          Iter 8
         Titok-L-32          58.44         -            -             -             -             -          -             -
         Ours-S              83.88       105.45       129.16        155.03        183.04        213.21     245.53        278.00
Table 9: GFlops Comparison on a single H100 GPU for single-image encoding. For 32 tokens,
we our latent-distillation encoder has 8 transformer layers much smaller than Titok-L-32 (with same
number of attention heads, feature dim and same number of tokens). Despite that, we have more
GFlops because of using VQGAN image encoder + a small additional patch embedding layer as the
image 2D embedding. We can switch to Titok-L-32 style image encoding and reduce upto 50 gflops.

                                                                                        Number of tokens
  Codebook Size          Codebook Sharing
                                                         32          64          96        128     160             192        224       256
  4096                   ×                            26.84        18.71        14.71     12.82     10.91        10.02       9.05       8.61
  4096                   ✓                            22.57        16.17        13.30     11.69     10.22        9.30        8.55       8.25
Table 10: Effect of Codebook Sharing on Reconstruction FID (↓). Shared codebook leads to
(a) more compression in terms of total codes. (b) theoretically allows one to rollout the adaptive
tokenizer for much longer rollouts than done during training by having timestep-invariant codebook.

                                                                        Number of tokens
                  Codebook Size
                                           32         64           96      128     160            192       224      256
                  2048                   26.65       18.91        14.76      12.20      10.86    10.03     9.49      9.13
                  4096                   22.57       16.17        13.30      11.69      10.22     9.30     8.55      8.25
                  8196                   23.76       16.55        13.11      11.14       9.75     9.17     8.61      8.42
Table 11: Reconstruction FID vs 1D Codebook Size There is not much (marginal) difference in
performance between 4096 and 8196 codebook size, stating that the tokenizer is less sensitive to the
codebook size. That said, when scaling to large models, scaling up the codebook while maintaining
utilization would be an intruiging research question. 4096 is a usual codebook size for Imagenet.

                                                                          Number of tokens
              Dynamic Halting
                                               32         64        96       128      160          192      224       256
              ×                              24.38    17.00        13.49      11.53      10.30    9.43      8.76     8.29
              ✓                              22.57    16.17        13.30      11.69      10.22    9.30      8.55     8.25
Table 12: Ablating Dynamic Halting for Reconstruction FID metric. Dynamic Halting is done
only in stage 1 of training (and is optional).

                                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: Recurrent processing of Latent Tokens on COCO Validation Set: Recurrent process-
ing with increasing computational tokens leads to specialization of attention. We showcase all the
first 32 tokens after the 1st & 8th iterations (out of total 256 tokens at the 8th iteration). (Left) A
broader comparison b/w iteration 1 vs 8 attention maps highlight emerging sparsity in attention.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       GT Image            Iteration 1   Iteration 2   Iteration 3   Iteration 4   Iteration 5     Iteration 6     Iteration 7   Iteration 8


Figure 16: Token Visualization over Multiple Recurrent Iteration: Recurrent processing leads to
sparse attention & specialization of tokens to localised objects, parts etc. For example – recurrence
led to near-perfect bed segmentation (row 1), bicycle-sign segmentation (row 2), improved human
segmentation (row 3), zebra-instance segmentation (row 4), and potted-plants segmentation (row 5).
                                  ALIT-S      ALIT-B        ALIT-L     Ground Truth                ALIT-S        ALIT-B          ALIT-L     Ground Truth
256 Tokens 128 Tokens 32 Tokens


                                  ALIT-S      ALIT-B        ALIT-L     Ground Truth                ALIT-S        ALIT-B          ALIT-L     Ground Truth
256 Tokens 128 Tokens 32 Tokens


Figure 17: Effect of Model Size on Image Reconstruction Quality. Increasing model size en-
hances reconstruction quality. This visualization uses VQGAN as the base tokenizer (discrete 2D)
distilled into discrete 1D latent tokens. With 256 tokens, the reconstruction quality closely aligns
with VQGAN results and approaches ground truth, even for complex images, supporting the use of
adaptive representations. (Zoom in for details.)


                                                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Quant-2D   Quant-2D   Cont-2D   Ground Truth        Quant-2D   Quant-2D   Cont-2D   Ground Truth
                          Quant-1D
                        64 Tokens    Cont-1D    Cont-1D                       Quant-1D   Cont-1D    Cont-1D
256 Tokens 128 Tokens


                          Quant-2D   Quant-2D   Cont-2D   Ground Truth        Quant-2D   Quant-2D   Cont-2D   Ground Truth
                          Quant-1D   Cont-1D    Cont-1D                       Quant-1D   Cont-1D    Cont-1D
64 Tokens
256 Tokens 128 Tokens


                          Quant-2D   Quant-2D   Cont-2D   Ground Truth        Quant-2D   Quant-2D   Cont-2D   Ground Truth
                          Quant-1D   Cont-1D    Cont-1D                       Quant-1D   Cont-1D    Cont-1D
64 Tokens
256 Tokens 128 Tokens


Figure 18: Impact of Discrete vs. Continuous Tokenization on Image Reconstruction. Contin-
uous 1D latent representations yield the best reconstructions overall. The advantage of using VAE
as the base tokenizer (third column of Cont-2D + Cont-1D) becomes more significant at higher to-
ken counts. VQGAN (discrete 2D) combined with continuous 1D (second column) also performs
well, especially at lower token counts, possibly due to the learning ease of the discrete cross-entropy
training framework. Note: ALIT-S is used in this visualization, and reconstructions may improve
with a larger model. (Zoom in for details.)


                                                                         23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  DINO-S visualizing all
                  CLS token attn maps       ALIT-S visualizing 6        ALIT-S visualizing all
  Input Image    (number of heads = 6)      selected attn maps           first 32 attn maps


Figure 19: DINO vs ALIT Token Visualization: Compared to DINO-S, which has one class to-
ken and 6 attention-heads per token, leading to 6 token-attention maps, we have arbitrary attention
maps (= number of latent tokens). Dino being trained with self-distillation implicitly has some bias
towards attending patches which lead to better classification, like “attending to phone and man
for implicit selfie representation”, while ALIT being trained with reconstruction even attends to the
small switch on the wall in the background behind the man. Note: we are not an alternative to
DINO, both approaches have orthogonal contributions.


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Input Image             64 Token                 128 Token              256 Token
   (from Internet)         Reconstruction           Reconstruction         Reconstruction


Figure 20: Generalization of ALIT trained on Imagenet100 on Internet Images: ALIT performs
quite well even on OOD imagesmost times, with great potential of being an “any-image” generaliz-
able adaptive tokenizer with some scaling.


                                               25
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Four Interesting Tokens
                                                         All First 32 Tokens
(Large) Encoder w/    (Manually Sampled)
ALIT-style Decoder
 Matryoshka-style
   ALIT-Small
    (Ours)
(Large) Encoder w/
ALIT-style Decoder
 Matryoshka-style
   ALIT-Small
     (Ours)


 Figure 21: Comparing ALIT adaptive tokenizer vs Matryoshka-Style tokenizer: Thanks to
 recurrent processing in presence of additonal compute (a.k.a tokens), ALIT learns more sharper
 attention maps over multiple iterations. Unlike ALIT where the first 32 tokens imporve over iter-
 ations, Matryoshka-style approach learn a fixed-length (static) embedding in one go. Note: This
 is ALIT-style decoding with Matryoshka-style encoding. One could also combine Matryoshka-
 Style encoding with recurrent encoding, which would be interesting future work.


                                                26
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Iteration 1                                                                         Iteration 2                                                                       Iteration 3
                           (Cum. Tokens = 32 * 5K)                                                             (Cum. Tokens = 64 * 5K)                                                           (Cum. Tokens = 96 * 5K)


                                                                                                                                                                   with that sampling count
with that sampling count


                                                                                 with that sampling count


                                                                                                                                                                      Number of Codes
   Number of Codes


                                                                                    Number of Codes


                                Code Sampling Count                                                               Code Sampling Count                                                                Code Sampling Count

                                  Iteration 4                                                                         Iteration 5                                                                       Iteration 6
                           (Cum. Tokens = 128 * 5K)                                                            (Cum. Tokens = 160 * 5K)                                                          (Cum. Tokens = 192 * 5K)
with that sampling count


                                                                                                                                                                      with that sampling count
                                                                                    with that sampling count
   Number of Codes


                                                                                                                                                                         Number of Codes
                                                                                       Number of Codes


                                 Code Sampling Count                                                              Code Sampling Count                                                                Code Sampling Count

                                                                         Iteration 7                                                                            Iteration 8
                                                                  (Cum. Tokens = 224 * 5K)                                                               (Cum. Tokens = 256 * 5K)
                                                                                                                             with that sampling count
                                     with that sampling count


                                                                                                                                Number of Codes
                                        Number of Codes


                                                                      Code Sampling Count                                                                     Code Sampling Count
                                                                (How many times is a code is sampled                                                    (How many times is a code is sampled
                                                                   from codebook of size 4096)                                                             from codebook of size 4096)

 Figure 22: Codebook Utilization at different recurrent iterations by ALIT-Small: As mentioned
 before, recurrent processing with adaptive memory (tokens), leads to token specialization. This can
 also be seen from the fact –– at larger iterations, there are more number of higher frequency tokens.
 When you have more memory / tokens, some of the memory can be utilized for specialization.
 Note – almost no code is sampled 0 times, that’s just a artifact of low x-axis tick sampling. “*5K” =
 cumulative tokens from 5K Imagenet100 validation images.


                                                                                                                     27
