Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F ROM T OKENS TO L ATTICES : E MERGENT L ATTICE
S TRUCTURES IN L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Bo Xiong                                    Steffen Staab
 Stanford University, United States          University of Stuttgart, Germany
 University of Stuttgart, Germany            University of Southampton, United Kingdom
 xiongbo@stanford.edu                        steffen.staab@ki.uni-stuttgart.de



                                            A BSTRACT
         Pretrained masked language models (MLMs) have demonstrated an impressive
         capability to comprehend and encode conceptual knowledge, revealing a lattice
         structure among concepts. This raises a critical question: how does this conceptual-
         ization emerge from MLM pretraining? In this paper, we explore this problem from
         the perspective of Formal Concept Analysis (FCA), a mathematical framework that
         derives concept lattices from the observations of object-attribute relationships. We
         show that the MLM’s objective implicitly learns a formal context that describes
         objects, attributes, and their dependencies, which enables the reconstruction of a
         concept lattice through FCA. We propose a novel framework for concept lattice
         construction from pretrained MLMs and investigate the origin of the inductive
         biases of MLMs in lattice structure learning. Our framework differs from previous
         work because it does not rely on human-defined concepts and allows for discov-
         ering "latent" concepts that extend beyond human definitions. We create three
         datasets for evaluation, and the empirical results verify our hypothesis.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Masked language models (MLMs) (Devlin et al., 2019) are pretrained to predict a masked token given
its bidirectional context. This self-supervised pretraining enables MLMs to encode vast amounts
of human and linguistic knowledge (AlKhamissi et al., 2022; Petroni et al., 2019), making them
valuable and implicit knowledge bases for a variety of knowledge-intensive tasks (Van Aken et al.,
2019). A key feature of MLMs is their ability to capture conceptual knowledge (Wu et al., 2023; Peng
et al., 2022; Lin & Ng, 2022), including understanding concepts and their hierarchical relationships,
which are essential aspects of human cognition. Despite substantial evidence (Wu et al., 2023; Peng
et al., 2022; Aspillaga et al., 2021; Dalvi et al., 2022) supporting MLMs’ ability to conceptualize, the
emergence of this capability from their pretraining objectives remains unclear.
To interpret this phenomenon, one pitfall of work in this field is the tendency to focus exclusively on
human-defined concepts and investigate how MLMs identify and learn these predefined concepts.
This is typically achieved by either classifying (Wu et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2022) or clustering
(Aspillaga et al., 2021; Dalvi et al., 2022) terms and then mapping them to established human-
defined ontologies, such as WordNet (Miller, 1995). However, this approach often overlooks "latent"
concepts that extend beyond human definitions. As a result, while these approaches may illuminate
the what—the discovery of human-defined concepts—they do not adequately explain the how—the
underlying mechanisms by which conceptualization emerges from the MLMs’ pretraining.
In this work, we adopt a mathematical formalization of concepts inspired by philosophical frameworks
(Ganter et al., 2005). In this definition, each concept is defined as the abstraction of a collection
of objects that share some common attributes. For example, bird is defined as a set of objects that
can fly, have feather, lay eggs, and so on, while eagle is defined as a subset of these objects that
share a superset of these attributes. By characterizing concepts as sets of objects and attributes, the
partial order relations between concepts are naturally induced from the inclusion relations of the
corresponding sets of objects and attributes, which is independent of human-defined structures.
To investigate the question–how does the conceptualization emerge from MLM pretraining? One
might argue that MLMs are trained on explicit definitions of concepts (e.g., through handbooks),


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    The eagle is a subclass of raptor                   The eagle can fly…can hunt…
    The owl is a subclass of raptor                     The owl can fly… can hunt…
                         BERT                                                    BERT
                            Raptor
         eagle owl          (human-defined)
                                                                eagle owl          fly⋀hunt⋀…

         (a) Definitional hypothesis                           (b) Distributional hypothesis

Figure 1: A comparison of two hypotheses of conceptualization in language models. (a) Defini-
tional hypothesis assumes that concepts are learned directly from the definitions (i.e., concepts are
explicitly defined in the texts); (b) Distributional hypothesis assumes that concepts are learned from
the observations of their attributes (i.e., similar concepts have similar attributes).

which we call as the definitional hypothesis. While this hypothesis may seem possible, as argued
by (Cimiano et al., 2005), such grounding or conceptualization is typically not frequently found
in non-wikipedia and non-handbook texts or conversation. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 1(a), the
definitional hypothesis relies on human-defined concept names as the text "definition", and cannot
handle "latent" concepts whose names are not explicitly defined by human. For example, there is no
popularly used term specifying birds that can swim and hunt, but they are indeed a formal concept in
the context of FCA. Another interpretation is based on the distributional hypothesis, which assumes
that terms are similar to the extent that they share similar linguistic contexts (Cimiano et al., 2005).
Therefore, the distributional hypothesis of formal concepts can be interpreted as: concepts are similar
to the extent that they share similar contexts describing their attributes. Fig. 1 shows a comparison of
the two hypotheses of concept learning for eagle and owl. Intuitively, the human-defined concept
raptor is a rarely used term in texts, while the attributes fly and hunt are more frequently used in texts.
In this paper, we follow the distributional hypothesis and argue that the conceptualization of MLMs
emerges from the learned dependencies between the latent variables representing the objects and
attributes. We made the following contributions: 1) We show that MLMs are implicitly doing
Formal Concept Analysis (FCA), a mathematical theory of lattices for deriving a concept lattice from
the observations of object and attributes. This is interpreted as: MLMs implicitly model objects or
attributes as masked tokens, and model the formal context by the conditional probability between
the objects and attributes under certain patterns. As a result, a concept lattice can be approximately
recovered from the conditional probability distributions of tokens given some patterns through FCA;
2) we propose a novel and efficient formal context construction method from MLMs using probing
and FCA; and 3) we provide theoretical analyses and empirical results on our new datasets that
support our findings. Notably, the reconstructed concept lattice contains "latent" concepts that are not
defined by human and the evaluation does not require any human-defined concepts and ontologies.
Our code and datasets will be made available upon acceptance.


2     P RELIMINARIES

Definition 1 (masked language model). Let w := [w1 , · · · , wT ] denote an input sequence of T tokens,
each taking a value from a vocabulary V , and w\t := [w1 , · · · , wt−1 , [MASK], wt+1 , · · · , wT ]
denote the masked sequence after replacing the t-th token wt with a special [MASK] token. A masked
language model predicts wt using its bidirectional context w\t . Let D denote the data generating
distribution. MLM learns a probabilistic model pθ that minimizes the pseudo log-likelihood loss

                            PLLMLM = Ew∼D,t∼[1,··· ,T ] − log pθ (wt |w\t ).                           (1)

MLMs can be interpreted as non-linear version of Gaussian graphical models (Wang & Cho, 2019).
The idea is to view tokens as random variables that form a fully-connected undirected graph, i.e., by
assuming that each variable is dependent on all the other variables, and learn the dependencies across
tokens. The dependencies cross tokens can be identified by conditional mutual information (CMI)
(Anandkumar et al., 2011), defined as the expected pointwise mutual information (PMI) conditioned


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


on the rest of the tokens

   CMIpθ (wi ; wj |w\i,j ) = Ewi ,wj [log pθ wi |w\i (j, wj ) − log Ewj |wi pθ wi |w\i (j, wj ) ],       (2)
where w(i, wj ) denotes the sentence substituting wi with a new token wj .
Formal Concept Analysis (Ganter et al., 2003) is a principled framework for deriving a concept
lattice from a collection of objects and their attributes. FCA follows the mathematical formalization of
concepts where each concept is defined as a collection of objects that share some common attributes
(Stock, 2010). FCA aims to reconstruct a concept lattice from such observations, which are the
objects and their corresponding attributes, represented by a formal context, defined as:
Definition 2 (formal context). A formal context is a triple (G, M, I) where G describes a finite set
of objects, M describes a finite set of attributes, and I ⊆ G × M denotes a binary relation (called
incidence) between objects and attributes with each element ⟨g, m⟩ ∈ I indicating whether an object
g ∈ G possesses a particular attribute m ∈ M .
A formal context can be represented by a matrix with rows and columns being the objects and
attributes, respectively, and each element describing whether the object possesses the corresponding
attribute. A formal concept can be defined as a set of objects G1 ⊆ G sharing a common set of
attributes M1 ⊆ M , formally defined as:
Definition 3 (formal concept). Given G1 ⊆ G and M1 ⊆ M , let G′1 := {m ∈ M |(g, m) ∈ I ∀g ∈
G1 } denote all attributes shared by the objects in G1 , and dually M1′ := {g ∈ G|(g, m) ∈ I ∀m ∈
M1 } denote all objects sharing the attributes in B. The pair (G1 , M1 ) is a formal concept iff
G′1 = M1 and M1′ = G1 . G1 and M1 are called the extent and intent of (G1 , M1 ), respectively.
In a nutshell, the pair (G1 , M1 ) is a formal concept iff the set of all attributes shared by the objects in
G1 is identical with M1 and dually, the set of objects that share the attributes in M1 is identical with
G1 . The inclusion between objects/attributes induces a partial order relation of formal concepts.
Definition 4 (partial order relation). A partial order relation ≤C between concepts is defined by
                         (G1 , M1 ) ≤C (G2 , M2 ) ⇔ G1 ⊆ G2 and M2 ⊆ M1 .                                 (3)
In this sense, top concept is ⊤ = (G, G′ ) and bottom concept is ⊥ = (M ′ , M ). That is, for any
concept (G1 , M1 ), we have (M ′ , M ) ≤C (G1 , M1 ) ≤C (G, G′ ). FCA can be extended to deal with
three-dimensional data where the object-attribute relations depend on certain patterns.
Definition 5 (triadic formal context (Jäschke et al., 2006)). A triadic formal context is a quadruple
(G, M, B, Y ), where G is a finite set of objects, M is a finite set of attributes, B is a finite set of
conditions (patterns), and Y ⊆ G × M × B is a ternary relation between objects, attributes, and
conditions.
An element (g, m, b) ∈ Y is interpreted as: The object g ∈ G possesses the attribute m ∈ M under
the condition b ∈ B. Triadic concept is defined as:
Definition 6. A triadic concept of the triadic formal context (G, M, B, Y ) is a triple (A1 , A2 , A3 )
where A1 ⊆ G, A2 ⊆ M , and A3 ⊆ B, and the following property holds:
                  (A1 , A2 , A3 ) = {g ∈ G | ∀m ∈ A2 , ∀b ∈ A3 , (g, m, b) ∈ Y },                  (4)
                                     {m ∈ M | ∀g ∈ A1 , ∀b ∈ A3 , (g, m, b) ∈ Y },                   (5)

                                     {b ∈ B | ∀g ∈ A1 , ∀m ∈ A2 , (g, m, b) ∈ Y } ,                  (6)
where A1 is the set of objects shared by all attributes in A2 under all conditions in A3 , A2 is the set
of attributes shared by all objects in A1 under all conditions in A3 , A3 is the set of conditions under
which all objects in A1 share all attributes in A2 .
Concept Lattice The set of all concepts and the partial order relation given in a formal context lead
to a concept lattice that describes inclusion relationship between their sets of objects and attributes.

3     T HE L ATTICE S TRUCTURE OF M ASKED L ANGUAGE M ODELS
We argue that MLMs implicitly model concepts by learning a formal context through conditional
distributions between objects and attributes in a target domain. First, we introduce how concept
lattices are constructed from MLMs using FCA in Section 3.1. Next, we discuss the inductive biases
of MLM pretraining as they pertain to the learning of formal contexts in Section 3.2.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



      (a) Observable world (training data)                   (d) Abstract world (concept lattice)
         eagle                                                                   Top
                       [MASK]          fly
         dove          is                                       flyable     huntable         swimmable
                                                Perception
         wolf          an
                       animal
                                     swim                     dove                         frog       fish
         snake                                                                   wolf
                       that
                                                                  fly-huntable          swim-huntable
          frog         can             hunt
                       [MASK]                                    eagle       bottom               snake
          fish
                                                    A
                                                  FC
                                BERT                                                classification

                                                                                        Swimmable

                                                                                                  Flyable



                                              Embedding

      (b) Normalized conditional probability                    (c) Conceptual embedding

Figure 2: An illustration of how MLMs learn conceptual/ontological knowledge from natural
language. (a) The observation is a set of sentences that describe relationships between objects and
attributes (nouns and verbs in this example). Each sentence is abstracted as a filling of a pattern with
an object-attribute pair; (b) the normalized conditional probability between objects and attributes is
learned by the MLM (e.g., BERT) and it can be viewed as a formal context in a probabilistic space; (c)
each row of the conditional probability can be viewed as the conceptual embedding of the object, and
each dimension/column of the embeddings corresponds to a particular attribute. These dimensionally
interpretable embeddings can be used for concept classification; (d) the abstract world (concept
lattice) can be recovered from the learned formal context in (c) through FCA, and the concept lattice
can be viewed as a hierarchy for concept classification.
3.1    L ATTICE C ONSTRUCTION FROM M ASKED L ANGUAGE M ODELS

The relationship between objects and attributes can be explored by probing using a cloze prompt,
for example, "[MASK]g is an animal that can [MASK]m ", where [MASK]g and [MASK]m serve
as placeholders for objects and attributes, respectively. This type of template, where both object and
attribute tokens are masked, is referred to as a concept pattern, denoted by b. The instantiation of
a pattern with a specific object-attribute pair (g, m) is termed the filling of b, denoted as bg,m . For
partial fillings of the pattern, we use bg,· to denote filling with the object g alone, and b·,m for the
attribute m alone. Figure 2a illustrates a concept pattern along with its potential fillings.

Probabilistic triadic formal context We estimate the conditional dependencies between objects and
attributes using pθ (g|b·,m ) or pθ (m|bg,· ). By cataloguing all possible fillings of objects and attributes
within a domain, we construct a conditional probability matrix that serves as an approximation of the
formal context for lattice construction. The accuracy of this formal context largely depends on the
pattern’s efficacy in capturing the intended concept domain and its ability to mitigate confounding
influences from other factors. To address these challenges, we utilize multiple patterns and propose
the creation of a probabilistic triadic formal context, represented as a three-dimensional tensor.
Definition 7 (construction of probabilistic triadic formal context). Given a pretrained MLM denoted
as pθ , and considering a set of objects G and a set of attributes M that the model has been trained
on (i.e., G, M ⊆ V where V is the vocabulary), and a set of patterns B, the triadic formal context
Y can be constructed by setting either Yg,m,b = pθ (g|b·,m ) or Yg,m,b = pθ (m|bg,· ), where g ∈ G,
m ∈ M , and b ∈ B.

Fig. 2b provides a normalized representation of a formal context incidence matrix using a single pat-
tern. However, constructing the complete three-way tensor, which requires calculating the conditional
probability among any combination of objects, attributes, and patterns, involves a time complexity of
O(|G||M ||B|). To address efficiency, we propose a method that requires only |B|⌈ |G|            |M |
                                                                                      β ⌉ or |B|⌈ β ⌉
evaluations of the cloze prompt in the MLM, with β representing the batch size and ⌈·⌉ the ceiling


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


function. Although the number of possible natural language patterns is infinity in theory, considering
the top most informative patterns is sufficient for construction (see Lemma 2). Therefore, it is
reasonable to assume that |G| ≫ |M | ≫ |B|, rendering the time complexity nearly linear with
respect to the number of objects or attributes. The efficient construction is formalized as follows:
Definition 8 (efficient construction). Let pθ (·|w\t ) ∈ R|V | denote the predicted conditional prob-
ability vector given w\t , and given a set of objects G, a set of attributes M , and a pattern b, we
construct W |M |×T (resp. W |G|×T ) such that its ith row Wi = b·,mi (resp. Wi = bgi ,· ) denote the
partial filling of pattern b with attribute mi (resp. object gi ). Let indG (resp. indM ) be the token
indexes of objects G (resp. attributes M ), the formal context of pattern b can be reconstructed by
Ŷ·,·,b := pθ (·|W |M |×T )[indG ] (resp. Ŷ·,·,b := pθ (·|W |G|×T )[indM ]).

The core idea of Def. 8 is to first extract the conditional probability over all possible tokens
(i.e., pθ (·|W |M |×T ) or pθ (·|W |G|×T )) in a batch manner, and then index the relevant conditional
probabilities using the attribute indices indM or object indices indG . This construction assumes
that either objects or attributes are included in the vocabulary, while the counterpart may consist of
multi-token text. Alternatively, instead of relying on a pre-defined set of objects and attributes within
a domain, one might generate the set of object-attribute pairs in the domain from the distribution.
However, direct sampling from the joint distribution via Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
sampling is challenging. By considering that MLMs can function as probabilistic generative models,
we employ Gibbs sampling to sample a sequence of object-attribute pairs that can be used to
approximate the joint distribution, which does not presuppose a known set of objects and attributes.
Definition 9 (formal context generation via Gibbs sampling). Given a MLM pθ and a concept pattern
b, the process begins by sampling an initial object g0 directly from pθ (·|b) and an attribute m0
from pθ (·|bg0 ,· ). At each subsequent step t (where t = 1, 2, . . .), a new object gt is sampled from
pθ (·|b·, mt−1 ) and a new attribute mt from pθ (·|bgt−1 ,· ). The conditional probabilities for all objects
and attributes are then computed based on the sequence (g0 , m0 ), · · · , (gt , mt ).

Lattice construction The reconstructed probabilistic triadic formal context, denoted as Ŷ , serves
as a smoothed version of the discrete triadic formal context. As shown in Fig. 2c, the smoothed
formal context can be viewed as a conceptual embedding that encodes the object-attribute relation in
a probabilistic space. We consider its 2-dimensional projection, which approximates the probabilistic
incidence matrix I.ˆ This approximation is achieved by aggregating over multiple patterns, either
                                  P
                                         Ŷ
through average pooling Iˆg,m = b∈B g,m,b , or max pooling Iˆg,m = maxb∈B Ŷg,m,b .
                                         |B|

As MLM outputs are softmax probabilities that may result in limited positive responses, and FCA
requires a binary input, we apply a min-max normalization approach where, given a threshold α, the
binarization is performed as follows:

                                         log(Iˆg,m ) − min log(I)
                                                               ˆ
                                Ig,m =                            > α.                                   (7)
                                                  ˆ − min log(I)
                                         max log(I)             ˆ

After binarization, a concept lattice is constructed by: (1) generating all formal concepts by identifying
combinations of objects and attributes that fulfill the closure property defined in Def. 3, and (2)
structuring these formal concepts into a lattice based on the partial order relations defined in Def. 4.
Fig. 2d illustrates the resulting lattice with α = 0.5 and the corresponding objects of each concept. 1

3.2   I NDUCTIVE B IASES OF F ORMAL C ONTEXT L EARNING

We introduce the formal context learning under certain abstractions. Drawing inspiration from natural
language concept analysis (Kamphuis & Sarbo, 1998), implying that conceptualization arises from
observing the attributes present in objects, we formalize the world model as a ground-truth formal
context defined as F0 := (G0 , M0 , I0 ). As data captures the perception of the world, we formalize
each data point as a "sentence" x describing that an object has a particular attribute, which can be
viewed a filling of a concept pattern with an object-attribute pair "sampled" from F0 .
   1
     In FCA, concepts are inherently unnamed. Names, if required, must be determined in a separate post-
processing phase.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 A Simple Formal Context Learning Algorithm
    Input: A dataset D, a set of objects G and attributes M
    Output: An estimated formal context incidence matrix I = [0, 1]|G|×|M |
  initialize I = 0|G|×|M |
  for w ∈ D do
       for wi ∈ w do
           for wj ∈ w do
               if wi ∈ G, wj ∈ M then
                   I(Gw ,Mw ) = I(Gw ,Mw ) + 1
                       i    j        i    j
               end if
           end for
       end for
  end for
  normalization: I = normalize(I)
  return I


Abstraction 1 (data generation). Given a formal context F0 := (G0 , M0 , I0 ) and a set of concept
patterns B, each data point x is generated by filling a concept pattern sampled i.i.d. from B with
an object-attribute pair (g, m) sampled i.i.d. from the formal context F0 . Thus, each data point is
represented as x = bg,m , where b ∈ B, g ∈ G0 , m ∈ M0 , and (g, m) ∈ I0 .

Under such an abstraction, formal context learning aims to reconstruct the world model (original
formal context) from the data points generated by Abstraction 1. Given that real-world data generation
is not as perfect as Abstraction 1 and might be influenced by other factors or noises. We hence
acknowledge that an exact reconstruction of the original formal context is improbable. Therefore, we
focus on ϵ-approximate formal context learning.
Definition 10 (ϵ-approximate formal context learning). Given a set of N data points D = {wi }N     i=1
generated according to Abstraction 1, ϵ-approximate formal context learning seeks to derive a
probabilistic formal context incidence matrix Iˆ from D, such that the distance d(I,
                                                                                   ˆ I0 ) ≤ ϵ.

Our hypothesis is that identifying the formal context incidence matrix from the sentences generated
from Abstraction 1 is possible. Lemma 1 establishes the feasibility of identifying the formal context
from the generated dataset at the population level.
Lemma 1 (feasibility). Let D = {wi }N        1 be a dataset consisting of data points generated by
Abstraction 1, then there exists an identification algorithm F mapping a dataset D to a formal context
I such that F (D) converges to the ground-truth formal context I0 as N → ∞ almost surely, i.e.,
Algorithm
F (D) → I 1≈isI0an. example algorithm. A full proof of Lemma 1 is provided in the appendix, but
the core idea is to demonstrate that I converges to I0 almost surely when the number of data points
N → ∞ by using the law of large numbers and concentration inequalities.

MLMs as formal context learner The MLM objective can be interpreted as a non-linear version
of Gaussian graphical models for latent structure learning (Mohan et al., 2012), which resembles
Lasso regression that aims to predict xi from x\i with each nonzero coefficient corresponding to a
dependency weight. Hence, we can formalize MLM objective as formal context learning by:
Definition 11 (masked formal context learning). Let D = {wi }N  1 be a dataset consisting of data
points generated by Abstraction 1, the goal of masked formal context learning is to minimize
   PLLMFCL = −Ew∼D (log pθ (g|b·,m ) + log pθ (m|bg,· ))) − Ew∼D,s∈b\g,m (log pθ (s|b·,· )) .            (8)

The first two loss terms directly encourage the capture of the dependency between objects and
attributes under certain the pattern b, i.e., pθ (g|b·,m ) and pθ (m|bg,· ). The third loss term implies that
the quality of the chosen pattern significantly influences the effectiveness of formal context learning.
The intuition is that a pattern might convey much irrelevant or confounding information that confuses
the learning of object-attribute dependency. We characterize this confounding information as latent
variable information Z. Lemma 2 shows the significant role of the patterns and the influence of Z.
Lemma 2 (role of pattern). Let |CMIpθ (g; m|b)| denote the conditional MI without latent variables,
and CMIp (g; m|Z; b) denote the conditional MI with latent variables Z, we have |CMIpθ (g; m|b)| −
CMIp (g; m|Z; b) ≤ 2H(Z|b), where H(Z|b) is the conditional entropy.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



    Table 1: The candidate concept patterns used to construct formal contexts for different datasets.

           Dataset                                    A set of concept patterns
                                          [MASK]m is the official language of [MASK]g
    Region-language                       The official language of [MASK]g is [MASK]m
                                        [MASK]m serves as the official language in [MASK]g
                                          The [MASK]g is an animal that can [MASK]m
    Animal-behavior               The [MASK]g is a type of animal that has the ability to [MASK]m
                                   An animal known as the [MASK]g has the ability to [MASK]m
                                    The [MASK]g is a disease that has symptom of [MASK]m
    Disease-symptom        People who infected the disease [MASK]g typically has symptom of [MASK]m
                                         [MASK]m is a kind of symptom of the [MASK]g



Lemma 2 implies that the difference between |CMIpθ (g; m|b)| and CMIp (g; m|Z; b) is bounded
by the conditional entropy H(Z|b). This means that if the concept pattern b provides sufficient
information that uniquely describes the object-attribute relationship without introducing confounding
factors (i.e., H(Z|b) ≈ 0 ), the conditional MI directly captures the dependency between objects and
attributes. This re-affirms the importance of the quality of patterns and their critical role in accurately
capturing the object-attribute relations. A full proof of Lemma 2 is detailed in the appendix.

    Takeaway 1.

      The inductive bias of MLMs in lattice structure learning originates from the learned condi-
      tional dependency between tokens. The precision of the lattice construction depends mainly
      on the quality of the chosen pattern in exclusively capturing the object-attribute relationship.



4         E VALUATION

In this section, we evaluate whether the formal contexts constructed from MLMs align with estab-
lished gold standards and assess their capability to reconstruct concept lattices. We have developed
several gold-standard formal context datasets across various domains for empirical analysis (Sec. 4.1).
Specifically, our investigation addresses two key research questions: 1) Can the conditional probabili-
ties in MLMs effectively recover formal contexts (Sec. 4.2)? 2) Can the reconstructed formal contexts
be utilized to construct concept lattices (Sec. 4.3)? We substantiate our findings with additional
ablation studies and case analyses in Sec. 4.4.

4.1        F ORMAL C ONTEXT DATASETS

We construct three new datasets of formal contexts in different domains, serving as the gold standards
for evaluation. Two of them are derived from commonsense knowledge, and the third one is from the
biomedical domain. 1) Region-language details the official languages used in different administrative
regions around the world. This dataset is extracted from Wiki44k (Ho et al., 2018), utilizing the
"official language" relation, which is a densely connected part of Wikidata; 2) Animal-behavior
captures the behaviors (e.g., live on land) of animals (e.g., tiger). This dataset is constructed through
human curation. We compiled a set of the most popular animal names in English, considering
only those with a single token. We identified 25 behaviors based on animal attributes that aid in
distinguishing them, such as habitat preferences, dietary habits, and methods of locomotion; 3)
Disease-symptom describes the symptoms associated with various diseases. We extracted diseases
represented by a single token and their symptoms from a dataset available on Kaggle2 . These datasets
vary in terms of density and the nature of objects and attributes. In particular, the Animal-behavior
dataset is notably denser compared to the other two that are relatively sparse. Additionally, these
datasets accommodate cases where objects or attributes can consist of multi-token texts. We design
three concept patterns for each dataset by varying the positions of objects and attributes, as given in
Table 1. The detailed statistics for these datasets are summarized in Table 4 in the appendix.

     2
         https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/itachi9604/disease-symptom-description-dataset


                                                        7
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                          abdominal pain


                                                                          loss of appetite
                                                                          chest pain



                                                                          high fever
                       BERT-uncased


                                                                          headache
                                                                          diarrhoea
         0.4


                                                                          skin rash
                                                                          sweating
                                                                          vomiting
                                                                                                                   Animals that do not fly


                                                                          malaise
                                                                          nausea
                                                                          fatigue
                       BioBert-uncased


                                                                          itching
                                                                          cough
                                            0.327                                                          20


                                                                          chills
                       PharmBERT-uncased                                                                           Animals that fly
                   0.261                          0.255              AIDS
                                                                  Arthritis                                10
Hit@10

                                                                  Asthma
         0.2                           0.182                         Cold
               0.136       0.147                                 Diabetes                                   0
                                                                 Hepatitis
                                                                  Malaria
                                                                 Paralysis                                 10
                                                               Pneumonia
                                                              Tuberculosis
         0.0
                All diseases           popular diseases            Vertigo                                         20         0       20
                               (a)                                            (b)                                       (c)
 Figure 3: (a) Comparision of BERT, BioBERT, and PharmBERT on formal context learning on
 disease-symptom; (b) The conditional distribution between diseases and symptoms learned by
 BioBERT; (c) The T-SNE visualization of the conceptual embeddings constructed from the learned
 formal context incidence matrix of animals, where the colors denote whether the animals fly or not.

Table 2: The performance of formal context reconstruction on Region-language and Animal-behavior
by the generated conditional probability of three variants of bidirectional MLMs (BERT), where −
denotes trivial results whose numbers are ≤ 0.1. The shaded rows are the baseline results. The best
and second best results are bold and underline numbers, respectively.
                                                                  Region-language                               Animal-Behavior
                                                    MRR (↑)   Hit@1 (↑) Hit@5 (↑)   Hit@10 (↑)   MRR (↑)    Hit@1 (↑) Hit@5 (↑)    Hit@10 (↑)
         BERT-base               BertEmb.            0.340      0.249       0.403      0.478        -           -          -            -
                             BertLattice (avg.)      0.823      0.721       0.950      0.975      0.208       0.078      0.291        0.493
                             BertLattice (max.)      0.842      0.751       0.945      0.975      0.207       0.078      0.288        0.493
     BERT-distill                BertEmb.            0.094      0.002       0.109      0.214        -           -          -            -
                             BertLattice (avg.)      0.838      0.746       0.945      0.975      0.207       0.067      0.301        0.537
                             BertLattice (max.)      0.831      0.736       0.945      0.970      0.206       0.068      0.310        0.519
     BERT-large                  BertEmb.            0.213      0.114       0.249      0.383        -           -          -            -
                             BertLattice (avg.)      0.833      0.731       0.970      0.975      0.194       0.067      0.276        0.453
                             BertLattice (max.)      0.819      0.706       0.960      0.975      0.192       0.070      0.267        0.459


Implementation and computational resources We instantiate our approach (i.e. Def. 8) with
BERT and dub it as BertLattice. We also design a naive baseline model, dubbed as BertEmb., which
predicts object-attribute relations by measuring the distance of the last-layer hidden state embedding
vectors of objects and attributes. All experiments were conducted on machines equipped with Nvidia
A100 GPU. Our method does not require training of MLMs. The extraction of the formal contexts is
very fast (≤ 60 seconds) for all three datasets.

 4.2             C AN CONDITIONAL PROBABILITY IN MLM S RECOVER FORMAL CONTEXT ?

We evaluate the capability of MLMs on reconstructing formal contexts from the conditional probabil-
ities by comparing the recovered formal contexts with gold standards. We formalize the problem as a
ranking problem and use ranking-based metrics commonly used in ranking problems, specifically
                                                         PN                          PN
mean reciprocal rank (MRR) and hit@k: MRR = N1 i=1 rank          1
                                                                   i
                                                                     , hit@k = N1 i=1 hiti . We
consider three variants of BERT models: BERT-distill, BERT-base, and BERT-large. For each model,
we use the uncased versions and compare the Average pooling and Max pooling variants, denoted as
BertLattice (avg.) and BertLattice (max.), respectively.
As Table 2 shows, all variants of BertLattice perform significantly better than BertEmb. on both
Region-language and Animal-behavior datasets. BERT-base performs best in terms of MRR and
Hit@1 while BERT-distill and BERT-large outperform BERT-base on Animal-behavior and Region-
language in terms of Hit@5 and Hit@10, respectively. The average results on Region-language
surpass those of Animal-behavior. We hypothesize that this is due to the objects and attributes in
Region-language being more frequently observed in Wikipedia, where BERT is pretrained. This
hypothesis is supported by the observation in Fig. 3(a) showing BERT’s relatively lower performance
on the domain-specific Disease-symptom dataset, while BioBERT and PharmBERT, pretrained on
biomedical texts, significantly outperform BERT-base. Additionally, results on popular diseases are
better than those on other diseases, suggesting that observation frequency significantly influences
MLMs’ ability to learn correct object-attribute correspondences. Fig. 3(b) shows part of the Disease-
symptom formal context extracted from BioBERT. BioBERT accurately identifies symptoms for


                                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          0.8                                                                Top

                                           Spanish Chinese Tamil Bengali Afrikaans                 Czech      Latvian


   F1 Score
                                        Argentina ChileChina Sri Lanka Bangladesh South Africa Czech Republic Latvia
                                           Urdu Georgian                                                 Finnish
          0.4           F1 (min-max)     Pakistan Georgia
                                                      Cameroon Canada              Luxembourg Macau      Finland
                                                                                                               Cyprus
                        F1 (sigmoid)
                        mAP (min-max)                   Belgium          Switzerland           Morocco

                        mAP (sigmoid)                                                          German and French

          0.0                                                          European Union
                                                                                               German
                                                                                               French
                 0.3 0.6 0.9
                  threshold                                                 Bottom


                  (a)                                                      (b)                                          (c)
Figure 4: (a) Comparison of different normalization approaches for lattice construction under different
thresholds; (b) The reconstructed Region-language concept lattice. For visualization, only a part
of the concepts and the corresponding objects are labeled. We also highlight German and French
speaking lattice paths; (c) The conceptual embeddings of regions/countries in the dimension of
German-speaking and French-speaking.

Table 3: The performance (F1 score and mAP) on concept classification, where − denotes trivial
results whose numbers are ≤ 0.1. The shaded rows denote the baseline results. The best and second
best results are bold and underline numbers, respectively.

                                               Region-language                                    Animal-behavior Disease-symptom
                                               F1 (↑) mAP (↑)                                     F1 (↑) mAP (↑) F1 (↑) mAP (↑)
                   BertEmb.                    0.214    0.027                                     0.269   0.393     -         -
   BERT-base   BertLattice (avg.)              0.630    0.528                                     0.643   0.388     -         -
               BertLattice (max.)              0.703    0.667                                     0.620   0.413     -         -
                   BertEmb.
  BERT-distill BertLattice                     0.207    0.026                                     0.292   0.382     -         -
                           (avg.)              0.249    0.291                                     0.651   0.396     -         -
               BertLattice (max.)              0.703    0.667                                     0.617   0.417     -         -
                   BertEmb.
  BERT-large BertLattice                       0.231    0.028                                     0.395   0.395     -         -
                           (avg.)              0.673    0.635                                     0.641   0.389     -         -
               BertLattice (max.)              0.709    0.701                                     0.636   0.407     -         -
   BioBERT         BertEmb.                      -        -                                       0.632   0.385   0.345     0.256
               BertLattice (avg.)                -        -                                       0.598   0.391   0.601     0.377
               BertLattice (max.)                -        -                                       0.631   0.382   0.611     0.389

common diseases, such as Asthma with symptoms Cough and chest pain, and Cold with symptom
chills. Full visualizations of the constructed formal contexts are available in the appendix.

4.3      C AN THE RECONSTRUCTED FORMAL CONTEXTS IDENTIFY CONCEPTS CORRECTLY ?

We now evaluate whether the formal contexts reconstructed from the conditional probabilities can be
used to identify concepts. We frame this as a multilabel concept classification task, aiming to identify
the correct concepts given an object. Specifically, we classify objects by determining whether they
possess all the attributes of a given concept, which is done by measuring the conditional probability
under the given patterns. We use F1 score and mean Average Precision (mAP) as metrics, which
balance precision and recall and are commonly used in multilabel classification (Xiong et al., 2022).
Table 3 presents the results of concept classification. Generally, we find that all variants of BertLattice
outperform BertEmb. on all three datasets. The BERT-base, BERT-distill, and BERT-large models
perform well on the Region-language and Animal-behavior datasets but not as well on the Disease-
symptom dataset. We hypothesize that this is because these BERT variants are not pretrained on
texts involving disease-symptom information. This hypothesis is supported by the observation that
BioBERT variants achieve more reasonable results in the Disease–symptom data set. An interesting
exception is that BioBERT also performs well on the Animal-behavior dataset.

4.4      A BLATION S TUDIES AND V ISUALIZATION

Influence of normalization & threshold We investigate the impact of different normalization
methods on the performance of lattice construction from the conditional probability. We compare
two normalization techniques: min-max normalization, which normalizes at the matrix level, and


                                                                           9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


sigmoid normalization, which normalizes at the element-wise level. As shown in Fig. 4(a), sigmoid
normalization achieves optimal results when the threshold α ≈ 0.5, whereas min-max normalization
performs best when α ≈ 0.6. Notably, different from the sigmoid normalization, further increasing
the threshold of the min-max normalization does not significantly degrade performance, highlighting
the robustness and advantages of min-max normalization.

Visualization Fig. 4(b) visualizes the concept lattice constructed from the Region-language datasets.
The model discovers some latent concepts that humans have not predefined. For example, it identifies
the concept of "German and French speaking regions," which includes Switzerland, Luxembourg,
Belgium, etc. These are parent classes of the European Union because it includes regions where
both German and French, among other languages, are spoken. Importantly, this Region-language
concept lattice is not predefined by human ontology. Fig. 4(c) and Fig. 3(c) further illustrate the
conceptual embeddings derived from the conditional distributions of MLMs. The first figure shows
the T-SNE embeddings and demonstrates that the flyable animals and non-flyable animals are clearly
distinguished. Fig. 3(c) shows that the "German and French speaking regions" concept corresponds
to a set of countries that speak both German and French in the embedding space.

5    R ELATED W ORK
Conceptual knowledge in language models Pretrained MLMs have demonstrated capabilities in
capturing conceptual knowledge (Wu et al., 2023; Lin & Ng, 2022). A variety of methods have been
proposed to probe MLMs for such conceptual knowledge. Most of them use binary probing classifiers
(Aspillaga et al., 2021; Michael et al., 2020) or hierarchical clustering (Sajjad et al., 2022; Hawasly
et al., 2024) to identify concepts and validate these against established human-defined ontologies
like WordNet (Miller, 1995). Despite these methods offering empirical insights into the conceptual
structures encoded by MLMs, they predominantly explore what MLMs learn without addressing how
the masked pretraining objectives facilitate the encoding of these conceptual structures. Moreover, it
is argued that MLMs can develop novel concepts that do not align strictly with existing human-defined
ontologies (Dalvi et al., 2022). This implies that traditional methods may not capture the full extent
of conceptual understanding that MLMs are capable of. From a theoretical perspective, recent studies
suggest that language models represent concepts through distinct directions in the latent spaces of
their hidden activations (Chanin et al., 2024). This observation aligns with the linear representation
hypothesis, implying that attributes or features are represented as directional vectors within a model’s
hidden activations (Elhage et al., 2022; Park et al., 2024). Our work is highly different from previous
research, as we consider a formal definition of concepts without any reliance on human-defined
concepts and ontologies, and we leverage a mathematical framework (FCA) to analyze concepts.

6    C ONCLUSION
This paper investigates how conceptualization emerges from the pretraining of MLMs through the lens
of FCA, a mathematical framework for deriving concept lattices from observations of object-attribute
relationships. We demonstrate that MLMs implicitly learn the conditional dependencies between
objects and attributes under certain patterns, which can be interpreted as a probabilistic formal
context that facilitates the reconstruction of the underlying concept lattice. We then propose a novel
framework for lattice construction and discuss the origin of the inductive bias for lattice structure
learning. Notably, our analysis of the conceptualization capabilities of MLMs does not rely on
predefined human concepts and ontologies, allowing for the discovery of latent concepts inherent in
natural language. Our empirical findings on three new datasets support our hypothesis.
Limitations and future work Currently, our FCA framework of MLMs is limited to single-relational
data. An immediate future work is to extend FCA to multi-relational data by using multi-relational
concept analysis (Wajnberg et al., 2021). For instance, a "Pizza lattice" could be constructed based on
both the toppings and sauces of pizzas. Our lattice analysis could also be adapted to autoregressive
language models, like GPT series (Ye et al., 2023), which predict the next token given all preceding
ones. However, this adaptation requires the masked token for either objects or attributes to be placed
at the end of the concept pattern, which may not fit well in some domains.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

Our study does not involve any training or hyperparameter tuning, but instead relies on pre-trained
masked language models. We use the PyTorch Transformer library for all model implementations.3
Our code and datasets are included as supplemental materials and will be made available upon
acceptance. Proofs of the lemmas presented in this paper are also provided in the appendix in the
supplemental materials.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT.

This work was partially funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in the project
“COFFEE” — STA 572_15-2.

R EFERENCES
Badr AlKhamissi, Millicent Li, Asli Celikyilmaz, Mona T. Diab, and Marjan Ghazvininejad. A
  review on language models as knowledge bases. CoRR, abs/2204.06031, 2022.

Animashree Anandkumar, Vincent Y. F. Tan, Furong Huang, and Alan S. Willsky. High-dimensional
  structure estimation in ising models: Tractable graph families. CoRR, abs/1107.1736, 2011.

Carlos Aspillaga, Marcelo Mendoza, and Alvaro Soto. Inspecting the concept knowledge graph
  encoded by modern language models. In ACL/IJCNLP (Findings), volume ACL/IJCNLP 2021 of
  Findings of ACL, pp. 2984–3000. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021.

David Chanin, Anthony Hunter, and Oana-Maria Camburu. Identifying linear relational concepts in
  large language models. NAACL, abs/2311.08968, 2024.

Philipp Cimiano, Andreas Hotho, and Steffen Staab. Learning concept hierarchies from text corpora
  using formal concept analysis. J. Artif. Intell. Res., 24:305–339, 2005.

Fahim Dalvi, Abdul Rafae Khan, Firoj Alam, Nadir Durrani, Jia Xu, and Hassan Sajjad. Discovering
  latent concepts learned in BERT. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2022.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In NAACL-HLT (1), pp. 4171–4186.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019.

Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Grosse, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah. Toy models of
  superposition. CoRR, abs/2209.10652, 2022.

Bernhard Ganter, Gerd Stumme, and R Wille. Formal concept analysis: Methods, and applications in
  computer science. TU: Dresden, Germany, 2003.

Bernhard Ganter, Gerd Stumme, and Rudolf Wille. Formal concept analysis: foundations and
  applications, volume 3626. springer, 2005.

Majd Hawasly, Fahim Dalvi, and Nadir Durrani. Scaling up discovery of latent concepts in deep NLP
 models. In EACL (1), pp. 793–806. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024.

Vinh Thinh Ho, Daria Stepanova, Mohamed H. Gad-Elrab, Evgeny Kharlamov, and Gerhard Weikum.
  Rule learning from knowledge graphs guided by embedding models. In ISWC (1), volume 11136
  of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 72–90. Springer, 2018.

Robert Jäschke, Andreas Hotho, Christoph Schmitz, Bernhard Ganter, and Gerd Stumme. TRIAS -
  an algorithm for mining iceberg tri-lattices. In ICDM, pp. 907–911. IEEE Computer Society, 2006.
   3
       https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.Transformer.html


                                                       11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Vera Kamphuis and Janos J. Sarbo. Natural language concept analysis. In CoNLL, pp. 205–214.
  ACL, 1998.
Ruixi Lin and Hwee Tou Ng. Does BERT know that the IS-A relation is transitive? In ACL (2), pp.
  94–99. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022.
Julian Michael, Jan A. Botha, and Ian Tenney. Asking without telling: Exploring latent ontologies
  in contextual representations. In EMNLP (1), pp. 6792–6812. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2020.
George A. Miller. Wordnet: A lexical database for english. Commun. ACM, 38(11):39–41, 1995.
Karthik Mohan, Michael Jae-Yoon Chung, Seungyeop Han, Daniela M. Witten, Su-In Lee, and
  Maryam Fazel. Structured learning of gaussian graphical models. In NIPS, pp. 629–637, 2012.
Kiho Park, Yo Joong Choe, and Victor Veitch. The linear representation hypothesis and the geometry
  of large language models. ICML, 2024.
Hao Peng, Xiaozhi Wang, Shengding Hu, Hailong Jin, Lei Hou, Juanzi Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Qun
  Liu. COPEN: probing conceptual knowledge in pre-trained language models. In EMNLP, pp.
  5015–5035. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, Patrick S. H. Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu,
  and Alexander H. Miller. Language models as knowledge bases? In EMNLP/IJCNLP (1), pp.
  2463–2473. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019.
Hassan Sajjad, Nadir Durrani, Fahim Dalvi, Firoj Alam, Abdul Rafae Khan, and Jia Xu. Analyzing
  encoded concepts in transformer language models. In NAACL-HLT, pp. 3082–3101. Association
  for Computational Linguistics, 2022.
Wolfgang G. Stock. Concepts and semantic relations in information science. J. Assoc. Inf. Sci.
 Technol., 61(10):1951–1969, 2010.
Betty Van Aken, Benjamin Winter, Alexander Löser, and Felix A Gers. How does bert answer
  questions? a layer-wise analysis of transformer representations. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM
  international conference on information and knowledge management, pp. 1823–1832, 2019.
Mickaël Wajnberg, Petko Valtchev, Mario Lezoche, Alexandre Blondin-Massé, and Hervé Panetto.
 Fca went (multi-) relational, but does it make any difference? In 9th workshop" What Can FCA
 Do for Artificial Intelligence?" colacated with 30th International Joint Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence, IJCAI-21, volume 2972, pp. 27–38, 2021.
Alex Wang and Kyunghyun Cho. BERT has a mouth, and it must speak: BERT as a markov random
  field language model. CoRR, abs/1902.04094, 2019.
Weiqi Wu, Chengyue Jiang, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, and Kewei Tu. Do plms know and understand
 ontological knowledge? In ACL (1), pp. 3080–3101. Association for Computational Linguistics,
 2023.
Bo Xiong, Michael Cochez, Mojtaba Nayyeri, and Steffen Staab. Hyperbolic embedding inference
  for structured multi-label prediction. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Junjie Ye, Xuanting Chen, Nuo Xu, Can Zu, Zekai Shao, Shichun Liu, Yuhan Cui, Zeyang Zhou,
  Chao Gong, Yang Shen, et al. A comprehensive capability analysis of gpt-3 and gpt-3.5 series
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10420, 2023.
Tianyi Zhang and Tatsunori Hashimoto. On the inductive bias of masked language modeling:
  From statistical to syntactic dependencies. In NAACL-HLT, pp. 5131–5146. Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Statistics of the used datasets, where density denotes the percentages of positive responses.

                      #objects   #attributes   density       object token                 attribute token
  Region-language       165          45         2.59     single or multi-token        single-token
  Animal-behavior       354          25         40.3         single-token              multi-token
  Disease-symptom       122          33         6.76         single-token         single or multi-token


A PPENDIX

S UPPLEMENTAL RESULTS

Computational resources All experiments were conducted on machines equipped with 4 Nvidia
A100 GPU. Our method do not require training of MLMs. The extraction of the formal contexts for
our datasets is very fast (≤ 60 seconds).


P ROOF OF LEMMAS

Lemma 1 (feasibility). Let D = {wi }N       i=1 be a dataset consisting of data points generated by
Abstraction 1, then there exists an identification algorithm F : D → I such that F (D) converges to
the ground-truth formal context I0 as N → ∞ almost surely, i.e., F (D) → I ≈ I0 .



Algorithm 1 A Formal Context Learning Algorithm
    Input: A dataset D, a set of objects G and attributes M
    Output: An estimated formal context incidence matrix I = [0, 1]|G|×|M |
  initialize I = 0|G|×|M |
  for w ∈ D do
       for wi ∈ w do
           for wj ∈ w do
               if wi ∈ G, wj ∈ M then
                   I(Gw ,Mw ) = I(Gw ,Mw ) + 1
                       i    j        i    j
               end if
           end for
       end for
  end for
  normalization: I = normalize(I)
  return I


Proof. The algorithm 1 is constructed to derive a formal context I from D, Our target is to demonstrate
that I converges to I0 almost surely when the number of data points N → ∞. Let Ω denote the
sample space, IN represent the learned formal context from DN , and XN = d(IN , I0 ) denote the
                                                                  a.s.
random variable indexed by N . We need to establish that XN −−→ 0.
Let us define EN            :=     {ω ∈ Ω : XN (ω) > ϵ} for ϵ           >        0,       where ω repre-

                                                                                      1    g, m ∈ xt
sents an element of the sample space.                    Let Yg,m,t      =                           , and
                                                                                      0    otherwise

                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Vietnamese
                             Portuguese
                             Indonesian


                             Norwegian


                             Romanian
                             Bulgarian


                             Ukrainian
                             Afrikaans


                             Georgian


                             Japanese
                             Icelandic
                             Burmese
                             Albanian


                             Estonian
                             Croatian


                             Swedish
                             German
                             Chinese


                             Slovene
                             Spanish
                             Russian
                             Catalan


                             Serbian
                             Bengali


                             Latvian


                             Persian
                             English


                             Turkish
                             Finnish


                             Korean
                             Danish


                             French


                             Slovak
                             Khmer
                             Arabic


                             Nepali
                             Italian
                             Czech
                             Dutch


                             Greek


                             Malay


                             Polish


                             Tamil
                             Hindi


                             Sami


                             Urdu
                             Thai
                    Albania
                     Algeria
                    Andorra
                      Angola
                  Australia
                     Austria
                    Bahrain
               Bangladesh
                   Belgium
                       Benin
Bosnia and Herzegovina
                 Botswana
                       Brazil
                      Brunei
                   Bulgaria
              Burkina Faso
                    Burundi
                 Cambodia
                 Cameroon
                    Canada
               Cape Verde
 Central African Republic
                        Chad
                        Chile
                       China
                  Comoros
                     Croatia
                     Cyprus
           Czech Republic
                  Denmark
                    Djibouti
                  Dominica
     Dominican Republic
                   Ecuador
                       Egypt
                    Estonia
                     Finland
                      France
                      Gabon
                    Gambia
                  Germany
                      Ghana
                     Greece
                     Guinea
            Guinea Bissau
                         Haiti
                 Honduras
                     Iceland
                        India
                 Indonesia
                          Iran
                          Iraq
                         Italy
                       Japan
                      Jordan
               Kazakhstan
                     Kiribati
                      Kuwait
                Kyrgyzstan
                       Latvia
                   Lebanon
                    Lesotho
             Liechtenstein
              Luxembourg
                      Malawi
                         Mali
                     Mexico
                  Myanmar
                       Nepal
             New Zealand
                        Niger
                     Nigeria
               North Korea
                    Norway
                        Palau
                Philippines
                      Poland
                   Portugal
       Republic of Ireland
   Republic of the Congo
                  Romania
               San Marino
                   Slovakia
              South Africa
              South Korea
                       Spain
                    Sweden
               Switzerland
                        Syria
               Timor Leste
                       Tonga
     Trinidad and Tobago
                      Turkey
                      Tuvalu
                    Ukraine
          United Kingdom
United States of America
                   Uruguay
                   Vanuatu

Figure 5: The normalized conditional probability of regions and their official language. The probabil-
ity is generated by the cloze prompt "[object] is the official language of [attribute]".


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                           P                 PN
                                                         1
consider    P (EN )         =         P      g∈G,m∈M              Yg,m,t − I0g,m > ϵ  ,   we      have
                                                        N
                                                             t=1
        (a)                     N
                   [         1 X                   ϵ
P (EN ) ≤ P                      Yg,m,t − I0g,m > 
                            N t=1                  q
                   g∈G,m∈M
                                N
                                                     !
           (b)   X          1 X                    ϵ
           ≤           P          Yg,m,t − I0g,m >
                            N t=1                  q
               g∈G,m∈M

                        2N ϵ2
           (c)

           ≤ 2q exp − 2         ,
                         q
where inequalities (a) and (b) use the union bound, and (c) applies the Hoeffding’s inequality.
By applying the Borel-Cantelli lemma, we have P (lim supN →∞ EN ) = 0.              Hence,
P (limN →∞ XN = 0) = 1. This means that I converges to I0 almost surely when N → ∞.
Lemma 2 (role of pattern). Let |CMIpθ (g; m|b)| denote the conditional MI without latent variables
and CMIp (g; m|Z; b) denote the conditional MI with latent variables Z, we have |CMIpθ (g; m|b)| −
CMIp (g; m|Z; b) ≤ 2H(Z|b), where H(Z|b) is the conditional entropy.

Proof. Proposition 3 from Zhang & Hashimoto (2021) shows that the dependency between two
tokens can be captured by conditional MI. Our lemma can be proved in a similar way by viewing that
the objects and attributes are all tokens in the vocabulary. That is g, m ∈ V .
Using the definition of conditional MI, we start with:
               CMIp (g; m|Z; b) = CMIp (g; m|b) − CMIp (g; Z|b) + CMIp (g; Z|m, b)
Expanding this, we get:
                     CMIp (g; m|Z; b) = CMIp (g; m|b) + H(Z|g, b) − H(Z|b)
                                        + H(Z|m, b) − H(Z|g, m, b).
Now, let’s consider the difference:
                       |CMIpθ (g; m|b)| − CMIp (g; m|Z; b)
                      = CMIp (g; m|b) − CMIp (g; m|Z; b)
                      = − H(Z|g, b) + H(Z|b) − H(Z|m, b) + H(Z|g, m, b)
Next, apply the inequality properties of entropy:
                  CMIp (g; m|b) − CMIp (g; m|Z; b) ≤ H(Z|b) + H(Z|g, m, b)
Since entropy is always non-negative, we further have:
                                          H(Z|g, m, b) ≤ H(Z|b)
Combining these, we get:
                  |CMIpθ (g; m|b)| − CMIp (g; m|Z; b) ≤ H(Z|b) + H(Z|g, m, b)
                                                      ≤ 2H(Z|b)
Therefore, we conclude that:
                          |CMIpθ (g; m|b)| − CMIp (g; m|Z; b) ≤ 2H(Z|b).
This completes the proof.


                                                    15
