Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D IFFUSION P OLICY P OLICY O PTIMIZATION
 Allen Z. Ren1 , Justin Lidard1 , Lars L. Ankile2,3 , Anthony Simeonov3 ,
 Pulkit Agrawal3 , Anirudha Majumdar1 , Benjamin Burchfiel4 , Hongkai Dai4 , Max Simchowitz3,5
 1
     Princeton University 2 Harvard University 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 4
     Toyota Research Institute 5 Carnegie Mellon University



                                                A BSTRACT
           We introduce Diffusion Policy Policy Optimization, DPPO, an algorithmic frame-
           work including best practices for fine-tuning diffusion-based policies (e.g. Diffu-
           sion Policy (Chi et al., 2024b)) in continuous control and robot learning tasks us-
           ing the policy gradient (PG) method from reinforcement learning (RL). PG meth-
           ods are ubiquitous in training RL policies with other policy parameterizations;
           nevertheless, they had been conjectured to be less efficient for diffusion-based
           policies. Surprisingly, we show that DPPO achieves the strongest overall perfor-
           mance and efficiency for fine-tuning in common benchmarks compared to other
           RL methods for diffusion-based policies and also compared to PG fine-tuning of
           other policy parameterizations. Through experimental investigation, we find that
           DPPO takes advantage of unique synergies between RL fine-tuning and the dif-
           fusion parameterization, leading to structured and on-manifold exploration, stable
           training, and strong policy robustness. We further demonstrate the strengths of
           DPPO in a range of realistic settings, including simulated robotic tasks with pixel
           observations, and via zero-shot deployment of simulation-trained policies on robot
           hardware in a long-horizon, multi-stage manipulation task. Webpage with code:
           diffusion-ppo.github.io.


1      I NTRODUCTION
Large-scale pre-training with additional fine-tuning has become a ubiquitous pipeline in the de-
velopment of language and image foundation models (Brown et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2021;
Ouyang et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2023). Though behavior cloning with expert data (Pomerleau,
1988) is rapidly emerging as dominant paradigm for pre-training robot policies (Florence et al.,
2019; 2022; Zhao et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024; Fu et al., 2024), their performance can be subopti-
mal (Osa et al., 2018) due to expert data being suboptimal or expert data exhibiting limited coverage
of possible environment conditions. As robot policies entail interaction with their environment, rein-
forcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto, 2018) is a natural candidate for further optimizing their
performance beyond the limits of demonstration data. However, RL fine-tuning can be nuanced for
pre-trained policies parameterized as diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020), which have emerged as
a leading parameterization for action policies (Chi et al., 2024b; Reuss et al., 2023; Pearce et al.,
2023), due in large part to their high training stability and ability to represent complex distributions
(Rombach et al., 2022; Poole et al., 2022; Kong et al., 2020; Ho et al., 2022).
Contribution 1 (DPPO). We introduce Diffusion Policy Policy Optimization (DPPO), a generic
framework as well as a set of carefully chosen design decisions for fine-tuning a diffusion-based
robot learning policy via popular policy gradient methods (Sutton et al., 1999; Schulman et al.,
2017) in reinforcement learning.
The literature has already studied improving/fine-tuning diffusion-based policies (Diffusion Policy)
using RL (Psenka et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2022; Hansen-Estruch et al., 2023), and has applied
policy gradient (PG) to fine-tuning non-interactive applications of diffusion models such as text-to-
image generation (Black et al., 2023; Clark et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2024). Yet PG methods have
been believed to be inefficient in training Diffusion Policy for continuous control tasks (Psenka
et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023). On the contrary, we show that for a Diffusion Policy pre-trained
from expert demonstrations, our methodology for fine-tuning via PG updates yields robust, high-
performing policies with favorable training behavior.


                                                       1
                                     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Observation
                       (3)
                                          DPPO: Di usion Policy Policy Optimization
 y, yaw)           Next Pose
                                                        Environment MDP                           Policy
                                            Diffusion       Diffusion                            Gradient
 alue-weighted                                MDP             MDP                                Update
loration
                                         Structured exploration    Training stability   Policy robustness
          (2)
                                     Figure 1: We introduce DPPO, Diffusion Policy Policy Optimization, that fine-tunes pre-trained
                                     Diffusion Policy using policy gradient. Extensive experiments in simulation and hardware show
                                     DPPO affords structured exploration and training stability during policy fine-tuning, and the final
                                     policy exhibits strong robustness and generalization. DPPO improves policy performance across
                                     benchmarks, including ones with pixel observations and with long-horizon rollouts that have been
                                     very challenging to solve using previous RL methods.

                                     Contribution 2 (Demonstration of DPPO’s Performance). We show that for fine-tuning a pre-
                                     trained Diffusion Policy, DPPO shows strong training stability across tasks and marked improve-
                                     ments in final performance in challenging robotic tasks in comparison to a range of alternatives,
Semantic map                         including those based on off-policy Q-learning (Wang et al., 2022; Hansen-Estruch et al., 2023;
                                     Yang et al., 2023; Psenka et al., 2023) and weighted regression (Peng et al., 2019; Peters and Schaal,
                                     2007; Kang et al., 2024), other demo-augmented RL methods (Ball et al., 2023; Nakamoto et al.,
                                     2024; Hu et al., 2023), as well as common policy parameterizations such as Gaussian and Gaussian
      shift_left
                     [1, 3, 0, 4]    Mixture models.
0]
                                     The above finding might be surprising because PG methods do not appear to take advantage of the
         swap
                                     unique capabilities of diffusion sampling (e.g., guidance (Janner et al., 2022; Ajay et al., 2023)).
                     [0, 1, 4, 3]    Through careful investigative experimentation, however, we find a unique synergy between RL
 0]                                  fine-tuning and diffusion-based policies.
       reverse       [0, 4, 1, 3]
                                     Contribution 3 (Understanding the mechanism of DPPO’s success). We complement our results
                                     with numerous investigative experiments that provide insight into the mechanisms behind DPPO’s
                        Initial:     strong performance. Compared to other common policy parameterizations, we provide evidence that
                   Orange on blue,
                    yellow on red
                                     DPPO engages in structured exploration that takes better advantage of the “manifold” of training
                                     data, and finds policies that exhibit greater robustness to perturbation.
                                     Through ablations, we further show that our design decisions overcome the speculated limitation of
                                     PG methods for fine-tuning Diffusion Policy. Finally, to justify the broad utility of DPPO, we verify
                        Goal:        its efficacy across both simulated and real environments, and in situations when either ground-truth
                    Orange on red    states or pixels are given to the policy as input.
                                     Contribution 4 (Tackling challenging robotic tasks and settings). We show DPPO is effective in
                                     challenging robotic and control settings, including pixel observations and long-horizon manipulation
                                     tasks with sparse reward. We deploy a policy trained in simulation via DPPO on real hardware in
                                     zero-shot, which exhibits smoother behavior than the baseline and transfers better to the real-world.

                                     2      R ELATED W ORK
                                     Policy optimization and its application to robotics. Policy optimization methods update an ex-
                                     plicit representation of an RL policy — typically parameterized by a neural network — by taking
                                     gradients through action likelihoods. Following the seminal policy gradient (PG) method (Williams,
                                     1992; Sutton et al., 1999), there have been a range of algorithms that further improve training stabil-
                                     ity and sample efficiency such as DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2015) and PPO (Schulman et al., 2015). PG
                                     methods have been broadly effective in training robot policies (Andrychowicz et al., 2020; Hwangbo
                                     et al., 2019; Kaufmann et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022b), largely due to their training stability with
                                     high-dimensional continuous action spaces, as well as their favorable scaling with parallelized simu-
                                     lated environments. Given the challenges of from-scratch exploration in long-horizon tasks, PG has
                                     seen great success in fine-tuning a baseline policy trained from demonstrations (Rajeswaran et al.,
                                     2017; Torne et al., 2024; Peng et al., 2021). Our experiments find DPPO performing on-policy PG
                                     often achieves stronger final performance in manipulation tasks, especially ones with long horizon


                                                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and high-dimensional action space, than off-policy Q-learning methods (Ball et al., 2023; Nakamoto
et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2023).
Learning and improving diffusion-based policies. Diffusion-based policies (Chi et al., 2024b;
Reuss et al., 2023; Ankile et al., 2024a; Ze et al.; Wang et al., 2024a; Sridhar et al., 2023; Pearce
et al., 2023) have shown recent success in robotics and decision making applications. Most typically,
these policies are trained from human demonstrations through a supervised objective, and enjoy
both high training stability and strong performance in modeling complex and multi-modal trajectory
distributions. As demonstration data are often limited and/or suboptimal, there have been many
approaches proposed to improve the performance of diffusion-based policies. One popular approach
has been to guide the diffusion denoising process using objectives such as reward signal or goal
conditioning (Janner et al., 2022; Ajay et al., 2023; Venkatraman et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024).
More recent work has explored techniques including Q-learning and weighted regression, either
from purely offline estimation (Chen et al., 2022a; Wang et al., 2022; Ding and Jin, 2023), and/or
with online interaction (Hansen-Estruch et al., 2023; Psenka et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023).
Policy gradient through diffusion models. RL techniques have been used to fine-tune diffusion
models such as ones for text-to-image generation (Fan and Lee, 2023; Fan et al., 2024; Black et al.,
2023; Wallace et al., 2023). Black et al. (2023) treat the denoising process as an MDP and apply
PPO updates. We build upon these earlier findings by embedding the denoising MDP into the
environmental MDP of the dynamics in control tasks, forming a two-layer “Diffusion Policy MDP”.
Though Psenka et al. (2023) have already shown how PG can be taken through Diffusion Policy by
propagating PG through both MDPs, they conjecture that it is likely to be ineffective due to large
action variance caused by the increased effective horizon induced from the denoising steps. Our
results contravene this supposition for diffusion-based policies in the fine-tuning setting.

3       P RELIMINARIES

Markov Decision Process. We consider a Markov Decision Process (MDP) ME NV :=
(S, A, P0 , P, R) with states s ∈ S, actions a ∈ A, initial state distribution P0 , transition proba-
bilities P , and reward R. At each timestep t, the agent (e.g., robot) observes the state st ∈ S, takes
an action at ∼ π(at | st ) ∈ A, transitions to the next state st+1 according to st+1 ∼ P (st+1 | st , at )
while receiving the reward R(st , at )1 . Fixing the MDP ME NV , we let Eπ (resp. Pπ ) denote the ex-
pectation (resp. probability distribution) over trajectories (s0 , a0 , ..., sT , aT ) with length T + 1, with
initial state distribution s0 ∼ P0 and transition operator P . We aim toPtrain a policy to optimize the
cumulative reward, discounted by a function γ(·): J (πθ ) = Eπθ ,P0 [ t≥0 γ(t)R(st , at )]
Policy optimization. The policy gradient method (e.g., R EINFORCE (Williams, 1992)) al-
lows for improving policy performance by approximating                    the gradient of this objective w.r.t.
the policy parameters: ∇θ J (πθ ) = Eπθ ,P0 [ t≥0 ∇θ log πθ (at |st )rt (st , at )], rt (st , at ) :=
                                                             P
P
   τ ≥t γ(τ )R(sτ , aτ ) where rt is the discounted cumulative future reward from time t , γ is the
discount factor that depends on the time-step, and ∇θ log πθ (at |st ) denotes the gradient of the
logarithm of the likelihood of at | st . To reduce the variance of the gradient estimation, a state-
value function V̂ πθ (st ) can be learned to approximate E[rt ]. The estimated advantage function
Âπθ (st , at ) := rt (st , at ) − V̂ πθ (st ) substitutes rt (st , at ).
Diffusion models. A denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) (Nichol and Dhariwal, 2021;
Ho et al., 2020; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) represents a continuous-valued data distribution p(·) =
p(x0 ) as the reverse denoising process of a forward noising process q(xk |xk−1 ) that iteratively adds
Gaussian noise to the data. The reverse process is parameterized by a neural network εθ (xk , k),
predicting the added noise ε that converts x0 to xk (Ho et al., 2020). Sampling starts with a random
sample xK ∼ N (0, I) and iteratively generates the denoised sample:

                         xk−1 ∼ pθ (xk−1 |xk ) := N (xk−1 ; µk (xk , εθ (xk , k)), σk2 I).                    (3.1)

Above, µk (·) is a fixed function, independent of θ, that maps xk and predicted εθ to the next mean,
and σk2 is a variance term that abides by a fixed schedule from k = 1, . . . , K. We refer the reader to
Chan (2024) for an in-depth survey.
    1
        For simplicity, we overload R(·, ·) to denote both the random variable reward and its distribution.


                                                          3
                      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Diffusion models as policies. Diffusion Policy (DP; see Chi et al. (2024b)) is a policy πθ parame-
                      terized by a DDPM which takes in s as a conditioning argument, and parameterizes pθ (ak−1 | ak , s)
                      as in (3.1). DPs can be trained via behavior cloning by fitting the conditional noise prediction
                      εθ (ak , s, k) to predict the added noise. Notice that unlike more standard policy parameterizations
                      such as unimodal Gaussian policies, DPs do not maintain an explicit likelihood of pθ (a0 | s). In this
                      work, we adopt the common practice of training DPs to predict an action chunk — a sequence of
                      actions a few time steps (denoted Tp ) into the future — to promote temporal consistency. For fair
                      comparison, our diffusion and non-diffusion baselines use the same chunk size.                                                         R^t
                                                                                        R^t

                      4         DPPO: D IFFUSION P OLICY P OLICY O PTIMIZATION                                                             s^t
s^0         s^1           s^t        s^{t+1}                     s^t                                            s^{t+1}
                      Directly applying policy gradient does not work. At first glance, applying policy gradient to a
                      new policy parameterization should be straightforward — the update simply uses the likelihood of s^t,                         s^t,
      a^0                     a^t                                            s^t,                                                                                 s^t,
                  \pi the sampled    action under the policy, πs^t,                        diffusion ass^t,a multi-step denoising pro- a_K
                                                                θ (at |st ). However, s^t,                                                         a_{K-1}        a_1
                                                               a_K          a_{K-1}        a_1         a_0                    k+1
                                                                                                                        k
                      cess introduces challenges: while the intermediate denoised action likelihood πθ (at |st , at ) can
R^0                   beR^treadily evaluated, the likelihood of the final denoised action πθ (ak=0     t     |st ) can only be approxi-
                      mated (Song et al., 2020b). In Appendix D.6       we show     that   differentiating   through  the approximated     a_{K-1}     \pi_diffusion
                                                                    a_{K-1}     \pi_diffusion    a_0
                      likelihood leads to training instability and fails to optimize the pre-trained policies. Next we take
                      the perspective of “denoising process as MDP” to address the issue.


                      Figure 2: We treat the denoising process in Diffusion Policy as an MDP, and the whole environment
                      episode can be considered as a chain of such MDPs. Now the entire chain (“Diffusion Policy MDP”,
                      MDP ) involves a Gaussian likelihood at each (denoising) step and thus can be optimized with policy
                      gradient. Blue circle denotes the state and red circle denotes the action in MDP .

                      Two-Layer “Diffusion Policy MDP”. As observed in Black et al. (2023) and Psenka et al. (2023),
                      a denoising process can be represented as a multi-step MDP in which policy likelihood of each
                      denoising step can be obtained directly. We extend this formalism by embedding the Diffusion MDP
                      into the environmental MDP, obtaining a larger “Diffusion Policy MDP” denoted MDP , visualized
                      in Fig. 2. Below, we use the notation δ to denote a Dirac distribution and ⊗ to denote a product
                      distribution. Recall the environment MDP ME NV := (S, A, P0 , P, R) in Section 3. The Diffusion
                      MDP MDP uses indices t̄(t, k) = tK + (K − k − 1) corresponding to (t, k), which increases in t but
                      (to keep the indexing conventions of diffusion) decreases lexicographically with K − 1 ≥ k ≥ 0.
                      The states, actions and rewards are

                                                                                                       0            k>0
                           s̄t̄(t,k) = (st , ak+1
                                              t   ), āt̄(t,k) = ak
                                                                  t , R̄        (s̄     , ā
                                                                         t̄(t,k) t̄(t,k) t̄(t,k) ) =                      ,
                                                                                                       R(st , a0t ) k = 0
                      where the bar-action at t̄(t, k) is the action akt after one denoising step. Reward is only given at
                      times corresponding to when a0t is taken. The initial state distribution is P̄ 0 = P0 ⊗ N (0, I),
                      corresponding to s0 ∼ P0 is the initial distribution from the environmental MDP and aK               0 ∼ N (0, I)
                      independently. Finally, the transitions are
                                                       (
                                                         (st , akt ) ∼ δ(st ,akt )                       t̄ = t̄(t, k), k > 0
                          P̄ (s̄t̄+1 | s̄t̄ , āt̄ ) =              K                     0                                   .
                                                         (st+1 , at+1 ) ∼ P (st+1 | st , at ) ⊗ N (0, I) t̄ = t̄(t, k), k = 0
                      That is, the transition moves the denoised action akt at step t̄(t, k) into the next state when k > 0, or
                      otherwise progresses the environment MDP dynamics with k = 0. The pure noise aK           t is considered
                      part of the environment when transitioning at k = 0. In light of (3.1), the policy in MDP is
                           π̄θ (āt̄(t,k) | s̄t̄(t,k) ) = πθ (akt | ak+1
                                                                     t   , st ) = N (akt ; µ(ak+1
                                                                                              t   , εθ (ak+1
                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                             , k + 1, st )), σk+1 I).   (4.1)


                                                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Fortunately, (4.1) is a Gaussian likelihood, which can be evaluated analytically and is amenable to
the policy gradient updates2 :
                            0 X                                                                 X
  ∇θ J¯(π̄θ ) = Eπ̄θ ,P̄ ,P̄ [  ∇θ log π̄θ (āt̄ | s̄t̄ )r̄(s̄t̄ , āt̄ )], r̄(s̄t̄ , āt̄ ) :=   γ(τ )R̄(s̄τ , āτ ). (4.2)
                               t̄≥0                                                        τ ≥t̄

Evaluating the above involves sampling through the denoising process, which is the usual “forward
pass” that samples actions in Diffusion Policy; as noted above, the inital state can be sampled from
the enviroment via P̄ 0 = P0 ⊗ N (0, I), where P0 is from the environment MDP.

4.1     I NSTANTIATING DPPO WITH P ROXIMAL P OLICY O PTIMIZATION

We apply Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017; Engstrom et al., 2019; Huang
et al., 2022; Achiam, 2018), a popular improvement of the vanilla policy gradient update.
Definition 4.1 (Generalized PPO, clipping variant). Consider a general MDP. Given an advantage
estimator Â(s, a), the PPO update (Schulman et al., 2017) is the sample approximation to
                                            πθ (at | st )                              πθ (at | st )
∇θ E(st ,at )∼πθold min Âπθold (st , at )                  , Âπθold (st , at ) clip                  , 1 − ε, 1 + ε ,
                                           πθold (at | st )                           πθold (at | st )
where ε, the clipping ratio, controls the maximum magnitude of the policy updated.

We instantiate PPO in our diffusion MDP with (s, a, t) ← (s̄, ā, t̄). Our advantage estimator
respects the two-level nature of the MDP: let γENV ∈ (0, 1) be the environment discount and
γDENOISE ∈ (0, 1) be the denoising discount. Consider the environment-discounted return:
                                           X ′
                                             t −t
                       r̄(s̄t̄ , āt̄ ) :=  γENV  r̄(s̄t̄(t′ ,0) , āt̄(t′ ,0) ), t̄ = t̄(t, k),
                                           t′ ≥t

since R̄(t̄) = 0 at k > 0. This fact also obviates the need of estimating the value at k > 1 and allows
us to use the following denoising-discounted advantage estimator3 :

                                                   k
                        Âπθold (s̄t̄ , āt̄ ) := γDENOISE   r̄(s̄t̄ , āt̄ ) − V̂ π̄θold (s̄t̄(t,0) )

The denoising-discounting has the effect of downweighting the contribution of noisier steps (larger
k) to the policy gradient (see study in Appendix D.2). Lastly, we choose the value estimator to only
depend on the “s” component of s̄: V̂ π̄θold (s̄t̄(t,0) ) := Ṽ π̄θold (st ), which we find leads to more
efficient and stable training compared to also estimating the value of applying the denoised action
ak=1
 t     (part of s̄t̄(t,0) ) as shown in Appendix D.2.
Best Practices for DPPO. We summarize a number of best practices for DPPO; precise details are
given in Appendix B. (1) We achieve substantial efficiency gains by fine-tuning the last few steps
of the DDPM, whilst in many cases obtaining performance comparable to fine-tuning all steps. (2)
For additional efficiency gains, one may fine-tune the Denoising Diffusion Implicit Model (DDIM)
(Song et al., 2020a) instead. (3) We propose clipping the diffusion noise schedule at a larger-than-
standard noise level to encourage exploration and training stability.

5       P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION OF DPPO
We study the performance of DPPO in popular RL and robotics benchmarking environments. For
comparisons, we consider (1) alternative RL methods for fine-tuning diffusion policies (Section 5.1),
(2) alternative RL methods that leverage expert data (Section 5.2), (3) policy optimization using
alternative policy parameterizations (Gaussian/GMM) (Section 5.3) additionally in multi-stage ma-
nipulation tasks including hardware evaluation (Section 5.4). These comparisons highlight the ef-
fectiveness of (1) policy gradient as a RL method for diffusion, (2) DPPO as a general framework
    2
      (Psenka et al., 2023) proposes a similar derivation but does not consider the denoising process as a MDP.
See further clarification in Appendix A.
    3
      In practice, we use Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE, Schulman et al. (2015)) that better balances
variance and bias in estimating the advantage. We present the simpler form here.


                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for pre-training plus fine-tuning, (3) diffusion as a RL parameterization (4) especially in challenging
tasks, respectively.
Environments: OpenAI Gym. We first consider three population OpenAI G YM locomotion bench-
marks (Brockman et al., 2016) : {Hopper-v2, Walker2D-v2, HalfCheetah-v2}. All poli-
cies are pre-trained with the full medium-level datasets from D4RL (Fu et al., 2020) with state input
and action chunk size Ta = 4. We use the original dense reward setup in fine-tuning.
Environments: Robomimic. Next we consider four simulated robot manipulation tasks from the
ROBOMIMIC benchmark (Mandlekar et al., 2021), {Lift, Can, Square, Transport}, ordered
in increasing difficulty. These are more representative of real-world robotic tasks, and Square and
Transport (Fig. 3) are considered very challenging for RL training. Both state and pixel pol-
icy input are considered. State-based and pixel-based policies are pre-trained with demonstrations
provided by ROBOMIMIC. We consider Ta = 4 for Can, Lift, and Square, and Ta = 8 for
Transport. They are then fine-tuned with sparse reward upon task completion.
Environments: Furniture-Bench & real furniture assembly. Finally, we demonstrate solving
longer-horizon, multi-stage robot manipulation tasks from the F URNITURE-B ENCH (Heo et al.,
2023) benchmark. We consider three simulated furniture assembly tasks, {One-leg, Lamp,
Round-table}. We consider two levels of randomness over initial state distribution, Low and
Med, defined by the benchmark. All policies are pre-trained with 50 human demonstrations col-
lected in simulation and Ta = 8. They are then fine-tuned with sparse (indicator of task stage
completion) reward. We also evaluate the zero-shot sim-to-real performance with One-leg.

  Transport                                               One-leg        Lamp           Round-table


Figure 3: Long-horizon robot manipulations tasks including (left) the bimanual Transport
from ROBOMIMIC and (right) F URNITURE-B ENCH tasks (full rollouts visualized in Fig. 23).

5.1   C OMPARISON TO DIFFUSION - BASED RL ALGORITHMS

We compare DPPO to an extensive list of RL methods for fine-tuning diffusion-based policies.
DRWR and DAWR are our own, novel baselines based on reward-weighted regression (Peters and
Schaal, 2007) and advantage-weighted regression (Peng et al., 2019). The remaining methods,
DIPO (Yang et al., 2023), IDQL (Hansen-Estruch et al., 2023), DQL (Wang et al., 2022), and
QSM (Psenka et al., 2023), are existing in the literature. We evaluate on the three OpenAI G YM
tasks and the four ROBOMIMIC tasks with state input; see Appendix F.3 for further details.
Overall, DPPO performs consistently, exhibits great training stability, and enjoys strong fine-tuning
performance across tasks. In the G YM tasks (Figure 4, top row), IDQL and DIPO exhibit com-
petitive performance, while the other methods often perform worse and train less stably. DPPO is
the strongest performer in the ROBOMIMIC tasks (Figure 4, bottom row), especially in the chal-
lenging Transport tasks. Surprisingly, DRWR, are strong baselines in {Lift, Can, Square}
but underperforms in Transport, while all other baselines fare worse still. We postulate that the
other baselines, using off-policy updates and propagating biased gradients from the Q function to
the actor, suffers from even greater training instability in sparse-reward ROBOMIMIC tasks given
continuous action space plus large action chunk sizes (see furtuer studies in Appendix D.2).

5.2   C OMPARISON TO OTHER DEMO - AUGMENTED RL ALGORITHMS

We compare DPPO with recently proposed RL methods for training robot policies (not necessarily
diffusion-based) leveraging offline data, including RLPD (Ball et al., 2023), Cal-QL (Nakamoto
et al., 2024), and IBRL (Hu et al., 2023). These methods add expert data in the replay buffer
and performs off-policy updates (IBRL and Cal-QL also do pre-training), which significantly
improves efficiency v.s. DPPO in HalfCheetah-v2. However, in sparse-reward manipulation
tasks including Can and Square, DPPO achieves much better final performance than all three
methods; RLPD and Cal-QL fail to learn at all and IBRL saturates at lower success levels. See
Appendix D.1, containing Fig. 11, for further discussion.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Comparing to other diffusion-based RL algorithms. Top row: G YM tasks (Brockman
et al., 2016) averaged over five seeds. Bottow row: ROBOMIMIC tasks (Mandlekar et al., 2021), av-
eraged over three seeds with state observation. DPPO curves are slightly thicker for better visibility.

5.3   C OMPARISON TO OTHER POLICY PARAMETERIZATIONS

We compare DPPO with popular RL policy parameterizations: unimodal Gaussian with diago-
nal covariance (Sutton et al., 1999) and Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM (Bishop and Nasrabadi,
2006)), using either MLPs or Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), and also fine-tuned with the PPO
objective. We compare these to DPPO-MLP and DPPO-UNet, which use either MLP or UNet as
the network backbone. We evaluate on the four tasks from ROBOMIMIC (Lift, Can, Square,
Transport) with both state and pixel input. With state input, DPPO pre-trains with 20 denoising
steps and then fine-tunes the last 10. With pixel input, DPPO pre-trains with 100 denoising steps
and then fine-tunes 5 DDIM steps.


Figure 5: Comparing to other policy parameterizations in the more challenging Square and
Transport tasks from ROBOMIMIC, with state (left) or pixel (right) observation. Results are
averaged over three seeds.

Fig. 5 display results for the more challenging Square and Transport — we defer the results
in Lift and Can to Fig. 20. With state input, DPPO outperforms Gaussian and GMM policies,
with faster convergence to ∼100% success rate in Lift and Can, and greater final performance
on Square and the challenging Transport, where it reaches > 90%. UNet and MLP variants
perform similarly, with the latter training somewhat more rapidly. With pixel inputs, we use a
Vision-Transformer-based (ViT) image encoder introduced in Hu et al. (2023) and an MLP head
and compare the resulting variants DPPO-ViT-MLP and Gaussian-ViT-MLP (we omit GMM due
to poor performance in state-based training). While the two are comparable on Lift and Can,
DPPO trains more quickly and to higher accuracy on Square, and drastically outperforms on
Transport, whereas Gaussian does not improve from its 0% pre-trained success rate. To our
knowledge, DPPO is the first RL algorithm to solve Transport from either state or pixel
input to high (>50%) success rates.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.4   E VALUATION ON F URNITURE -B ENCH , AND SIM - TO - REAL TRANSFER


Figure 6: (Top) DPPO vs. Gaussian-MLP baseline in simulated F URNITURE-B ENCH tasks. Re-
sults are averaged over three seeds. (Bottom) Sim-to-real transfer results in One-leg.

Here we evaluate DPPO on the long-horizon manipulation tasks from F URNITURE-B ENCH (Heo
et al., 2023). We compare DPPO to Gaussian-MLP, the overall most effective baseline from Sec-
tion 5.3. Fig. 6 (top row) shows the evaluation success rate over fine-tuning iterations. DPPO
exhibits strong training stability and improves policy performance in all six settings. Gaussian-MLP
collapses to zero success rate in all three tasks with Med randomness (except for one seed in Lamp)
and Round-table with Low randomness. Note that we are only using 50 human demonstrations
for pre-training; we expect DPPO can leverage additional human data (better state space coverage)
to further improve in Med, which is corroborated by ablation studies in Appendix D.3.
Sim-to-real transfer. We evaluate DPPO and Gaussian policies trained in the simulated One-leg
task on physical hardware zero-shot (i.e., no real data fine-tuning / co-training) over 20 trials.
Please see additional simulation training and hardware details in Appendix F.8. Fig. 6 (bottom
row) shows simulated and hardware success rates after pre-training and fine-tuning. Notably, DPPO
improves the real-world performance to 80% (16 out of 20 trials). Though the Gaussian policy
achieves a high success rate in simulation after fine-tuning (88%), it fails entirely on hardware (0%).
Supplemental video suggests it exhibits volatile and jittery behavior. For stronger comparison, we
also fine-tune the Gaussian policy with an auxiliary behavior-cloning loss (Torne et al., 2024) such
that the fine-tuned policy is encouraged to stay close to the base policy. However, this limits fine-
tuning and only leads to 53% success rate in simulation and 50% in reality. Qualitatively, we find
fine-tuned policies to be more robust and exhibit more corrective behaviors than pre-trained-only
policies, especially during the insertion stage of the task; such behaviors are visualized in Fig. 24
with representative hardware rollouts.

5.5   S UMMARY OF ABLATION FINDINGS

Our ablation studies (c.f. Appendix D.2) find that: (1) for challenging tasks, using a value estimator
which depends on environment state but is independent of denoised action is crucial for perfor-
mance; we conjecture that this is related to the high stochasticity of Diffusion Policy; (2) there is a
sweet spot for clipping the denoising noise level for DPPO exploration, trading off between too little
exploration and too much action noise; (3) DPPO is resilient to fine-tuning fewer-than-K denoising
steps, yielding improved runtime and comparable performance; (4) DPPO yields improvements over
Gaussian-MLP baselines for varying levels of expert demonstration data, and achieves comparable
final performance and sample efficiency when training from scratch in G YM environments.


6     U NDERSTANDING THE PERFORMANCE OF DPPO

The improvement of DPPO over popular Gaussian and GMM methods in Section 5.3 comes as a
surprise initially as DPPO solves a much longer Diffusion Policy MDP (Section 4) than the origi-


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


nal environment MDP that other methods solve. This leads us to study the factors contributing to
DPPO’s strong performance through a series of investigate experiments below.
We use the Avoid environment from D3IL benchmark (Jia et al., 2024), where a robot arm needs
to reach the other side of the table while avoiding an array of obstacles (Fig. 7, top-left). The action
space is the 2D target location of the end-effector. D3IL provides a set of expert demonstrations that
covers different possible paths to the goal line — we consider three subsets of the demonstrations,
M1, M2, and M3 in Fig. 7, each with two distinct modes. We pre-train MLP-based Diffusion,
Gaussian, and GMM policies (Ta = 4 unless noted) with the demonstrations. For fine-tuning, we
assign (sparse) reward when the robot reaches the goal line from the topmost mode. Gaussian and
GMM policies are also fine-tuned with the PPO objective.


Figure 7: (Left) We use the Avoid environment from Jia et al. (2024) to visualize the DPPO’s
exploration tendencies. The task is to reach the green goal line from the topmost mode. (Right)
Structured exploration. We show sampled trajectories at the first iteration of fine-tuning for DPPO,
Gaussian, and GMM after pre-training on three sets of expert demonstrations, M1, M2, and M3.
Benefit 1: Structured, on-manifold exploration. Fig. 7 (right) shows the sampled trajectories
(with exploration noise) from DPPO, Gaussian, and GMM during the first iteration of fine-tuning.
DPPO explores in wide coverage around the expert data manifold, whereas Gaussian generates
less structured exploration noise (especially in M2) and GMM exhibits narrower coverage. Unlike
Gaussian policy that adds noise only to the final sampled action, diffusion adds multiple rounds
of noise through denoising. Each denoising step expands the coverage with new noise while also
pushing the newly denoised action towards the expert data manifold (Permenter and Yuan, 2023).
Moreover, the combination of diffusion parameterization with the denoising of action chunks means
that policy stochasticity in DPPO is structured in both action dimension and time horizon.

Benefit 2: Training stability from multi-step denoising process. In Fig. 8 (left), we run fine-
tuning after pre-training with M2 and attempt to de-stabilize fine-tuning by gradually adding noise
to the action during the fine-tuning process (see Appendix F.9 for details). We find that Gaussian
and GMM’s performance both collapse, while with DPPO, the performance is robust to the noise if
at least four denoising steps are used. This property also allows DPPO to apply significant noise to
the sampled actions, simulating an imperfect low-level controller to facilitate sim-to-real transfer in
Section 5.4. In Fig. 8 (right), we also find DPPO enjoys greater training stability when fine-tuning
long action chunks, e.g., up to Ta = 16, while Gaussian and GMM can fail to improve at all.
Fig. 9 visualizes how DPPO affects the multi-step denoising process. Over fine-tuning iterations,
the action distribution gradually converges through the denoising steps — the iterative refinement
is largely preserved, as opposed to, e.g., “collapsing” to the optimal actions at the first fine-tuned
denoising step or the final one. We postulate this contributes to the training stability of DPPO.

Benefit 3: Robust and generalizable fine-tuned policy. DPPO also generates final policies
robust to perturbations in dynamics and the initial state distribution. In Fig. 10, we again add noise
to the actions sampled from the fine-tuned policy (no noise applied during training) and find that
DPPO policy exhibits strong robustness to the noise compared to the Gaussian policy. DPPO policy
also converges to the (near-)optimal path from a larger distribution of initial states. This finding
echoes theoretical guarantees that Diffusion Policy, capable of representing complex multi-modal


                                                   9
                                                                            Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Goal


               reverse       [4, 1, 3, 0]
                                    .
                                                                                                                      Noise level
        [0, 3, 1, 4]                .
                                    .           swap
                                                             [0, 1, 4, 3]
              shift_left
                             [3, 1, 4, 0]
                                               reverse       [0, 4, 1, 3]

          Blocksworld
                                                               Initial:
                                                          Orange on blue,
                                                           yellow on red


                                                                            Figure 8: Training stability. Fine-tuning performance (averaged over five seeds, standard deviation
                                                                            not shown) after pre-training with M2. (Left) Noise is injected into the applied actions after a few
                                                                            training iterations. (Right)
                                                                                                 M2
                                                                                                         The action chunk size Ta is varied.

                                                                                                                k=9   Denoising steps    DPPO           k=0   Gaussian   GMM
                                                                                      Itr 0
                                                                                                  Fine-tuning
                                                                                                   iterations



                                                                                      Itr 4


                                                                                      Itr 8


                                                                                                     Final



                                                                            Figure 9: Preserving the iterative refinement. The 2D actions from 50 trajectories at the branching
                                                                            point through fine-tuning iterations after pre-training with M2. For DPPO, we also visualize the
                                                                            action distribution through the final denoising steps at each fine-tuning iteration.
                                                                            data distribution, can effectively deconvolve noise from noisy states (Block et al., 2024), a property
                                                                            used in Chen et al. (2024) to stabilize long-horizon video generation.


Goal

                                          shift_left
                                                         [1, 3, 0, 4]
              reverse      [4, 1, 3, 0]
       [0, 3, 1, 4]             .
                                .            swap
                                .                        [0, 1, 4, 3]
             shift_left
                           [3, 1, 4, 0]
                                            reverse      [0, 4, 1, 3]

        Blocksworld
                                                            Initial:
                                                       Orange on blue,
                                                        yellow on red


                                                                                Figure 10: Policy robustness after fine-tuning. Green dot / box indicates the initial state region.

                                                                            7      C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
                                                                            We believe DPPO will become an important component in the pre-training-plus-fine-tuning pipeline
                                                                            for training general-purpose real-world robotic policies. To this end, we hope in future work to
                                                                            further showcase the promise of DPPO for simulation-to-real transfer (Chen et al., 2023b; Liang
                                                                            et al., 2020; Ren et al., 2023; Chi et al., 2024a) in which we fine-tune a vision-based policy that
                                                                            has been pre-trained on a variety of diverse tasks. We expect this pre-training to provide a large
                                                                            and diverse expert data manifold, of which, as we have shown in Section 6, DPPO is well-suited
                                                                            to take advantage for better exploration during fine-tuning. We are also excited to understand how
                                                                            DPPO can fit together with other decision-making tools such as model-based planning (Janner et al.,
                                                                            2022; Ding et al., 2024) and decision-making aided by video prediction (Chen et al., 2024); these
                                                                            tools may help address the main limitation of DPPO — its lower sample efficiency than off-policy
                                                                            methods — and unlocking performing practical RL in physical hardware.



                                                                                                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Lirui Wang and Terry Suh for helpful discussions in the early stage of the
project. The authors were partially supported by the Toyota Research Institute (TRI). This article
solely reflects the opinions and conclusions of its authors and not TRI or any other Toyota entity.

R EFERENCES
J. Achiam. Spinning Up in Deep Reinforcement Learning. 2018.
A. Ajay, Y. Du, A. Gupta, J. B. Tenenbaum, T. S. Jaakkola, and P. Agrawal. Is conditional gener-
  ative modeling all you need for decision making? In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.
M. Alakuijala, G. Dulac-Arnold, J. Mairal, J. Ponce, and C. Schmid. Residual reinforcement learn-
 ing from demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08050, 2021.
O. M. Andrychowicz, B. Baker, M. Chociej, R. Jozefowicz, B. McGrew, J. Pachocki, A. Petron,
  M. Plappert, G. Powell, A. Ray, et al. Learning dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International
  Journal of Robotics Research, 2020.
L. Ankile, A. Simeonov, I. Shenfeld, and P. Agrawal. Juicer: Data-efficient imitation learning for
  robotic assembly. arXiv, 2024a.
L. Ankile, A. Simeonov, I. Shenfeld, M. Torne, and P. Agrawal. From imitation to refinement–
  residual rl for precise visual assembly. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16677, 2024b.
P. J. Ball, L. Smith, I. Kostrikov, and S. Levine. Efficient online reinforcement learning with offline
   data. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1577–1594. PMLR, 2023.
C. M. Bishop and N. M. Nasrabadi. Pattern recognition and machine learning. Springer, 2006.
K. Black, M. Janner, Y. Du, I. Kostrikov, and S. Levine. Training diffusion models with reinforce-
  ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13301, 2023.
A. Block, A. Jadbabaie, D. Pfrommer, M. Simchowitz, and R. Tedrake. Provable guarantees for
  generative behavior cloning: Bridging low-level stability and high-level behavior. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
G. Brockman, V. Cheung, L. Pettersson, J. Schneider, J. Schulman, J. Tang, and W. Zaremba. Openai
  gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam,
   G. Sastry, A. Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural informa-
   tion processing systems, 2020.
S. H. Chan. Tutorial on diffusion models for imaging and vision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.18103,
   2024.
B. Chen, D. M. Monso, Y. Du, M. Simchowitz, R. Tedrake, and V. Sitzmann. Diffusion forcing:
  Next-token prediction meets full-sequence diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01392, 2024.
H. Chen, C. Lu, C. Ying, H. Su, and J. Zhu. Offline reinforcement learning via high-fidelity genera-
  tive behavior modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14548, 2022a.
T. Chen, J. Xu, and P. Agrawal. A system for general in-hand object re-orientation. In Conference
   on Robot Learning, 2022b.
Y. Chen, H. Li, and D. Zhao. Boosting continuous control with consistency policy. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2310.06343, 2023a.
Y. Chen, C. Wang, L. Fei-Fei, and C. K. Liu. Sequential dexterity: Chaining dexterous policies for
   long-horizon manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00987, 2023b.

                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C. Chi, B. Burchfiel, E. Cousineau, S. Feng, and S. Song. Iterative residual policy: for goal-
  conditioned dynamic manipulation of deformable objects. The International Journal of Robotics
  Research, 2024a.

C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake, and S. Song. Diffusion
  policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. The International Journal of Robotics
  Research, 2024b.

K. Clark, P. Vicol, K. Swersky, and D. J. Fleet. Directly fine-tuning diffusion models on differen-
  tiable rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17400, 2023.

Z. Ding and C. Jin. Consistency models as a rich and efficient policy class for reinforcement learning.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16984, 2023.

Z. Ding, A. Zhang, Y. Tian, and Q. Zheng. Diffusion world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03570,
   2024.

L. Engstrom, A. Ilyas, S. Santurkar, D. Tsipras, F. Janoos, L. Rudolph, and A. Madry. Implemen-
  tation matters in deep rl: A case study on ppo and trpo. In International conference on learning
  representations, 2019.

Y. Fan and K. Lee. Optimizing ddpm sampling with shortcut fine-tuning.                 arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.13362, 2023.

Y. Fan, O. Watkins, Y. Du, H. Liu, M. Ryu, C. Boutilier, P. Abbeel, M. Ghavamzadeh, K. Lee,
  and K. Lee. Reinforcement learning for fine-tuning text-to-image diffusion models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.

P. Florence, L. Manuelli, and R. Tedrake. Self-supervised correspondence in visuomotor policy
   learning. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2019.

P. Florence, C. Lynch, A. Zeng, O. A. Ramirez, A. Wahid, L. Downs, A. Wong, J. Lee, I. Mordatch,
   and J. Tompson. Implicit behavioral cloning. In Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2022.

J. Fu, A. Kumar, O. Nachum, G. Tucker, and S. Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep data-driven rein-
   forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07219, 2020.

Z. Fu, T. Z. Zhao, and C. Finn. Mobile aloha: Learning bimanual mobile manipulation with low-cost
   whole-body teleoperation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02117, 2024.

W. Goo and S. Niekum. Know your boundaries: The necessity of explicit behavioral cloning in
  offline rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00695, 2022.

T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep
   reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International conference on machine learning,
   pages 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.

S. Haldar, J. Pari, A. Rai, and L. Pinto. Teach a robot to fish: Versatile imitation from one minute of
   demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.01497, 2023.

P. Hansen-Estruch, I. Kostrikov, M. Janner, J. G. Kuba, and S. Levine. Idql: Implicit q-learning as
   an actor-critic method with diffusion policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10573, 2023.

M. Heo, Y. Lee, D. Lee, and J. J. Lim. Furniturebench: Reproducible real-world benchmark for
 long-horizon complex manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12821, 2023.

T. Hester, M. Vecerik, O. Pietquin, M. Lanctot, T. Schaul, B. Piot, D. Horgan, J. Quan,
  A. Sendonaris, I. Osband, et al. Deep q-learning from demonstrations. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 32, 2018.

J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural infor-
   mation processing systems, 2020.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J. Ho, W. Chan, C. Saharia, J. Whang, R. Gao, A. Gritsenko, D. P. Kingma, B. Poole, M. Norouzi,
   D. J. Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition video generation with diffusion models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022.
H. Hu, S. Mirchandani, and D. Sadigh. Imitation bootstrapped reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2311.02198, 2023.
S. Huang, R. F. J. Dossa, C. Ye, J. Braga, D. Chakraborty, K. Mehta, and J. G. AraÃšjo. Cleanrl:
   High-quality single-file implementations of deep reinforcement learning algorithms. Journal of
   Machine Learning Research, 2022.
Z. Huang, L. Yang, X. Zhou, Z. Zhang, W. Zhang, X. Zheng, J. Chen, Y. Wang, C. Bin, and W. Yang.
   Protein-ligand interaction prior for binding-aware 3d molecule diffusion models. In The Twelfth
   International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, A. Dosovitskiy, D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter. Learning
   agile and dynamic motor skills for legged robots. Science Robotics, 2019.
M. T. Jackson, M. T. Matthews, C. Lu, B. Ellis, S. Whiteson, and J. Foerster. Policy-guided diffusion.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06356, 2024.
M. Janner, Y. Du, J. B. Tenenbaum, and S. Levine. Planning with diffusion for flexible behavior
 synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09991, 2022.
X. Jia, D. Blessing, X. Jiang, M. Reuss, A. Donat, R. Lioutikov, and G. Neumann. Towards di-
  verse behaviors: A benchmark for imitation learning with human demonstrations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.14606, 2024.
B. Kang, X. Ma, C. Du, T. Pang, and S. Yan. Efficient diffusion policies for offline reinforcement
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
E. Kaufmann, L. Bauersfeld, A. Loquercio, M. Müller, V. Koltun, and D. Scaramuzza. Champion-
   level drone racing using deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 2023.
Z. Kong, W. Ping, J. Huang, K. Zhao, and B. Catanzaro. Diffwave: A versatile diffusion model for
   audio synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09761, 2020.
S. Lee, Y. Seo, K. Lee, P. Abbeel, and J. Shin. Offline-to-online reinforcement learning via balanced
   replay and pessimistic q-ensemble. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages 1702–1712. PMLR,
   2022.
S. Lee, Y. Wang, H. Etukuru, H. J. Kim, N. M. M. Shafiullah, and L. Pinto. Behavior generation
   with latent actions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03181, 2024.
K. Lei, Z. He, C. Lu, K. Hu, Y. Gao, and H. Xu. Uni-o4: Unifying online and offline deep re-
  inforcement learning with multi-step on-policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.03351,
  2023.
J. Liang, S. Saxena, and O. Kroemer. Learning active task-oriented exploration policies for bridging
   the sim-to-real gap. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.01952, 2020.
T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa, D. Silver, and D. Wierstra. Contin-
   uous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
Y. Lin, A. S. Wang, G. Sutanto, A. Rai, and F. Meier. Polymetis.                            https://
  facebookresearch.github.io/fairo/polymetis/, 2021.
A. Lou, C. Meng, and S. Ermon. Discrete diffusion modeling by estimating the ratios of the data
  distribution. stat, 2024.
J. Luo, Z. Hu, C. Xu, Y. L. Tan, J. Berg, A. Sharma, S. Schaal, C. Finn, A. Gupta, and S. Levine.
   Serl: A software suite for sample-efficient robotic reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2401.16013, 2024.


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S. Luo, Y. Su, X. Peng, S. Wang, J. Peng, and J. Ma. Antigen-specific antibody design and op-
   timization with diffusion-based generative models for protein structures. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 2022.
V. Makoviychuk, L. Wawrzyniak, Y. Guo, M. Lu, K. Storey, M. Macklin, D. Hoeller, N. Rudin,
  A. Allshire, A. Handa, et al. Isaac gym: High performance gpu-based physics simulation for
  robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470, 2021.
A. Mandlekar, D. Xu, J. Wong, S. Nasiriany, C. Wang, R. Kulkarni, L. Fei-Fei, S. Savarese, Y. Zhu,
  and R. Martín-Martín. What matters in learning from offline human demonstrations for robot
  manipulation. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.03298, 2021.
A. Nair, A. Gupta, M. Dalal, and S. Levine. Awac: Accelerating online reinforcement learning with
  offline datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09359, 2020.
M. Nakamoto, S. Zhai, A. Singh, M. Sobol Mark, Y. Ma, C. Finn, A. Kumar, and S. Levine. Cal-ql:
 Calibrated offline rl pre-training for efficient online fine-tuning. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
A. Q. Nichol and P. Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In International
  conference on machine learning, 2021.
T. Osa, J. Pajarinen, G. Neumann, J. A. Bagnell, P. Abbeel, J. Peters, et al. An algorithmic perspec-
   tive on imitation learning. Foundations and Trends® in Robotics, 2018.
L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal,
  K. Slama, A. Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 2022.
T. Pearce, T. Rashid, A. Kanervisto, D. Bignell, M. Sun, R. Georgescu, S. V. Macua, S. Z. Tan,
   I. Momennejad, K. Hofmann, et al. Imitating human behaviour with diffusion models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2301.10677, 2023.
X. B. Peng, A. Kumar, G. Zhang, and S. Levine. Advantage-weighted regression: Simple and
  scalable off-policy reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00177, 2019.
X. B. Peng, Z. Ma, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, and A. Kanazawa. Amp: Adversarial motion priors for
  stylized physics-based character control. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 2021.
F. Permenter and C. Yuan. Interpreting and improving diffusion models from an optimization per-
   spective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04848, 2023.
J. Peters and S. Schaal. Reinforcement learning by reward-weighted regression for operational space
   control. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on Machine learning, 2007.
D. A. Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 1988.
B. Poole, A. Jain, J. T. Barron, and B. Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14988, 2022.
M. Popova, O. Isayev, and A. Tropsha. Deep reinforcement learning for de novo drug design.
 Science advances, 2018.
M. Psenka, A. Escontrela, P. Abbeel, and Y. Ma. Learning a diffusion model policy from rewards
 via q-score matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11752, 2023.
A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin,
  J. Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Inter-
  national conference on machine learning, 2021.
A. Rajeswaran, V. Kumar, A. Gupta, G. Vezzani, J. Schulman, E. Todorov, and S. Levine. Learning
  complex dexterous manipulation with deep reinforcement learning and demonstrations. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1709.10087, 2017.

                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A. Z. Ren, H. Dai, B. Burchfiel, and A. Majumdar. Adaptsim: Task-driven simulation adaptation
  for sim-to-real transfer. In Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2023.

M. Reuss, M. Li, X. Jia, and R. Lioutikov. Goal-conditioned imitation learning using score-based
 diffusion policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02532, 2023.

M. Rigter, J. Yamada, and I. Posner. World models via policy-guided trajectory diffusion. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2312.08533, 2023.

R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis
  with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, 2022.

O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image
  segmentation. In Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention (MICCAI), 2015.

N. Ruiz, Y. Li, V. Jampani, Y. Pritch, M. Rubinstein, and K. Aberman. Dreambooth: Fine tuning
  text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2023.

S. S. Sahoo, M. Arriola, Y. Schiff, A. Gokaslan, E. Marroquin, J. T. Chiu, A. Rush, and V. Kuleshov.
   Simple and effective masked diffusion language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07524, 2024.

J. Schulman, P. Moritz, S. Levine, M. Jordan, and P. Abbeel. High-dimensional continuous control
   using generalized advantage estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438, 2015.

J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
   algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, and S. Ganguli. Deep unsupervised learning
   using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learning, 2015.

J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon.          Denoising diffusion implicit models.       arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2010.02502, 2020a.

Y. Song, J. Sohl-Dickstein, D. P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Ermon, and B. Poole. Score-based genera-
   tive modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13456, 2020b.

A. Sridhar, D. Shah, C. Glossop, and S. Levine. Nomad: Goal masked diffusion policies for navi-
  gation and exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07896, 2023.

R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.

R. S. Sutton, D. McAllester, S. Singh, and Y. Mansour. Policy gradient methods for reinforcement
  learning with function approximation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 1999.

E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In 2012
  IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, 2012.

M. Torne, A. Simeonov, Z. Li, A. Chan, T. Chen, A. Gupta, and P. Agrawal. Reconciling real-
 ity through simulation: A real-to-sim-to-real approach for robust manipulation. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2403.03949, 2024.

A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polo-
  sukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2017.

M. Vecerik, T. Hester, J. Scholz, F. Wang, O. Pietquin, B. Piot, N. Heess, T. Rothörl, T. Lampe, and
 M. Riedmiller. Leveraging demonstrations for deep reinforcement learning on robotics problems
 with sparse rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.08817, 2017.

S. Venkatraman, S. Khaitan, R. T. Akella, J. Dolan, J. Schneider, and G. Berseth. Reasoning with
   latent diffusion in offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06599, 2023.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B. Wallace, M. Dang, R. Rafailov, L. Zhou, A. Lou, S. Purushwalkam, S. Ermon, C. Xiong, S. Joty,
  and N. Naik. Diffusion model alignment using direct preference optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.12908, 2023.
J. Wang and E. Olson. Apriltag 2: Efficient and robust fiducial detection. In IEEE/RSJ International
   Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2016.
L. Wang, J. Zhao, Y. Du, E. H. Adelson, and R. Tedrake. Poco: Policy composition from and for
  heterogeneous robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02511, 2024a.
S. Wang, Q. Yang, J. Gao, M. Lin, H. Chen, L. Wu, N. Jia, S. Song, and G. Huang. Train once, get a
   family: State-adaptive balances for offline-to-online reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024b.
Z. Wang, J. J. Hunt, and M. Zhou. Diffusion policies as an expressive policy class for offline
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.06193, 2022.
R. J. Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Machine learning, 1992.
J. Yang, M. S. Mark, B. Vu, A. Sharma, J. Bohg, and C. Finn. Robot fine-tuning made easy: Pre-
   training rewards and policies for autonomous real-world reinforcement learning. In 2024 IEEE
   International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 4804–4811. IEEE, 2024.
L. Yang, Z. Huang, F. Lei, Y. Zhong, Y. Yang, C. Fang, S. Wen, B. Zhou, and Z. Lin. Pol-
  icy representation via diffusion probability model for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.13122, 2023.
Y. Ze, G. Zhang, K. Zhang, C. Hu, M. Wang, and H. Xu. 3d diffusion policy: Generalizable
  visuomotor policy learning via simple 3d representations. In ICRA 2024 Workshop on 3D Visual
  Representations for Robot Manipulation.
H. Zhang, W. Xu, and H. Yu. Policy expansion for bridging offline-to-online reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00935, 2023.
T. Z. Zhao, V. Kumar, S. Levine, and C. Finn. Learning fine-grained bimanual manipulation with
   low-cost hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705, 2023.
H. Zhu, A. Gupta, A. Rajeswaran, S. Levine, and V. Kumar. Dexterous manipulation with deep
  reinforcement learning: Efficient, general, and low-cost. In 2019 International Conference on
  Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 3651–3657. IEEE, 2019.
Z. Zhu, H. Zhao, H. He, Y. Zhong, S. Zhang, Y. Yu, and W. Zhang. Diffusion models for reinforce-
   ment learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01223, 2023.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                     1

2   Related Work                                                                                     2

3   Preliminaries                                                                                    3

4   DPPO: Diffusion Policy Policy Optimization                                                       4
    4.1   Instantiating DPPO with Proximal Policy Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         5

5   Performance Evaluation of DPPO                                                                   5
    5.1   Comparison to diffusion-based RL algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        6
    5.2   Comparison to other demo-augmented RL algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           6
    5.3   Comparison to other policy parameterizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       7
    5.4   Evaluation on Furniture-Bench, and sim-to-real transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      8
    5.5   Summary of ablation findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     8

6   Understanding the performance of DPPO                                                            8

7   Conclusion and Future Work                                                                      10

A Extended Related Work                                                                             18
    A.1 RL training of robot policies with offline data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18
    A.2 Diffusion-based RL methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        18

B Best Practices for DPPO                                                                           20

C Additional details of DPPO implementation                                                         20

D Additional experimental results                                                                   22
    D.1 Comparing to other demo-augmented RL methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            22
    D.2 Ablation studies on design decisions in DPPO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        24
    D.3 Effect of expert data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25
    D.4 Comparing to other policy parameterizations in Avoid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          26
    D.5 Comparing to other policy parameterizations in the easier tasks from ROBOMIMIC              27
    D.6 Comparing to policy gradient using exact likelihood of Diffusion Policy . . . . . .         27
    D.7 Ablating Structured Exploration in DPPO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         27

E Reporting of Wall-Clock Times                                                                     28

F Additional Experimental Details                                                                   30
    F.1   Details of policy architectures used in all experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
    F.2   Additional details of G YM tasks and training in Section 5.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . .    31


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    F.3   Descriptions of diffusion-based RL algorithm baselines in Section 5.1 . . . . . . .        31
    F.4   Descriptions of RL fine-tuning algorithm baselines in Section 5.2 . . . . . . . . . .      32
    F.5   Additional details of F RANKA-K ITCHEN tasks and training in Section 5.2 . . . . .         33
    F.6   Additional details of ROBOMIMIC tasks and training in Section 5.3 . . . . . . . . .        34
    F.7   Descriptions of policy parameterization baselines in Section 5.3 . . . . . . . . . .       34
    F.8   Additional details of F URNITURE-B ENCH tasks and training in Section 5.4 . . . .          34
    F.9   Additional details of Avoid task from D3IL and training in Section 6 . . . . . . .         38
    F.10 Listed training hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       38


A     E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK

A.1   RL TRAINING OF ROBOT POLICIES WITH OFFLINE DATA

Here, we discuss related work in training robot policies using RL augmented with offline data to
help RL better explore online in sparse reward settings.
One simple form is to use offline data to pre-train the policy, typically using behavior cloning, and
then fine-tune the policy online. This is the approach that DPPO takes. Often, a regularization
loss is applied to constrain the fine-tuned policy to stay close to the base policy, leading to natural
fine-tuned behavior and often better learning (Rajeswaran et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2019; Torne et al.,
2024). DPPO does not apply regularization at fine-tuning as we find the on-manifold exploration
helps DPPO maintain natural behavior after fine-tuning Section 5.4. Another popular approach is
to learn a residual policy with RL on top of the frozen base policy (Alakuijala et al., 2021; Haldar
et al., 2023). A closer work to ours is Ankile et al. (2024b), which trains a one-step residual non-
diffusion policy with on-policy RL on top of a pre-trained chunked diffusion policy. This approach
has the benefit of being fully closed-loop but lacks the structured on-manifold exploration of DPPO.
Another hybrid approach is from Hu et al. (2023), which uses pre-trained and fine-tuned policies to
sample online experiences.
Another popular line of work, instead of training a base policy using offline data, directly adds
the data in the replay buffer for online, off-policy learning in a single stage (Hester et al., 2018;
Vecerik et al., 2017; Nair et al., 2020). One recent approach from Ball et al. (2023), RLPD, further
improves sample efficiency from previous off-policy methods incorporating, e.g., critic ensembling.
Luo et al. (2024) demonstrates RLPD solving real-world manipulation tasks (although generally
less challenging than ones solved by DPPO).
Other approaches, including Cal-QL, build on offline RL to learn from offline data and then switch
to online RL while still sampling from offline data (Nakamoto et al., 2024; Hansen-Estruch et al.,
2023; Yang et al., 2024). Often the distributional mismatch between offline data and online policy
needs to be addressed: Cal-QL proposes calibrated conservative Q-learning that learns a offline Q
function that lower bounds the true value of the learned policy; Lei et al. (2023) proposes ensemble
behavior cloning during pre-training to promote policy diversity (similarly in Wang et al. (2024b));
Lee et al. (2022) proposes prioritizing online samples and then near-on-policy samples from the
offline dataset during fine-tuning; Zhang et al. (2023) proposes a similar method akin to Hu et al.
(2023) that uses both pre-trained and online policies for collecting new samples.

A.2   D IFFUSION - BASED RL METHODS

This section discusses related methods that directly train or improve diffusion-based policies with
RL methods. The baselines to which we compare in Section 5.1 are discussed below as well, and
are highlighted in their corresponding colors. We also refer the readers to Zhu et al. (2023) for an
extensive survey on diffusion models for RL.
Most previous works have focused on the offline setting with a static dataset. One line of work fo-
cuses on state trajectory planning and guiding the denoising sampling process such that the sampled
actions satisfy some desired objectives. Janner et al. (2022) applies classifier guidance that generates


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


trajectories with higher predicted rewards. Ajay et al. (2023) introduces classifier-free guidance that
avoids learning the value of noisy states. There is another line of work that uses diffusion models
as an action policy (instead of state planner) and generally applies Q-learning. DQL (Wang et al.,
2022) introduces Diffusion Q-Learning that learns a state-action critic for the final denoised actions
and backpropagates the gradient from the critic through the entire Diffusion Policy (actor) denois-
ing chain, akin to the usual Q-learning. IDQL (Hansen-Estruch et al., 2023), or Implicit Diffusion
Q-learning, proposes learning the critic to select the actions at inference time for either training or
evaluation while fitting the actor to all sampled actions. Kang et al. (2024) instead proposes using
the critic to re-weight the sampled actions for updating the actor itself, similar to weighted regression
baselines DAWR and DRWR introduced in our work. Goo and Niekum (2022) similarly extracts the
policy in the spirit of AWR (Peng et al., 2019). Chen et al. (2022a) trains the critic using value itera-
tion instead based on samples from the actor. Finally, Jackson et al. (2024) explores using diffusion
guidance to move offline data towards the target trajectory distribution.
We note that methods like DQL and IDQL can also be applied in the online setting. A small
amount of work also focuses entirely on the online setting. DIPO (Yang et al., 2023) differs from
DQL and related work in that it uses the critic to update the sampled actions (“action gradient”)
instead of the actor — the actor is then fitted with updated actions from the replay buffer. QSM, or
Q-Score Matching (Psenka et al., 2023), suggests that optimizing the likelihood of the entire chain
of denoised actions can be inefficient (contrary to our findings in the fine-tuning setting) and instead
proposes learning the optimal policy by iteratively aligning the gradient of the actor (i.e., score) with
the action gradient of the critic. Rigter et al. (2023) proposes learning a diffusion dynamic model to
generate synthetic trajectories for online training of a non-diffusion RL policy.
We note that almost all prior work in diffusion-based RL (offline or online) have relied on approxi-
mating the state-action Q function and using it to update the diffusion actor in some form — policy
gradient update has been deemed challenging due to the multi-step denoising process (Psenka et al.,
2023; Yang et al., 2023). Inaccurate Q values may lead to biased updates to the actor, which can
lead to training collapse as it starts with decent pre-training performance but quickly drops to zero
success rate as seen in Fig. 4, also failing to recover since then due to the sparse-reward setup. While
Q-learning methods generally achieve better sample efficiency when they can solve the task of in-
terest, our focus has been largely on challenging long-horizon robot manipulation tasks where the
training stability is much desired.
Lastly, we point out that the role of stochasticity of diffusion/consistency policy for exploration is
also explored by Chen et al. (2023a), who find such stochasticity suffices for exploration without
additional strategies needed. Our work discovers the similar effect, but also performs extensive
investigative experiments in Section 6 and ablation studies in Appendix D.7 to provide affirmative
evidence for the distinct exploration strategies induced by diffusion.


Distinction from the policy gradient formulation in Psenka et al. (2023). There has been a
different formulation introduced in Psenka et al. (2023) Sec. 3 that derives the policy gradient up-
date for diffusion policy. The derivation is based on converting the gradient of the log likelihood
of the final denoised action to the sum over log likelihood of individual denoising actions. This
formulation, unlike DPPO, does not treat the multi-step denoising process as a MDP. In the policy
gradient update, Psenka et al. (2023) sums over denoising steps and then takes expectation over
environment steps, while DPPO’s update (4.2) takes expectation over both denoising and environ-
ment steps, potentially leading to better sample efficiency. Moreover, Psenka et al. (2023) does not
propose leveraging PPO updates or other modifications to diffusion, and finds such vanilla form of
policy gradient update to be ineffective. We formulate DPPO independent of their work and find
DPPO highly effective in fine-tuning settings while also being competitive in training from scratch
(Appendix D.3).


Potential impact beyond robotics. DPPO is a generic framework that can be potentially applied
to fine-tuning diffusion-based models in sequential interactive settings beyond robotics. These in-
clude: extending diffusion-based text-to-image generation (Black et al., 2023; Clark et al., 2023) to
a multi-turn interactive setting with human feedback; drug design/discovery applications (Luo et al.,
2022; Huang et al., 2024) with policy search on the molecular level in feedback with simulators
(in the spirit of prior non-diffusion-based drug discovery with RL (Popova et al., 2018)); and the


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


adaptation of diffusion-based language modeling (Sahoo et al., 2024; Lou et al., 2024) to interactive
(e.g. with human feedback (Ouyang et al., 2022)), problem-solving and planning tasks.


B      B EST P RACTICES FOR DPPO

Fine-tune only the last few denoising steps. Diffusion Policy often uses up to K = 100 denoising
steps with DDPM to better capture the complex data distribution of expert demonstrations. With
DPPO, we can choose to fine-tune only a subset of the denoising steps instead, e.g., the last K ′
steps. In Section 4.1 and Section 6 we find this speeds up DPPO training and reduces GPU memory
usage without sacrificing the asymptotic performance. Instead of fine-tuning the pre-trained model
weights θ, we make a copy θFT — θ is frozen and used for the early denoising steps, while θFT is
used for the last K ′ steps and updated with DPPO. Although maintaining the frozen θ takes extra
GPU memory (e.g., about 60MB in HalfCheetah-v2), we find that storing the extra intermediate
denoised actions and their likelihoods due to higher K ′ can taking significantly more GPU memory
(e.g., 1.1GB extra if K ′ = 20 instead 10 in HalfCheetah-v2).

Fine-tune DDIM. Instead of fine-tuning all K or the last few steps of the DDPM, one can also
apply Denoising Diffusion Implicit Model (DDIM) (Song et al., 2020a) during fine-tuning, which
greatly reduces the number of sampling steps K DDIM ≪ K, e.g., as few as 5 steps, and thus poten-
tially improves DPPO efficiency as fewer steps are fine-tuned.


    xk−1 ∼ pθDDIM (xk−1 |xk ) := N (xk−1 ; µDDIM (xk , εθ (xk , k)), ησk2 I),    k = K DDIM , ..., 0. (B.1)

Although DDIM is typically used as a deterministic sampler by setting η = 0 in (B.1), we can use
η > 0 for fine-tuning that provides exploration noise and avoids calculating Gaussian likelihood
with a Dirac distribution. In practice, we set η = 1 for training (equivalent to applying DDPM
Song et al. (2020a)) and then η = 0 for evaluation. We reserve DDIM sampling for our pixel-based
experiments and long-horizon furniture assembly tasks, where the efficiency improvements are much
desired.

Diffusion noise scheduling. We use the cosine schedule for σk introduced in Nichol and Dhariwal
(2021), which was originally annealed to a small value on the order of 1E −4 at k = 0. In DPPO, the
value of σk also translates to the exploration noise that is crucial to training efficiency. Empirically,
                                                                  exp
we find that clipping σk to a higher minimum value (denoted σmin      , e.g., 0.01 − 0.1) when sampling
actions helps exploration (see sensitivity analysis in Appendix D.2). Additionally we clip σk to be
                        prob
at least 0.1 (denoted σmin   ) when evaluating the Gaussian likelihood log π̄θ (āt̄ |s̄t̄ ), which improves
training stability by avoiding large magnitude.

Network architecture. We study both Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) and UNet (Ronneberger
et al., 2015) as the policy heads in Diffusion Policy. An MLP offers simpler setup and we find
it generally fine-tunes more stably with DPPO. Moreover, since the UNet applies convolution to
the denoised action, we can pre-train and fine-tune with different action chunk size Ta (the number
of environment timesteps that the policy predicts future actions with), e.g., 16 and 8. We find that
DPPO benefits from pre-training with larger Ta (better prediction) and fine-tuning with smaller Ta
(more amenable to policy gradient)4 .


C      A DDITIONAL DETAILS OF DPPO IMPLEMENTATION

Pseudocode. The pseudocode for DPPO is presented in Algorithm 1. DPPO takes as input a
diffusion policy πθ trained using behavior cloning loss LBC . The policy is then fine-tuned using a
PPO-style loss (Schulman et al., 2017) with careful treatment of the denoising process (Section 4).
   4
     With fully-connected layers in MLP, empirically we find that using different chunk sizes for pre-training
and fine-tuning with MLP leads to training instability.


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pre-training. The diffusion policy πθ is pre-trained using a behavior cloning loss (Ho et al., 2020):
                                          0
                        LBC (θ) = E(st ,at )∼Doff ∥εt − εθ (a0t , st , k)∥2 ,

                                                                                                (C.1)
where Doff is the offline dataset and εθ is the policy network predicting the sampled noise added to
a0t based on the noisy action. We use the cosine noise schedule from Nichol and Dhariwal (2021).


Algorithm 1 DPPO
 1: Pre-train diffusion policy πθ with offline dataset Doff using BC loss LBC (θ) Eq. (C.1).
 2: Initialize value function Vϕ .
 3: for iteration = 1, 2, . . . do
 4:     Initialize rollout buffer Ditr .
 5:     πθold = πθ .
 6:     for environment = 1, 2, . . . , N in parallel do
 7:          Initialize state s̄t̄(0,K) = (s0 , aK0 ) in MDP .
 8:          for environment step t = 1, . . . , T , denoising step k = K − 1, . . . , 0 do
 9:              Sample the next denoised action āt̄(t,k) = akt ∼ πθold .
10:              if k = 0 then
11:                   Run a0t in the environment and observe R̄t̄(t,0) and s̄t̄(t+1,K) .
12:              else
13:                   Set R̄t̄(t,k) = 0 and s̄t̄(t,k−1) = (st , akt ).
14:             Add (k, s̄t̄(t,k) , āt̄(t,k) , R̄t̄(t,k) ) to Ditr .
15:     Compute advantage estimates Aπθold (st̄(t,k=0) , at̄(t,k=0) ) for Ditr using GAE Eq. (C.2).
16:     for update = 1, 2, . . . , num_update do                                            ▷ Based on replay ratio Nθ
17:         for minibatch = 1, 2, . . . , B do
18:             Sample (k, s̄t̄(t,k) , āt̄(t,k) , R̄t̄(t,k) ) and Aπθold (st̄(t,k) , at̄(t,k) ) from Ditr .
19:             Compute denoising-discounted advantage Ât̄(t,k) = γDENOISE            k
                                                                                                 Aπθold (st̄(t,0) , at̄(t,0) ).
20:             Optimize πθ using policy gradient loss Lθ Eq. (C.3).
21:             Optimize Vϕ using value loss Lϕ Eq. (C.4).
22: return converged policy πθ .



Environment-step advantage estimation. We use Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE)
(Schulman et al., 2015) with parameter λ for advantage estimation in Algorithm 1. GAE-λ ap-
proximates the advantage function using the series
                   ∞
                   X
  Âλt̄(t,k=0) =         (γλ)l δ̄t̄(t+l,k=0) ,      where δ̄t̄(t,k) = R̄t̄(t,k) + γENV Vϕ (s̄t̄(t+1,k) ) − Vϕ (s̄t̄(t,k) ).
                   l=0
                                                                                                           (C.2)
Notably, GAE-λ interpolates between a one-step temporal difference (Âλ=0                t̄(t,k) =  R̄t̄(t,k) +
γENV Vϕ (s̄t̄(t+1,k) ) − Vϕ (s̄t̄(t,k) )) and the Monte Carlo return of the episode relative to the baseline
   λ=1
             PT −t l
(Ât̄(t,k) = l=0 γENV     R̄t̄(t+l,k) − Vϕ (s̄t̄(t,k) )). We refer the reader to Table 8 for additional details
on GAE parameter selection and Section D.2 for ablations on the choice of advantage estimator.
Note that in Eq. (C.2) we are only concerned with k = 0, i.e., the final denoising step. In DPPO
formulation, we only need to calculate the advantage for k = 0 (i.e., environment steps), but not
for intermediate denoising steps. We only need to apply denoising discounting to the calculated
advantages so they can be applied to each denoising step k.

Fine-tuning.  During RL fine-tuning, we update the policy πθ using the clipped objective:
                                         π̄θ (s̄t̄ , āt̄ )                                  π̄θ (s̄t̄ , āt̄ )
 Lθ = EDitr min Âπ̄θold (s̄t̄ , āt̄ )                       , Âπθold (s̄t̄ , āt̄ ) clip                       , 1 − ε, 1 + ε . (C.3)
                                        π̄θold (s̄t̄ , āt̄ )                               π̄θold (s̄t̄ , āt̄ )
If we choose to fine-tune only the last K ′ denoising steps, then we sample only those from Ditr .


                                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Finally, we train the value function to predict the future discounted sum of rewards (i.e., discounted
returns):
                                         −t
                                        TX
                            Lϕ = EDitr ∥     l
                                                 R̄t̄(t+l,k) − Vϕ (st )∥2 .

                                            γENV                                                  (C.4)
                                          l=0



Similar to all baselines in Appendix F.3, we denote Nθ and Nϕ the replay ratio for the actor (diffusion
policy) and the value critic in DPPO; in practice we always set Nθ = Nϕ . Similar to usual PPO
implementations (Huang et al., 2022), the batch updates in an iteration terminate when the KL
divergence between πθ and πθold reaches 1.


Large batch size. Since the gradient update in DPPO involves expectation over both environment
steps and denoising steps, we use a larger batch size compared to, e.g., PPO training with Gaussian
policy parameterization. Roughly we use the batch size from Gaussian training times the number
of the fine-tuned denoising steps; in some cases like ROBOMIMIC we also observe that a much
smaller batch size (close to that of Gaussian training) can be used and significantly improves sample
efficiency.


Gradient clipping ratio. We also find the PPO clipping ratio, ε, can affect the training stability
significantly in DPPO (as well as in Gaussian and GMM policies) especially in sparse-reward ma-
nipulation tasks. In practice we find that, a good indicator of the amount of clipping leading to opti-
mal training efficiency, is to aim for a clipping fraction (fraction of individual samples being clipped
in a batch) of 10% to 20%. For each method in different tasks, we vary ε in {.1, .01, .001} and
choose the highest value that satisfies the clipping fraction target. Empirically we also find that, us-
ing a higher ε for earlier denoising steps in DPPO further improves training stability in manipulation
tasks. Denote εk the clipping value at denoising step k, and in practice we set εk=(K−1) = 0.1εk=0 ,
and it follows an exponential schedule among intermediate k.


D     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

D.1   C OMPARING TO OTHER DEMO - AUGMENTED RL METHODS

We compare DPPO with recently proposed RL methods for training robot policies (not necessarily
diffusion-based) leveraging offline data, including RLPD (Ball et al., 2023), Cal-QL (Nakamoto
et al., 2024), and IBRL (Hu et al., 2023). These methods add expert data in the replay buffer
and performs off-policy updates (IBRL and Cal-QL also pretrain with behavior cloning and of-
fline RL objectives, respectively), which significantly improves sample efficiency vs. DPPO in
HalfCheetah-v2 (Fig. 11, top left).
Among the F RANKA-K ITCHEN settings (Fig. 11, top right), we find RLPD and IBRL
fail to learn well especially with noisier demonstrations from Kitchen-Partial-v0 and
Kitchen-Mixed-v0. Cal-QL achieves competitive performance but DPPO still achieves over-
all the best performance especially with Kitchen-Complete-v0. We note that DPPO, not us-
ing any expert data during fine-tuning, can be sensitive to the pre-training performance; we find the
incomplete demonstrations in Kitchen-Partial-v0 and Kitchen-Mixed-v0 cause chal-
lenge in fully modeling the multi-modality of the data even with diffusion parameterization and
prevent DPPO from achieving (near-)perfect fine-tuning performance.
Nonetheless, we believe the expert demonstrations from ROBOMIMIC are most reflective of pre-
training plus fine-tuning in robotics as all demonstrations complete the task despite the varying
quality. Fig. 11 bottom row shows the performance of DPPO and baselines using either cleaner
PH or noisier MH data in Can and Square; DPPO exhibits strong final performance. RLPD and
Cal-QL fail to learn at all. Although IBRL matches the success rates with DPPO in Square, we
find that it saturates at lower success levels while DPPO continues to reach ∼100% success rates
(not shown). DPPO also runs significantly faster in wall-clock time than the baselines as it leverages


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


sampling from highly parallelized environments5 ; thus we cap the number of samples at 1e6 for the
baselines in ROBOMIMIC, also since their performance saturates.


Figure 11: Comparing to other demo-augmented RL methods.         Results are aver-
aged over five seeds in HalfCheetah-v2 and three seeds in Kitchen-Complete-v0,
Kitchen-Partial-v0, Kitchen-Partial-v0, Can, and Square.


We have also experimented with using diffusion policies for RLPD, Cal-QL, and IBRL, and
the results are shown in Fig. 12. We use either action chunk size Ta = 1 or Ta = 4. We see
similar results as in Fig. 11 using Gaussian policies that RLPD and Cal-QL fails to solve the
task at all. We believe that the worse performance of Cal-QL is due to the offline RL objective
(based on learning the state-action Q function) making learning precise continuous actions needed in
ROBOMIMIC tasks very difficult, regardless of the policy parameterization, which corroborates our
original finding in Section 5.1 when comparing DPPO to Q-learning-based diffusion RL methods.
Compared to RLPD that trains with the SAC objective and expert data in the replay buffer, IBRL,
using BC pre-training, is able to learn a base policy more effectively and uses it for online data
collection. DPPO benefits from directly fine-tuning the pre-trained policy (instead of training a new
one using experiences from the pre-trained policy), and achieves similar or better sample efficiency
before 1e6 steps compared to IBRL, and converges to ∼100% success rates unlike IBRL saturates
at lower levels (not shown).


Figure 12: Using diffusion policy for other demo-augmented RL methods. Results are averaged
over three seeds.


    5
      Off-policy methods (baselines) usually cannot fully leverage parallelized sampling as the policy is updated
less often (e.g., 50 updates per 50 samples instead of 1 update per 1 sample) and the performance can be
affected.


                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2    A BLATION STUDIES ON DESIGN DECISIONS IN DPPO

1. Choice of advantage estimator. In Section 4.1 we demonstrate how to efficiently estimate the
advantage used in PPO updates by learning Ṽ (st ) that only depends on the environment state; the
advantage used in DPPO is formally
                                           k
                                     Â = γDENOISE (r̄(s̄t̄ , āt̄ ) − Ṽ (st )).
We now compare this choice with learning the value of the full state s̄t̄(t,0) that includes environ-
ment state st and denoised action ak=1
                                    t   . We additionally compare with the state-action Q-function
estimator used in Psenka et al. (2023) , Q̃(st , ak=0
                                      6
                                                  t   ), that does not directly use the rollout reward r̄
in the advantage.
Fig. 13 shows the fine-tuning results in Hopper-v2 and HalfCheetah-v2 from G YM, and Can
and Square from ROBOMIMIC. On the simpler Hopper-v2, we observe that the two baselines,
both estimating the value of some action, achieves higher reward during fine-tuning than DPPO’s
choice. However, in the more challenging tasks, the environment-state-only advantage used in
DPPO consistently leads to the most improved performance. We believe estimating the accurate
value of applying a continuous and high-dimensional action can be challenging, and this is exac-
erbated by the high stochasticity of diffusion-based policies and the action chunk size. The results
here corroborate the findings in Section 5.1 that off-policy Q-learning methods can perform well in
Hopper-v2 and Walker2D-v2, but often exhibit training instability in manipulation tasks from
ROBOMIMIC.


Figure 13: Choice of advantage estimator. Results are averaged over five seeds in Hopper-v2
and HalfCheetah-v2 and three seeds in Can and Square.


Denoising discount factor. We further examine how γDENOISE in the DPPO advantage estimator
affects fine-tuning. Using a smaller value (i.e., more discount) has the effect of downweighting
the contribution of earlier denoising steps in the policy gradient. Fig. 14 shows the fine-tuning
results in the same four tasks with varying γDENOISE ∈ [0.5, 0.8, 0.9, 1]. We find in Hopper-v2 and
HalfCheetah-v2 γDENOISE = 0.8 leads to better efficiency while smaller γDENOISE = 0.5 slows
training. The value does not affect training noticeably in Can. In Square the smaller γDENOISE =
0.5 works slightly better. Overall in manipulation tasks, DPPO training seems relatively robust to
this choice.


Figure 14: Choice of denoising discount factor. Results are averaged over five seeds in
Hopper-v2 and HalfCheetah-v2 and three seeds in Can and Square.

    6
      Psenka et al. (2023) applies off-policy training with double Q-learning (according to its open-source im-
plementation) and policy gradient over the denoising steps. Note that this is a baseline in Psenka et al. (2023)
that is conjectured to be inefficient. We follow the same except for applying on-policy PPO updates.


                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2. Choice of diffusion noise schedule. As introduced in Section 4.1, we find it helpful to clip the
                                                    exp
diffusion noise σk to a higher minimum value σmin       to ensure sufficient exploration. In Figure 15, we
                                 exp                                    prob
perform analysis on varying σmin ∈ {.001, .01, .1, .2} (keeping σmin         = .1 to evaluate likelihoods).
                                      exp
Although in Can the choice of σmin does not affect the fine-tuning performance, in Square a
         exp
higher σmin  = 0.1 is required to prevent the policy from collapsing. We conjecture that this is due to
limited exploration causing policy over-optimizing the collected samples that exhibit limited state-
action coverage. We also visualize the trajectories at the beginning of fine-tuning in Avoid task
                             exp
from D3IL. With higher σmin      , the trajectories still remain near the two modes of the pre-training
data but exhibit a higher coverage in the state space — we believe this additional coverage leads to
better exploration. Anecdotally, we find terminating the denoising process early can also provide
exploration noise and lead to comparable results, but it requires a more involved implementation
around the denoising MDP.

         Training trajectories at the beginning of ﬁne-tuning

 0.001                   0.01                     0.1


Figure 15: Choice of minimum diffusion noise. Results are averaged over three seeds. Note in
Left, with higher minimum noise level, the sampled trajectories exhibit wider coverage at the two
modes but still maintain the overall structure.
                                                                            Minimum noise level

3. Choice of the number of fine-tuned denoising steps. We examine how the number of fine-
tuned denoising steps in DPPO, K ′ , affects the fine-tune performance and wall-clock time in Fig. 16.
We show the curves of individual runs (three for each K ′ ) instead of the average as their wall-clock
times (X-axis) are not perfectly aligned. Generally, fine-tuning too few denoising steps (e.g., 3) can
lead to subpar asymptotic performance and slower convergence especially in Can. Fine-tuning 10
steps leads to the overall best efficiency. Similar results are also shown in Fig. 19 with Avoid task.
Lastly, we note that the GPU memory usage scales linearly with K ′ .
We note that the findings here mostly correlate with those from varying the denoising discount
factor, γDENOISE . Discounting the earlier denoising steps in the policy gradient can be considered as
a soft version of hard limiting the number of fine-tuned denoising steps. Depending on the amount
of fine-tuning needed from the pre-trained action distribution, one can flexibly adjust γDENOISE and
K ′ to achieve the best efficiency.


Figure 16: Choice of number of fine-tuned denoising steps, K ′ . Individual runs are shown. The
curves are smoothed using a Savitzky–Golay filter.

D.3      E FFECT OF EXPERT DATA

We investigate the effect of the amount of pre-training expert data on fine-tuning performance. In
Fig. 17 we compare DPPO and Gaussian in Hopper-v2, Square, and One-leg task from F UR -
NITURE-B ENCH , using varying numbers of expert data (episodes) denoted in the figure. Overall,
we find DPPO can better leverage the pre-training data and fine-tune to high success rates. Notably,
DPPO obtains non-trivial performance (60% success rate) on One-leg from only 10 episode of
demonstrations.


                                                                25
       Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Figure 17: Varying the number of expert demonstrations. The numbers in the legends indicates
4]     the number of episodes used in pre-training.

3]
       Training from scratch. In Fig. 18 we compare DPPO (10 denoising steps) and Gaussian trained
3]     from scratch (no pre-training on expert data) in the three OpenAI G YM tasks. As using larger action
       chunk sizes Ta leads to poor from-scratch training shown in Fig. 17, we focus on single-action
lue,
       chunks Ta = 1 (and Tp = 1) as is typical in RL benchmarking. Though we find Gaussian trains
ed     faster than DPPO (expected since DPPO solves an MDP with longer effective horizon), DPPO
       still attains reasonable final performance. However, due to the multi-step (10) denoising sampling,
       DPPO takes about 6× wall-clock time compared to Gaussian. We hope that future work will explore
       how to design the training curriculum of denoising steps for the best balance of training performance
       and wall-clock efficiency.


        Figure 18: No expert data / pre-training with G YM tasks. Results are averaged over five seeds.

       D.4   C OMPARING TO OTHER POLICY PARAMETERIZATIONS IN A V O I D

       Figure 19 depicts the performance of various parameterizations of DPPO (with differing numbers
       of fine-tuned denoising steps, K ′ ) to Gaussian and GMM baselines. We study the Avoid task from
       D3IL, after pre-training with the data from M1, M2, M3 as described in Section 6. We find that,
       for K ′ ∈ {15, 20}, DPPO attains the highest performance of all methods and trains the quickest in
       terms of environment steps; on M1, M2, it appears to attain the greatest terminal performance as
       well. K ′ = 10 appears slightly better than, but roughly comparable to, the Gaussian baseline, with
       GMM and K ′ < 10 performing less strongly.


       Figure 19: Fine-tuning performance (averaged over five seeds, standard deviation not shown) after
       pre-training with M1, M2, and M3 in Avoid task from D3IL. DPPO (K = 20), Gaussian, and
       GMM policies are compared. We also sweep the number of fine-tuned denoising steps K ′ in DPPO.

                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.5      C OMPARING TO OTHER POLICY PARAMETERIZATIONS IN THE EASIER TASKS FROM
         ROBOMIMIC

Figure 20 compares the performance of DPPO to Gaussian and GMM baslines, across a variety of
architectures, and with state and pixel inputs, in Lift and Can environments in the ROBOMIMIC
suite. Compared to the Square and Transport (results shown in Section 5), these environments
are considered to be “easier”, and this is reflected in the greater performance of DPPO and Gaussian
baselines (GMM still exhibits subpar performance). Nonetheless, DPPO still achieves similar or
even better sample efficiency compared to Gaussian baseline.


Figure 20: Comparing to other policy parameterizations in the easier Lift and Can tasks from
ROBOMIMIC, with state (left) or pixel (right) observation. Results are averaged over three seeds.

D.6      C OMPARING TO POLICY GRADIENT USING EXACT LIKELIHOOD OF D IFFUSION P OLICY

Here we experiment another novel method (which, to our knowledge, has not been explicitly studied
in any previous work) for performing policy gradient with diffusion-based policies. Although diffu-
sion model does not directly model the action likelihood, pθ (a0 |s), there have been ways to estimate
the value, e.g., by solving the probability flow ODE that implements DDPM (Song et al., 2020b).
We refer the readers to Appendix. D in Song et al. (2020b) for a comprehensive exposition. We
follow the official open-source code from Song et al.7 , and implement policy gradient (single-level
MDP) that uses the exact action likelihood πθ (at |st ).
Fig. 21 shows the comparison between DPPO and diffusion policy gradient using exact likelihood
estimate. Exact policy gradient improves the base policy in Hopper-v2 but does not outperform
DPPO. It also requires more runtime and GPU memory as it backpropagates through the ODE.
In the more challenging Can its success rate drops to zero. Moreover, policy gradient with exact
likelihood does not offer the flexibility of fine-tuning fewer-than-K denoising steps or discounting
the early denoising steps that DPPO offers, which have shown in Appendix D.2 to often improve
fine-tuning efficiency.


Figure 21: Comparing to diffusion policy gradient with exact action likelihood. Results are
averaged over five seeds in Hopper-v2 and HalfCheetah-v2, and three seeds in Can.

D.7      A BLATING S TRUCTURED E XPLORATION IN DPPO

Here we provide additional evidence on how structured exploration of DPPO (Section 6) aids RL
fine-tuning. While Fig. 19 compares DPPO with Gaussian and GMM policies and shows DPPO
   7
       https://github.com/yang-song/score_sde_pytorch


                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


trajectories achieve wide coverage and stay near the expert data manifold, in Fig. 22 we ablate
such structured exploration within DPPO. We use DDIM (Song et al., 2020a) such that actions can
be sampled deterministically — this allows us to sample trajectories without adding any noise to
intermediate denoising steps but only to the final denoised action (k = 0), and compare that to
DPPO with noise added to all denoising steps. In both cases, we consider the minimum noise level
  exp
σmin  of 0.05 and 0.1. We see in Fig. 22 that with higher noise level, DPPO trajectories cover the
expert data modes well without exploring aggressively into new modes, while in the case of only
adding noise to the final step, the trajectories become less structured especially in M3.
Then we run both exploration schemes in Can and Square from ROBOMIMIC, and Fig. 14 right
shows the original DPPO setup achieves faster convergence than when noise is only added to the
final step. This result, on top of results from Section 5.3 showing DPPO achiving better sample
efficiency than Gaussian and GMM policies, showcases the benefit of structured exploration in fine-
tuning.


Figure 22: Ablating Structured Exploration in DPPO. (Left) Sampled trajectories with noise
added to all denoising steps vs. only to the last step k = 0 in Avoid. (Right) Results are averaged
over three seeds in Can and Square.


E    R EPORTING OF WALL -C LOCK T IMES

Comparing to other diffusion-based RL algorithms Section 5.1. Table 1 and Table 2 shows the
the wall-clock time used in each OpenAI G YM task and ROBOMIMIC task. In G YM tasks, on average
DPPO trains 41%, 37%, and 12% faster than DAWR, DIPO, and DQL, respectively, which all
require a significant amount of gradient updates per sample to train stably. QSM, DRWR, and IDQL
trains 43%, 33%, and 7% faster than DPPO, respectively. ROBOMIMIC tasks are more expensive
to simulate, especially with Transport task, and thus the wall-clock difference is smaller among
the different methods. All methods use comparable time except for DIPO that uses slightly more
on average.

                                                      Task
                     Method
                               Hopper-v2       Walker2D-v2    HalfCheetah-v2
                     DRWR          11.3            12.7             10.4
                     DAWR          30.4            30.7             27.1
                     DIPO          27.8            27.9             26.0
                     IDQL          16.3            16.1             15.5
                      DQL          20.5            20.5             17.6
                      QSM           9.6             9.9              9.7
                     DPPO          16.6            18.3             16.8


Table 1: Wall-clock time in seconds for a single training iteration in OpenAI G YM tasks when
comparing diffusion-based RL algorithms. Each iteration involves 500 environment timesteps in
each of the 40 parallelized environments running on 40 CPU threads and a NVIDIA RTX 2080
GPU (20000 steps total).


                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                          Task
                          Method
                                       Lift                Can            Square           Transport
                           DRWR            32.5            39.5            59.8              346.1
                           DAWR            38.6            46.0            70.5              354.3
                           DIPO            43.9            51.6            73.3              359.7
                           IDQL            33.8            41.7            63.7              349.9
                           DQL             36.9            44.4            68.5              353.5
                           QSM             31.8            44.5            68.7              322.5
                           DPPO            35.2            42.0            65.6              350.3


Table 2: Wall-clock time in seconds for a single training iteration in ROBOMIMIC tasks with
state input when comparing diffusion-based RL algorithms. Each iteration involves 4 episodes
(1200 environment timesteps for Lift and Can, 1600 for Square, and 3200 for Transport)
from each of the 50 parallelized environments running on 50 CPU threads and a NVIDIA L40 GPU
(60000, 80000, 160000 steps).



Comparing to other policy parameterizations and architecture Section 5.3 and Section 5.4.
Table 3 and Table 4 shows the wall-clock time used in fine-tuning in each ROBOMIMIC task with
state or pixel input, respectively. Gaussian and GMM use similar times and Transformer is slightly
more expensive than MLP. On average with state input, DPPO-MLP trains 24%, 21%, 24%, and
22% slower than baselines due to the more expensive diffusion sampling. DPPO-UNet requires
more time with the extensive use of convolutional and normalization layers and trains on average
49% slower than DPPO-MLP. On average with pixel input, DPPO-ViT-MLP trains 14% slower
than Gaussian-ViT-MLP — the difference is smaller than the state input case as the rendering in
simulation can be expensive. Table 5 shows the wall-clock time used in F URNITURE-B ENCH tasks.
DPPO-UNet trains 20% slower than Gaussian-MLP on average.


                                                                                  Task
                          Method
                                                   Lift            Can            Square        Transport
                       Gaussian-MLP                 27.7           35.7            56.2              255.6
                    Gaussian-Transformer            29.8           37.1            57.8              266.1
                        GMM-MLP                     28.0           36.2             55.2             254.5
                     GMM-Transformer                29.5           37.4             58.1             260.2
                        DPPO-MLP                    35.6           43.3            65.0              350.5
                        DPPO-UNet                   83.6           92.7            130.4             431.1


Table 3: Wall-clock time in seconds for a single training iteration in ROBOMIMIC tasks with
state input when comparing policy parameterizations. Each iteration involves 4 episodes (1200
environment timesteps for Lift and Can, 1600 for Square, and 3200 for Transport) from
each of the 50 parallelized environments running on 50 CPU threads and a NVIDIA L40 GPU
(60000, 80000, 160000 steps).


                                                                                 Task
                          Method
                                                  Lift            Can            Square        Transport
                    Gaussian-ViT-MLP              153.6           173.1           277.0              770.0
                     DPPO-ViT-MLP                 194.9           202.5           328.5              871.3


Table 4: Wall-clock time in seconds for a single training iteration in ROBOMIMIC tasks with
pixel input when comparing policy parameterizations. Each iteration involves 4 episodes (1200
environment timesteps for Lift and Can, 1600 for Square, and 3200 for Transport) from
each of the 50 parallelized environments running on 50 CPU threads and a NVIDIA L40 GPU
(60000, 80000, 160000 steps).

                                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                        Task
                                       Method
                                                   One-leg        Lamp           Round-table
                                 Gaussian-MLP       101.8         202.8               168.7
                                  DPPO-UNet         148.4         258.2               188.6


Table 5: Wall-clock time in seconds for a single training iteration in F URNITURE-B ENCH tasks
when comparing policy parameterizations. Each iteration involves 1 episodes (700 environment
timesteps for One-leg, and 1000 for Lamp and Round-table) from each of the 1000 paral-
lelized environments running on a NVIDIA L40 GPU (700000, 1000000, 1000000 steps).

F      A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

                      Task / Dataset                  Obs dim - State     Obs dim - Pixel     Act dim    T     Sparse reward ?

                                   Hopper-v2                 11                   -             3       1000         No
            G YM                  Walker2D-v2                17                   -             6       1000         No
                                HalfCheetah-v2               17                   -             6       1000         No

                             Kitchen-Complete-v0             60                   -             9       280         Yes
      F RANKA-K ITCHEN       Kitchen-Partial-v0              60                   -             9       280         Yes
                              Kitchen-Mixed-v0               60                   -             9       280         Yes

                                          Lift               19                   -              7      300         Yes
                                          Can                23                   -              7      300         Yes
    ROBOMIMIC, state input
                                         Square              23                   -              7      400         Yes
                                       Transport             59                   -             14      800         Yes

                                          Lift                9                 96×96            7      300         Yes
                                          Can                 9                 96×96            7      300         Yes
    ROBOMIMIC, pixel input
                                         Square               9                 96×96            7      400         Yes
                                       Transport             18                2×96×96          14      800         Yes

                                     One-leg                 58                   -             10       700        Yes
      F URNITURE-B ENCH                Lamp                  44                   -             10      1000        Yes
                                   Round-table               44                   -             10      1000        Yes

                                          M1                  4                   -             2       100         Yes
            D3IL                          M2                  4                   -             2       100         Yes
                                          M3                  4                   -             2       100         Yes


Table 6: Comparison of the different tasks considered. “Obs dim - State”: dimension of the state
observation input. “Obs dim - State”: dimension of the pixel observation input. “Act dim - State”:
dimension of the action space. T : maximum number of steps in an episode. “Sparse reward ?”:
whether sparse reward is used in training instead of dense reward.

F.1     D ETAILS OF POLICY ARCHITECTURES USED IN ALL EXPERIMENTS

MLP. For most of the experiments, we use a Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) with two-layer residual
connection as the policy head. For diffusion-based policies, we also use a small MLP encoder for the
state input and another small MLP with sinusoidal positional encoding for the denoising timestep
input. Their output features are then concatenated before being fed into the MLP head. Diffusion
Policy, proposed by Chi et al. (2024b), does not use MLP as the diffusion architecture, but we find
it delivers comparable (or even better) pre-training performance compared to UNet.

Transformer. For comparing to other policy parameterizations in Section 5.3, we also consider
Transformer as the policy architecture for the Gaussian and GMM baselines. We consider decoder
only. No dropout is used. A learned positional embedding for the action chunk is the sequence into
the decoder.

UNet. For comparing to other policy parameterizations in Section 5.3, we also consider UNet
(Ronneberger et al., 2015) as a possible architecture for DP. We follow the implementation from
Chi et al. (2024b) that uses sinusoidal positional encoding for the denoising timestep input, except
for using a larger MLP encoder for the observation input in each convolutional block. We find this
modification helpful in more challenging tasks.


                                                             30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ViT. For pixel-based experiments in Section 5.3 we use Vision-Transformer(ViT)-based image
encoder introduced by Hu et al. (2023) before an MLP head. Proprioception input is appended
to each channel of the image patches. We also follow (Hu et al., 2023) and use a learned spatial
embedding for the ViT output to greatly reduce the number of features, which are then fed into the
downstream MLP head.

F.2   A DDITIONAL DETAILS OF G YM TASKS AND TRAINING IN S ECTION 5.1

Pre-training. The observations and actions are normalized to [0, 1] using min/max statistics from
the pre-training dataset. For all three tasks the policy is trained for 3000 epochs with batch size 128,
learning rate of 1e-3 decayed to 1e-4 with a cosine schedule, and weight decay of 1e-6. Exponential
Moving Average (EMA) is applied with a decay rate of 0.995.

Fine-tuning. All methods from Section 5.1 use the same pre-trained policy. Fine-tuning is done
using online experiences sampled from 40 parallelized MuJoCo environments (Todorov et al., 2012).
                                                                                  exp
Reward curves shown in Fig. 4 are evaluated by running fine-tuned policies with σmin  = 0.001 (i.e.,
without extra noise) for 40 episodes. Each episode terminates if the default conditions are met or
the episode reaches 1000 timesteps. Detailed hyperparameters are listed in Table 7.

F.3   D ESCRIPTIONS OF DIFFUSION - BASED RL ALGORITHM BASELINES IN S ECTION 5.1

DRWR: This is a customized reward-weighted regression (RWR) algorithm Peters and Schaal
(2007) that fine-tunes a pre-trained DP with a supervised objective with higher weights on actions
that lead to higher reward-to-go r.
The reward is scaled with β and the exponentiated weight is clipped at wmax . The policy is updated
with experiences collected with the current policy (no buffer for data from previous iteration) and a
replay ratio of Nθ . No critic is learned.
                                      h                                        i
                       Lθ = Eπ̄θ ,εt min(eβrt , wmax )∥εt − εθ (a0t , st , k)∥2 .

DAWR: This is a customized advantage-weighted regression (AWR) algorithm Peng et al. (2019)
that builds on DRWR but uses TD-bootstrapped Sutton and Barto (2018) advantage estimation in-
stead of the higher-variance reward-to-go for better training stability and efficiency. DAWR (and
DRWR) can be seen as approximately optimizing (4.2) with a Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence
constraint on the policy Peng et al. (2019); Black et al. (2023).
The advantage is scaled with β and the exponentiated weight is clipped at wmax . Unlike DRWR, we
follow (Peng et al., 2019) and trains the actor in an off-policy manner: recent experiences are saved
in a replay buffer D, and the actor is updated with a replay ratio of Nθ .
                                                  0
                     Lθ = ED,εt min(eβ Âϕ (st ,at ) , wmax )∥εt − εθ (a0t , st , k)∥2 .


The critic is updated less frequently (we find diffusion models need many gradient updates to fit the
actions) with a replay ratio of Nϕ .
                                Lϕ = ED ∥Âϕ (st , a0t ) − A(st , a0t )∥2 ,


where A is calculated using TD(λ), with λ as λDAWR and the discount factor γENV .

DIPO (Yang et al., 2023): This baseline applies “action gradient” that uses a learned state-action
Q function to update the actions saved in the replay buffer, and then has DP fitting on them without
weighting.
Similar to DAWR, recent experiences are saved in a replay buffer D. The actions (k = 0) in the
buffer are updated for MDIPO iterations with learning rate αDIPO .
              am+1,k=0
                t        = am,k=0
                             t     + αDIPO ∇ϕ Q̂ϕ (st , am,k=0
                                                          t       ), m = 0, . . . , MDIPO − 1.
The actor is then updated with a replay ratio of Nθ .
                               Lθ = ED ∥εt − εθ (aM    DIPO ,k=0
                                                                 , st , k)∥2 .

                                                    t
The critic is trained to minimize the Bellman residual with a replay ratio of Nϕ . Double Q-learning
is also applied.
                                                                                 m=0,k=0 2
              Lϕ = ED ∥(Rt + γENV Q̂ϕ (st+1 , π̄θ (ak=0

                                                     t+1 |st+1 )) − Q̂ϕ (st , at          )∥


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


IDQL (Hansen-Estruch et al., 2023): This baseline learns a state-action Q function and state V
function to choose among the sampled actions from DP. DP fits on new samples without weighting.
Again recent experiences are saved in a replay buffer D. The state value function is updated to match
the expected Q value with an expectile loss, with a replay ratio of Nψ .
                           Lψ = ED |τIDQL − 1(Q̂ϕ (st , a0t ) < V̂ψ2 (st ))| .


The value function is used to update the Q function with a replay ratio of Nϕ .
                         Lϕ = ED ∥(Rt + γENV V̂ψ (st+1 ) − Q̂ϕ (st , a0t )∥2 .


The actor fits all sampled experiences without weighting, with a replay ratio of Nθ .
                                   Lθ = ED ∥εt − εθ (a0t , st , k)∥2 .


At inference time, MIDQL actions are sampled from the actor. For training, Boltzmann exploration
is applied based on the difference between Q value of the sampled actions and and the V value at
the current state. For evaluation, the greedy action under Q is chosen.

DQL (Wang et al., 2022): This baseline learns a state-action Q function and backpropagates the
gradient from the critic through the entire actor (with multiple denoising steps), akin to the usual
Q-learning.
Again recent experiences are saved in a replay buffer D. The actor is then updated using both a
supervised loss and the value loss with a replay ratio of Nθ .
                     Lθ = ED ∥εt − εθ (a0t , st , k)∥2 − αDQL Q̂ϕ (st , π̄θ (a0t |st )) ,


where αDQL is a weighting coefficient. The critic is trained to minimize the Bellman residual with a
replay ratio of Nϕ . Double Q-learning is also applied.
                 Lϕ = ED ∥(Rt + γENV Q̂ϕ (st+1 , π̄θ (a0t+1 |st+1 )) − Q̂ϕ (st , a0t )∥2


QSM (Psenka et al., 2023): This baselines learns a state-action Q function, and then updates the
actor by aligning the score of the diffusion actor with the gradient of the Q function.
Again recent experiences are saved in a replay buffer D. The critic is trained to minimize the
Bellman residual with a replay ratio of Nϕ . Double Q-learning is also applied.
               Lϕ = ED ∥(Rt + γENV Q̂ϕ (st+1 , π̄θ (a0t+1 |st+1 )) − Q̂ϕ (st , a0t )∥2 .


The actor is updated as follows with a replay ratio of Nθ .
                      Lθ = ED ∥αQSM ∇a Q̂ϕ (st , at ) − (−εθ (a0t , st , k))∥2 ,


where αQSM scales the gradient. The negative sign before εθ is from taking the gradient of the mean
µ in the denoising process.

F.4   D ESCRIPTIONS OF RL FINE - TUNING ALGORITHM BASELINES IN S ECTION 5.2

In this subsection, we detail the baselines RLPD, Cal-QL, and IBRL. All policies πθ are param-
eterized as unimodal Gaussian.

RLPD (Ball et al., 2023): This baseline is based on Soft Actor Critic (SAC, Haarnoja et al. (2018))
— it learns an entropy-regularized state-action Q function, and then updates the actor by maximizing
the Q function w.r.t. the action.
A replay buffer D is initialized with offline data, and online samples are added to D. Each gradient
update uses a batch of mixed 50/50 offline and online data. An ensemble of Ncritic critics is used,
and at each gradient step two critics are randomly chosen. The critics are trained to minimize the
Bellman residual with replay ratio Nϕ :
                Lϕ = ED ∥(Rt + γENV Q̂ϕ′ (st+1 , πθ (at+1 |st+1 )) − Q̂ϕ (st , at )∥2 .


The target critic parameter ϕ′ is updated with delay. The actor minimizes the following loss with a
replay ratio of 1:
                           Lθ = ED − Q̂ϕ (st , at ) + αent log πθ (at |st ) ,


where αent is the entropy coefficient (automatically tuned as in SAC starting at 1).


                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Cal-QL (Nakamoto et al., 2024): This baseline trains the policy µ and the action-value function
Qµ in an offline phase and then an online phase. During the offline phase only offline data is sampled
for gradient update, while during the online phase mixed 50/50 offline and online data are sampled.
The critic is trained to minimize the following loss (Bellman residual and calibrated Q-learning):
                  Lϕ =ED ∥(Rt + γENV Q̂ϕ′ (st+1 , πθ (at+1 |st+1 ))) − Q̂ϕ (st , at )∥2


                         + βcql (ED max(Qϕ (st , at ), V (st )) − ED Qϕ (st , at ) ),


where βcql is a weighting coefficient between Bellman residual and calibration Q-learning and V (st )
is estimated using Monte-Carlo returns. The target critic parameter ϕ′ is updated with delay. The
actor minimizes the following loss:
                           Lθ = ED − Q̂ϕ (st , at ) + αent log πθ (at |st ) ,


where αent is the entropy coefficient (automatically tuned as in SAC starting at 1).

IBRL (Hu et al., 2023): This baseline first pre-trains a policy µψ using behavior cloning, and for
fine-tuning it trains a RL policy πθ initialized as µψ . During fine-tuning recent experiences are saved
in a replay buffer D. An ensemble of Ncritic critics is used, and at each gradient step two critics are
randomly chosen. The critics are trained to minimize the Bellman residual with replay ratio Nϕ :

                  Lϕ = ED ∥(Rt + γENV                    Q̂ϕ′ (st+1 , a′ ) − Q̂ϕ (st , at )∥2

                                               max
                                         a′ ∈{aIL ,aRL }

where aIL = µψ (st+1 ) (no noise) and aRL ∼ πθ′ (st+1 ), and πθ′ is the target actor. The target critic
parameter ϕ′ is updated with delay. The actor minimizes the following loss with a replay ratio of 1:
                                     Lθ = −ED Q̂ϕ (st , at ) .


The target actor parameter θ′ is also updated with delay.

F.5   A DDITIONAL DETAILS OF F RANKA -K ITCHEN TASKS AND TRAINING IN S ECTION 5.2

Tasks. We consider three settings from the D4RL benchmark (Fu et al., 2020): (1)
Kitchen-Complete-v0 containing demonstrations that complete the entire task (four subtasks),
(2) Kitchen-Partial-v0 containing some complete demonstrations and many ones complet-
ing only subtasks, and (3) Kitchen-Mixed-v0 containing incomplete demonstrations only.

Pre-training. The observations and actions are normalized to [0, 1] using min/max statistics from
the pre-training dataset. No history observation (proprioception or ground-truth object states) is
used. All policies are trained with batch size 128, learning rate 1e-4 decayed to 1e-5 with a cosine
schedule, and weight decay 1e-6. DPPO policies are trained with 8000 epochs. For IBRL and
Cal-QL we follow the hyperparameters from the original implementations — IBRL proposes
using (1) wider MLP layers and (2) dropout during pre-training, which we follow too. We use Ta =
4 for DPPO; we also tried to use the same action chunk size with IBRL, RLPD, and Cal-QL, but
we find for all of them Ta = 1 leads to better performance.

Fine-tuning. With DPPO, policies are fine-tuned using online experiences sampled from 40 paral-
lelized MuJoCo environments (Todorov et al., 2012), while the baselines use only one environment
(matching their original implementations). Episodes terminates when they reach maximum episode
lengths (shown in Table 6) or all four subtasks are completed. Detailed hyperparameters are listed in
Table 8 — we follow the hyperparameter choices from the original implementations of the baselines.

Larger variance with DPPO in Fig. 11. In Fig. 11, it is shown that DPPO exhibits a larger vari-
ance in normalized score with Kitchen-Partial-v0 than Cal-QL. This is due to DPPO solv-
ing either 3/4 or 2/4 subtasks in one seed (low variance within the evaluation episodes in one seed)
but high variance over seeds, whereas Cal-QL has higher variance among evaluation episodes
in one seed but on average over seeds it shows lower variance. This also highlights a notable
property of DPPO: Kitchen-Partial-v0 and Kitchen-Mixed-v0 have trajectories only
completing subtasks, thus being highly multi-modal. Diffusion policy can sometimes struggle to


                                                   33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


learn all the modes from pre-training, and since DPPO directly fine-tunes the pre-trained policy,
it can fail to converge to 100% success rate at fine-tuning. Cal-QL instead learns from all of-
fline data during fine-tuning in an off-policy manner, thus less sensitive to pre-training performance.
Nonetheless, with offline data completing tasks consistently despite varying quality (ROBOMIMIC
and Kitchen-Complete-v0, which, we believe, are more realistic in the current paradigm of
robot manipulation), DPPO demonstrates much better final performance than Cal-QL and other
baselines in Fig. 11.

F.6   A DDITIONAL DETAILS OF ROBOMIMIC TASKS AND TRAINING IN S ECTION 5.3

Tasks. We consider four tasks from the ROBOMIMIC benchmark (Mandlekar et al., 2021): (1)
Lift: lifting a cube from the table, (2) Can: picking up a Coke can and placing it at a target
bin, (3) Square: picking up a square nut and place it on a rod, and (4) Transport: two robot
arms removing a bin cover, picking and placing a cube, and then transferring a hammer from one
container to another one.

Pre-training. ROBOMIMIC provides the Multi-Human (MH) dataset with noisy human demon-
strations for each task, which we use to pre-train the policies. The observations and actions are
normalized to [0, 1] using min/max statistics from the pre-training dataset. No history observation
(pixel, proprioception, or ground-truth object states) is used. All policies are trained with batch size
128, learning rate 1e-4 decayed to 1e-5 with a cosine schedule, and weight decay 1e-6. Diffusion-
based policies are trained with 8000 epochs, while Gaussian and GMM policies are trained with
5000 epochs — we find diffusion models require more gradient updates to fit the data well.

Fine-tuning. Diffusion-based, Gaussian, and GMM pre-trained policies are then fine-tuned using
online experiences sampled from 50 parallelized MuJoCo environments (Todorov et al., 2012). Suc-
cess rate curves shown in Fig. 4, Fig. 5, and Fig. 20 are evaluated by running fine-tuned policies with
 exp
σmin = 0.001 (i.e., without extra noise) for 50 episodes. Episodes terminates only when they reach
maximum episode lengths (shown in Table 6). Detailed hyperparameters are listed in Table 9.

Pixel training. We use the wrist camera view in Lift and Can, the third-person camera view in
Square, and the two robot shoulder camera views in Transport. Random-shift data augmenta-
tion is applied to the camera images during both pre-training and fine-tuning. Gradient accumulation
is used in fine-tuning so that the same batch size (as in state-input training) can fit on the GPU. De-
tailed hyperparameters are listed in Table 10.

F.7   D ESCRIPTIONS OF POLICY PARAMETERIZATION BASELINES IN S ECTION 5.3

Gaussian. We consider unimodal Gaussian with diagonal covariance, the most commonly used
policy parameterization in RL. The standard deviation for each action dimension, σGau , is fixed
during pre-training; we also tried to learn σGau from the dataset but we find the training very unstable.
During fine-tuning σGau is learned starting from the same fixed value and also clipped between 0.01
and 0.2. Additionally we clip the sampled action to be within 3 standard deviation from the mean.
As discusses in Appendix C, we choose the PPO clipping ratio ε based on the empirical clipping
fraction in each task. This setup is also used in the F URNITURE-B ENCH experiments. We note that
we spend significant amount of efforts tuning the Gaussian baseline, and our results with it are some
of the best known ones in RL training for long-horizon manipulation tasks (exceeding our initial
expectations), e.g., reaching ∼100% success rate in Lamp with Low randomness.

GMM. We also consider Gaussian Mixture Model as the policy parameterization. We denote
MGMM the number of mixtures. The standard deviation for each action dimension in each mixture,
σGMM , is also fixed during pre-training. Again during fine-tuning σGMM is learned starting from the
same fixed value and also clipped between 0.01 and 0.2.

F.8   A DDITIONAL DETAILS OF F URNITURE -B ENCH TASKS AND TRAINING IN S ECTION 5.4

Tasks. We consider three tasks from the F URNITURE-B ENCH benchmark (Heo et al., 2023): (1)
One-leg: assemble one leg of a table by placing the tabletop in the fixture corner, grasping and


                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


inserting the table leg, and screwing in the leg, (2) Lamp: place the lamp base in the fixture corner,
grasp, insert, and screw in the light bulb, and finally place the lamp shade, (3) Round-table:
place a round tabletop in the fixture corner, insert and screw in the table leg, and then insert and
screw in the table base. See Fig. 23 for the visualized rollouts in simulation.

Pre-training. The pre-training dataset is collected in the simulated environments using a Space-
Mouse8 , a 6 DoF input device. The simulator runs at 10Hz. At every timestep, we read off the state
of the SpaceMouse as δa = [∆x, ∆y, ∆z, ∆roll, ∆pitch, ∆yaw], which is converted to a quaternion
before passed to the environment step and stored as the action alongside the current observation in
the trajectory. If |∆ai | < ε ∀i for some small ε = 0.05 defining the threshold for a no-op, we do
not record any action nor pass it to the environment. Discarding no-ops is important for allowing
the policies to learn from demonstrations effectively. When the desired number of demonstrations
has been collected (typically 50), we process the actions to convert the delta actions stored from the
SpaceMouse into absolute pose actions by applying the delta action to the current EE pose at each
timestep.
The observations and actions are normalized to [−1, 1] using min/max statistics from the pre-training
dataset. No history observation (proprioception or ground-truth object states) is used, i.e., only the
current observation is passed to the policy. All policies are trained with batch size 256, learning rate
1e-4 decayed to 1e-5 with a cosine schedule, and weight decay 1e-6. Diffusion-based policies are
trained with 8000 epochs, while Gaussian policies are trained with 3000 epochs. Gaussian policies
can easily overfit the pre-trained dataset, while diffusion-based policies are more resilient. Gaussian
policies also require a very large MLP (∼10 million parameters) to fit the data well.

Fine-tuning. Diffusion-based and Gaussian pre-trained policies are then fine-tuned using online
experiences sampled from 1000 parallelized IsaacGym environments Makoviychuk et al. (2021).
                                                                                            exp
Success rate curves shown in Fig. 6 are evaluated by running fine-tuned policies with σmin      = 0.001
(i.e., without extra noise) for 1000 episodes. Episodes terminate only when they reach maximum
                 Solvinginmulti-stage
episode length (shown                 dexterous
                           Table 6). Detailed    manipulation tasks
                                              hyperparameters        frominFurniture-Bench
                                                               are listed   Table 11. We find a smaller
                                        exp
amount of exploration noise (we set σmin    and σGau to be 0.04) is necessary for the pre-trained policy
achieving nonzero success rates at the beginning of fine-tuning.

                                                                                     One-leg


                                                                                      Lamp


                                                                                  Round-table


             Figure 23: Representative rollouts from simulated F URNITURE-B ENCH tasks.


Hardware setup - robot control. The physical robot used is a Franka Emika Panda arm. The
policies output a sequenceRobust  sim-to-real
                           of desired         transfer
                                      end-effector     in zero-shot
                                                   poses  in the robot base frame to control the robot.
These poses are converted into joint position targets through differential inverse kinematics. We
                                                                             Corrective
calculate the desired end-effector velocity as the difference between the desired    and current poses
                                                                              behavior
divided by the delta time dt = 1/10. We then convert this to desired joint velocities using the
Jacobian and compute the desired joint positions with a first-order integration over the current joint
positions and desired velocity. The resulting joint position targets are passed to a low-level joint
impedance controller provided by Polymetis (Lin et al., 2021), running at 1kHz.

   8
       https://3dconnexion.com/us/product/spacemouse-wireless/


                                                     35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hardware setup - state estimation. To deploy state-based policies on real hardware, we utilize
AprilTags (Wang and Olson, 2016) for part pose estimation. The F URNITURE-B ENCH (Heo et al.,
2023) task suite provides AprilTags for each part and code for estimating part poses from tag detec-
tions. The process involves several steps: (1) detecting tags in the camera frame, (2) mapping tag
detections to the robot frame for policy compatibility, (3) utilizing known offsets between tags and
object centers in the simulator, and (4) calibrating the camera pose using an AprilTag at a known
position relative to the robot base. Despite general accuracy, detections can be noisy, especially
during movement or partial occlusion, which the One-leg task features. Since the task requires
high precision, we find the following to help make the estimation reliable enough:

 • Camera coverage: We find detection quality sensitive to distance and angle between the camera
   and tag. This issue is likely due to the RealSense D435 camera having mediocre image quality
   and clarity and the relatively small tags. To remedy this, we opt to use 4 cameras roughly evenly
   spread out around the scene to ensure that at least one camera has a solid view of a tag on all the
   parts (i.e., as close as possible with a straight-on view). To find the best camera positions, we
   start with having a camera in each of the cardinal directions around the scene. Then, we adjust
   the pose of each to get it as close as possible to the objects while still covering the necessary
   workspace and capturing the base tag for calibration. Moving the robot arm around the scene to
   avoid the worst occlusion is also helpful.
 • Lighting: Even with better camera coverage and placement, detection quality depends on having
   crisp images. We find proper lighting helpful to improve image quality. In particular, the scene
   should be well and evenly lit around the scene without causing reflections in either the tag or
   table.
 • Filtering: Bad detections can sometimes cause the resulting pose estimate to deviate signifi-
   cantly from the true pose, i.e., jumping several centimeters from one frame to the next. This
   usually only happens on isolated frames, and thus before “accepting” a given detection, we
   check if the new position and orientation are within 5 cm and 20 degrees of the previously ac-
   cepted pose. In addition, we apply low-pass filtering on the detection using a simple exponential
   average (with α = 0.25) to smooth out the high-frequency noise.
 • Averaging: The objects have multiple tags that can be detected from multiple cameras. After
   performing the filtering step, we average all pose estimates for the same object across different
   tags and cameras, which also helps smooth out noise. This alone, however, does not fully cancel
   the case when a single detection has a large jump, as this can severely skew the average, still
   necessitating a filtering step. Having multiple cameras benefits this step, too, as it provides more
   detections to average over.
 • Caching part pose in hand: A particularly difficult phase of the task to achieve good detections
   is when the robot transports the table leg from the initial position to the tabletop for insertion.
   The main problems are that the movement can blur the images, and the grasping can cause
   occlusions. Therefore, we found it helpful to assume that once the part was grasped by the
   robot, it would not move in the grasp until the gripper opened. With this, we can “cache” the
   pose of the part relative to the end-effector once the object is fully grasped and use this instead
   of relying on detections during the movement.
 • Normalization pitfalls and clipping: We generally use min-max normalization of the state
   observations to ensure observations are in [−1, 1]. The tabletop part moves very little in the
   z-direction demonstration data, meaning the resulting normalization limits (the minimum and
   maximum value of the data) can be very close, xmax − xmin ≈ 0. With these tight limits, the
                                                                            x−xmin
   noise in the real-world detection can be amplified greatly as xnorm = xmax −xmin . Therefore, ensure
   that normalization ranges are reasonable. As an extra safeguard, clipping the data to [−1, 1] can
   also help.
 • Only estimate necessary states: Despite the One-leg task having 5 parts, only 2 are manipu-
   lated. Only estimating the pose of those parts can eliminate a lot of noise. In particular, the pose
   of the 3 legs that are not used and the obstacle (the U-shaped fixture) can be set to an arbitrary
   value from the dataset.
 • Visualization for debugging: We use the visualization tool MeshCat9 extensively for debugging
   of state estimation. The tool allows for easy visualizations of poses of all relevant objects in the
   9
       https://github.com/meshcat-dev/meshcat


                                                 36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     scene, like the robot end-effector and parts, which makes sanity-checking the implementation
     far easier than looking at raw numbers.

Hardware evaluation. We perform 20 trials for each method. We adopt a single-blind model
selection process: at the beginning of each trial, we first randomize the initial state. Then, we
randomly select a method and roll it out, but the experimenter does not observe which model is
used. We record the success and failure of each trial and then aggregate statistics for each model
after all trials are completed.

 DP Pre-trained


              Initialization       Grasp tabletop          Place tabletop             Grasp leg              Insert leg       Screw leg
(A) Pre-trained Diffusion policy performs successful rollout


(B) Policy pushes peg down without proper alignment with the hole before releasing the peg, making it topple over
 DP Fine-tuned


(C) Fine-tuned DPPO policy performs successful rollout


(D) Initial peg alignment is off, the policy corrects placement until it is properly inserted in the hole before letting go
Figure 24: Qualitative comparison of pre-trained vs. fine-tuned DPPO policies in real eval-
uation. (A) Successful rollout with the pre-trained policy. (B) Failed rollout with the pre-trained
policy due to imprecise insertion. (C) Successful rollout with the fine-tuned policy. (D) Successful
rollout with the fine-tuned policy that requires corrective behavior.


Domain randomization for sim-to-real transfer. To facilitate the sim-to-real transfer, we apply
additional domain randomization to the simulation training. We record the range of observation
noises in hardware without any robot motion and then apply the same amount of noise to state
observations in simulation. We find the state estimation in hardware particularly sensitive to the
object heights. Also, we apply random noise (zero mean with 0.03 standard deviation) to the sampled
action from DPPO to simulate the imperfect low-level controller; we find adding such noise to the
Gaussian policy leads to zero task success rate while DPPO is robust to it (also see discussion in
Section 6).

BC regularization loss used for Gaussian baseline. Since the fine-tuned Gaussian policy exhibits
very jittery behavior and leads to zero success rate in real evaluation, we further experiment with
adding a behavior cloning (BC) regularization loss in fine-tuning with the Gaussian baseline. The


                                                                       37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


combined loss follows
                                                  K−1
                                                  X
                     Lθ,+BC = Lθ − αBC Eπθold [         log πθpre-trained (akt |ak+1
                                                                                 t   , st )],
                                                  k=0

where πθpre-trained is the frozen BC-only policy. The extra term encourages the newly sampled actions
from the fine-tuned policy to remain high-likelihood under the BC-only policy. We set αBC = 0.1.
However, although this regularization reduces the sim-to-real gap, it also significantly limits fine-
tuning, leading to the fine-tuning policy saturating at 53% success rate shown in Fig. 6.

F.9    A DDITIONAL DETAILS OF A V O I D TASK FROM D3IL AND TRAINING IN S ECTION 6

Pre-training. We split the original dataset from D3IL based on the three settings, M1, M2, and
M3; in each setting, observations and actions are normalized to [0, 1] using min/max statistics. All
policies are trained with batch size 16 (due to the small dataset size), learning rate 1e-4 decayed
to 1e-5 with a cosine schedule, and weight decay 1e-6. Diffusion-based policies are trained with
about 15000 epochs, while Gaussian and GMM policies are trained with about 10000 epochs; we
manually examine the trajectories from different pre-trained checkpoints and pick ones that visually
match the expert data the best.

Fine-tuning. Diffusion-based, Gaussian, and GMM pre-trained policies are then fine-tuned us-
ing online experiences sampled from 50 parallelized MuJoCo environments (Todorov et al., 2012).
Reward curves shown in Fig. 8 and Fig. 19 are evaluated by running fine-tuned policies with the
same amount of exploration noise used in training for 50 episodes; we choose to use the training
(instead of evaluation) setup since Gaussian policies exhibit multi-modality only with training noise.
Episodes terminate only when they reach 100 steps.

Added action noise during fine-tuning. In Fig. 8 left, we demonstrate that DPPO exhibits
stronger training stability when noise is added to the sampled actions during fine-tuning. The noise
starts at the 5th iteration. It is sampled from a uniform distribution with the lower limit ramping up
to 0.1 and the upper limit ramping up to 0.2 linearly in 5 iterations. The limits are kept the same
from the 10th iteration to the end of fine-tuning.

F.10    L ISTED TRAINING HYPERPARAMETERS


                                                  38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                 Task(s)
     Method              Parameter                    G YM         Lift, Can             Square         Transport

                            γENV                      0.99            0.999                0.999            0.999
                              exp
                            σmin                      0.1              0.1                  0.1             0.08
                             prob
                           σmin                                                    0.1
                             Tp                         4               4                    4                8
     Common                  Ta                         4               4                    4                8
                             K                                                        20
                    Actor learning rate                    1e-4 for DPPO and 1e-5 for others (tuned from 1e-4 to 1e-5)
              Critic learning rate (if applies)                                      1e-3
                      Actor MLP dims              [512, 512, 512] [512, 512, 512] [1024, 1024, 1024] [1024, 1024, 1024]
               Critic MLP dims (if applies)                                    [256, 256, 256]

                            β                                                       10
                         wmax                                                      100
     DRWR
                           Nθ                                                       16
                        Batch size                                                1000

                            β                                                      10
                         wmax                                                     100
                         λDAWR                                                    0.95
     DAWR                  Nθ                                                      64
                           Nϕ                                                      16
                        Buffer size                  200000          120000                120000          120000
                        Batch size                                                1000

                          αDIPO                                                   1e-4
                         MDIPO                                                     10
     DIPO                  Nθ                                                      64
                        Buffer size                                             1000000
                        Batch size                                                1000

                         MIDQL                         20              10                   10               10
                           Nθ                                                     128
     IDQL                  Nϕ                                                     128
                        Buffer size                 1000000          250000                250000          250000
                        Batch size                                                1000

                          αDQL                                                     1
                           Nθ                                                      16
      DQL                  Nϕ                                                      16
                        Buffer eize                                             1000000
                        Batch size                                               1000

                          αQSM                                                     10
                           Nθ                                                      16
      QSM                  Nϕ                                                      16
                        Buffer size                 1000000          250000                250000          250000
                        Batch size                                                1000

                         γDENOISE                                                 0.99
                         GAE λ                                                    0.95
                           Nθ                           5              10                   10               10
     DPPO                  Nϕ                           5              10                   10               10
                            ε                                                     0.01
                        Batch size                   50000            7500                 10000            10000
                           K′                                                      10


Table 7: Fine-tuning hyperparameters for OpenAI G YM and ROBOMIMIC tasks when compar-
ing diffusion-based RL methods. We list hyperparameters shared by all methods first, and then
method-specific ones.


                                                              39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                               Task(s)
    Method   Parameter HalfCheetah-v2 Kitchen-Complete-v0 Kitchen-Partial-v0 Kitchen-Mixed-v0
   Common      γENV                                                0.99

                Tp                                                  1
    RLPD        Ta                                                  1
                Nϕ           20                   10                               10                  10
              Ncritic        10                    5                                5                   5
             Batch size                                            256

             Tp                                                     1
   Cal-QL
             Ta                                                     1
             βcql                                                   5
          Batch size                                               256

                Tp                                                  1
    IBRL        Ta                                                  1
                Nϕ                                                  5
              Ncritic                                               5
             Batch size                                            256

                Tp           1                    4                                4                   4
                Ta           1                    4                                4                   4
                 exp
               σmin                                                0.1
                prob
               σmin                                                0.1
    DPPO      γDENOISE                                             0.99
              GAE λ                                                0.95
                Nθ           5                    10                               10                  10
                Nϕ           5                    10                               10                  10
                 ε                                                 0.01
             Batch size    10000                 5600                             5600                5600
                K                                                   20
                K′                                                  10

              Method      Parameter    Can, PH          Square, PH                Can, MH   Square, MH

                            γENV                                          0.999
             Common
                             Ta                                             1
                             Ta                                             1

                             Nϕ                                            3
              RLPD         Ncritic                                         5
                          Batch size                                      256

                             βcql                                          5
             Cal-QL
                          Batch size                                      256

                             Nϕ                                            3
              IBRL         Ncritic                                         5
                          Batch size                                      256
                             exp
                            σmin                                           0.1
                             prob
                            σmin                                           0.1
                           γDENOISE      0.9                 0.9                   0.99        0.99
                           GAE λ                                          0.95
              DPPO           Nθ                                            10
                             Nϕ                                            10
                              ε                                           0.01
                          Batch size    6000                15000                  8000       20000
                             K                                             20
                             K′                                            10


Table 8: Fine-tuning hyperparameters for HalfCheetah-v2, F RANKA-K ITCHEN, Can, and
Square (PH or MH datasets) when comparing demo-augmented RL methods. We list hyperpa-
rameters shared by all methods first, and then method-specific ones.


                                                       40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                 Task
              Method                 Parameter          Lift, Can      Square                 Transport

                                        γENV                                    0.999
                                         Ta                  4            4                        8
                                Actor learning rate         1e-4         1e-5            1e-5 (decayed to 1e-6)
                                Critic learning rate                             1e-3
                                      GAE λ                                      0.95
             Common
                                         Nθ                  10            10                         8
                                        Nϕ                   10            10                         8
                                          ε                          0.01 (annealed in DPPO)

                                      σGau                   0.1          0.1                     0.08
         Gaussian, Common
                                    Batch size              7500        10000                    10000
           Gaussian-MLP             Model size              552K        2.15M                    1.93M
        Gaussian-Transformer        Model size              675K        1.86M                    1.87M

                                     MGMM                                         5
          GMM, Common                σGMM                   0.1           0.1                     0.08
                                    Batch size             7500         10000                    10000
           GMM-MLP                  Model size            1.15M         4.40M                    4.90M
         GMM-Transformer            Model size            680K          1.87M                    1.89M

                                     γDENOISE                                    0.99
                                        exp
                                      σmin                   0.1          0.1                     0.08
                                        prob
          DPPO, Common                σmin                   0.1          0.1                      0.1
                                       K                                          20
                                       K′                                         10
                                    Batch size            75000         100000                  100000
            DPPO-MLP                Model size            576K          2.31M                   2.43M
            DPPO-UNet               Model size            652K          1.62M                   1.68M


Table 9: Fine-tuning hyperparameters for ROBOMIMIC tasks with state input when comparing
policy parameterizations. We list hyperparameters shared by all methods first, and then method-
specific ones. Since the different policy parameterizations use different neural network architecture,
we list the total model size here instead of the details such as MLP dimensions.


                                                                                Task
              Method               Parameter           Lift, Can      Square                Transport

                                       γENV                                    0.999
                                        Ta                4              4                        8
                               Actor learning rate       1e-4           1e-5            1e-5 (decayed to 1e-6)
                               Critic learning rate                             1e-3
                                     GAE λ                                      0.95
             Common
                                        Nθ                  10            10                      8
                                       Nϕ                   10            10                      8
                                         ε                          0.01 (annealed in DPPO)

                                   Model size           1.03M          1.03M                   1.93M
         Gaussian-ViT-MLP
                                     σGau                 0.1            0.1                    0.08
                                   Batch size            7500          10000                   10000

                                   Model size           1.06M          1.06M                   2.05M
                                    γDENOISE                                    0.9
                                       exp
                                     σmin                   0.1          0.1                    0.08
          DPPO-ViT-MLP                 prob
                                     σmin                                    0.10
                                      K                                      100
                                      K′                                  5 (DDIM)
                                   Batch size            37500         50000                   50000


Table 10: Fine-tuning hyperparameters for ROBOMIMIC tasks with pixel input when comparing
policy parameterizations. We list hyperparameters shared by all methods first, and then method-
specific ones. Since the different policy parameterizations use different neural network architecture,
we list the total model size here instead of the details such as MLP dimensions.


                                                       41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                     Task
               Method           Parameter          One-leg        Lamp           Round-table

                                    γENV                             0.999
                                     Ta                                 8
                            Actor learning rate              1e-5 (decayed to 1e-6)
                            Critic learning rate                      1e-3
                                  GAE λ                               0.95
              Common
                                     Nθ                                 5
                                    Nϕ                                  5
                                      ε                              0.001

                                Model size          10.64M       10.62M               10.62M
            Gaussian-MLP
                                  σGau                               0.04
                                Batch size                           8800

                                Model size          6.86M        6.81M                6.81M
                                 γDENOISE                             0.9
                                    exp
                                  σmin                               0.04
             DPPO-UNet              prob
                                  σmin                                0.1
                                   K                                 100
                                   K′                             5 (DDIM)
                                Batch size                          44000


Table 11: Fine-tuning hyperparameters for F URNITURE-B ENCH tasks when comparing policy pa-
rameterizations. We list hyperparameters shared by all methods first, and then method-specific
ones.


                                                   42
