Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S PECTRAL -R EFINER : ACCURATE F INE -T UNING OF
S PATIOTEMPORAL F OURIER N EURAL O PERATOR FOR
T URBULENT F LOWS
 Shuhao Cao∗                                                   Francesco Brarda
 School of Science and Engineering                             Department of Mathematics
 University of Missouri-Kansas City                            Emory University

 Rui Peng Li                                                   Yuanzhe Xi∗
 Center for Applied Scientific Computing                       Department of Mathematics
 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory                        Emory University



                                               A BSTRACT

            Recent advancements in operator-type neural networks have shown promising re-
            sults in approximating the solutions of spatiotemporal Partial Differential Equations
            (PDEs). However, these neural networks often entail considerable training expenses,
            and may not always achieve the desired accuracy required in many scientific and
            engineering disciplines. In this paper, we propose a new learning framework to
            address these issues. A new spatiotemporal adaptation is proposed to generalize
            any Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) variant to learn maps between Bochner spaces,
            which can perform an arbitrary-length temporal super-resolution for the first time.
            To better exploit this capacity, a new paradigm is proposed to refine the commonly
            adopted end-to-end neural operator training and evaluations with the help from the
            wisdom from traditional numerical PDE theory and techniques. Specifically, in the
            learning problems for the turbulent flow modeled by the Navier-Stokes Equations
            (NSE), the proposed paradigm trains an FNO only for a few epochs. Then, only
            the newly proposed spatiotemporal spectral convolution layer is fine-tuned without
            the frequency truncation. The spectral fine-tuning loss function uses a negative
            Sobolev norm for the first time in operator learning, defined through a reliable
            functional-type a posteriori error estimator whose evaluation is exact thanks to the
            Parseval identity. Moreover, unlike the difficult nonconvex optimization problems
            in the end-to-end training, this fine-tuning loss is convex. Numerical experiments
            on commonly used NSE benchmarks demonstrate significant improvements in
            both computational efficiency and accuracy, compared to end-to-end evaluation
            and traditional numerical PDE solvers under certain conditions. The source code is
            publicly available at https://github.com/scaomath/torch-cfd.



1       I NTRODUCTION

Recently, Deep Learning (DL) pipelines have proven particularly effective in addressing problems
formulated by Partial Differential Equations (PDEs). In this paper, we study the problem of learning
Neural Operators (NOs) between infinite-dimensional function spaces (Boullé & Townsend, 2023;
Kovachki et al., 2023; Azizzadenesheli et al., 2024; de Hoop et al., 2022; 2023). Specifically,
the problem in consideration is for the Navier-Stokes Equations (NSE) in the turbulent regime
(Re = O(103 ) to O(104 )). In computation, the difficulties of solving NSE in this regime roots
from its “stiffness” attributed to the nonlinear convection with a nearly singular viscous diffusion,
as well as the spatiotemporal nature of being highly transient. For this problem, we propose to
synergize operator learning with classical numerical PDE methods, complementing one’s drawbacks
and limitations with the other’s strengths.
    ∗
        Corresponding to scao@umkc.edu or yuanzhe.xi@emory.edu


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Compromises and drawbacks of traditional numerical methods. To solve NSE, traditional
time stepping schemes include Adams-Bashforth/-Moulton or Runge-Kutta (RK) families, e.g., see
Canuto et al. (2007, Appendix D), Karniadakis et al. (1991). If one opts to use an explicit scheme,
or there exists a certain portion of the forcing terms (e.g., the convection term in NSE) computed
via explicit schemes, then small time step sizes must be used: ∆t ∼ O ((∆x)α ), α ≥ 1 (Rannacher,
2000, Chapter 4). This necessity is often referred to as the “stiffness” of the PDE, and the threshold or
constraint of the time step is called the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) condition, e.g., see Johnston
& Liu (2004); Wang (2012); He & Sun (2007). CFL poses a sufficient condition on the step size for
“stability”, and this requires the step size usually much smaller than the requirement for “consistency”.
Here, this temporal consistency usually refers to a first-order optimal local truncation error, e.g., how
the original Butcher tableau is derived for RK (Butcher, 1965). The CFL puts a threshold for all
explicit time-marching schemes on how fast the local errors in different frequencies can propagate,
and thus prevent error accumulation “pollutes” the approximation globally to ensure stability. This
means that, for any time-marching schemes, finer mesh (better spatial consistency) requires the time
steps to be much smaller to prevent errors from traveling to neighboring nodes and elements, which
greatly increases the computational cost.
Spatiotemporal operator learning. Among the end-to-end operator learning for NSE, the common
approach is the so-called autoregressive “roll-out”. During rolling-out, several snapshots of solutions
are concatenated as channels in the input tensor to the neural operator, which outputs an approximated
solution at the subsequent time step. This procedure can be repeated recurrently until reaching the
model’s stability capacity. In contrast to the traditional time marching solvers whose step sizes are
restricted by the CFL condition, roll-out can withstand a much bigger time step size. NOs used in roll-
out approach include the original FNO2d (Li et al., 2021), and those in Li et al. (2022); Brandstetter
et al. (2023); Gupta & Brandstetter (2023); Fonseca et al. (2023); Zheng et al. (2024). However, for
an end-to-end operator learner, the roll-out approach faces the same dilemma of super-resolution
capacity in the temporal dimension as a traditional solver: finer time steps cost prohibitively more,
while larger time steps does not guarantee stability. To solve this problem, we turn to the prevalent
functional analytic framework for studying the convergence and stability of solution trajectories for
NSE: the theory of Bochner spaces, e.g., Aubin-Lions lemma (Lions & Magenes, 2012, Chapter 3),
(Temam, 1995, Chapter 2), (Evans, 2022, Chapter 7). Inspired by this theoretical insight, we propose
a SpatioTemporal adaption for all Fourier Neural Operator (ST-FNO) variants. ST-FNO now can
perform arbitrary zero-shot super-resolution not only spatial dimensions, but also allows the temporal
dimension to vary for the first time. For a prototype spatiotemporal operator learner FNO3d in Li
et al. (2021), it learns a map between a fixed number of spatial “snapshots” (product spaces). The
newly proposed ST-FNO directly learns a map between Bochner spaces L2 (T0 ; V) to L2 (T ; V) on
non-overlapping time intervals T0 and T . This makes the model become “trajectory-to-trajectory”,
where the initial trajectory is the input of an NO to obtain the output evaluation as an approximation
to the subsequent trajectory of the solution. Here V denotes the spatial Hilbert space in which
snapshots of the solution at a specific time reside, and for a detailed notation list, we refer the readers
to Appendix A.
Limits and the lack of accuracy for neural operators. The NO approach has the potential to
bypass various difficulties and compromises of traditional schemes of numerical PDEs. However,
in all end-to-end operator learning benchmarks of NSE, even the state-of-the-art NOs still fall short
in achieving high-accuracy solutions. For example, an end-to-end roll-out approach suffers from
error accumulation experimentally, e.g., see Li et al. (2022, Figure 9). To our best knowledge, in
terms of the relative difference with the ground truth under the Bochner norm, no NO-only-based
operator learning approach can break the barrier of an even 2-digit accuracy. Moreover, to our best
knowledge, NO-only approaches have no theoretical stability estimate, such as the error propagation
operator is a contraction. Recently, a remarkable advancement called PDE-Refiner (Lippe et al.,
2023) learns an extra error correction NO under the Denoising Diffusion framework (Ho et al., 2020).
For a single instance, it can get a stable long roll-out, and achieve for the first time O(10−8 ) relative
difference with the ground truth after a single time marching step, and O(10−6 ) in the Bochner norm.
Nevertheless, for all models above and their learning frameworks, the optimization is to minimize
the difference between the outputs from the NO, namely uN , and the ground truth uS , generated
by a traditional numerical PDE solver. The difference with the true solution u under a certain norm
is not directly optimized, as the analytical expression of u is unknown most of the time in real-life
applications. For difficult PDEs such as the NSE, in a linear time-stepping scheme, the ground truth
uS may on its own only have 3-digit accuracy in the Bochner norm. Note that this may already


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


be of optimal order O(∆t) by convergence estimates (Heywood & Rannacher, 1986). Therefore,
minimizing the difference between uN and uS becomes fruitless if the numerical approximation
(ground truth) uS is not accurate at the first place, as unnecessary computational resources may have
been spent to get closer to uS .
New hybrid scheme. To address these dilemmas for NSE’s approximation, we take an alternative
hybrid learning paradigm inspired by traditional numerical methods. Unlike the arduous training of
running hundreds of epochs, the newly proposed ST-FNO is trained for only a few epochs (e.g., 10),
concluding with the freezing of most model parameters. Then, the newly proposed spatiotemporal
spectral convolution, as the last layer, in ST-FNO is fine-tuned with the help of traditional solvers.
Note that SF-FNO’s temporal arbitrary-length inference capacity is attributed to this last layer. During
fine-tuning, this layer is relieved from the common frequency truncation FNO has. A traditional solver
with a single time step is used to obtain highly accurate approximations for extra field variables to
conform with the physics. These extra fields help the evaluation of a new loss function in fine-tuning,
a functional-type a posteriori error estimate measured under a negative Sobolev norm, which is
equivalent to the variational form-associated norm for the NSE. Note that there shall be no training of
extra error-correcting NOs (Dresdner et al., 2023; Lippe et al., 2023). Moreover, unlike the same
nonconvex optimization problem that the extra error-correcting NOs try to tackle as the one in the
original end-to-end training, our fine-tuning optimization problem is convex, and allows us to achieve
high accuracy with a fractional of computational resources when compared with other fine-tuning
approaches that optimize the whole model with a physics-informed loss.
Fine-tuning using functional-type a posteriori error estimation. To seek highly accurate NO
approximated solutions that are closer to the true solution directly, we turn to the a posteriori error
estimation techniques. This technique allows computing the error without knowing the true PDE
solutions, and has been widely studied for Galerkin-type methods, such as finite element (Ainsworth
& Oden, 1993; 1997; Oden et al., 1994), as well as for parameterized PDEs (Hesthaven et al., 2016;
Patera et al., 2007). Among all types of a posteriori error estimation techniques, functional-type a
posteriori estimator (Repin, 2008) views the error as a functional on the test Sobolev spaces and
evaluates accurate representations with the help of an extra dual variable (Ern & Vohralík, 2010). In
our hybrid approach, inspired by this, we combine the strengths of NOs and traditional numerical
solvers. Using the newly proposed spatiotemporal discretization-invariant NO, we propose to use a
negative Sobolev norm in the frequency domain as a functional-type a posteriori error estimation as
the fine-tuning loss. Traditionally, the a posteriori error estimation is used to refine local basis, yet
this constraint on the purpose of the method leads to inaccurate localized representations for the H −1
error functional. Our new approach is not attached to the local refining requirement (Bonito et al.,
2024). As a result, the negative Sobolev norm used in the new loss is handily defined through the
Gelfand triple in the frequency domain which is global. Our method needs no extra dual variable
reconstruction problem as in the traditional methods (Ern & Vohralík, 2010). Unlike commonly
adopted physics-informed operator learning (Li et al., 2024d), NO prediction for other field variables
are not needed either. The extra field variables for computing the error are recovered through an
auto-differentiable numerical solver with the NO output of the primal variable (vorticity or velocity).
Overall, this practice leads to “refining” the learnable set of the global spectral basis.
For a more detailed review of operator learning and further motivation discussion with a much higher
degree of mathematical rigor, we refer the readers to Appendix B.

Main contributions. The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows. For the
difference between the common roll-out approach versus direct spatiotemporal learning between
Bochner spaces, we refer the readers to Figure 1.
• Spatiotemporal Fourier Neural Operator. We design the first spatiotemporal adaption technique
   for all FNO variants (ST-FNO) to enable them to learn maps between Bochner spaces.
• New hybrid operator learning paradigm. We propose to train and evaluate ST-FNOs using a new
   strategy, which has significantly improved over the existing methods in speed and accuracy. Only a
   few epochs of training combined with a spectral-refining fine-tuner yield highly accurate approxi-
   mations. Extra field variables are obtained by auto-differentiable single-step (RK4) or multistep
   (Adam-Bashforth) solvers, the input of which are neural predictions. The auto-differentiability of
   the solver makes it possible for the fine-tuning to optimize the parameters in FNO.
• Functional a posteriori error estimation. Leveraging the spectral structure of the new SpatioTem-
   poral layer in ST-FNO and Parseval identity, the fine-tuning utilizes for the first time the negative


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                              ||           ||           ||
                                      2
          min R uN , Dt Gα (uN ), f     2  ′
           θ
                                     L (T,V ) t
                   where uN := uN {θ}nm=1

    STFNO
                                      ||                                  ||



    RK4


    Rollout


Figure 1: Schematic differences between approaches. 4th-order Runge-Kutta (RK4): small time
steps bounded by the CFL condition, de-aliasing filter needed; autoregressive NO rolling-out: using
previous evaluation as input repetitively, large time steps, no stability guarantees; Spatiotemporal FNO
(ST-FNO) with hybrid fine-tuning: large time steps, yielding arbitrary-length temporal prediction in a
single evaluation, parallel-in-time optimization for spectral fine-tuning.


  Sobolev norm (functional norm) as loss via a posteriori error estimation. This procedure does not
  require any ground truth data (e.g., numerical solution generated by traditional numerical solvers),
  nor the knowledge of the true solution(s) to the PDE. This new loss is proven to be reliable in
  theory, in the meantime much more efficient in the ablation experiments.
• Experimental results. We created a native PyTorch port of Google’s Computational Fluid
  Dynamics written in JAX (Kochkov et al., 2021; Dresdner et al., 2023) with enhanced functionality
  for tensor operations such as the facilitation of fine-tuning for the latent fields, publicly available
  at https://github.com/scaomath/torch-cfd, with scripts to replicate the experiments as well
  as the data generation. The data are available at https://huggingface.co/datasets/scaomath/
  navier-stokes-dataset .


2      S PATIOTEMPORAL O PERATOR L EARNING FOR NAVIER -S TOKES E QUATIONS
Both drawbacks and advantages of traditional numerical methods and NO-based methods in Section
1 play vital roles in shaping our study. We first briefly discuss the spatiotemporal operator learning
problem on Bochner spaces associated with NSE. Then, we detail how to modify a generic FNO-based
neural architecture to obtain an operator learner between Bochner spaces.

2.1       S PATIOTEMPORAL O PERATOR LEARNING PROBLEM FOR NSE

For 2D NSE, in the the velocity-pressure (V-P) formulation (2.2), the velocity field u(t, x) : [0, T ] ×
Ω → R2 is seen as an element in the Bochner space Lp ([0, T ], V) where V is a spatial Sobolev space
in which each snapshot at t of the solution u(t, ·) resides. As in Li et al. (2021), we also consider
the vorticity-streamfunction (V-S) formulation (2.1) with periodic boundary condition (PBC). In
[0, T ] × Ω, the scalar-valued vorticity ω := ∇×u, and streamfunction ψ satisfies u = rot ψ. These
two formulations read
      (Vorticity-Streamfunction)        ∂t ω + rot ψ · ∇ω − ν∆ω = ∇×f , ω + ∆ψ = 0.                (2.1)
       (Velocity-Pressure)                 ∂t u + (u · ∇)u − ν∆u + ∇p = f ,     ∇ · u = 0.         (2.2)
For all analyses in line with the Hilbertian framework, V = H 1 (T2 ) for vorticity and H 1 (T2 ) for
velocity, where T2 denotes the unit torus, i.e., Ω = (0, 1)2 with a component-wise PBC. For a fixed
forcing function in V ′ , the initial condition is either ω(0, x) = ω0 (x) or u(0, ·) = rot (−∆)−1 ω0 .
Here ω0 is drawn from a compactly supported probability measure µ, in which the compactness corre-
sponds to certain power/enstrophy spectrum decay law to produce isotropic turbulence (McWilliams,


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1984), and we refer the reader to Appendix C for details. Then, we can consider the following map
  µ
G : Xµ ⋐ Πℓi=1 V → Πni=1   t
                             V:
               µ
             G : a := ω(t1 , ·), . . . , ω(tℓ , ·) 7→ u := ω(tℓ+1 , ·), . . . , ω(tℓ+nt , ·) , (2.3)
                                                                         µ
where tℓ+nt ≤ T . The input and the output in the training data for G are snapshots obtained from a
solution trajectory with the same initial condition ω0 that is drawn from certain compactly supported
probability measure µ. The operator learning task for NSE using a prototype spatiotemporal operator
learner, e.g., FNO3d (Li et al., 2021), is to learn this G between a fixed number of Cartesian products
                                             µ
of spatial Sobolev spaces. Specifically, G : Xµ → Y maps elements in Xµ ⋐ Πℓi=1 V to elements in
        nt
Y = Πi=1 V. In the task for this prototype “snapshots learner”, the number of snapshots ℓ ∈ Z+ is
fixed. As such, Xµ and Y represent spaces of two non-overlapping temporal segments of solution
snapshots. Based on these snapshots’ discretized approximations from data, these snapshots learners
learn an operator Gθ : X → Y, where the number of parameters in Gθ is independent of the spatial
discretization size, yet does depend on the number of snapshots ℓ. This dependence in the setting
of this task makes it not “trajectory-to-trajectory”.
In this study, the learning aims to recast (2.3) to a trajectory-to-trajectory operator learning problem,
conforming to the Hilbertian formulation of NSE using Bochner spaces. Using the fact that the weak
solutions to (2.1) and (2.2) at a given time interval T is in L2 (T ; V), the operator to be learned is
 Gµ : L2 (t1 , tℓ ; V) → L2 (tℓ+1 , tℓ+nt ; V) for V := H 1 (T2 ) or {v ∈ H 1 (T2 ) : ∇ · v = 0}. (2.4)
In what follows, we shall present how to modify any common FNO variant to become a Bochner space
operator learner that can learn maps from arbitrary-sized discretization in Rℓ×n×n×d to Rnt ×n×n×d
(d = 1 in V-S; d = 2 in V-P). This operator can be trained by a standard end-to-end supervised
learning pipeline using lower-resolution data, and for inference, the newly proposed spatiotemporal
trajectory-to-trajectory learner, ℓ, nt , n can all be of variable sizes. In contrast, the snapshot learner
FNO3d predicts the subsequent nt snapshots with the first ℓ snapshots as input, with both nt and ℓ
fixed, and only the spatial resolution n can be much higher than the input-output pairs used in the
training. Hereafter we omit the d dimension if no ambiguity arises.

2.2    S PATIOTEMPORAL A DAPTATION OF F OURIER N EURAL O PERATORS

For any FNO variant, such as FNO3d (Li et al., 2021) or Factorized FNO (Tran et al., 2023), with
the following meta-architecture: Gθ := Q ◦ σL ◦ KL−1 ◦ · · · ◦ σ1 ◦ K0 ◦ P , where P is a lifting
operator, Q is a projection operator that does a pointwise reduction in the channel dimension, σj
can be a pointwise universal approximator or simply chosen as a nonlinearity. Kj := Kϕj is the
parametrized spectral convolution that uses a spatiotemporal 3D FFT. During training, the operator to
be learned is restricted to finite-dimensional subspaces X ⊃ Xn → Yn ⊂ X , in the sense that the
continuous spatial Sobolev space V in the product spaces is replaced by a finite-dimensional subspace
V ⊃ S ≃ Rn×n with continuous embeddings {aS ∈ Rℓ×n×n } ,→ X , and {uS ∈ Rnt ×n×n } ,→ Y.
The positional encodings p := (ti , xj )ℓi=1 ∈ R3×ℓ×n×n represents the underlying spatiotemporal
grid, and is concatenated to aS before feeding to P .
For spatiotemporal problems, all FNO variants novelly exploit a convenient architectural advantage
of operator-valued NNs: the input temporal dimension ℓ is treated as the channel dimension of an
image, thus enabling channel mixing as a learnable temporal extrapolation. However, this neat trick
coincidentally makes the lifting operator the biggest hurdle for Gθ to become a trajectory-to-trajectory
operator learner between Bochner spaces, since the channel dimension of P must be hard-coded1 and
thus depends on the input pair’s time steps.
In what follows, we use FNO3d as an example to present three new modifications to FNO3d to
become a trajectory-to-trajectory learner ST-FNO3d, that is, to act as an operator that maps an
arbitrary-time-step input to an arbitrary-time-step output. We also note that this modification applies
to any FNO variant that predicts spatial and temporal dimensions at the same time. These changes
are so simple that the trajectory-to-trajectory modification can serve as drop-in replacements for
their snapshot learner counterparts, when the temporal input dimensions are fixed in a task. For the
schematic difference, please refer to Figure 2, Figure 3, and Appendix D.2 for more comments.
   1
    Line 97 in the original FNO3d source code fourier_3d.py (link provided for an unaltered fork of the
master branch commit de514f2 in the original FNO GitHub repository).



                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             n      oℓ                                                                            n        ont
               (t )                                                                                 (t   )
              ωS i                                                                                 ωNℓ+i
                     i=1                                                                                    i=1


                         ℓ×n×n×nt

                                    dv ×n×n×nt   dv ×n×n×nt   dv ×n×n×nt   dv ×n×n×nt   n×n×nt


Figure 2: The FNO3d in Li et al. (2021) is a snapshot learner. : spectral convolution layer ; :
pointwise nn.Conv3d that works as channel expansion/reduction; : pointwise nonlinearity. The
TikZ source code to produce this figure is modified from the examples in Iqbal (2018).


                 n×n×ℓ dv ×n×n×ℓ

 n      oℓ                          dv ×n×n×dt   dv ×n×n×dt   dv ×n×n×dt   dv ×n×n×dt   n×n×(∗)        n        o(∗)
   (t )                                                                                                  (t   )
  ωS i                                                                                                  ωNℓ+i
         i=1                                                                                                      i=1



Figure 3: The Spatiotemporal-adaptated FNO3d (ST-FNO3d) is now a trajectory-to-trajectory learner.
  : layer normalization to replace a hard-coded global normalization. Combined with channel mixing,
the first spectral convolution layer serves as a time-depth-wise separable (global) convolution, after
which the time dimension is shrank to a fixed “latent” time dimension through iFFT’s resampling. :
the spatiotemporal spectral convolution layer as the final layer is fine-tuned after the training phase.


Modifications to 3D FFT. The first change is in the spatiotemporal FFT from an analytical point
of view. Using the spectral convolution K(·) in FNO3d as an example, with a slight abuse of
notation, denote the latent dimension (width) by dv , let the vector-valued latent representation
with dv channels be continuously embedded into Πni=1        t
                                                               V by vS ,→ v in each channel, and denote
Λ := [tℓ+1 , . . . , tℓ+nt ], then K(·) is “semi-discrete” in a sense as follows
                                                 X       ˆ

                (Kv)(t, x) := (W v)(t, x) +                   κ (t, x), (s, y) v(s, y)dm(y),       (2.5)
                                                              s∈Λ   Ω

where t takes values only in a discrete set Λ, and x ∈ Ω. Here W ∈ R(dv +1)×dv is a pointwise-
applied affine linear operator, κ ∈ C (Λ × Ω) × (Λ × Ω); Rdv ×dv , and m denotes an approximation
to the Lebesgue measure on Ω. Evolving K into a spatiotemporal spectral convolution acting on
Bochner space is straightforward. We change (2.5) slightly by adopting of an atom-like measure δ(·)
in the temporal dimension, which then generalizes to the variable-length temporal discretization for
any (t, x) ∈ (a, b) × Ω, i.e., one can obtain arbitrarily many snapshots on the interval of interest
                                             ˆ bˆ

             e
            (K(v))(t, x) := (W v)(t, x) +            κ (t, x), (s, y) v(s, y) dm(y)dδ(s).         (2.6)
                                                          a    Ω

During training using the discretized data, each hidden layer is a map from Rdv ×dt ×n×n →
Rdv ×dt ×n×n , where dt is a “latent” dimension of time steps that is chosen ≤ nt . The layerwise propa-
gation mechanics remains the same: K   e ϕ v := W v + F −1 (Rϕ · (F v)), where F and F −1 denote the
spatiotemporal Fourier transform and its inverse, respectively. The global spatiotemporal interaction
characterized by the kernel is truncated in terms of modes in the frequency domain at (τmax , kmax ),
such that {(τ, k) ∈ Z3 : |τ | ≤ τmax , |kj | ≤ kmax , j = 1, 2} are kept. Rϕ is parametrized as a
Cτmax ×kmax ×kmax ×dv ×dv -tensor. Here (τ, k) denotes the coordinate in the spatiotemporal Fourier
domain. Note that the integral represented by matrix product with Fκ(·, (s, y)) can then be viewed
as residing in the continuous space as the Fourier basis (3.1) can be evaluated at arbitrary point.
Modifications to the lifting operator P . The other major hurdle for FNO3d to become trajectory-to-
trajectory is that a global normalization is applied with a hard-coded temporal dimension using training


                                                               6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


data.2 In ST-FNO3d’s modification, a periodic padding along the temporal dimension is applied to
the input, and then a time-depth separable convolution layer I with variable time steps is used to map
an arbitrary number of snapshots to a fixed number of channels dv with a fixed latent time steps dt .
The spatiotemporal positional encodings p  e S := Wp p, with Wp a learnable random projection with
periodically padded p as input. This makes p e S match the latent fields’ dimensions such that they can
be concatenated. The latent fields, concatenated with p e S , are then normalized by a learnable layer
normalization layer Ln(·), instead of a global fixed pointwise normalizer for the raw data in FNO3d.

Finally, in ST-FNO3d, the lifting operator becomes Pe := Ln p   e S + I(·) : Rℓ×n×n → Rdv ×dt ×n×n .
Modifications to the projection operator Q. In FNO3d, the original out projection operator
Q maps a tensor in Rnt ×dv ×n×n to another in Rnt ×n×n . In the spatiotemporal-adapted FNO
Qe : Rdv ×dt ×n×n → Rnt ×n×n , which maps the last latent representation to match the dimension of
                    e the key for an arbitrary-length inference is that we compose another spectral
the output uS . In Q,
convolution KS after channel reduction. KS can be thought of as a post-processing layer (also as the
only layer to be fine-tuned). It takes advantage of the FFT/iFFT’s natural super-resolution capacity,
especially in the temporal dimension, by zero-padding the latent temporal step dimension (dt ) to
given arbitrary output time steps. For the necessity of this padding, we refer the reader to Figure 7 for
an illustrative example. For the V-P formulation, to impose the divergence-free condition for, S is
implemented as an optional non-learnable Helmholtz decomposition layer in Q.      e


3     N EW H YBRID PARADIGM FOR S PATIOTEMPORAL O PERATOR L EARNING
Built upon a reasonably accurate approximation, the fine-tuning of ST-FNO is proposed. It is able to
yield accuracy on par with traditional numerical methods on the same time horizon, and computational
resources used are comparable to the evaluation of NOs. Taking advantage of the efficient ST-FNO
zero-shot arbitrary-length temporal inference, this new approach does not need thousands of marching
steps like traditional methods. Meanwhile, it borrows the wisdom from traditional Galerkin methods
to improve the accuracy (consistency) of the NO approach, liberating the scheme from trade-offs that
the traditional methods must make to ensure stability and convergence.

3.1   A POSTERIORI ERROR ESTIMATION USING A FUNCTIONAL NORM

We shall present the proposed fine-tuning using the V-P formulation in subsequent subsections.
Denote an ST-FNO evaluation at a specific tm ∈ Tnt := {tℓ+1 , · · · , tℓ+nt } in the output time
             (m)                     e in ST-FNO renders u(m) ∈ W, where W is the divergence-
interval as uN . The construction of Q                     N
free subspace of S |t=tm × S |t=tm ⊂ V := H 1 (T2 ), where

     S := span Re eiτm t eik·x : −n/2 ≤ kj ≤ n/2 − 1, −nt /2 ≤ m ≤ nt /2 − 1 /R,            (3.1)
where k := 2π(kj )j=1,2 and τm := 2πm/(T − tl ). Then, a temporal continuous approximation
uN := uN (t, ·) can be naturally defined by allowing t vary continuously on T := [tℓ+1 − tp , T + tp ]
thanks to the spectral basis of S, where tp is the temporal periodic padding in Section 2.2. Define
residual functional R(uN ) ∈ L2 (T ; V ′ ): at t ∈ T and for v ∈ V
      R(uN ) := f − ∂t uN − (uN · ∇)uN + ν∆uN , and R(uN )(v) := ⟨R(uN ), v⟩ .                          (3.2)
R(uN ) measures how PDE (2.2) is violated by the finite-dimensional approximation uN , not in a
localized/pointwise fashion, but rather in a global way by representing the error based on its inner
product against arbitrary v. At a specific time t, the functional norm of R(uN )(t, ·) ∈ V ′ defined
as follows is then an excellent measure of the error to be a candidate for a loss function in view of
Theorem 3.1:
                        ∥R(uN )(t, ·)∥V ′ := supv∈V,∥v∥V =1 |(R(uN ), v)| .                          (3.3)
Theorem 3.1 (A posteriori error bound for any fine-tuned approximations, informal version). Let the
weak solution to (2.2) be u ∈ L2 (T ; V), and ∂t u ∈ L2 (T ; V ′ ). For u that is sufficiently regular, the
dual norm of the residual is efficient to estimate the error for any uN :
                 ∥R(uN )∥2L2 (T ;V ′ ) ≲ ∥u − uN ∥2L2 (T ;V) + ∥∂t (u − uN )∥2L2 (T ;V ′ ) .            (3.4)
    2
      Line 205 and 209 in the original FNO3d source code fourier_3d.py (link provided for an unaltered fork of
the master branch commit de514f2 in the original FNO GitHub repository).


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Moreover, if u and uN are “sufficiently close”, then it is reliable to serve as an error measure:
                                                                             ˆ
                                                                      2
∥u − uN ∥2L∞ (Tm ;H) + ∥u − uN ∥2L2 (Tm ;V) ≤ (u − uN )(tm , ·) V + C            ∥R(uN )(t, ·)∥2V ′ dt.
                                                                              Tm
                                                                                                  (3.5)
where Tm := (tm , tm+1 ], and the constants depend on the regularity of the true solution u.

3.2   F INE - TUNING USING NEGATIVE S OBOLEV NORM AS LOSS

The functional norm (3.3) is “global” because it does not have a natural ℓ2 -like summation form
where each summand can be evaluated in a localized neighborhood of grid points. Nevertheless,
thanks to the Gelfand triple, and viewing the Fourier transform as an automorphism in the tempered
distribution space (e.g., see Peetre (1975) and Gel’fand & Shilov (2016, Chapter 3)), we can define
the pairing between V and V ′ as follows without getting into the intricate natures of the tempered
distribution:
                        ˆ
      ⟨f, g⟩V,V ′ “ = ”   (1 + |k|2 )−s fˆ(k)ĝ(k)(1 + |k|2 )s dk, where v̂ := Fv for v ∈ V ′ . (3.6)
                      Z2

The spatial Sobolev space H s (T2 ) can be alternatively identified using norm ∥ · ∥s and seminorm
| · |s (e.g., see Ruzhansky & Turunen (2009, Def. 3.2.2)) as follows for any s ∈ R
                        X                                       X                2
              ∥f ∥2s :=   (1 + |k|2 )s |fˆ(k)|2 , and |f |2s :=      |k|2s fˆ(k) , s ̸= 0.     (3.7)
                    k∈Z2                                    k∈Z2n \{0}

Moreover, we have the subsequent lemma in our specific case.
Theorem 3.2 (Functional norm “≃” negative norm). If f ∈ H := L2 (T2 )/R, ∥f ∥H′ = |f |−1 .

Spatially, we realize a regularized negative Sobolev norm by the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT):
                    X                               2
    ∥f ∥2−1,α,n :=         2
                                 (α + |k|2 )−1 fˆ(k) , where Z2n := (Z/nZ)2 , and α ≥ 0.     (3.8)
                       k∈Zn \{0}

With this norm at hand, (3.3) and the Bochner norm in (3.4) of the residual are realized to serve as
the loss function in the fine-tuning to “refine” the approximation in the spectral domain
                             ηm (uN , ∂t uN ) := ∥R(uN )(tm , ·)∥−1,α,n .                         (3.9)
Parseval identity. In the context of using an optimization algorithm to train an NN as a function
approximator, it is known (e.g., Siegel et al. (2023)) that whether the integral in the loss function
is accurately computed affects whether the NN can achieve the scientific computing level of ac-
curacy. For example, on a uniform grid, the accuracy of the mesh-weighted spatial ℓ2 -norm as
the numerical quadrature is highly affected by the local smoothness of the function in considera-
tion. Nevertheless, computing the integral in the frequency domain yields exponentially convergent
approximations (Trefethen & Weideman, 2014, Theorem 3.1) thanks to the Parseval identity.
Why functional-type norm for the residual evaluation? We note that in “physics-informed”
learning of operators, for example, in Li et al. (2024d), the PDE residual is evaluated using L2 -norm
as loss. In the meantime, positive Sobolev norm, which is local in terms of differential operators, is
used in Li et al. (2022). To our best knowledge, the H −1 -functional norm has not been applied in
either function learning or operator learning problems. In fact, the relation of the Gelfand triple is
so simple and elegant, leading to Theorem 3.2, that the functional norm is nothing but an inverse
frequency weight in the frequency domain that emphasizes the learning of low frequency information.
This suits especially well for the learning problem of NSE. Quite contrary to the intuition of FNO
variants having the frequency truncation that results error dominating in the high-frequency part, it
has been discovered in Lippe et al. (2023) that the error of operator learning for NSE is still dominant
in the lower end of the spectrum. This has been corroborated in our study as well, see Figure 8 and
Figure 6. For a more detailed and mathematically enriched discussion on why functional norm is not
widely popular in traditional numerical methods, we refer the reader to Appendix B.
3.3 N EW TRAINING AND SPECTRAL FINE - TUNING PARADIGM
With the trajectory-to-trajectory learner and the error estimators, we propose a new training-fine-
tuning paradigm. Another important motivation of this new paradigm is that, experimentally, all


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


FNO variants capture the statistical properties of the 2D turbulence (Benzi et al., 1987; Boffetta &
Ecke, 2012) quickly in training. Even after a single epoch, the evaluations of ST-FNO converge to a
reasonably small neighborhood of the ground truth in terms of the frequency signature of the energy
cascade of the flow (see e.g., Figure 8, and Appendix D.3 for more details). Then, 95% of the FLOPs
spent in training only contribute to marginal improvements. These observations motivate us to rethink
a more efficient paradigm than end-to-end, in the meantime not needing to initiate the expensive
training of another nonlinear corrector as PDE-Refiner (Lippe et al., 2023) in the postprocessing
phase.
The computation of extra fields. In evaluating the loss accurately and relying on this evaluation to
apply the gradient method, another key barrier is that the extra field variables in evaluating the residual
for the velocity (3.2), one needs to compute ∂t uN . Instead of a common approach of using NO to rep-
resent the extra field variables (Wen et al., 2022; Brandstetter et al., 2023), we opt to apply a traditional
implicit-explicit (IMEX) numerical solver Bγ (·) with a fine time step (Wang, 2012), e.g., O((∆t)γ )
for γ ≥ 2, to compute these extra field variables (Line 8 of Algorithm 1), while preserving the compu-
tational graph for auto-differentiation. We note that, in NSE simulations using traditional numerical
solvers, for efficiency, the magnitude of this fine time step is never realistic or attainable due to time
marching. Given the training data with trajectories at {t1 , . . . , tℓ } aiming to predict the trajectories
at {tℓ+1 , . . . , tℓ+nt }, the new paradigm to train and fine-tune ST-FNO is outlined in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 The new parallel-in-time spectral refining fine-tune strategy in small data regime.
Input: ST-FNO Gθ,Θ := Q      e θ ◦GΘ ; time stepping scheme Bγ (·); optimizer D(θ, ∇θ (·)); training
    dataset: solution trajectories at [t1 , . . . , tℓ′ ] as input and at [tℓ′ +1 , . . . , tℓ′ +n′t ] as output.
 1: Train the ST-FNO model until the energy signature matches the energy cascade.
 2: Freeze Θ in GΘ of ST-FNO Gθ,Θ , keep Q          e θ trainable.
 3: Cast all nn.Module involved and tensors to torch.float64 and torch.complex128 hereafter.
Input: Evaluation dataset: solution trajectories at [t1 , . . . , tℓ ] as input, output time step nt .
 4: for m = ℓ, · · · , ℓ + nt − 1 do
                                    (m+1)
 5:     Extract the latent fields vN         output of GΘ at tm+1 and hold them fixed.
                                      (m+1)                 (ℓ)
 6: By construction of ST-FNO: uN              (θ) := uN + Q       e θ v (m+1) for all m.
                                                                         N
 7: for j = 1, · · · , Itermax do
 8:     March one step with (∆t)γ using Bγ and approximate the ∂t uN as follows:
         (m+1)                          (m+1)                 (m+1)
    D t uN     (θ) := (∆t)−γ (Bγ (uN              (θ)) − uN          (θ)) for all m.
                      2
                           P      2   (m+1)                 (m+1)
 9:     Compute η := m ηm (uN                  (θ), Dt uN          (θ)) for all evaluation time steps.
10:     Apply the optimizer to update parameters in Q:          e θ ← D(θ, ∇θ (η 2 )).
11:     Forward pass only through Q    e to update u(m+1) ← u(ℓ) + Q            e θ (v (m+1) ) for all m.
                                                            N            N               N
                                                                                         (m)
Output: A sequence of velocity profiles at corresponding time steps {uN }ℓ+n                          t
                                                                                                m=ℓ+1 .


Interpretations of the theoretical results. Theorem 3.1 establishes that the functional norm of the
residual R(uN ), without accessing u, is a good representation of the error u − uN in Bochner norms.
Estimate (3.4) indicates that reducing the a posteriori error estimator is a necessary condition for
reducing the true error. While estimate (3.5) is more delicate in that it is only reliable when uN gets
“close” to u. Theorem 3.2 lays the foundation to accurately evaluate this functional norm via FFT.
Nevertheless, (3.5) serves as a guideline to design the “refining” procedure (lines 11 in Algorithm
1), where the error estimator moves to refine the next time step once the error in the previous one
becomes less than a given threshold.


4     N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS

4.1    I LLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE : TAYLOR -G REEN VORTEX

In this illustrative example, we examine the 2D Taylor-Green vortex model (Taylor & Green, 1937),
whose analytical solution is known and frequently employed as a benchmark for evaluating traditional
numerical schemes for NSE (Gottlieb & Orszag, 1977). We create a toy train dataset with 10
trajectories on a 2562 grid with varying numbers of vortices per wavelength, and the test sample has


                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


an unseen number of vortices yet still can be resolved up to the Nyquist scale. For details please refer
to Appendix C.2. The FNO3d used in this example is scaled down to 1 layer.

4.2      2D ISOTROPIC TURBULENCE

This meta-example contains a series of examples of isotropic turbulence (McWilliams, 1984), featured
in various work such as Kochkov et al. (2021); Li et al. (2021). The energy and the enstrophy spectra
satisfy the energy law of turbulence first proposed by A. N. Kolmogorov (Kolmogorov, 1941). The
data are generated using a second-order time-stepping scheme that is proven in theory to preserve the
inverse cascade of the energy/enstrophy spectra (Wang, 2012; Gottlieb et al., 2012). We consider two
cases:
(I) NSE benchmark in Li et al. (2021), ν = 10−3 , ω0 ∼ N (0, (−∆ + τ 2 I)−α/2 ), the energy density
    in wavenumber k := |k| is f (k) ∼ (k 2 + τ 2 )−α , no drag, fixed force with a low wavenumber.
(II) The famous decaying turbulence discovered in McWilliams (1984), the initial power spectrum
    |ψ̂(k)|2 ∼ k −1 (τ 2 + (k/k0 )4 )−1 is chosen that the decaying is slow and the enstrophy density
    evolves to a similar energy cascade to the Kolmogorov flow used as examples in Kochkov et al.
    (2021); Lippe et al. (2023); Sun et al. (2023).
Tables 2 and 3 report the results for example (I) and example (II), respectively. In Appendix D.2,Table
5 and Table 6 report the architectural changes and the computational efficiency comparison with
roll-out and traditional solver.

5      C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS
We designed a new pipeline to train and fine-tune a new spatiotemporal modification of FNO to
get close to the true solution (not the ground truth generated by the numerical solver) of NSE in
the turbulent regime. The evaluation errors in benchmark problems are up to 105 times better than
the non-fine-tuned FNO variants trained by a simple end-to-end pipeline. Due the exploitation of
the intricate connections with traditional spectral methods, e.g., the optimally learned parameters
correspond to a Fourier-Galerkin projection (Kovachki et al., 2021) using the Fourier basis, only
FNO-based neural operators benefit from this advancement. How to generalize this new pipeline to
other types of operator learners in Appendix B will be worthy of exploration.

Table 1: Results for Taylor-Green vortex, the relative Table 2: Ablation study using forced turbulence, origi-
errorsa at the final time step, ε := ωtrue − ωN .                           nal example from Li et al. (2021). ε := ωS − ωN

                  Evaluation after training          After fine-tuning                             Evaluation after training      After fine-tuning
                                                                                      ST-FNO3d
                    ∥ε∥L2        ∥R∥−1,n            ∥ε∥L2       ∥R∥−1,n                              ∥ε∥L2        ∥R∥−1,n        ∥ε∥L2       ∥R∥−1,n
       ST-FNO3d   1.94×10−1     2.18×10−1         1.24×10−7    3.21×10−7           10 ep & L2 FT   2.08×10−2     1.27×10−2     2.82×10−4    2.78×10−5
    PS+RK2 (GT)   5.91×10−6     1.16×10−5            N/A          N/A            10 ep & H −1 FT       –             –         3.16×10−4    4.59×10−7



Table 3: Evaluation metrics of the McWilliams isotropic turbulence example. All models are trained
using on 64×64 mesh and evaluated on 256×256 mesh. ε := uS −uN or ωS −ωN . S stands for the
Fourier approximation space (3.1) on a 256 × 256 fine grid. r := R(uN ) or R(ωN ). Y := H −1 (T2 ).
All error norms are evaluated at the final time step. H −1 appending model means the training uses
the difference in the H −1 -norm as the loss function. Errors are measured for 32 trajectories in the
test dataset. Fine-tuning uses 100 iterations of Adam optimizer in line 10.

                                                                     Evaluation after training                   After fine-tuning
                                                                         ∥ε∥L2            ∥R∥−1,n              ∥ε∥L2            ∥R∥−1,n
                                              2                                  −2                −2
                 FNO3d 10 ep, L train, no FT                        4.32×10             6.09×10              N/A                  N/A
                FNO3d 100 ep, L2 train, no FT                       3.87×10−2           2.44×10−2            N/A                  N/A
         ST-FNO3d 10 ep, H −1 train & H −1 FT                       6.54×10−2           6.19×10−2         5.71×10−3            2.24×10−5
               ST-FNO3d 10 ep, L2 train & FT                        3.69×10−2           2.35×10−2         1.79×10−3            9.55×10−5
           ST-FNO3d 10 ep, L2 train & H −1 FT                           –                   –             2.88×10−4            4.02×10−6


                                                                           10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The research of Brarda and Xi is supported by the National Science Foundation award DMS-2208412.
The work of Li was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DEAC52-07NA27344 (LLNL-CONF-872321) and
was supported by the LLNL-LDRD program under Project No. 24ERD033. Cao is supported in part
by the National Science Foundation award DMS-2309778.

R EFERENCES
Mark Ainsworth and J Tinsley Oden. A unified approach to a posteriori error estimation using
 element residual methods. Numerische Mathematik, 65:23–50, 1993.

Mark Ainsworth and J Tinsley Oden. A posteriori error estimation in finite element analysis. Computer
 methods in applied mechanics and engineering, 142(1-2):1–88, 1997.

Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Nikola Kovachki, Zongyi Li, Miguel Liu-Schiaffini, Jean Kossaifi, and
  Anima Anandkumar. Neural operators for accelerating scientific simulations and design. Nature
  Reviews Physics, pp. 1–9, 2024.

Constantine A Balanis. Advanced Engineering Electromagnetics. John Wiley & Sons, 2012.

Randolph E Bank and Bruno D Welfert. A posteriori error estimates for the Stokes problem. SIAM
  Journal on Numerical Analysis, 28(3):591–623, 1991.

Francesca Bartolucci, Emmanuel de Bezenac, Bogdan Raonic, Roberto Molinaro, Siddhartha Mishra,
  and Rima Alaifari. Representation equivalent neural operators: a framework for alias-free operator
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

R Benzi, S Patarnello, and P Santangelo. On the statistical properties of two-dimensional decaying
  turbulence. Europhysics Letters, 3(7):811, 1987.

Christine Bernardi, Vivette Girault, and Yvon Maday. Mixed spectral element approximation of
  the Navier-Stokes equations in the stream-function and vorticity formulation. IMA journal of
  numerical analysis, 12(4):565–608, 1992.

Guido Boffetta and Robert E Ecke. Two-dimensional turbulence. Annual review of fluid mechanics,
 44:427–451, 2012.

Daniele Boffi, Franco Brezzi, and Michel Fortin. Mixed finite element methods and applications,
  volume 44. Springer, 2013.

Andrea Bonito, Claudio Canuto, Ricardo H. Nochetto, and Andreas Veeser. Adaptive finite element
  methods. Acta Numerica, 33:163–485, July 2024.

Nicolas Boullé and Alex Townsend. A mathematical guide to operator learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2312.14688, 2023.

Johannes Brandstetter, Rianne van den Berg, Max Welling, and Jayesh K Gupta. Clifford neural
  layers for PDE modeling. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023.

Steven L Brunton, Joshua L Proctor, and J Nathan Kutz. Discovering governing equations from data
  by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems. Proceedings of the national academy of
  sciences, 113(15):3932–3937, 2016.

John C Butcher. On the attainable order of runge-kutta methods. Mathematics of computation, 19
  (91):408–417, 1965.

Edoardo Calvello, Nikola B Kovachki, Matthew E Levine, and Andrew M Stuart. Continuum
  attention for neural operators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06486, 2024.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Claudio Canuto, M Yousuff Hussaini, Alfio Quarteroni, and Thomas A Zang. Spectral methods:
  evolution to complex geometries and applications to fluid dynamics. Springer Science & Business
  Media, 2007.
Lianghao Cao, Thomas O’Leary-Roseberry, Prashant K Jha, J Tinsley Oden, and Omar Ghattas.
  Residual-based error correction for neural operator accelerated infinite-dimensional bayesian
  inverse problems. Journal of Computational Physics, 486:112104, 2023.
Shuhao Cao. Choose a Transformer: Fourier or Galerkin. In 35th Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 24924–24940, 2021.
Carsten Carstensen and Stefan A Funken. Fully reliable localized error control in the fem. SIAM
  Journal on Scientific Computing, 21(4):1465–1484, 1999.
Kathleen Champion, Bethany Lusch, J Nathan Kutz, and Steven L Brunton. Data-driven discovery of
  coordinates and governing equations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(45):
  22445–22451, 2019.
Yanlai Chen and Shawn Koohy. GPT-PINN: Generative pre-trained physics-informed neural networks
  toward non-intrusive meta-learning of parametric pdes. Finite Elements in Analysis and Design,
  228:104047, 2024.
Chun-Wun Cheng, Jiahao Huang, Yi Zhang, Guang Yang, Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb, and Angelica I
  Aviles-Rivero. Mamba neural operator: Who wins? transformers vs. state-space models for pdes.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02113, 2024.
Alexandre Joel Chorin. Numerical solution of the Navier-Stokes equations. Mathematics of computa-
  tion, 22(104):745–762, 1968.
Maarten V. de Hoop, Daniel Zhengyu Huang, Elizabeth Qian null, and Andrew M. Stuart. The
 cost-accuracy trade-off in operator learning with neural networks. Journal of Machine Learning, 1
 (3):299–341, June 2022.
Maarten V de Hoop, Nikola B Kovachki, Nicholas H Nelsen, and Andrew M Stuart. Convergence rates
 for learning linear operators from noisy data. SIAM/ASA Journal on Uncertainty Quantification,
 11(2):480–513, 2023.
Gideon Dresdner, Dmitrii Kochkov, Peter Christian Norgaard, Leonardo Zepeda-Nunez, Jamie Smith,
  Michael Brenner, and Stephan Hoyer. Learning to correct spectral methods for simulating turbulent
  flows. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023.
Yiheng Du, Nithin Chalapathi, and Aditi S. Krishnapriyan. Neural spectral methods: Self-supervised
  learning in the spectral domain. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2024.
Alexandre Ern and Martin Vohralík. A posteriori error estimation based on potential and flux
  reconstruction for the heat equation. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis, 48(1):198–223, 2010.
Lawrence C Evans. Partial differential equations, volume 19. American Mathematical Society, 2022.
Vladimir Fanaskov, Alexander Rudikov, and Ivan Oseledets. Neural functional a posteriori error
  estimates. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05585, 2024.
Julian Fischer. A posteriori modeling error estimates for the assumption of perfect incompressibility
  in the Navier–Stokes equation. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis, 53(5):2178–2205, 2015.
Antonio Henrique De Oliveira Fonseca, Emanuele Zappala, Josue Ortega Caro, and David Van Dijk.
  Continuous spatiotemporal Transformer. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  7343–7365. PMLR, 2023.
I.M. Gel’fand and G.E. Shilov. Generalized Functions, Volume 2: Spaces of Fundamental and
  Generalized Functions. AMS Chelsea Publishing. American Mathematical Society, 2016. ISBN
  9781470426590.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Andrew Gillette, Brendan Keith, and Socratis Petrides. Learning robust marking policies for adaptive
  mesh refinement. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 46(1):A264–A289, 2024.
Vivette Girault and Pierre-Arnaud Raviart. Finite element methods for Navier-Stokes equations:
  theory and algorithms, volume 5. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
Jonathan Goodman, Thomas Hou, and Eitan Tadmor. On the stability of the unsmoothed fourier
  method for hyperbolic equations. Numerische Mathematik, 67(1):93–129, 1994.
Somdatta Goswami, Aniruddha Bora, Yue Yu, and George Em Karniadakis. Physics-informed
  deep neural operator networks. In Machine Learning in Modeling and Simulation: Methods and
  Applications, pp. 219–254. Springer, 2023.
David Gottlieb and Steven A Orszag. Numerical analysis of spectral methods: theory and applications.
  SIAM, 1977.
Sigal Gottlieb, Florentina Tone, Cheng Wang, Xiaoming Wang, and Djoko Wirosoetisno. Long
  time stability of a classical efficient scheme for two-dimensional Navier–Stokes equations. SIAM
  Journal on Numerical Analysis, 50(1):126–150, 2012.
Daniel Greenfeld, Meirav Galun, Ronen Basri, Irad Yavneh, and Ron Kimmel. Learning to optimize
  multigrid pde solvers. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2415–2423. PMLR,
  2019.
Albert Gu, Tri Dao, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Hippo: Recurrent memory
  with optimal polynomial projections. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
  1474–1487, 2020.
Gaurav Gupta, Xiongye Xiao, and Paul Bogdan. Multiwavelet-based operator learning for differential
  equations. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Jayesh K Gupta and Johannes Brandstetter. Towards multi-spatiotemporal-scale generalized PDE
  modeling. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023.
Jiequn Han, Arnulf Jentzen, and Weinan E. Solving high-dimensional partial differential equations
   using deep learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(34):8505–8510, 2018.
Zhongkai Hao, Zhengyi Wang, Hang Su, Chengyang Ying, Yinpeng Dong, Songming Liu, Ze Cheng,
  Jian Song, and Jun Zhu. Gnot: A general neural operator Transformer for operator learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12556–12569. PMLR, 2023.
Zhongkai Hao, Chang Su, Songming Liu, Julius Berner, Chengyang Ying, Hang Su, Anima Anandku-
  mar, Jian Song, and Jun Zhu. DPOT: Auto-regressive denoising operator transformer for large-scale
  PDE pre-training. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 17616–17635. PMLR, 21–27 Jul
  2024.
Juncai He, Xinliang Liu, and Jinchao Xu. MgNO: Efficient parameterization of linear operators via
  multigrid. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Yinnian He and Weiwei Sun. Stability and convergence of the Crank–Nicolson/Adams–Bashforth
  scheme for the time-dependent Navier–Stokes equations. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis,
  45(2):837–869, 2007.
Jan S Hesthaven, Gianluigi Rozza, Benjamin Stamm, et al. Certified reduced basis methods for
  parametrized partial differential equations, volume 590. Springer, 2016.
John G Heywood and Rolf Rannacher. Finite element approximation of the nonstationary Navier–
  Stokes problem, part ii: stability of solutions and error estimates uniform in time. SIAM journal on
  numerical analysis, 23(4):750–777, 1986.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In H. Larochelle,
  M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 33, pp. 6840–6851. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thomas Y Hou. Blow-up or no blow-up? a unified computational and analytic approach to 3d
  incompressible euler and Navier–Stokes equations. Acta Numerica, 18:277–346, 2009.
Jun Hu and Pengzhan Jin. A hybrid iterative method based on mionet for pdes: Theory and numerical
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07156, 2024.
Zheyuan Hu, Nazanin Ahmadi Daryakenari, Qianli Shen, Kenji Kawaguchi, and George Em Kar-
  niadakis. State-space models are accurate and efficient neural operators for dynamical systems.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.03231, 2024.
Ru Huang, Ruipeng Li, and Yuanzhe Xi. Learning optimal multigrid smoothers via neural networks.
  SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 45(3):S199–S225, 2022.
Ru Huang, Kai Chang, Huan He, Ruipeng Li, and Yuanzhe Xi. Reducing operator complexity in
  algebraic multigrid with machine learning approaches. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07695, 2023.
Haris Iqbal. Harisiqbal88/plotneuralnet v1.0.0. https://zenodo.org/record/2526396, 2018.
Hans Johnston and Jian-Guo Liu. Accurate, stable and efficient Navier–Stokes solvers based on
  explicit treatment of the pressure term. Journal of Computational Physics, 199(1):221–259, 2004.
George Em Karniadakis, Moshe Israeli, and Steven A Orszag. High-order splitting methods for the
  incompressible Navier-Stokes equations. Journal of computational physics, 97(2):414–443, 1991.
Aly-Khan Kassam and Lloyd N Trefethen. Fourth-order time-stepping for stiff pdes. SIAM Journal
  on Scientific Computing, 26(4):1214–1233, 2005.
Ryan Keisler. Forecasting global weather with graph neural networks.                arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.07575, 2022.
Georgios Kissas, Jacob H Seidman, Leonardo Ferreira Guilhoto, Victor M Preciado, George J Pappas,
  and Paris Perdikaris. Learning operators with coupled attention. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 23(215):1–63, 2022.
Dmitrii Kochkov, Jamie A Smith, Ayya Alieva, Qing Wang, Michael P Brenner, and Stephan Hoyer.
 Machine learning–accelerated computational fluid dynamics. Proceedings of the National Academy
 of Sciences, 118(21):e2101784118, 2021.
Andrey Nikolaevich Kolmogorov. The local structure of turbulence in incompressible viscous fluid
  for very large reynolds. Numbers. In Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 30:301, 1941.
Nikola Kovachki, Samuel Lanthaler, and Siddhartha Mishra. On universal approximation and error
  bounds for Fourier neural operators. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(290):1–76, 2021.
Nikola Kovachki, Zongyi Li, Burigede Liu, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Kaushik Bhattacharya, Andrew
  Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Neural operator: Learning maps between function spaces with
  applications to pdes. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(89):1–97, 2023.
Heinz-Otto Kreiss and Joseph Oliger. Stability of the fourier method. SIAM Journal on Numerical
 Analysis, 16(3):421–433, 1979.
Hwar C Ku, Thomas D Taylor, and Richard S Hirsh. Pseudospectral methods for solution of the
 incompressible Navier-Stokes equations. Computers & fluids, 15(2):195–214, 1987.
Samuel Lanthaler, Roberto Molinaro, Patrik Hadorn, and Siddhartha Mishra. Nonlinear reconstruction
  for operator learning of PDEs with discontinuities. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.
Peter D Lax. Functional analysis, volume 55. John Wiley & Sons, 2002.
Sanjiva K Lele. Compact finite difference schemes with spectral-like resolution. Journal of computa-
  tional physics, 103(1):16–42, 1992.
Zhijie Li, Wenhui Peng, Zelong Yuan, and Jianchun Wang. Long-term predictions of turbulence by
  implicit U-net enhanced Fourier neural operator. Physics of Fluids, 35(7), 2023a.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zijie Li, Kazem Meidani, and Amir Barati Farimani. Transformer for partial differential equations’
  operator learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023b.
Zijie Li, Dule Shu, and Amir Barati Farimani. Scalable Transformer for PDE surrogate modeling.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024a.
Zijie Li, Anthony Zhou, Saurabh Patil, and Amir Barati Farimani. Cafa: Global weather forecasting
  with factorized attention on sphere. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07395, 2024b.
Zijie Li, Saurabh Patil, Francis Ogoke, Dule Shu, Wilson Zhen, Michael Schneier, John R. Buchanan,
  and Amir Barati Farimani. Latent neural pde solver: A reduced-order modeling framework for
  partial differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics, 524:113705, 2025.
Zongyi Li, Nikola Borislavov Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede liu, Kaushik Bhat-
  tacharya, Andrew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier neural operator for parametric partial
  differential equations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Zongyi Li, Miguel Liu-Schiaffini, Nikola Borislavov Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede
  Liu, Kaushik Bhattacharya, Andrew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Learning chaotic dynamics
  in dissipative systems. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Zongyi Li, Nikola Kovachki, Chris Choy, Boyi Li, Jean Kossaifi, Shourya Otta, Mohammad Amin
  Nabian, Maximilian Stadler, Christian Hundt, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, et al. Geometry-informed
  neural operator for large-scale 3d pdes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
  2024c.
Zongyi Li, Hongkai Zheng, Nikola Kovachki, David Jin, Haoxuan Chen, Burigede Liu, Kamyar
  Azizzadenesheli, and Anima Anandkumar. Physics-informed neural operator for learning partial
  differential equations. ACM/JMS Journal of Data Science, 1(3):1–27, 2024d.
Marten Lienen, Jan Hansen-Palmus, David Lüdke, and Stephan Günnemann. Generative diffusion
 for 3d turbulent flows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01776, 2023.
Jacques Louis Lions and Enrico Magenes. Non-homogeneous boundary value problems and applica-
  tions: Vol. 1, volume 181. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
Phillip Lippe, Bastiaan S. Veeling, Paris Perdikaris, Richard E Turner, and Johannes Brandstet-
  ter. PDE-refiner: Achieving accurate long rollouts with neural PDE solvers. In Thirty-seventh
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Xinliang Liu, Bo Xu, Shuhao Cao, and Lei Zhang. Mitigating spectral bias for the multiscale operator
  learning. Journal of Computational Physics, 506:112944, 2024.
Lu Lu, Pengzhan Jin, Guofei Pang, Zhongqiang Zhang, and George Em Karniadakis. Learning
  nonlinear operators via deeponet based on the universal approximation theorem of operators.
  Nature machine intelligence, 3(3):218–229, 2021.
Martine Marion and R Temam. Nonlinear Galerkin methods: the finite elements case. Numerische
 Mathematik, 57:205–226, 1990.
Nick McGreivy and Ammar Hakim. Invariant preservation in machine learned pde solvers via error
  correction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16110, 2023.
James C McWilliams. The emergence of isolated coherent vortices in turbulent flow. Journal of
  Fluid Mechanics, 146:21–43, 1984.
J Tinsley Oden, Weihan Wu, and Mark Ainsworth. An a posteriori error estimate for finite element
   approximations of the Navier-Stokes equations. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
   Engineering, 111(1-2):185–202, 1994.
Steven A. Orszag. Numerical simulation of incompressible flows within simple boundaries. i. Galerkin
  (spectral) representations. Studies in Applied Mathematics, 50(4):293–327, 1971a.
Steven A. Orszag. On the elimination of aliasing in finite-difference schemes by filtering high-
  wavenumber components. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, 28(6):1074–1074, 1971b.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Steven A Orszag. Comparison of pseudospectral and spectral approximation. Studies in Applied
  Mathematics, 51(3):253–259, 1972.
Anthony T Patera, Gianluigi Rozza, et al. Reduced basis approximation and a posteriori error
  estimation for parametrized partial differential equations, 2007.
GS Patterson and Steven A Orszag. Spectral calculations of isotropic turbulence: Efficient removal
 of aliasing interactions. Physics of Fluids, 14(11):2538, 1971.
Jaak Peetre. On spaces of Triebel–Lizorkin type. Arkiv för Matematik, 13(1):123–130, 1975.
Kai Qi and Jian Sun. Gabor-filtered fourier neural operator for solving partial differential equations.
  Computers & Fluids, 274:106239, 2024.
Md Ashiqur Rahman, Zachary E Ross, and Kamyar Azizzadenesheli. U-NO: U-shaped neural
 operators. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023.
Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A
 deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial
 differential equations. Journal of Computational physics, 378:686–707, 2019.
Rolf Rannacher. Finite element methods for the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations. Springer,
  2000.
Bogdan Raonic, Roberto Molinaro, Tim De Ryck, Tobias Rohner, Francesca Bartolucci, Rima
  Alaifari, Siddhartha Mishra, and Emmanuel de Bézenac. Convolutional neural operators for robust
  and accurate learning of pdes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Sergey Repin. A Posteriori Estimates for Partial Differential Equations. Walter de Gruyter, September
  2008. ISBN 9783110191530.
Sergey I Repin. A posteriori error estimation for nonlinear variational problems by duality theory.
  Journal of Mathematical Sciences, 99:927–935, 2000.
Ricardo Buitrago Ruiz, Tanya Marwah, Albert Gu, and Andrej Risteski. On the benefits of memory
  for modeling time-dependent pdes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02313, 2024.
Michael Ruzhansky and Ville Turunen. Pseudo-differential operators and symmetries: background
 analysis and advanced topics, volume 2. Springer Science & Business Media, 2009.
Jie Shen. Efficient spectral-galerkin method i. direct solvers of second-and fourth-order equations
   using legendre polynomials. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 15(6):1489–1505, 1994.
Benjamin Shih, Ahmad Peyvan, Zhongqiang Zhang, and George Em Karniadakis. Transformers as
  neural operators for solutions of differential equations with finite regularity. Computer Methods in
  Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 434:117560, 2025.
Dule Shu, Zijie Li, and Amir Barati Farimani. A physics-informed diffusion model for high-fidelity
  flow field reconstruction. Journal of Computational Physics, 478:111972, 2023.
Jonathan W. Siegel, Qingguo Hong, Xianlin Jin, Wenrui Hao, and Jinchao Xu. Greedy training
  algorithms for neural networks and applications to pdes. Journal of Computational Physics, 484:
  112084, 2023.
Leslie N Smith and Nicholay Topin. Super-convergence: Very fast training of neural networks using
  large learning rates. In Artificial intelligence and machine learning for multi-domain operations
  applications, volume 11006, pp. 369–386. SPIE, 2019.
Zhiqing Sun, Yiming Yang, and Shinjae Yoo. A neural PDE solver with temporal stencil modeling.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 33135–33155. PMLR, 2023.
Eitan Tadmor. Stability analysis of finite difference, pseudospectral and fourier–galerkin approxima-
  tions for time-dependent problems. SIAM review, 29(4):525–555, 1987.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ali Taghibakhshi, Scott MacLachlan, Luke Olson, and Matthew West. Optimization-based algebraic
  multigrid coarsening using reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 34:12129–12140, 2021.
Ali Taghibakhshi, Nicolas Nytko, Tareq Uz Zaman, Scott MacLachlan, Luke Olson, and Matthew
  West. Mg-gnn: Multigrid graph neural networks for learning multilevel domain decomposition
  methods. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 33381–33395. PMLR, 2023.
Geoffrey Ingram Taylor and Albert Edward Green. Mechanism of the production of small eddies
  from large ones. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A-Mathematical and Physical
  Sciences, 158(895):499–521, 1937.
Roger Temam. Navier–Stokes equations and nonlinear functional analysis. SIAM, 1995.
Alasdair Tran, Alexander Mathews, Lexing Xie, and Cheng Soon Ong. Factorized fourier neural
  operators. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Lloyd N Trefethen and JAC Weideman. The exponentially convergent trapezoidal rule. SIAM review,
  56(3):385–458, 2014.
Kiwon Um, Robert Brand, Yun Raymond Fei, Philipp Holl, and Nils Thuerey. Solver-in-the-loop:
  Learning from differentiable physics to interact with iterative pde-solvers. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:6111–6122, 2020.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Andreas Veeser and Rüdiger Verfürth. Explicit upper bounds for dual norms of residuals. SIAM
  journal on numerical analysis, 47(3):2387–2405, 2009.
Andreas Veeser and Rüdiger Verfürth. Poincaré constants for finite element stars. IMA Journal of
 Numerical Analysis, 32(1):30–47, 2012.
Rüdiger Verfürth. A posteriori error estimators for the Stokes equations. Numerische Mathematik, 55
  (3):309–325, 1989.
Rüdiger Verfürth. A posteriori error estimates for nonlinear problems. finite element discretizations
  of elliptic equations. Mathematics of Computation, 62(206):445–475, 1994.
Rüdiger Verfürth. A posteriori error estimates for finite element discretizations of the heat equation.
  Calcolo, 40(3):195–212, 2003.
Rüdiger Verfürth. A posteriori error estimation techniques for finite element methods. OUP Oxford,
  2013.
Cheng Wang and Jian-Guo Liu. Analysis of finite difference schemes for unsteady navier-stokes
  equations in vorticity formulation. Numerische Mathematik, 91:543–576, 2002.
Sifan Wang, Hanwen Wang, and Paris Perdikaris. Learning the solution operator of parametric partial
   differential equations with physics-informed deeponets. Science advances, 7(40):eabi8605, 2021.
Xiaoming Wang. An efficient second order in time scheme for approximating long time statistical
  properties of the two dimensional Navier–Stokes equations. Numerische Mathematik, 121(4):
  753–779, 2012.
E Weinan and Jian-Guo Liu. Projection method i: convergence and numerical boundary layers. SIAM
  journal on numerical analysis, pp. 1017–1057, 1995.
Gege Wen, Zongyi Li, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Anima Anandkumar, and Sally M Benson. U-
  fno—an enhanced fourier neural operator-based deep-learning model for multiphase flow. Advances
  in Water Resources, 163:104180, 2022.
Haixu Wu, Tengge Hu, Huakun Luo, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Solving high-dimensional
  pdes with latent spectral models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Haixu Wu, Huakun Luo, Haowen Wang, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Transolver: A
  fast transformer solver for pdes on general geometries. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2024a.
Hao Wu, Huiyuan Wang, Kun Wang, Weiyan Wang, ChanganYe, Yangyu Tao, Chong Chen, Xian-
  Sheng Hua, and Xiao Luo. Prometheus: Out-of-distribution fluid dynamics modeling with
  disentangled graph ODE. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024b.
Zipeng Xiao, Zhongkai Hao, Bokai Lin, Zhijie Deng, and Hang Su. Improved operator learning by
  orthogonal attention. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Liang Yan and Tao Zhou. An adaptive surrogate modeling based on deep neural networks for large-
  scale bayesian inverse problems. Communications in Computational Physics, 28(5):2180–2205,
  June 2020.
Jiachen Yang, Tarik Dzanic, Brenden Petersen, Jun Kudo, Ketan Mittal, Vladimir Tomov, Jean-
   Sylvain Camier, Tuo Zhao, Hongyuan Zha, Tzanio Kolev, et al. Reinforcement learning for
   adaptive mesh refinement. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
   5997–6014. PMLR, 2023.
Hongkai Zheng, Weili Nie, Arash Vahdat, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, and Anima Anandkumar. Fast
  sampling of diffusion models via operator learning. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 42390–42402. PMLR, 2023.
Jianwei Zheng, LiweiNo, Ni Xu, Junwei Zhu, XiaoxuLin, and Xiaoqin Zhang. Alias-free Mamba
   neural operator. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
   Systems, 2024.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     N OTATIONS

    Table 4: Notations used in an approximate chronological order and their meaning in this work.

      Notation                                         Meaning
         Ω           Ω = (0, 2π) or (0, 1) the modeling domain in R2
                                2         2

       V, H          Hilbert spaces defined on the domain Ω above, f ∈ H : Ω → R
                                      Q
       X,Y           product spaces j∈Λ H
                                                             Q
          ||         concatenation, for fj ∈ H, ||j∈Λ fj ∈ j∈Λ H
          ν          viscosity, the inverse of the Reynolds number, strength of diffusion
         T2          T2 := S 1 × S 1 where S 1 is homeomorphic to [0, 1) with the point 1 being 0.
      H 1 (T2 )      {u ∈ H 1 (Ω) : u satisfies the periodical boundary condition}
      H 1 (T2 )      H 1 (T2 ) := H 1 (T2 ) × H 1 (T2 )
       rot ψ         rot ψ := (∂y ψ, −∂x ψ) is the rotated gradient´ vector
     Lp (T ; V)      the Bochner spaces containing {u : T → V T ∥u(t, ·)∥pV dt < +∞}, p ∈ [1, ∞)
    L∞ (T ; V)       Bochner space containing {u : T → H ess supt∈T ∥u(t, ·)∥V < +∞}
         u           the true weak solution to the NSE u(t, ·) ∈ V for any t
           (l)
        uS           the ground truth data generated at tl by the numerical solver in S ⊂ V
         (m)
       uN            neural operator evaluations at tm that ´can be embedded in S ⊂ V
  (u, v) or (u, v)   the L2 -inner product on H, (u, v) := Ω uv dx
       ∥u∥s          the H s -norm of u, computed by (3.7), ∥u∥ := ∥u∥0 falls back to L2 -norm
        |u|s         the H s -seminorm of u, computed by (3.7), is a norm on H s (T2 )/R
         ≲           a ≲ b means that ∃c independent of asymptotics if any such that a ≤ cb
         ≃           a ≃ b ⇔ a ≲ b and b ≲ a
         V′          dual space of V, contains all continuous functionals f such that |f (v)| ≲ ∥v∥V
       ⟨f, v⟩        the pairing between v ∈ V and f ∈ V ′ , can be identified as (f, v) if f ∈ H
      V ,→ H         V is continuously embedded in H such that ∥u∥H ≲ ∥u∥V
   V ⋐ H ⋐ V′        compact embeddings
                                P           by Poincaré inequality, H = L2 (T2 ), V = H 1 (T2 )
       A:B           A : B = 1≤i,j≤2 Aij Bij for A, B ∈ R2×2
       a⊗b           ab⊤ if both are viewed as column vectors



B     D ETAILED L ITERATURE R EVIEW AND M OTIVATIONS

Interplay of deep learning and PDEs. PDE solvers are function learners to represent PDE solutions
using neural networks (Han et al., 2018; Raissi et al., 2019; Chen & Koohy, 2024). PDE discovery
encompasses all the techniques dedicated to identifying and optimizing PDE coefficients from data
(Brunton et al., 2016; Champion et al., 2019). Recently, hybrid solver approach has been explored
in Greenfeld et al. (2019); Kochkov et al. (2021); Huang et al. (2023); Taghibakhshi et al. (2023;
2021); Hu & Jin (2024); Huang et al. (2022). Reinforcement learning has been applied in the field of
mesh generation to build more efficient solving pipelines (Yang et al., 2023; Gillette et al., 2024).
For neural operators, remarkable outcomes are achieved in diverse applications, such as weather
forecasting (Keisler, 2022) and turbulent fluids simulations (Shu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a; Lienen
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2025), the methods based on neural operators have significantly influenced
the progress of the interplay between PDE and deep learning. This success was a natural outcome
of several improvements brought to the field, for example, fast solution evaluations, a feature very
appealing in many engineering applications (Zheng et al., 2023); and the ability to provide mesh-free
and resolution-independent solvers in cases of irregular domains (Hao et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024c).

Neural operators. Looking at neural operator architectures, we can identify two different ap-
proaches. The first one creates “basis” (or frames) through nonlinear approximators and aggregates
them linearly. Developed architectures that belong to this category include Deep Operator Network
(DeepONet) (Lu et al., 2021; Goswami et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2021), wherein aggregation occurs
via linear combination. Similarly, Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) (Li et al., 2021), and some of
its variants (Gupta et al., 2021; Rahman et al., 2023; Tran et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024c; Wen et al.,
2022), aggregate different latent representations through convolution with a learnable kernel in the


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


frequency domain. Additional examples with a linear aggregation with a U-Net meta-architecture
can be found in Raonic et al. (2024); He et al. (2024). Bartolucci et al. (2024) further explores the
error analyses for the linear aggregations through the lens of the frame(let) theory. The second ap-
proach to designing neural operator architectures aims to obtain the “basis” through linear projections
of the latent representations. In this scenario, the aggregation is nonlinear, for example, using a
signal-dependent kernel integral. In this category, the most notable example is the scaled dot-product
attention operator in Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017), which builds an instance-dependent kernel.
In the context of operator learning applications, Transformer-based neural operators have been studied
in Cao (2021); Kissas et al. (2022); Li et al. (2023b); Hao et al. (2023); Wu et al. (2023); Li et al.
(2024a); Fonseca et al. (2023); Li et al. (2024b); Calvello et al. (2024); Liu et al. (2024); Xiao et al.
(2024); Hao et al. (2024); Wu et al. (2024a); Shih et al. (2025). It is also shown in Lanthaler et al.
(2023) that nonlinear aggregations outperform its linear counterparts in learning solutions with less
regularity. More recently, for spatiotemporal problems, the state-space based neural operators explore
an expansion to the natural operator exponential representation of the solution map, see e.g., Zheng
et al. (2024); Cheng et al. (2024); Hu et al. (2024); Ruiz et al. (2024).


Numerical methods for NSE. The NSE falls into the category of a stiff PDE (system) ∂t u =
Lu + N (u) + f , where f is the external forcing, L and N (·) are a linear and a nonlinear operator,
respectively. Trefethen noted back in Kassam & Trefethen (2005) on the difficulty to design a
time-stepping scheme as N (·) and L have to be treated differently. There are a long history of
numerical methods for NSE we draw inspiration from. Petrov-Galerkin methods have been developed
for NSE in Boffi et al. (2013); Girault & Raviart (2012). Nonlinear Galerkin method (Marion &
Temam, 1990) inspires us to prove Theorem E.9. Chorin (1968) uses a clever trick to impose the
divergence free condition without constructing a divergence-conforming finite element subspace.
Shen (1994) designed various Galerkin methods in the space of orthogonal polynomials. Pioneered
by Chorin, Shen, and E, projection methods are among the most popular schemes to solve NSE (see
e.g., Weinan & Liu (1995) for a summary), also serves as an inspiration to add the Helmholtz layer.
Bernardi et al. (1992) proposed a mixed discretization for the vorticity-streamfunction formulation.


Consistency-stability trade-offs. In view of the Lax equivalence principle (“consistency” + “sta-
bility” =⇒ “convergence” (Lax, 2002, Theorem 8)), the improvement of the stability of the method
has a trade-off with a method’s consistency at the cost of the approximation capacity. Numerical
methods for NSE is the epitome for such trade-off. For example, high-order explicit time stepping
schemes offer better local truncation error estimates near boundary layers of the flow (Lele, 1992),
yet the lack of stability is more severe and needs higher-order temporal smoothing. On the other hand,
implicit schemes can be unconditionally stable for stiff or highly transient NSE with relatively large
time steps O(1). The stability in implicit schemes becomes much less stringent on the time step, as
no CFL condition is required. However, the solution at the next time step requires solving a linear or
nonlinear system. Thus, computationally implicit schemes are usually an order of magnitude more
expensive compared to explicit schemes. The implicit-explicit (IMEX) stable solver chosen in the
fine-tuning postprocessing is from Wang & Liu (2002); Wang (2012).


De-aliasing filter sacrifices consistency for stability. One famous example of the consistency-
stability trade-off is the 3/2-rule (also known as 2/3-dealiasing filter) for the nonlinear convective
term (Orszag, 1971b; Patterson & Orszag, 1971; Hou, 2009; Gottlieb & Orszag, 1977) for pseudo-
spectral methods (Orszag, 1971a; 1972). The highest 1/3 modes, the inclusion of which contributes
to better approximation capacity, are filtered out to ensure long-term stability. Compromises such
as the CFL condition and the 3/2-rule must be made for traditional numerical schemes to be stable,
keeping the balance between stability and accuracy. These constraints apply to traditional numerical
methods because any solver has to march a consecutive multitude of time steps, which makes the
error propagation operator’s norm a product of many. Numerical results suggest that for pseudo-
spectral spatial discretization with no higher-order Fourier smoothing temporally, the dealiasing
filter is indispensable (Tadmor, 1987), as the time marching may experience numerical instability
(Kreiss & Oliger, 1979; Goodman et al., 1994) without it. This is due to the nonlinear interaction
in the convective term, which is caused by the amplification of high-frequency “aliasing” errors
when the underlying solution lacks sufficient smoothness. In this study, the hybrid approach we
adopted combines the strengths of NOs and traditional numerical solvers. There is no time marching


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


consecutively for a multitude of time steps, which renders the method free of the stability constraints
such as the CFL condition and the 3/2-rule.

Why and why not functional-type a posteriori error estimation? For the sake of presentation, we
make some handy assumptions: (1) A : V → V ′ denotes a linear operator on the Gelfand triple; (2) uS
is obtained through Galerkin methods (Evans, 2022), which is a projection onto a finite-dimensional
approximation subspace of S ⊂ V; and (3) an evaluation of uN can be continuously embedded
into S. Then, we have the following enlightening Pythagorean-type identity for the true solution u
satisfying Au = f
      ∥u − uS ∥2a + ∥uS − uN ∥2a = ∥u − uN ∥2a           since (u − uS ) ⊥a (uS − uN ) ∈ V.          (B.1)
Through the Riesz representation theorem, uS is solved through (u−uS , v)a := ⟨A(u)−A(uS ), v⟩ =
0, for any v ∈ S. This bilinear form (·, ·)a induces a (semi)norm ∥ · ∥a inheriting the topology from
V. Given this orthogonality, minimizing the difference between uN and uS becomes fruitless if
∥u − uS ∥a is relatively big in the first place, and unnecessary computational resources may have been
spent to get closer to uS . Rather, (B.1) indicates that it is more efficient if one can design a method to
reduce the error of ∥u − uN ∥a directly, while circumventing the fact that u is not accessible.
Speaking of the a posteriori error estimation in traditional PDE discretization, part of the goal is to
help the adaptive mesh refinement to get a better local basis. In this regard, the global error functional
in negative Sobolev spaces must be approximated using localized L2 residuals to indicate where
the mesh needs to be refined. There are various compromises for this H −1 -to-L2 representation to
happen that renders the estimate inaccurate, such as discrete Poincaré constant (Veeser & Verfürth,
2012) or inverse inequalities (Carstensen & Funken, 1999; Veeser & Verfürth, 2009), see also Verfürth
(2013, §1.6.2). Functional-type a posteriori error estimation (Repin, 2008) consider the error as a
functional, which is equivalent to error to bilinear form-associated norm as follows
                            R(uS ) ∈ V ′ , and ⟨R(uS ), v⟩ = (u − uS , v)a ,
where the weak form of the PDE is
                      (u, v)a = f (v) ∀v ∈ V and (uS , v)a = f (v) ∀v ∈ S ⊂ V.
The common approach is using the help from extra “flux” or “stress” dual variables (Repin, 2008,
§6.4), see also Repin (2000) for how to get an accurate representation of the error functional in L2 .
For example, for the Stokes flow, which can be viewed as a steady-state limit of viscous fluid, such
that ∂t u = 0 and no nonlinear convection in (2.2), Re ∼ O(1), Repin (2008, §6.2) estimates error of
an H(div)–L2 mixed discretization as follows
                     ν∥∇(u − uS )∥ ≤ ∥σ + qI − ν∇uS ∥ + CP ∥∇ · σ + f ∥,
where CP is the Poincaré constant of the compact embedding and (σ, q) is a reconstruction field
pair. However, the drawback of this approach is that an expensive global minimization problem
needs to be solved, e.g., for (σ, q) above. Another main reason to introduce extra field variables is
that, for finite element methods, the basis functions are local and do not have a globally continuous
derivative, in that ∆uS yields singular distributions, whose proper norm is H −1 -norm and cannot
be evaluated by summing up element-wise L2 -norms. In computation, it has to be replace by ∇ · σ
where σ ∈ H(div), and is constructed to be closer to the true solution’s gradient ∇u than ∇uS .
Meanwhile, for systems like NSE, the error estimation in Galerkin methods for NSE is further
complicated by its saddle point nature from the divergence-free constraint, in that consistency has
to be tweaked to ensure the Ladyzhenskaya-Babuška-Brezzi stability condition (Girault & Raviart,
2012, Chapter III §1 Sec 1.2). Recently, Fanaskov et al. (2024) considers NN as a function learner to
represent solutions of linear convection-diffusion equations, yet still falls into the traditional error
estimation framework in that an extra flux variable is learned by NN, and the error if of typical
accuracy of NN function learners O(10−3 ). In contrast, in our study, the need of extra “stress” or
“flux” variables to build the residual functional is circumvented as well.

Error correction for Bayesian inverse problems. The a posteriori error-correction approaches
through sampling for the output of surrogate NNs in Bayesian inverse problems (Yan & Zhou, 2020).
More recently, in Cao et al. (2023), the error equation in an inverse problem is approximated by
solving for a Galerkin projection of a linearized error equation, while in this paper, we leverage the
Gelfand triple directly to compute a nonlinear Galerkin projection directly by minimizing the spectral
norm.


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sobolev norms in operator learning In the context of function learning problems, Du et al. (2024)
applied an L2 -spectral loss for Physics-informed Neural Networks (PINN) (Raissi et al., 2019)
and found superior results over mesh-weighted spatial losses. Du et al. (2024) realized the PDE
residual as a functional on L2 and exploited the Parseval identity on this space, which computes
supv∈L2 ⟨R, v⟩/∥v∥L2 . We note that this is not the natural space to measure the PDE residual
according to the Galerkin formulation of NSE. Using the Poisson equation −∆u = f as a simpler
example, if u ∈ H 1 , then the residual f + ∆u ∈ H −1 . −∆ is a bounded operator from H 1 to H −1
which guarantees the stability estimate ∥u∥1 ≤ c∥f ∥−1 , while −∆ is unbounded from L2 to L2 .
The dual space of H 1 (T2 ) is the natural space to consider the residual functional. The reason is that
the solution to NSE belongs to H 1 (T2 ) at a given snapshot. The dual space of H 1 (T2 ) happens to
be H −1 using the Gelfand triple. In this paper, we compute supv∈H 1 ⟨R, v⟩/∥v∥H 1 . However, this
H −1 -norm is a non-localizable functional norm in the spatial domain, and traditional wisdom (FEM
or FVM) has to circumvent the direct evaluation of it by localizing the residual, which introduced
inaccurate compromises in the residual-based error estimation.

A posteriori error estimation for flow problems There is a vast amount of literature for the a
posteriori error estimation for the viscous flow (1/Re > 0) problems under the Hilbertian framework
for traditional numerical methods. Our methods draw inspiration from these pioneers and try to
address the drawbacks. The most popular a posteriori error estimator for stationary Stokes problem is
from Verfürth (1989), and it is of residual-type by computing a mesh-weighted L2 -norm elementwise,
and the singular distribution ∆uS is represented by the magnitude of flux jumps across the facets in
this mesh. In Bank & Welfert (1991), a more accurate a posteriori estimation technique is invented for
Stokes problem in which a local problem is solved to represent the residual functional on a collection
of neighboring elements. L2 residual-type error estimation for stationary NSE is considered in Oden
et al. (1994). To our best knowledge, no functional-type a posteriori error estimation has been applied
to solve the transient NSE, due to its in-efficiency for traditional finite element or finite volume
methods. As at every time step, a global nonlinear problem has to be solved if one ought to evaluate
the functional accurately using finite element local basis functions, whose computational cost is an
order of magnitude higher than implicit Euler methods.

Hybrid methods for turbulent flow predictions. There are quite a few approaches that combine
NN-based learners with traditional time-marching solvers. Notable examples include: solution from
Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) corrected using an NN (Um et al., 2020); interpolation to achieve
spatial super-resolution using solutions produced by traditional numerical solvers marching on coarser
grids (Kochkov et al., 2021). Sun et al. (2023) uses orthogonal polynomial features (HiPPO from
Gu et al. (2020)) to achieve temporal super-resolution in addition to the spatial one. McGreivy &
Hakim (2023) explores how to incorporate energy-preserving schemes such as upwinding into the
ML solvers through traditional numerical methods. Dresdner et al. (2023) explores the possibility
of using neural networks to correct the result of the traditional time-marching solvers. Qi & Sun
(2024) identifies important frequency bands in FNO parametrization and improves FNO’s rolling-out
performance in NSE benchmarks. Wu et al. (2024b) uses graph-based neural ODE to improve the
out-of-distribution performance in fluid dynamics tasks.

C     DATA G ENERATION
C.1   VORTICITY–S TREAMFUNCTION F ORMULATION

Here we derive the vorticity-streamfunction formulation for the convenience of the readers. Consider
the standard NSE in 3D, u’s z-component is 0, and u = u(t, x, y) has only planar dependence
                             
                              ∂u + (u · ∇)u = − 1 ∇p + ν∆u + f .
                                ∂t                   ρ                                         (C.1)
                             
                                         ∇·u=0
Taking ∇×(·) on both sides, and we assume that the solution is sufficiently regular that the spatial
and temporal derivative can interchange, as well as curl and the Laplacian can interchange, one gets
the following equation by letting ω = ∇ × u
                       2
        ∂ω              u                                      1
            +∇×∇              + u · ∇ω − ω · ∇u = −∇ ×           ∇p + ν∆ω + ∇×f .              (C.2)
         ∂t              2                                     ρ

                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 t = 30.0                  t = 45.0              t = 60.0



                               0.7


                               0.6



          Velocity Magnitude   0.5


                               0.4
                                                 t = 75.0                  t = 90.0              t = 105.0



                               0.3


                               0.2


                               0.1


                                     Figure 4: Ground truth streamlines for Taylor-Green vortex example.


Next, one can have ω · ∇u = 0, thus the equation becomes
                            ∂ω
                                + u · ∇ω = ω · ∇u + ν∆ω + ∇×f .                              (C.3)
                            ∂t
We need to introduce a streamfunction ψ to recover the velocity u = ∇ × (0, 0, ψ). The main
simplification comes from the assumption of dependence on x- and y-variable only. Thus, in 2D this
becomes u = rot ψ (a π/2 rotation of the 2D gradient ∇ψ). Therefore,
                                                u = (u1 , u2 , 0) =⇒ u1 = ∂y ψ, u2 = −∂x ψ
and the vector vorticity can be equivalently represented by a scalar vorticity ω
                                     ω = ∇×u = (0, 0, curl(u1 , u2 )) = (0, 0, ∂x u2 − ∂y u1 ) =: (0, 0, ω)

The equation becomes a nonlinear system for ω and ψ:

                              ∂t ω + rot ψ · ∇ω − ν∆ω = ∇×f ,                                                 (C.4)
                                                ω + ∆ψ = 0.                                                   (C.5)

C.2   TAYLOR -G REEN VORTEX

Taylor-Green vortex serves as one of the most well-known benchmarks for NSE numerical methods,
as its flow type experiences from laminar, to transitional, and finally evolving into turbulent regime.
We consider the trajectory before the breakdown phase. We opt to use a doubly periodic solution on
[0, 2π)2 such that the inflow/outflow occurs on the “boundary” (see Figure 4). The exact solution is
given by:

                          −2κ2 νt   sin(κx) cos(κy)          −2κ2 νt − cos(κx) sin(κy)
            u(t, x, y) = e                               or e
                                   − cos(κx) sin(κy)                    sin(κx) cos(κy),
where ν = 1/Re is chosen as 10−3 . For a sample trajectory with κ = 1, please refer to Figure 4.
We apply the pseudo-spectral method with RK2 time stepping for the convection term and Crank-
Nicolson for the diffusion term. The dataset has 11 trajectories with κ ranging from 1 to 11, among
which κ = 11 is chosen as the test trajectory.

C.3   2D I SOTROPIC T URBULENCE

The example featured in the original FNO paper (Li et al., 2021) can be viewed as a special case of
the isotropic turbulence with a strongly regularized initial condition, no drag, and a force with low


                                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


wavenumber. This is our example (I). The example (II) has weakly-regularized initial condition, small
drag, and no external force. The initial condition spectra are chosen such that, after the warmup time,
the spectra are the comparable with the Kolmogorov flow featured in Kochkov et al. (2021). The
similarity is in the sense of the energy cascade formed in the Fourier domain (see Figure 8 and 9). The
training data used in both (I) and (II) are generated using a pseudo-spectral method with a de-aliasing
filter using an RK4 marching for the convection term and implicit Euler for the diffusion term. The
Reynolds number used in this example is 1000. The time steps for both are ∆t = 10−3 on a 2562
grid, then downsampled to a 642 grid. The warmup time is 4.5. The δt for the ST-FNO training
and evaluations are δt = 55∆t. The testing data are generated on a 5122 grid with a 5 × 10−4 time
step then downsampled to 2562 . There are 1024 trajectories in the training data. The input of model
has 10 snapshots from t = 4.5 to t = 4.5 + 9 δt. The output ground truth has the 10 subsequent
snapshots from t = 4.5 + 10 δt to t = 4.5 + 19 δt. There are 32 trajectories in the testing data.
Each of the testing data’s trajectory runs from the same time interval, and has 40 snapshots in the
input and 40 snapshots in the output. The initial energy distribution for the training and testing data
trajectories are draw from the same energy distribution, see (D.1). For additional experiments using
out-of-distribution data with different initial energy distribution and evaluation using trajectories with
different Reynolds number than the training data, we refer the reader to Section D.4.

                           2.5e−4
                                                                 0.01                                1e−6


                           0                                     0
                                                                                                     0



                                                                 −0.01
                           −2.5e−4
                                                                                                     −1e−6


                (a)                                (b)                                (c)

Figure 5: Contours plots of pointwise values of residuals for Example (I). (a): the residual of the
ground truth; (b): residual of ST-FNO, where the time derivative in the residual is using the ground
truth’s; (c): the residual after fine-tuning for 10 ADAM iterations where the time derivative is
computed using an extra-fine-step numerical solver.


       0                                                 0
                                               0                                                 0
      10                                              10
                                               −10                                               −10
      20                                              20

      30                                       −20    30                                         −20
           0      20             40      60                  0       20          40         60

                           (a)                                             (b)

Figure 6: Pointwise values of residual of ST-FNO in the frequency domain in ln scale of Example
(I). (a): the residual of ST-FNO before correction, time derivative computed using the ground truth;
(b): the residual of ST-FNO after fine-tuning for 10 ADAM iterations where the time derivative is
computed using an extra-fine-step numerical solver.


D     E XPERIMENTS
D.1    T RAINING AND EVALUATION

The training uses torch.optim.OneCycleLR (Smith & Topin, 2019) learning rate strategy with a
20% warm-up phase. AdamW is the optimizer with no extra regularization. The learning rate starts
and ends with 10−3 · lrmax . The lrmax = 10−3 . Despite using the negative Sobolev norm is quite


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: A simple illustration of necessity of padding using a 1D non-periodic data. FNO3d cannot
handle temporal non-periodic data. The free temporal super-resolution by FFT/iFFT has Runge-like
phenomena near the end points without padding. Padding in the ST-FNO3d modification resolves
this problem. Since data themselves are intrinsically lower-dimensional, we opt not to pad the latent
representations, but rather apply the padding only in the last spectral convolution layer to get the
output.


efficient in fine-tuning, using it in training not be the most efficient in minimizing the L2 -norm due to
the optimization being non-convex, we observe that all norms are equivalent “bad” due to nonlinearity
of NOs. The result demonstrated is obtained from fixing the random number generator seed to be
1127825. All models are trained on a single RTX A4500 or RTX A6000, the inference is done with a
power limiter on the GPU to ensure fairness. The codes to replicate the experiments are open-source
and publicly available at https://github.com/scaomath/torch-cfd.

D.2    M ODELS

Helmholtz layer for the velocity-pressure formulation. For the V-P formulation in a simplified
connected convex or periodic domain, it is known that an exact divergence-free subspace W ⊂ V for
velocity means that the pressure field is not needed. The reason is that in the weak formulation, the
pressure is a Lagrange multiplier to impose the divergence-free condition (Girault & Raviart, 2012,
Chapter III 1 Section 1.1). Inspired by the postprocessing to eliminate ∇p (Ku et al., 1987, eq. (15))
together with the neural Clifford layers (Brandstetter et al., 2023), we add a Helmholtz layer S after
each application of σj ◦ (Wj + Kj ). S performs a discrete Helmholtz decomposition (Girault &
Raviart, 2012, Chapter 1 §1 Section 3.1) in the frequency domain to project the latent fields to be
solenoidal.

Difference with Fourier Neural Operator 3d In view of (2.5), the FFTs in FNO3d transforms
are continuous integrals in the spatial dimensions yet a discrete sum in the temporal dimension due
to the channel treatment. In the original FNO3d architecture, despite that no explicit restriction
imposed on the output time steps, the dout cannot be trivially changed as the data are prepared by
applying a pointwise Gaussian normalizer that depends on dout . Denote the lifting operator (channel
expansion) in FNO3d by P : {ah } ⊕ {ph } → Rdv ×dout ×n×n . Before the application of P in FNO3d,
ah is artificially repeated dout times, then P is in a space of linear operators ≃ R(din +3)×dv . This
observation makes it independent of the spatial discretization size n × n by dependent on din . In
FNO3d, the channel reduction is a pointwise nonlinear universal approximator, yet in ST-FNO3d,
this is linear, which eventually facilitate the convexity of the fine-tuning optimization problem.

D.3    F INE - TUNING

In implementations, we choose Itermax = 100 and the ADAM optimizer with learning rate 10−1 in
Algorithm 1, i.e., an ADAM is simply run for 100 iterations to update parameters that count only a
fraction of a spectral layer since the number of parameters accounts for only a single channel.


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: The detailed comparison of FNO3d and its spatiotemporal modification. Layer: # of spectral
convolution layers; ST-FNO has an extra layer of spectral convolution in a single channel with skip
connection. Modes: (τmax , kmax ). Pre-norm: whether a pointwise Gaussian normalizer is applied
for the input data. Eval FLOPs: Giga FLOPs for one evaluation instance. FT: finetuning GFLOPs
profiles per ADAM iterations for a 2562 grid for a single instance. A torch.cfloat type parameter
entry counts as two parameters.

                                                               Architectures                                   GFLOPs
                                                                                                                            # params
                                layers     channel/width           modes       activation       pre-norm    Eval     FT
       FNO3d Example 2 (I)        4              20                 (5, 8)      GELU               Y        13.3     N/A        9.03m
                                    1
    ST-FNO3d Example 2 (I)     4 + 20            20                 (5, 8)      GELU               N        27.0     3.28       9.02m
      FNO3d Example 2 (II)        4              10                (5, 32)      GELU               Y        28.7     N/A        16.38m
                                    1
   ST-FNO3d Example 2 (II)     4 + 10            10                (5, 32)      GELU               N        42.5      3.4       16.42m


Table 6: The FLOPs/runtime comparison. FNO3d with a roll-out prediction (10 steps to predict
next 10), ST-FNO3d (spatiotemporal prediction), and a traditional numerical solver’s time marching
(IMEX 4-th order Runge-Kutta). Spatial grid size 256 × 256, prediction time interval from t = 4.5 to
t = 5.5 (stable energy cascade regime), numerical solver ∆t = 10−3 , roll-out δt = 10∆t, ST-FNO3d
δt = 25∆t. Note that ST-FNO3d gets all 40 steps in a single evaluation, the numerical solver has to
march 1000 steps, and the roll-out prediction inference is supposed to march 10 times yet becomes
de-correlated around t ≈ 4.8 after the third step. Runtimes are reported for a single instance averaging
20 runs with a 100w GPU power limiter on a single RTX 4500.

                                     Architectures                         GFLOPs                      Runtime (×10−2 s)
                                                                                                                                  # params
                            layers     channel       modes       Eval/Step      FT        All      Single eval        All
 FNO3d roll-out Example 2      4          10         (5, 32)        28.7       N/A       2.9M      4.1 ± 1.5       45.6 ± 6.7     16.38m
                                 1
    ST-FNO3d Example 2      4 + 10        10         (5, 32)        1.06       2.51      337.6    22.7 ± 4.0       162 ± 4.1      16.42m
      IMEX Runge-Kutta       N/A         N/A          N/A           3.98       N/A        4M      0.449 ± 0.3      450 ± 8.7        10


To train or to stop? Investigating the frequency domain signatures In Stuart’s paper on the
convergence of linear operator learning (de Hoop et al., 2023), the evaluation error scales with number
of samples, in the few-data regime, the overfitting comes fast. Part of the reason is that the operator
learning problems are in the “small” data regime.
Denote ω(t, x) := ∇ × u, and ω̂ := F ω where F is applied only in space, then we can define
enstrophy spectra as follows:
                              X                        X            ˆ
               E(t, k) =             |ω̂(t, k)|2 , and   E(t, k) :=   |ω|2 dx
                             k−δk≤|k|≤k+δk                                           k                     Ω



In Example (II), the enstrophy spectrum decays as O(k −3 ), which is slightly faster than kinetic
energy. This is usually referred to as the direct cascade, as opposed to the inverse cascade O(k −5/3 )
discovered by Kolmogorov. For ST-FNO, it learns the frequency signature of the data after a single
epoch. See Figure 8 and Figure 9.

D.4    A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS

In this subsection, we perform the following additional experiments regarding the possibility of
fine-tuning ST-FNO3d for “out-of-distribution” data. All ST-FNO3d models are trained for 15
epochs (5 more than the model in Table 3) with the data generated using the McWilliams’s isotropic
turbulence data from Example (II) with ν = 10−3 . The initial energy distribution satisfies:

                                         |ψ̂(k)|2 ∼ k −1 (τ 2 + (k/k0 )4 )−1 .                                                       (D.1)

The parameter k0 in Example (II) roughly means that the initial energy is concentrated at |k| ≈ k0 .
In Table 3 k0 is chosen as 4 according to McWilliams (1984). For all examples, the same “burn-in”


                                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           (a)                                                             (b)

Figure 8: Enstrophy spectrum density comparison for Example (II) to illustrate the “convergence” of
the ST-FNO training. The ST-FNO evaluation is on a 256 × 256 grid for a fixed randomly chosen
sample, and the training is on a 64 × 64 grid starting from 10 different seeds at different time steps.
The error bars are plotted with +/− 10 times the standard deviation from the mean to boost the
visibility of the convergence. (a): the comparison after 1 epoch, the average relative L2 difference
with the ground truth is 2.150 × 10−1 ; (b): the comparison after 10 epochs, the average relative L2
difference with the ground truth is 8.051 × 10−2 .


time is used (t = 4.5), the training output time steps are 10 and evaluation output time steps are
40. Please refer to Figure 10 for sample trajectories and Figure 11 for the energy cascade after the
“burn-in” time period.
(Ex1) The initial energy is concentrated at k0 = 2. A sample trajectory can be found in Figure
     10(a).
(Ex2) Same with above, k0 = 8. A sample trajectory can be found in Figure 10(c).
(Ex3) k0 = 4, ν = 1/Re = 1/5000. In order to resolve the small viscosity, the mesh size becomes
     512 × 512.
(Ex4) k0 = 8, ν = 1/Re = 1/10000, mesh size is 1024 × 1024 for the same reason as above.
The evaluation and fine-tuning result can be found in Table 7. We found that the new paradigm
works reasonably well for first three example, yet fails to converge for the last example. For an
example plot of the prediction comparison please refer to Figure 12. The correlation graph between
the ST-FNO3d’s predictions and the ground truth can be found in Figure 13, in which the FNO(2+1)d
is adapted from the original FNO2d code. This roll-out-based model predicts the next snapshot based
on 10 given snapshots as input, and the predicted snapshot is concatenated to the current input as the
latest snapshot to form the input for the next prediction.

Table 7: Evaluation metrics of the McWilliams isotropic turbulence example for “out-of-distribution”
data. For details please refer to Section D.4 ε := ωS − ωN . r := R(ωN ). Y := H −1 (T2 ). All error
norms are evaluated at the final time step. The training is under the L2 -norm and the fine-tuning is
under the H −1 -norm. Symbol “–” means the errors are the same as the entry on the row above.

                            In-distribution evaluation   Out-of-distribution evaluation      After fine-tuning
                                 ∥ε∥L2      ∥R∥−1,n        ∥ε∥L2          ∥R∥−1,n           ∥ε∥L2       ∥R∥−1,n
            (Ex1) k0 = 2    5.39×10−2     1.66×10−2      8.52×10−2       4.25×10−2        2.73×10−2    5.05×10−5
            (Ex2) k0 = 8        –             –          1.46×10−1       2.31×10−2        2.06×10−2    5.85×10−6
      (Ex3) Re = 5 · 103        –             –          2.94×10−1       2.73×10−2        2.50×10−2    2.96×10−4
         (Ex4) Re = 104         –             –          4.92×10−1       1.76×10−1        2.355×106    2.873×104


                                                           27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                (a)                                 (b)                                 (c)


                (d)                                 (e)                                 (f)

Figure 9: Enstrophy spectrum density comparison for Example (II) for two randomly selected
trajectories for a given trained ST-FNO. Training and evaluation setups are identical to those in Figure
8. (a), (b), (c): the comparison of the spectra of the ST-FNO evaluation and the ground truth after 10
epochs of training at tℓ+4 , tℓ+7 , and tℓ+10 of the first trajectory; (d), (e), (f): the comparison for the
second trajectory at the same time steps.


E    A SSUMPTIONS AND P ROOFS
Assumption E.1 (Assumptions for Theorems 3.1, 3.2, E.9). The following notions and assumptions
are adopted throughout the proof of the three theorems involved, all of which are common in the
literature for NSE. While some of them can be proved, we opt for list them here to facilitate the
presentation.
 (E1 ) The compact embeddings for Gelfand triple V ⋐ H ⋐ V ′ hold, where V = H 1 (T2 ), and
  H = L2 (T2 ).
 (E2 ) The time interval T in consideration is fixed in that we consider the “refining” problem for a
  fixed time interval but with variable time steps.
 (E3 ) The initial condition u0 ∈ V, and f ∈ L2 (T ; V ′ ).
Lemma E.2 (Skew-symmetry of the trilinear term). For z, u, v ∈ H 1 (T2 ), where T2 denotes
Ω := (0, 1)2 equipped with component-wise PBC. Denote
                                                     ˆ

                      c(z, u, v) := (z · ∇)u, v = ((z · ∇)u) · v dx.
                                                            Ω
If ∇ · z = 0, then
                                       c(z, u, v) = −c(z, v, u),                                      (E.1)
and specifically c(z, v, v) = 0.

Proof. We note that this result is common in NSE literature, see e.g., Temam (1995, Part I Sec 2.3),
for homogeneous boundary or whole space. In this case, it suffices to verify that the boundary term


                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 (a)


                                                 (b)


                                                 (c)

Figure 10: Examples trajectories of the evaluation datasets for additional experiments for Example
(II). (a): k0 = 2; (b): k0 = 4. (c): k0 = 8.


                (a)                              (b)                                (c)

Figure 11: Energy spectrum densities datasets for additional experiments for Example (II). (a):
k0 = 2; (b): k0 = 4. (c): k0 = 8.


vanishes. Here we still provide a short argument for the convenience of readers. First by the product
rule, and a vector calculus identity of ∇ · (v · u), see e.g., Balanis (2012, Appendix II.3.2).
                ∇ · ((v · u)z) = ((z · ∇)u) · v + ((z · ∇)v) · u + (v · u)∇ · z.                 (E.2)
By Gauss divergence theorem, we then obtain:
        ˆ                      ˆ                              X         ˆ
           ∇ · ((v · u)z) dx =     (v · u)z · n ds =                         (v · u)z · ni ds,
          Ω                         ∂Ω                   ei ⊂∂Ω,1≤i≤4   ∂Ω

with n is outer normal with respect to ∂Ω, and ni denotes that with respect to edge ei . Now on
e1 := {x = 0} × {y ∈ (0, 1)}, n1 = (−1, 0)⊤ , w|e1 = w|e2 by PBC where e2 := {x = 1} × {y ∈
(0, 1)} and w ∈ {z, u, v}. The integrals on e1 and e2 cancel with one another since n2 = −n1 .
Furthermore, if ∇ · z = 0, integrating (E.2) on Ω yields the desired result.


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               (a)                               (b)                              (c)

Figure 12: The ground truth versus the ST-FNO3d evaluation/fine-tuning results for the Re = 5000
additional experiment for Example (II). (a): the ground truth at t = 5 (prediction step 20) generated
by IMEX RK4; (b): ST-FNO3d prediction. (c): ST-FNO3d fine-tuned prediction.


Figure 13: Comparison of the correlation with the ground truth (on 1024 × 1024 grid) generated by
IMEX RK4 solver.


Lemma E.3 (Poincaré inequality). V/R ⋐ H/R is compact and the following Poincaré inequality
holds with constant 1: for any v ∈ V/R
                                            ∥v∥ ≤ |v|1                                         (E.3)

Proof. A common textbook proof exploits the equivalence of sequential compactness and compact-
ness, once the norm topology is introduced, we prove this in a very intuitive way under our special
setting: by definition (3.7), if v ∈ V/R then v̂(0, 0) = 0
                                   X                   X
                       ∥v∥20 =          |v̂(k)|2 ≤         |k|2 |v̂(k)|2 = |v|21 .
                              k∈Z2 \{0}           k∈Z2 \{0}


E.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1

To prove Theorem 3.1, we need Lemmas E.4, E.5, and E.6, all of which can be found in classical
textbook on analysis and approximations of NSE, such as Temam (Temam, 1995), or Girault &
Raviart (Girault & Raviart, 2012) for homogeneous Dirichlet boundary condition for the velocity
field or slip boundary condition for the (pseudo-)stress tensor. We shall complement some proofs
with simple adaptations to PBC whenever necessary for the convenience of readers.


                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Before presenting any lemmas, we need the following definitions, a weighted H 1 -norm on V =
H 1 (T2 ) for α > 0 on Ω is defined as
                                               1/2
                  ∥v∥α,1 := ∥v∥2L2 + ∥α∇v∥2L2      , and |v|α,1 := ∥α∇v∥L2 .

For f ∈ V ′ , define a weighted dual norm as follows:
                                                               ⟨f , v⟩
                                      ∥f ∥α−1 ,−1 := sup                                         (E.4)
                                                           v∈V ∥v∥α,1

Lemma E.4 (Contuinity and embedding results for the convection term). For trilinear convection
term
         (u · ∇)v, w ≤ ∥u∥L4 |v|1 ∥v∥L4 . and         (u · ∇)v, w ≤ |u|1 |v|1 |w|1       (E.5)

Proof. The first result is obtained by the Hölder inequality, and the second holds with suite Sobolev
embedding results (Temam, 1995, Part I, §2.3, Lemma 2.1).
Lemma E.5 (Energy stability of NSE in a bounded domain).
                               ∥u∥2L∞ (T ;H) ≤ ∥u0 ∥2H + ∥f ∥2L2 (T ;V ′ ) .                     (E.6)

Proof. (E.17) is a classical result, see e.g., Temam (1995, Section 3.1).
Lemma E.6 (Fréchet derivative of the convection term). Given v, u ∈ V, the linearization of the
difference of the convection term reads

          v · ∇v = u · ∇u + D(u)(v − u) + r where D(u)ξ := ξ · ∇ u + (u · ∇)ξ,            (E.7)
is the Fréchet derivative and ∥r∥ ≲ ∥u − v∥ ∥u − v∥1 .

Proof. This result is normally used without proof in linearizing NSE, see e.g., Girault & Raviart
(2012, Chapter 4 eq. (6.5.2)). Define F (u, G) := u⊤ G, then expanding F at v and G = ∇u yields
the desired result.
Theorem 2.1 Part I (Functional-type a posterior error estimate is efficient (rigorous version)).
Consider the Gelfand triple V ⋐ H ⋐ V ′ , and the weak solution u ∈ L2 (T ; V) ∩ L∞ (T ; H) to (2.2)
be sufficiently regular, then the dual norm of the residual is efficient to estimate the error:
                ∥R(uN )∥2L2 (T ;V ′ ) ≲ ∥∂t (u − uN )∥2L2 (T ;V ′ ) + ∥u − uN ∥2L2 (T ;V) .      (E.8)
The constant depend on the regularity of the true solution u.

Proof. The proof of the lower bound (efficiency) (E.8) follows the skeleton laid out in Verfürth (2003,
Lemma 4.1) for diffusion and temporal derivative terms, while not needing to extend approximation
using an affine linear extension operator as Verfürth (2003) does. The treatment of the nonlinear
convection term follows Fischer (2015, Lemma 7) for the steady-state NSE (no temporal derivatives),
barring the technicality of the divergence-free condition. Consider at t ∈ T , for any test function
v ∈ H 1 (T2 ) and ∇ · v = 0, integrating v against R(uN ) in (3.2) yields

                     ⟨R(uN ), v⟩ = f − ∂t uN − (uN · ∇)uN + ν∆uN , v

                                   = ∂t (u − uN ), v − ν∆(u − uN ), v

                                     + (u · ∇)u − (uN · ∇)uN , v .
Integrating by parts for the diffusion term, using the same argument for PBC as in Lemma E.2, and
inserting (u · ∇)uN yield

               ⟨R(uN ), v⟩ = ∂t (u − uN ), v + ν∇(u − uN ), ∇v
                                |       {z       } |         {z        }
                                        (I)                       (II)
                                                                                                 (E.9)
                               + (u · ∇)(u − uN ), v + (((u − uN ) · ∇) uN , v) .
                                |        {z         } |          {z           }
                                              (III)                        (IV)



                                                      31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Applying the definition of a weighted dual norm (E.4) on (I) we have
                             (I) ≤ ∥∂t (u − uN )(t, ·)∥ν −1/2 ,−1 ∥v∥ν 1/2 ,1 .

For (II) we simply have

                              (II) ≤ ∥ν 1/2 ∇(u − uN )∥L2 ∥ν 1/2 ∇v∥L2 .
For (III), applying Lemma E.4 and the stability estimate in Lemma E.5 for u:
     (III) ≤ C∥u∥ν −1 ,1 ∥u − uN ∥ν 1/2 ,1 ∥v∥ν 1/2 ,1 ≤ ν −1 C1 (t, u0 )∥u − uN ∥ν 1/2 ,1 ∥v∥ν 1/2 ,1 .
For (IV), applying Lemma E.4 and the stability estimate in Lemma E.5 for uN :
    (IV) ≤ C∥u − uN ∥ν 1/2 ,1 ∥uN ∥ν −1 ,1 ∥v∥ν 1/2 ,1 ≤ ν −1 C2 (t, u0 )∥u − uN ∥ν 1/2 ,1 ∥v∥ν 1/2 ,1 .
Applying the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, one has

                                                2
       |⟨R(uN ), v⟩|2 ≤ C ∥∂t (u − uN )(t, ·)∥ν −1/2 ,−1 + ∥u − uN ∥2ν 1/2 ,1 ∥v∥2ν 1/2 ,1 .

Finally, equipping V ′ with the weighted norm (E.4), and by the definition of L2 (T ; V ′ ), we have
                                ˆ
                                       |⟨R(uN ), v⟩|2
          ∥R(uN )∥2L2 (T ;V) =     sup                 dt
                                 T v∈V    ∥v∥2ν 1/2 ,1
                                  ˆ
                                                          2
                             ≤C       ∥∂t (u − uN )(t, ·)∥ν −1/2 ,−1 + ∥u − uN ∥2ν 1/2 ,1 dt,
                                    T

where C = C(u0 , ν, T ).
Theorem 2.1 Part II (Functional-type a posterior error estimate is reliable (rigorous version)).
Consider the Gelfand triple V ⋐ H ⋐ V ′ , and the weak solution is u ∈ L2 (T ; V) ∩ L∞ (T ; H) to
(2.2). We assume that
(2.1.1) uN and u are sufficiently close in the sense that: there exists γ ∈ [0, C) for a fixed C ∈ R+ ,
        for J defined in Lemma E.6
                                        ∥J (u, uN )∥V ′ ≤ γ∥∇(u − uN )∥.                              (E.10)

(2.1.2) u satisfies the Gårding inequality (a weaker coercivity): for any v(t, ·) ∈ V, define

                         B(v, w; u) := (∂t v, w) + ν(∇v, ∇w) + (u · ∇)v, w ,
         and for v in a neighborhood such that Assumption (2.1.1) holds, there exists α, β > 0 such
         that α − β ≥ ν,
                                                       d
                                B(v, v; u) + β∥v∥2 ≥ ∥v∥2 + α∥∇v∥2 .                         (E.11)
                                                       dt
The dual norm of the residual is then reliable to serve as an error measure in the following sense:
denote Tm := (tm , tm+1 ]
                                                                         ˆ
          2                        2                               2
∥u − uN ∥L∞ (Tm ;H) + ∥u − uN ∥L2 (Tm ;V) ≤ (u − uN )(tm , ·) V + C           ∥R(uN )(t, ·)∥2V ′ dt.
                                                                                   Tm
                                                                                                      (E.12)
The constant C = C(ν).

Proof. The proof of part II of Theorem 3.1 combines the meta-framework of Verfürth (2003) for
time-dependent problems and Verfürth (1994, Section 8) for the stationary NSE. Note that thanks for
the construction of divergence-free uN , the technicality of applying the Ladyzhenskaya-Babušška-
Brezzi inf-sup condition is avoided. In the meantime, no interpolations are needed to convert the
functional norm for the negative Sobolev spaces to an L2 representation.
To prove the upper bound (reliability) (3.5), we simply choose a time step t = tm , and let v =
(u − uN )(t, ·) on (tm , tm+1 ). Note that the discretized approximation’s evaluation at t, which may


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


not be the temporal grids tm or tm+1 are naturally defined using the basis in (3.1). Using the error
representation in (E.9), we have the (I) and (II) terms in ⟨R(uN ), u − uN ⟩ are

               (I) + (II) = ∂t (u − uN ), u − uN + ν∇(u − uN ), ∇(u − uN )
                            1 d                                                              (E.13)
                          =      ∥u − uN ∥2L2 + ν∥∇(u − uN )∥2L2
                            2 dt
For the (III) and (IV) terms we have
                                =0 by Lemma E.2                        =:(∗)
                       z        }|            { z             }|             {
      (III) + (IV) = (u · ∇)(u − uN ), u − uN + (((u − uN ) · ∇) uN , u − uN ) .                       (E.14)
Note by Lemma E.2, (∗) is also:
                                 (∗) = (((u − uN ) · ∇) u, u − uN ) ,                                  (E.15)
since c(z, z, z) = 0 for z = u − uN . Consequently, by a vector calculus identity, we have
                            ˆ                    ˆ
                               (z · ∇)u · z dx =    ∇u : (z⊗z) dx.
                                Ω                       Ω

Thus, we reach the following error equation:
                                                            ˆ
                           1 d
⟨R(uN ), u − uN ⟩ =             ∥u−uN ∥2L2 +ν∥∇(u−uN )∥2L2 + ∇u : ((u − uN )⊗(u − uN )) dx.
                           2 dt                              Ω
                                                                                    (E.16)
Now, by Assumption (2.1.2) , Poincaré inequality from Lemma E.3,
    1 d                                d
         ∥u − uN ∥2 + ν∥∇(u − uN )∥2 ≤ ∥u − uN ∥2 + (α − β)∥∇(u − uN )∥2
    2 dt                               dt
                                       d
                                     ≤ ∥u − uN ∥2 + α∥∇(u − uN )∥2 − β∥u − uN ∥
                                       dt
                                     ≤ B(u − uN , u − uN ; u).
By (E.13), (E.14), and (E.15),
            B(u − uN , u − uN ; u) = (I) + (II) + (III) + (IV) = ⟨R(uN ), u − uN ⟩
                                   ≤ ∥R(uN )∥ν −1/2 ,−1 |u − uN |ν 1/2 ,1
                                     1                       1
                                   ≤ ∥R(uN )∥2ν −1/2 ,−1 + |u − uN |2ν 1/2 ,1 .
                                     2                       2
As a result, we have
                       d
                          ∥u − uN ∥2 + ν∥∇(u − uN )∥2 ≤ ∥R(uN )∥2ν −1/2 ,−1 .                          (E.17)
                       dt
Integrating from tm to any t ∈ (tm , tm+1 ] yields
                                                                         ˆ t
∥(u−uN )(t, ·)∥2 −∥(u−uN )(tm , ·)∥2 +ν∥∇(u−uN )∥2L2 (tm ,t;H) ≤                   ∥R(uN )(t, ·)∥2ν −1/2 ,−1 dt.
                                                                              tm

Since t ∈ (tm , tm+1 ] is arbitrary, we have proved the reliability (E.12).
Remark E.7 (Necessity of the “sufficient close” and the regularity conditions). First, the main hurdle
to prove the reliability is that the convection term (∗) is not positive definite, one would encounter
some difficult in deriving the upper bound as yet moving (∗) to the right-hand side in (E.16) does not
yield a meaningful estimate,
         norm of the error ≃ (I) + (II) = ⟨R(uN ), u − uN ⟩ − (∗) ̸≤ ⟨R(uN ), u − uN ⟩
We note that Assumption (2.1.2) is equivalent to putting a threshold on ∥u(t, ·)∥L∞ , which is
commonly assumed in the analysis of numerical methods for convection-dominated problems. A
stronger alternative assumption than Assumption (2.1.2) would be imposing a stronger constraint


                                                   33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


on γ in Assumption (2.1.1) Using the “sufficient close” assumption (E.10) on the nonlinear term,
we have
                |(∗)| ≤ ∥ ((u − uN ) · ∇) uN ∥V ′ ∥u − uN ∥V ≤ γ∥∇(u − uN )∥2 .

Now if ν̄ := ν − γ ≥ 0, one would reach a similar estimate as (E.17) by replacing ν with ν̄. If no
extra assumption on γ is imposed.
Another way is to consider a Sobolev embedding directly after applying the Hölder inequality, for
(E.15) we have
                  ˆ
          |(∗)| ≤    |∇u||u − uN |2 ≤ ∥∇u∥ ∥u − uN ∥2L4 ≤ ρ∥∇u∥ ∥∇(u − uN )∥2 ,
                    Ω

where ρ is the constant in the following Sobolev embedding

                                     ∥u − uN ∥L4 ≤ ρ∥∇(u − uN )∥.

Now if ν̃ := ν − ρ∥∇u∥ ≥ 0, one would reach a similar estimate as (E.17) by replacing ν with ν̃.

E.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.2

Theorem 2.2 (Equivalence of functional norm and negative Sobolev norm). Consider the Gelfand
triple V ⋐ H ⋐ V ′ , then
                                       ∥f ∥V ′ = |f |−1 for f ∈ H/R.                                 (E.18)


Proof. This proof leverages the spectral basis for H without the extra technicality of Schwartz space
involved if one ought to assume that f ∈ V ′ . Recall (3.1), and define an infinite version

                                 S ∞ := span eik·x : k ∈ 2πZ2 .                                (E.19)

In what follows, we shall omit the extra technicality that one has to work on partial sums first, and
then considers the convergence in the corresponding norms. We simply take for granted that the
differentiation and integration/sum can be interchanged, and directly identify f ∈ H/R with its
Fourier series in S ∞ ,
                                              X
                                    f (x) =          fˆ(k)eik·x .
                                                    k∈2πZ2


Note since f lies in the quotient space, fˆ(0, 0) = 0. Then, the duality pairing can be identified as an
L2 -inner product, as well as the test function v ∈ H,
                                                                              !
                                        X                   X
            ⟨f, v⟩V ′ ,V = (f, v) =           fˆ(k)e ik·x
                                                          ,      v̂(m)eim·x
                                          k∈2πZ2               m∈2πZ2
                                X
                        =                  fˆ(k)v̂(k)
                            k∈2πZ2n \{0}
                                                            1/2                            1/2
                                 X                                      X
                        ≤                  |k|−2 |fˆ(k)|2                      |k|2 |v̂(k)|2 
                             k∈2πZ2n \{0}                          k∈2πZ2n \{0}

                        ≤ |f |−1 |v|1 .

As a result, by the definition in (3.7) and the estimate above

                                                                    (f, v)
                        ∥f ∥V ′ =         sup       |⟨f, v⟩| = sup         ≤ |f |−1 .
                                    v∈V/R,|v|V =1              v∈V/R |v|1


                                                        34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To show the other direction, let v = (−∆)−1 f ∈ H 1 (T2 ) by the well-posedness of −∆v = f for
f ∈ L2 (T2 ). We have

              ⟨f, (−∆)−1 f ⟩ = −∆v, v = f, (−∆)−1 f
                                                                                !
                                    X                 X
                              =          ˆ
                                        f (k)e ik·x
                                                    ,             −1 ˆ
                                                            (−∆x ) f (m)e  im·x

                                                k∈2πZ2                      m∈2πZ2
                                                                                                        !
                                                 X                             X       1 ˆ
                                      =                   fˆ(k)eik·x ,                   2
                                                                                           f (m)eim·x
                                                                                      |m|
                                                k∈2πZ2                      m∈2πZ   2
                                                  X
                                      =                      |k|    −2
                                                                         |fˆ(k)|2 = |f |2−1 .
                                              k∈2πZ2n \{0}

Note that by the construction of v above, |v|1 = |f |−1 , thus,

                                   (f, v)     f, (−∆)−1 f
                              sup         ≥                     = |f |−1 ,
                              v∈V |v|1             |v|1
which proves the theorem.



E.3   C ONVERGENCE RESULT OF FINE - TUNING

In the following theorem, Theorem E.9, we show that a sufficient condition for the optimizer to
converge is to “reach” a neighborhood of the true solution, thus corroborating the necessity of
                                                                  (m)
training. Note in both Theorems 3.1 and E.9, the error term of uN − u(tm , ·) is present. We have
to acknowledge that the “initial value” for the predicted trajectory, which is the last snapshot in the
                                                                                       (ℓ)
input trajectory, may have errors. This is the major motivation that we opt to use uN , which is the
                                                           e
input trajectory’s last snapshot in the skip-connection in Q
                          (m+1)        (ℓ) e θ (v (m+1) ), for m = ℓ, . . . , ℓ + nt − 1.
                      uN            = uN + Q     N                                                          (E.20)
In some sense, ST-FNO learns the derivative ∂t u’s arbitrary-length integral. If one wants to modify
Algorithm 1 in view of Theorem E.9 such that the error control is guaranteed, the following algorithm
can be used but loses the “parallel-in-time” nature. We also note that , thanks to the spectral
convolution in Q e being affine linear, showing Theorem E.9 is quite straightforward, as one has
to establish the connection between fine-tuning and seeking a nonlinear Galerkin projection in
Fourier space (3.1) under the functional norm. Let θ∗ = arg minθ ∥R(uN (θ))(tm+1 , ·)∥−1 , then
Qe θ∗ (uN ) = arg minv∈S ∥u(tm+1 , ·) − (u(tm , ·) + v)∥∗ .
Lemma E.8 (Local strict  convexity for the fine-tuning
                                                         loss). Define ∥ · ∥∗,δ to be a (dual) graph
norm on L∞ Tδ ; L2 (T2 ) ∩ L2 Tδ ; H 1 (T2 ) , where Tδ := [t − δ, t + δ]
                                                                                  1/2
                                                                           2
                ∥v∥∗,δ =        ∥v(t, ·)∥2 dt +    ∥(∂t v + v · ∇v) (t, ·)∥V ′ dt
                                     Tδ                             Tδ
            ∞         2     2
                                          2           1     2

For u ∈ L Tδ ; L (T ) ∩ L Tδ ; H (T ) the weak solution to (2.2) on Tδ that is sufficiently
smooth, there exists δ, ϵ ∈ R+ , such that on

            B(u; ϵ) := v ∈ L∞ Tδ ; L2 (T2 ) ∩ L2 Tδ ; H 1 (T2 ) : ∥u − v∥∗,δ ≤ ϵ ,
the functional
                                    1
                J(v(t, ·)) :=         ∥R(v)∥2V ′ where R(v) := f − ∂t v − (v · ∇)v + ν∆v
                                    2
is strictly convex.

Proof. First, by Theorem 3.2,
                                                     1
                                       J(v) =          R(v), (−∆)−1 R(v) V ′ ,V
                                                     2

                                                                     35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 An error-guarantee fine-tuning strategy.
Input: ST-FNO Gθ,Θ := Q      e θ ◦ GΘ ; time stepping scheme Bγ (·); optimizer D(θ, ∇θ (·)); training
    dataset: solution trajectories at [t1 , . . . , tℓ′ ] as input and at [tℓ′ +1 , . . . , tℓ′ +n′t ] as output.
 1: Train the ST-FNO model until the energy signature matches the inverse cascade.
 2: Freeze Θ in GΘ of ST-FNO Gθ,Θ , keep Q          e θ trainable.
 3: Cast all nn.Module involved and tensors to torch.float64 and torch.complex128 hereafter.
Input: Evaluation dataset: solution trajectories at [t1 , . . . , tℓ ] as input, output time step nt .
 4: for m = ℓ, · · · , ℓ + nt − 1 do
                                    (m+1)
 5:     Extract the latent fields vN         output of GΘ at tm+1 and hold them fixed.
                                                           (m+1)           (m)
 6:     By construction of ST-FNO: such that uN                  (θ) := uN + Q       e θ v (m+1) .
                                                                                              N
 7:     March one step with (∆t)γ using Bγ : Dt uN (θ) := (∆t)−γ (Bγ (uN (θ)) − uN (θ)).
 8:     j←0
 9:     while ηm (uN (θ), Dt uN (θ)) > Tol do
10:         Apply the optimizer to update parameters in Q:          e θ ← D(θ, ∇θ (η 2 )), j ← j + 1.
                                                                                              m
11:         Forward pass only through Q      e to update uN ← u(m) + Q           e θ (v (m+1) ).
                                                                        N                 N
12:         if j > Itermax then break
         (m+1)
13:     uN       ← uN
                                                                                         (m)
Output: A sequence of velocity profiles at corresponding time steps {uN }ℓ+n                          t
                                                                                                m=ℓ+1 .



Then,
                                             J(v + τ ξ) − J(v)   d
                       DJ(v; ξ) := lim                         =    J(v + τ ξ)
                                      τ →0           τ           dτ            τ =0
                                  = ⟨DR(v)ξ, (−∆)−1 R(v)⟩V ′ ,V .
where
                                          1
                           DR(v)ξ = ∂t ξ +    ξ · ∇ v + (v · ∇)ξ − ν∆ξ
                                          2
is the Fréchet derivative DR(v) : V → V ′ by Lemma E.6. The Hessian is then
        Hess J(v; ξ, ζ) = DR(v)ξ, (−∆)−1 DR(v)ζ + ζ · D2 R(v)ξ, (−∆)−1 R(v) .
Now, since R(u) = 0 on Tδ , we have
                            Hess J(u; ξ, ξ) = DR(v)ξ, (−∆)−1 DR(v)ξ .
If we assume that DR(u)ξ ∈ V ′ has its functional norm bounded above and below in B(u; ϵ), one
has for any ξ
                          ∥ξ∥2V ≲ ∥DR(u)ξ∥2V ′ ≤ Hess J(u; ξ, ξ).
Simply choosing ϵ small enough such that v is sufficiently close to u in graph norm associated
with the PDE to make the coercivity above still true for Hess J(v; ξ, ξ) yields the desired local
convexity.
Theorem E.9 (Guaranteed convergence of the fine-tuning). In addition to the same assumptions
with Theorem 3.1, suppose Lemma E.8 holds for ϵ ∈ (0, 1), and a given uN can be embedded in
                                     (k)
B(u; ϵ′ ) for a 0 < ϵ′ ≤ ϵ. Denote uN ,j the evaluation in Line 9 of Algorithm 2, and j the iteration
of optimizer in Line 10, then the fine-tuning using the new loss function (3.9) produces a sequence
   (k)
{uN ,j }∞              ′
         j=1 ⊂ B u; ϵ Furthermore, suppose that the optimizer in Line 10 of Algorithm 2 has a
learning rate converging to 0. Then, then the fine-tuning using the new loss function (3.9) produces a
                                                                             (m+1)
sequence of evaluations converging to the best possible approximation uN ,∞ ∈ S of u(tm+1 , ·)
                 (m)
starting from uN , in the sense that for m = ℓ, . . . , ℓ + nt − 1
    (m+1)                            (l)
 ∥uN ,∞ − u(tm+1 , ·)∥V ≤ ∥uN − u(tm , ·)∥V + c1 nt n−2 |u(tm+1 , ·)|2 + c2 nt (∆t)γ−1 . (E.21)

                                                                              (m)
Proof. For simplicity, we denote u0 := u(tl , ·) ∈ V, and uN := uN ∈ S |t=tm =: S. First, by
line 10 fine-tuning algorithm, if one solves the optimization in the functional norm exactly, we have
                                                 2
               θ∗ = arg min δt R Bγ uN (θ) S ′ where uN (θ) := uN + Q̃θ (vN )                  (E.22)
                            θ


                                                       36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where R(·) is the residual functional computed using the time derivative term from an extra-fine-step
solver’s result
                               R(v) := f − Dt v − (v · ∇)v + ν∆v
Unlike representing the derivative using output from the neural operator, one of the keys of our
algorithm is that the error for ∂t u − Dt uN (θ) can be explicitly estimated using the framework to
develop estimates for truncation error in traditional time marching schemes for NSE. Due to the
choice of the time step, this truncation error will be of higher order. Note for any vN , Q̃θ (vN ) ∈ S,
as a result, solving (E.22) is equivalent to solve the following: denote uδ := Bγ (uN + δu) for
δu ∈ S
                        min (δt)1/2 ∥Dt (uδ ) + (uδ · ∇)uδ − ν∆uδ − f ∥S ′ .
                        δu∈S

Replacing Dt (·) by ∂t (·) we have a truncation error term, whose error is of order (∆t)γ−1 due to
taking the time derivative:
                    ∥Dt (uδ ) + (uδ · ∇)uδ − ν∆uδ − f ∥S ′
                   ≤ ∥∂t uδ + (uδ · ∇)uδ − ν∆uδ − f ∥S ′ + ∥Dt (uδ ) − ∂t uδ ∥S ′
We focus on estimating the first term above,
                           min (δt)1/2 ∥∂t uδ + (uδ · ∇)uδ − ν∆uδ − f ∥S ′                           (E.23)
                          δu∈S

By the fact that ∥ · ∥S ′ inherit the scaling law and the triangle inequality from ∥ · ∥V ′ , it is convex as
well in this neighborhood. As a result, any gradient-based optimizer with a linearly converging step
                                                        (m)
size shall converge to the minimum, achieved at uN ,∞ , with a linear convergence rate. Moreover,
 (m)         (m)
uN ,∞ := uN + (δu)∗ is the (nonlinear) Galerkin projection of u(tm , ·) ∈ V.


                                                     37
