Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F ROM I SOLATED C ONVERSATIONS TO H IERARCHICAL
S CHEMAS : DYNAMIC T REE M EMORY R EPRESENTA -
TION FOR LLM S

 Alireza Rezazadeh, Zichao Li, Wei Wei, Yujia Bao
 Center for Advanced AI, Accenture
 {alireza.rezazadeh,zichao.li,wei.h.wei,yujia.bao}@accenture.com



                                           A BSTRACT

         Recent advancements in large language models have significantly improved their
         context windows, yet challenges in effective long-term memory management
         remain. We introduce MemTree, an algorithm that leverages a dynamic, tree-
         structured memory representation to optimize the organization, retrieval, and in-
         tegration of information, akin to human cognitive schemas. MemTree organizes
         memory hierarchically, with each node encapsulating aggregated textual content,
         corresponding semantic embeddings, and varying abstraction levels across the
         tree’s depths. Our algorithm dynamically adapts this memory structure by com-
         puting and comparing semantic embeddings of new and existing information to
         enrich the model’s context-awareness. This approach allows MemTree to handle
         complex reasoning and extended interactions more effectively than traditional
         memory augmentation methods, which often rely on flat lookup tables. Evalua-
         tions on benchmarks for multi-turn dialogue understanding and document question
         answering show that MemTree significantly enhances performance in scenarios
         that demand structured memory management.


Figure 1: MemTree (subset) developed on the MultiHop dataset (Tang & Yang, 2024). MemTree
updates its structured knowledge when new information arrives, enhancing inference-time reasoning
capabilities of LLMs.

1   I NTRODUCTION

Despite recent advances in large language models (LLMs) where the context window has expanded
to millions of tokens (Ding et al., 2024; Bulatov et al., 2023; Beltagy et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2023; Tworkowski et al., 2024), these models continue to struggle with reasoning over long-term
memory (Sun et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2024; Kuratov et al., 2024). This challenge arises because LLMs
rely primarily on a key-value (KV) cache of past interactions, processed through a fixed number of
transformer layers, which lack the capacity to effectively aggregate extensive historical data. Unlike
LLMs, the human brain employs dynamic memory structures known as schemas, which facilitate the
efficient organization, retrieval, and integration of information as new experiences occur (Anderson,
2005; Ghosh & Gilboa, 2014; Gilboa & Marlatte, 2017). This dynamic restructuring of memory is
a cornerstone of human cognition, allowing for the flexible application of accumulated knowledge
across varied contexts.
A prevalent method to address the limitations of long-term memory in LLMs involves the use of
external memory. Weston et al. (2014) introduced the concept of utilizing external memory for
the storage and retrieval of relevant information. More recent approaches in LLM research have


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Articles                  MemTree               New Article                  MemTree                                     New Article                               MemTree
       # Joe Biden
         # Nvidia                                     # Donald Trump                                                               # Apple
                             Nvidia       Joe Biden                               Nvidia        US Politics                                                        Tech                     US Politics

                                                                                           Joe Biden         Donald Trump                                Nvidia         Apple      Joe Biden     Donald Trump


                Conversations                                 New Conv ersation                                        MemTree
                     08/ 25/202 4                                 10/ 25/202 4
                                                                                                          sim = 0.00        𝑣0       sim = 0.60 > 𝜃1 = 0.50
      What is your favorite dish?                     I’ve recently moved to Seattle!

                               I like pasta!                                                                 I like                I live in    [Node Update]                  I recently moved from
                                                Wow! Must be quite exciting!


                                                                                                   𝑣1.1


                                                                                                                                                                      𝑣1.2
                                                                                                                          𝑣1.2
                                                                                                             pasta!              San Francisco!                               SF now live in Seattle.
                     09/ 01/202 4
                                                                                                           08/ 25/202 4             09/ 01/202 4                                      10/ 25/202 4
       Where do you live?
                                                                I’ve recently
                                                                                                                                                                I live in                     I’ve recently


                                                      cn ew
                I live in San Francisco!                      moved to Seattle!


                                                                                                                                                                                     𝑣2.2
                                                                                                                                                       𝑣2.1
                                                                                                                                                              San Francisco!                moved to Seattle!
                                                                   10/ 25/202 4
                                                                                                                                                                 09/ 01/202 4                    10/ 25/202 4

                                                                                                                                                              [Expand Leaf Node]               [Insert New Node]



Figure 2: Illustration of MemTree. MemTree represents knowledge schema via a dynamic tree. Both
parent and leaf nodes archive textual content, summarizing information relevant to their respective
levels. Upon receiving new information, the system begins traversal from the root node. If the new
information is semantically akin to an existing leaf node under the current node, it is routed to that
node. Conversely, if it diverges from all existing leaf nodes under the current node, a new leaf node is
created under the current node, concluding the traversal. During this process, all ancestor nodes will
integrate the new information into the higher-level summaries they maintain.

explored various techniques to manage historical observations in databases, retrieving pertinent
data for given queries through vector similarity searches in the embedding space (Park et al., 2023;
Packer et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2024). However, these methods primarily utilize a lookup table for
memory representation, which fails to capture the inherent structure in data. Consequently, each past
experience is stored as an isolated instance, lacking the interconnectedness and integrative capabilities
of the human brain’s schemas. This limitation becomes increasingly problematic as the size of the
memory grows or when relevant information is distributed across multiple instances.
In this work, we introduce MemTree, an algorithm designed to emulate the schema-like structures of
the human brain by maintaining a dynamically structured memory representation during interactions.
Within MemTree, each memory unit is represented as a node within a tree, containing node-level
information and links to child nodes.
Upon encountering new information, MemTree updates its memory structure starting from the root
node. It evaluates at each node whether to instantiate a new child node or integrate the information
into an existing child node. This decision process is governed by a traversal algorithm that efficiently
adds new information with an insertion complexity of O(log N), where N denotes the number of
conversational interactions. This structure facilitates the aggregation of knowledge at parent nodes,
which evolve to capture high-level semantics as the tree expands. For knowledge retrieval, MemTree
computes the cosine similarity between node embeddings and the query embedding. This method
maintains the retrieval time complexity comparable to existing approaches, ensuring efficiency.
We evaluated MemTree across four benchmarks, covering both conversational and document question-
answering tasks, and compared it against online and offline knowledge representation methods.
MemTree enables seamless dynamic updates as new data becomes available, a capability characteristic
of online methods. In contrast, offline methods require complete dataset access and are costly to
update, as they involve periodic rebuilding to incorporate new information.

 • In extended conversations, MemTree consistently outperforms other online methods, including
   MemoryStream (Park et al., 2023) and MemGPT (Packer et al., 2023), maintaining superior
   accuracy as discussions progress.
 • For document question-answering, MemTree excels in two key areas. On single-document
   tasks, it outperforms other online methods and reduces the performance gap with offline models,
   particularly surpassing RAPTOR (Sarthi et al., 2024) on challenging questions that require
   deeper reasoning. In multi-document tasks, MemTree not only surpasses online methods but also
   approaches the performance of offline models, particularly outperforming GraphRAG (Edge et al.,
   2024). Moreover, on complex temporal queries requiring the analysis of event sequences across
   multiple documents, MemTree exceeds all offline methods.

These results demonstrate that MemTree is a robust and scalable solution, delivering high accuracy
across diverse and challenging tasks while retaining the efficiency of online systems.


                                                                                               2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2   R ELATED W ORK
Memory-Augmented LLMs Recent advancements in memory-augmented LLMs have introduced
various strategies for enhancing memory capabilities. Park et al. (2023) developed LLM-based
agents that log experiences as timestamped descriptions, retrieving memories based on recency,
importance, and relevance. Similarly, Cheng et al. (2023) developed Selfmem with a dedicated
memory selector. MemGPT (Packer et al., 2023) proposed automatic memory management through
LLM function-calling for conversational agents and document analysis, providing a pre-prompt
with detailed instructions on memory hierarchy and utilities, along with a schema for accessing
and modifying the memory database. Zhong et al. (2024) introduced MemoryBank, a long-term
memory framework that stores timestamped dialogues and uses exponential decay to forget outdated
information. Additionally, Mitchell et al. (2022) proposed storing model edits in an explicit memory
and learning to reason over them to adjust the base model’s predictions. These methods represent
common solutions for adding memory to LLMs, focusing on tabular memory storage and vector
similarity retrieval (Zhang et al., 2024). However, as memory scales or information becomes dispersed
across multiple entries, their unstructured representations reveal significant limitations.
Another line of work explores triplet-based memory. For example, Modarressi et al. (2023) proposed
encoding relationships in triplets, and Anokhin et al. (2024) extended this approach to graph-based
triplet memory for text-based games. While effective at encoding individual relations or scene graphs
at the object level, these methods struggle with scalability and generalization to more complex data
that do not fit neatly into a strict triplet format.

Structured Retrieval-Augmented Generation Approaches To address the limitations of unstruc-
tured memory representations, recent advances have integrated structured knowledge into RAG
models, enhancing navigation and summarization in complex QA tasks. Trajanoska et al. (2023)
leveraged LLMs to extract entities and relationships from unstructured text to construct knowledge
graphs. Similarly, Yao et al. (2023) proposed techniques to fill in missing links and nodes in existing
knowledge graphs by utilizing LLMs to infer unseen relationships. Ban et al. (2023) identified causal
relationships within textual data and represented them in graph form to enhance understanding of
causal structures. In the context of retrieval-augmented generation, Gao et al. (2023) provided a
comprehensive review of existing RAG methods, and Baek et al. (2023) utilized knowledge graphs as
indexes within RAG frameworks for efficient retrieval of structured information.
More relevant to our work, RAPTOR (Sarthi et al., 2024) organizes text into a recursive tree,
clustering and summarizing chunks at multiple layers to enable efficient retrieval of both high-level
themes and detailed information. GraphRAG (Edge et al., 2024) constructs a knowledge graph from
LLM-extracted entities and relations, partitioning it into modular communities that are independently
summarized and combined via a map-reduce framework. While these methods effectively structure
large textual data to improve retrieval and generation capabilities, they are limited to static corpora,
requiring full reconstruction to integrate new information, and do not support online memory updates.
In this work, we propose a novel structured memory representation that overcomes these limitations by
enabling dynamic updates and efficient retrieval in large-scale memory systems without necessitating
full reconstruction.

3   M ETHOD
MemTree represents memory as a tree T = (V, E), where V is the set of nodes, and E ⊆ V × V is
the set of directed edges representing parent-child relationships. Each node v ∈ V is represented as:
                                        v = [cv , ev , pv , Cv , dv ]
where:

 • cv : the textual content aggregated at node v.
 • ev ∈ Rd : an embedding vector derived using an embedding model femb (cv ).
 • pv ∈ V : the parent of node v.
 • Cv ⊆ V : the set of children of node v, with edges directed from v to each u ∈ Cv .


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 • dv : the depth of node v from the root node v0 .

Note that the root node v0 serves as a structural node, containing neither content nor embedding, i.e.,
cv0 = ∅ and ev0 = ∅.
MemTree utilizes this tree-structured representation to dynamically track and update the knowledge
exchanged between the user and the LLM. While less flexible than a generic graph architecture, the
tree structure inherently biases the model towards hierarchical representation. Additionally, trees
offer efficient complexity for insertion and traversal, making the algorithm suitable for real-time
online use cases.
When new information is observed, MemTree dynamically adapts by traversing the existing structure,
identifying the appropriate subtree for integration, and updating relevant nodes (Section 3.1). This
process, illustrated in Figure 2, ensures the proper integration of new information while preserving the
underlying context and hierarchical relationships within the memory. When retrieving information
from the memory, MemTree simply compares the embeddings of the query message with the
embeddings of each node in the tree, returning the most relevant nodes (Section 3.2).

3.1   M EMORY U PDATE

The memory update procedure in MemTree is triggered upon observing new information (e.g., a new
conversation). This procedure ensures that the tree structure dynamically adapts and integrates new
data while maintaining a coherent hierarchical representation. The complete memory update process
is outlined in Algorithm 1.

Attaching New Information by Traversing the Existing Tree To integrate new information, we
begin by creating a new node vnew with the textual content cvnew . Then we start tree traversal from the
root node. At each node v, MemTree evaluates the semantic similarity between the new information
cvnew and the children of the current node in the embedding space. This evaluation is performed
by computing the embedding evnew = femb (cvnew ) for the new content cvnew and comparing it to the
embeddings of the child nodes C(v) of the current node v using cosine similarity.
This similarity evaluation drives the following decisions:

 • Traverse Deeper: If a child node’s similarity exceeds a depth-adaptive threshold θ(dv ), traversal
   continues along that path. If multiple child nodes meet this criterion, the path with the highest
   similarity score is chosen.
    – Boundary: When traversal reaches a leaf node, the leaf is expanded to become a parent node,
       accommodating both the original leaf node and vnew as children. The parent’s content is then
       updated to aggregate both the original leaf node’s content and the new information cvnew . The
       details of this aggregation process will be explained below.
 • Create New Leaf Node: If all child nodes’ similarities are below the threshold θ(dv ), vnew is
   directly attached as a new leaf node under the current node.

The similarity threshold θ(d) is adaptive based on the node’s depth d, defined as:
                                            θ(d) = θ0 eλd ,
where θ0 is the base threshold, and λ controls the rate of increase with depth. This mechanism ensures
that deeper nodes, which represent more specific information, require a higher similarity for new data
integration, thereby preserving the tree’s hierarchical integrity. Further details, including specific
parameter values, are provided in the Appendix A.1.3.

Updating Parent Nodes Along the Traversal Path Once vnew is inserted, the content and embed-
dings of all parent nodes v along the traversal path are updated to reflect the new information. This is
achieved through a conditional aggregation function:
                                    c′v ← Aggregate(cv , cnew | n),
where c′v is the updated content, and n = |C(v)| is the number of descendants of node v. The
aggregation function, implemented as an LLM-based operation, combines the existing content cv


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with the new content cnew , conditioned on n. As n increases, the aggregation abstracts the content
further to balance the existing and new information (see Appendix A.1.2 for more details).
The embedding of the parent node is then updated as:
                                            ev ← femb (c′v ),
ensuring that the parent node effectively represents both the new and existing information. This
process maintains the hierarchical organization of the memory as the tree expands, enabling MemTree
to adaptively and accurately represent the evolving conversation. A key advantage of this method is its
computational efficiency: once the traversal path is defined, the content aggregation and embedding
updates for parent nodes can be parallelized on the CPU. This significantly accelerates the update
process, reducing bottlenecks as the memory grows.

Connection to Online Hierarchical Clustering Algorithms Our memory update algorithm can be
viewed as an instance of online hierarchical clustering algorithms (Zhang et al., 1996; Kobren et al.,
2017). We draw inspiration from the OTD (Online Top-Down Clustering) algorithm proposed by
Menon et al. (2019), which enables efficient online updates by calculating inter- and intra-subtree
similarities during the insertion process. This algorithm is known to provably approximate the
Moseley-Wang revenue (Moseley & Wang, 2017). In this work, we relax the inter- and intra-subtree
similarity comparisons by utilizing semantic similarities in the embedding space. We achieve this by
formatting the subtree representation (parent nodes) with LLMs as we traverse the MemTree during
the memory update.
Theorem 1 (Approximation Guarantee of MemTree (Informal)). Assuming the data processed by
MemTree satisfies the β-well-separated condition (see Appendix B.4), the hierarchy maintained by
MemTree achieves a revenue
                             Rev(MemTree; W ) ≥ β/3 · Rev(T ∗ ; W ),
where T ∗ is the optimal hierarchy maximizing the Moseley-Wang revenue.

This alignment with OTD ensures a high-quality hierarchical memory representation in MemTree.
Further details and proofs are provided in Appendix B.

3.2   M EMORY R ETRIEVAL

Efficient and effective retrieval of relevant information is crucial for ensuring that MemTree can
provide meaningful responses based on past conversations. Inspired by RAPTOR (Sarthi et al., 2024),
we adopt the collapsed tree retrieval method, which offers significant advantages over traditional tree
traversal-based retrieval.

Collapsed Tree Retrieval The collapsed tree approach enhances the search process by treating
all nodes in the tree as a single set. Instead of conducting a sequential, layer-by-layer traversal, this
method flattens the hierarchical structure, allowing for simultaneous comparison of all nodes. This
technique simplifies the retrieval process and ensures a more efficient search.
The retrieval process involves the following steps:

 1. Query Embedding: Embed the query q using femb (q) to obtain eq .
 2. Similarity Computation: Calculate cosine similarities between eq and all tree nodes.
 3. Filtering: Exclude nodes with similarity scores below a threshold θretrieve .
 4. Top-K Selection: Sort the remaining nodes by similarity and select the top-k most relevant nodes.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   DATASETS

We evaluate the effectiveness of MemTree across various settings using four datasets: Multi-Session
Chat, Multi-Session Chat Extended, QuALITY, MultiHop RAG. These datasets were selected to


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


represent different interactive contexts—dialogue interactions and information retrieval from multiple
texts, respectively, providing a comprehensive test bed for our model. Additional statistics for each
dataset can be found in Appendix A.2.1.

 • Multi-Session Chat (MSC): The dataset was introduced by (Xu, 2021). In this work, we consider
   the processed version provided by (Packer et al., 2023). The dataset consists of 500 sessions,
   each featuring approximately 15 rounds of synthetic dialogue between two agents. Each session
   includes follow-up questions that challenge the model to retrieve and utilize information from prior
   dialogues within the same session. For each session, a memory representation is independently
   built, capturing the dialogue rounds as they unfold.
 • Multi-Session Chat Extended (MSC-E): To test the performance for even longer conversation
   rounds, we expanded MSC by generating an additional 70 sessions, each containing about 200
   rounds of dialogue. In these extended sessions, a follow-up question follows each conversation
   round, demanding more precise and timely information retrieval across the dialogues. As in MSC,
   memory representations are constructed independently for each session. We detail the extension
   methodology in Appendix A.2.3.
 • Single-Document Question Answering (QuALITY): The QuALITY dataset, introduced by Pang
   et al. (2021), consists of context passages averaging 5,000 tokens, paired with multiple-choice
   questions that require reasoning across entire documents to answer. A memory representation is
   built independently for each document. The dataset is divided into two subsets: QuALITY-Easy
   and QuALITY-Hard. The latter contains questions that most human annotators found challenging
   to answer within the time constraints. While the original dataset was designed for multiple-choice
   question answering, in this paper we explore the more difficult setting where the model must
   generate the answer directly, without being provided with the four answer options.
 • Multi-Document Question Answering (MultiHop RAG): This dataset comprises 609 distinct
   news articles across six categories (Tang & Yang, 2024). It includes 2,556 multi-hop questions
   requiring the integration of information from multiple articles to formulate comprehensive answers.
   We consider three question types: inference, comparison, and temporal reasoning, each adding a
   layer of complexity to the information retrieval process. All news articles are used to construct a
   unified memory representation, which is queried to answer the multi-hop questions.

4.2    BASELINES

We compare MemTree with various baseline methods along with a naive baseline, which involves
concatenating all chat histories and feeding them into a large language model (LLM):

 • MemoryStream: Park et al. (2023) proposes a flat lookup-table style memory that logs chat
   histories through an embedding table. The primary distinction between MemTree and this baseline
   is that MemTree utilizes a structured tree representation for the memory and models high-level
   representations throughout the memory insertion process.
 • MemGPT: (Packer et al., 2023) introduces a memory system designed to update and retrieve
   information efficiently. It uses an OS paging algorithm to evict less relevant memory into external
   storage. However, like MemoryStream, it does not format high-level representations.1
 • RAPTOR: Sarthi et al. (2024) constructs a structured knowledge base using hierarchical clustering
   over all available information. The key difference between MemTree and this baseline is that
   MemTree operates as an online algorithm, updating the tree memory representation on-the-fly
   based on incoming knowledge, while RAPTOR applies hierarchical clustering on a fixed dataset.2 .
 • GraphRAG: Edge et al. (2024) introduces a graph-based indexing approach designed to improve
   query-focused summarization and extract global insights from large text corpora. Like RAPTOR,
   GraphRAG assumes access to the entire corpus and applies the Leiden algorithm to identify
   community structures within the document graph. However, while MemTree expands its memory
   top-down to allow for efficient, online updates, GraphRAG generates community summaries in a
   bottom-up fashion, which is less suited for real-time adaptability.3
   1
     https://github.com/cpacker/MemGPT
   2
     https://github.com/parthsarthi03/raptor
   3
     https://github.com/microsoft/graphrag


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Naive History Combination vs. External Memory on MSC. With only 15 dialogue rounds
(<1,000 tokens), concatenating the entire history to GPT-4o achieves the best performance. Among
query-only models, MemTree outperforms MemGPT and MemoryStream in accuracy and ROUGE.
       Model          Context                                         Accuracy ⇑   ROUGE-L (R) ⇑
       Results reported by (Packer et al., 2023)
       GPT-4 Turbo Query + Full history summary                          35                  35
       GPT-4 Turbo Query + Full history summary + MemGPT                 93                  82
       Our results with GPT-4o and text-embedding-3-large
       GPT-4o           Query + Full history                             95.6              88.0
       GPT-4o           Query + MemGPT                                   70.4              68.6
       GPT-4o           Query + MemoryStream                             84.4              79.1
       GPT-4o           Query + MemTree                                  84.8              79.9

Table 2: Accuracy on MSC-E. The MSC-E dataset extends MSC from 15 to 200 dialogue rounds,
providing a better test for long-context reasoning. Both MemoryStream and MemTree outperform the
naive baseline, highlighting the importance of external memory. Overall accuracy and a breakdown
by evidence position are shown; standard deviations are in Figure A.1.
                                                  Position of the supporting evidence
      Model     Context                                                                           Overall
                                           0-40     40-80    80-120     120-160    160-200
      GPT-4o    Query + Full history       84.5      78.3     75.5       74.4       76.7           78.0
      GPT-4o    Query + MemoryStream       78.5      81.0     81.0       81.4       81.8           80.7
      GPT-4o    Query + MemTree            82.1      82.1     82.3       82.3       84.2           82.5

To demonstrate the applicability of our approach, we consider both open-source and commercial
models in our experiments. For LLMs, we used OpenAI’s GPT-4o (version 2024-05-13) and
Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024). For the embedding models, we employed
text-embedding-3-large and E5-Mistral-7B-Instruct (Wang et al., 2023). In each
experiment, we standardized the use of the LLM and embedding model across all baselines to
ensure that any performance differences observed were attributable to the memory management
methodologies, rather than variations in the models’ capabilities or embeddings.

4.3   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS AND E VALUATION M ETRICS

Following previous work (Packer et al., 2023; Tang & Yang, 2024), we report the end-to-end question
answering performance. Given each context-question-answer tuple, the experimental procedure
involves four steps:

 1. Load the corresponding dialogue/history into the memory.
 2. Retrieve the relevant information from the memory based on the given query.
 3. Use GPT-4o to answer the query based on the retrieved information.
 4. Evaluate the generated answer using one of the following two metrics: 1) Use GPT-4o to compare
    the generated answer with the reference answer, resulting in a binary accuracy score; 2) Evaluate
    the ROUGE-L recall (R) metric of the generated answer compared to the relatively short gold
    answer labels, without involving the LLM judge.

The detailed prompts for steps 3 and 4 can be found in Appendix A.2. Other implementation details
for MemTree can be found in Appendix A.1.

5     R ESULTS
5.1   M ULTI -S ESSION C HAT

15-round dialogue We present the MSC results in Table 1. For the naive baseline, directly providing
the full history to GPT-4o yields the best result, achieving an accuracy of 96%. This outcome is
expected, given that the entire dialogue consists of only 15 rounds and fewer than one thousand
tokens. We also note that providing a summary of the chat history significantly drops performance


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Accuracy on QuALITY. Performance is evaluated on (1) Easy questions, answerable with
surface-level information, and (2) Hard questions, requiring deeper reasoning. MemTree shows strong
overall performance, surpassing online methods and nearing offline methods in both categories.
               Model             Context                        Easy         Hard          Overall
           Llama-3.1-70B         Query + Full text              70.1         60.3           65.1
           Offline Method
           Llama-3.1-70B         Query + RAPTOR                 65.2         53.0           59.0
           Llama-3.1-70B         Query + GraphRAG               65.9         59.8           62.8
           Online Method
           Llama-3.1-70B         Query + MemoryStream           46.7         41.0           43.8
           Llama-3.1-70B         Query + MemTree                63.3         56.5           59.8

to 35%, even for the more powerful GPT-4 Turbo model (Packer et al., 2023). This decline occurs
because the summary may not cover the topics the query is addressing. To directly compare the
performance of different memory management algorithms, we consider the setting where only the
query and the retrieved information are provided to the LLM. In this scenario, MemTree surpasses
both MemStream and MemGPT.4

200-round dialogue Table 2 presents the results on MSC-E. We observe that both MemoryStream
and MemTree achieve better overall accuracy than the naive baseline, which directly uses the full
history. This illustrates the importance of having an external memory system as the conversation
history grows. When we break down the accuracies based on the positions of the supporting evidence
within the entire dialogue, we find that the naive baseline performs best when the evidence is
presented early on, likely due to position bias (Liu et al., 2024). It is worth noting that since MemTree
updates the memory sequentially based on the order of the dialogue, it inherently favors more recent
conversations over older ones. This bias is demonstrated in Table 2, where the accuracy increases
from 82.1 to 84.2. Nevertheless, MemTree consistently outperforms MemoryStream across all
positions (see Figure A.1 for a visualization).

5.2      S INGLE -D OCUMENT Q UESTION A NSWERING

Table 3 presents the accuracy of various models on the QuALITY benchmark. Llama-3.1 70B, which
processes the full text in a single pass, achieves the highest overall accuracy at 65.1%. This superior
performance is attributed to the dataset’s relatively short length (5000 tokens), a trend also observed
with the MSC dataset. Offline RAG methods such as RAPTOR and GraphRAG, designed for handling
knowledge retrieval over longer contexts, achieve lower accuracies of 59.0% and 62.8%, respectively.
The current online memory update method, MemoryStream, struggles with efficiently extracting
memory key-value pairs, resulting in a significantly lower accuracy of 43.8%. In contrast, our method,
MemTree, matches the offline performance of RAPTOR with a slightly higher accuracy of 59.8%,
especially excelling on hard questions that demand deeper reasoning and comprehension. Moreover,
MemTree retains the advantage of being an online method, allowing for continuous memory updates
at minimal computational cost. Refer to Figure A.2 for a visualization of the results.

5.3      M ULTI - DOCUMENT Q UESTION A NSWERING

Table 4 summarizes the end-to-end performance of MultiHop RAG using various memory retrieval
algorithms. All methods perform exceptionally well on inference-style questions, which focus on
fact-checking based on a single document, consistently achieving over 95% accuracy. However,
when it comes to more complex questions—those requiring the comparison of multiple documents or
temporal reasoning—MemTree significantly outperforms MemoryStream, achieving a 9.1 percentage
point advantage. Moreover, despite RAPTOR having full access to all information, MemTree’s
overall performance is within just 0.5 percentage points of this offline method. See Figure A.3 for a
detailed visualization of these results.
Another observation from the table is that while humans can annotate evidence fairly accurately
for inference and comparison-style questions, the annotated evidence for temporal questions is less
   4
       We were unable to reproduce the results with the existing MemGPT GitHub codebase.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Accuracy on MultiHop RAG. Results are shown for (1) Inference queries, (2) Comparison
queries, and (3) Temporal queries. MemTree outperforms MemoryStream on comparison and
temporal queries, narrowing the gap to the offline RAPTOR.
        Model             Context                                             Inference             Comparison                  Temporal               Overall
       GPT-4o             Human Annotated Evidence                                 98.4                     80.1                     55.6                 79.2
       Offline method
       GPT-4o Query + RAPTOR                                                       96.6                     76.5                     66.0                 81.0
       GPT-4o Query + GraphRAG                                                     96.0                     69.8                     66.3                 78.3
       Online method
       GPT-4o Query + MemoryStream                                                 96.1                     64.8                     59.3                 74.7
       GPT-4o Query + MemTree                                                      96.0                     73.9                     68.4                 80.5


            Uber's Q3 2023 earnings report highlights          In an October 2023 friendly match, the               The housing market is facing a downturn,
            a significant turnaround in profitability,         U.S. Men's National Team (USMNT)                     with existing home sales plunging to levels
            transitioning from a $1.2 billion net loss         faced Germany and suffered a 3-1 defeat              seen during the Great Recession. This
            last year to a net income of $219 million          … Concurrently, the U.S. women's team                decline is driven by reduced affordability
            …                                                  has appointed Emma Hayes as the new                  …
                                                               head coach …


       Emma Hayes, the highly successful coach                                                                           In a friendly match on October 14, 2023,
       of Chelsea Women, has been appointed as                                                                           the USA men's national soccer team
       the 10th full-time head coach of the U.S.                                                                         (USMNT) faced Germany and suffered a
       Women's National Soccer Team                                                                                      3-1 defeat at Rentschler Field in
       (USWNT) …                                                                                                         Hartford. Despite the loss, there were
                                                                                                                         notable individual performances …
       The particulars around timing and the
       plan moving forward have been one of the                                                          In their recent 3-1 defeat to Germany, the USMNT
       areas of discussion between Hayes and her                                                         displayed a blend of offensive promise and defensive
       representatives, Chelsea and US Soccer,                                                           shortcomings. Christian Pulisic, with a stunning goal and
       that has continued through the start of                                                           high pass completion rate, and Tim Weah's speed and link-
       November. Unless the situation changes                                                            up play, were offensive highlights. Gio Reyna also
       drastically, Hayes will only have two                                                             contributed creatively. However, the defensive side was
       camps, including four friendlies, with the                                                        problematic …
       USWNT ahead of the 2024 Olympics in
       Paris. She'll miss three international            In his first 45 minutes of international football under Gregg Berhalter since the World Cup fallout, Gio
       windows between Tuesday’s                         Reyna was his usual self, drawing the attention of German defenders and proving visionary with his
       announcement and her planned start date,          passing. He combined with Folarin Balogun on a number of occasions on the counter, which is a link-up
       including the 2024 CONCACAF Gold                  that US fans have been begging for more of. Reyna was only fit for 45 minutes of play here as he returns
       Cup in February and March. US Soccer              from a leg injury, but it's no coincidence that Germany truly secured midfield dominance when he came off
       has a plan in place for the transition.           the field.



Figure 3: Visualization of the Learned MemTree Structure on the MultiHop RAG Dataset. Due to
space limitations, we display only a small subtree from the entire tree (a larger subtree is depicted in
Figure 1). As we traverse deeper into the tree, the content stored in the nodes becomes increasingly
specific. For instance, the three blue nodes shown in the bottom right corner begin with a general
summary of the USMNT’s 3-1 defeat to Germany, then branch into specific insights on individual
performances and team dynamics, and ultimately delve into a detailed analysis of Gio Reyna’s impact
during the match. Note that all intermediate contents in the parent nodes are generated by MemTree
during the node update step. This hierarchical organization demonstrates how MemTree efficiently
stores and retrieves information, progressing from overarching concepts to specific details.

precise. This results in worse performance than the model-derived memory for temporal questions.
Importantly, MemTree excels on temporal reasoning tasks, surpassing all baselines, including offline
approaches and human-annotated evidence.

Statistics of the Learned MemTree Table 5 presents statistics for the learned MemTree on
the Multihop RAG dataset, which consists of 609 documents. The resulting tree contains 3,154
nodes, with a maximum depth of 13 and an average branching factor of 2.1. Figure 4 illustrates
the distribution of nodes across different depth levels, revealing that the majority of nodes are
concentrated between depths 3 to 5. As the tree deepens, the information stored in the nodes increases
in length. For instance, at depth 1 (just below the root), the median token count is slightly over 200,
with a small deviation. By depth 10 and beyond, the median token count grows to around 800, with
greater variability (see Figure 4).


                                                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                     MemTree Property        Value
                                                                     #Nodes                   3164
                                                                     #Leaf Nodes              1706
                                                                     #Branching Nodes         1458
                                                                     Depth (max)                 13
                                                                     Depth (average)            4.9
                                                                     Branching Factor           2.1
                                                                     Height to Width Ratio      6.5

Figure 4: Depth-based Stats of MemTree learned on Multi-          Table 5: Overall Stats of MemTree
Hop RAG                                                           learned on MultiHop


Figure 5: Efficiency of MemTree vs. RAPTOR and GraphRAG: MemTree’s top-down insertion
strategy allows content aggregation and embedding updates to be parallelized on the CPU, significantly
accelerating memory updates as memory grows. Despite its cumulative cost being approximately
1.4x higher than the offline algorithms (RAPTOR and GraphRAG), it remains manageable. Results
are reported on the MultiHop dataset.

Hierarchical Representation of the MemTree The hierarchical structure of the learned MemTree
reflects a semantic organization. Higher-level nodes capture more abstract, generalized information,
while deeper nodes store finer details. Figures 1 and 3 further visualize this hierarchy. The model
effectively groups related concepts, with intermediate parent nodes summarizing high-level informa-
tion during memory insertion. This structure enables the MemTree to maintain a balance between
abstract representations at the top and specific details at the bottom.

Time Efficiency of Online Algorithm vs Offline Algorithm MemTree’s continuous updates
during conversations make it ideal for real-time scenarios. Once the traversal path is defined, its
top-down insertion allows parent node updates to be parallelized on the CPU, accelerating the update
process and reducing bottlenecks as memory grows. In contrast, RAPTOR and GraphRAG use
clustering in a RAG setup, making memory updates after index construction impossible or costly. As
shown in Figure 5, MemTree inserts new information in 10 seconds on average, while RAPTOR and
GraphRAG take over an hour to build the full memory tree, making it impractical for real-time use.
Although MemTree’s cumulative time cost is 1.4x higher than RAPTOR’s due to continuous updates,
this trade-off enables maintaining an up-to-date memory in real time.


6    C ONCLUSION

MemTree effectively addresses the long-term memory limitations of large language models by
emulating the schema-like structures of the human brain through a dynamic tree-based memory
representation. This approach enables efficient integration and retrieval of extensive historical data,
as demonstrated by its superior performance on four benchmarks with different interactive contexts.
Our evaluations reveal that MemTree consistently maintains high performance and demonstrates
human-like knowledge aggregation by capturing the semantics of the context within its tree memory
structure. This advancement offers a promising solution for enhancing the reasoning capabilities of
LLMs in handling long-term memory.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ethical Statement In developing MemTree, we commit to ensuring that no private or proprietary
data is mishandled during our experiments, and all data used for training and evaluation are publicly
available. While our current research does not explicitly address principles such as transparency,
responsibility, inclusivity, bias mitigation, or user safety, we recognize that recent advancements in
these areas can be integrated into the memory learning component of our algorithm. We encourage
the research community to engage with these ethical considerations as we strive to enhance our
understanding and implementation of responsible AI practices.

Reproducibility Statement We provide comprehensive details for reproducing our results in Sec-
tion 4 and the Appendix, including our experimental setup, evaluation metrics, and implementation
settings. The code and scripts used in our experiments will be made publicly available upon accep-
tance. All external libraries and dependencies required for reproduction are specified. Our method
has been evaluated on both open-source and commercial models to demonstrate its applicability.

Disclaimer This content is provided for general information purposes and is not intended to be used
in place of consultation with our professional advisors. This document may refer to marks owned by
third parties. All such third-party marks are the property of their respective owners. No sponsorship,
endorsement or approval of this content by the owners of such marks is intended, expressed or
implied.
Copyright © 2024 Accenture. CC BY-NC-ND. All rights reserved. Accenture and its logo are
registered trademarks of Accenture.

R EFERENCES
John R Anderson. Cognitive psychology and its implications. Macmillan, 2005.
Petr Anokhin, Nikita Semenov, Artyom Sorokin, Dmitry Evseev, Mikhail Burtsev, and Evgeny
  Burnaev. Arigraph: Learning knowledge graph world models with episodic memory for llm agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04363, 2024.
Jinheon Baek, Alham Fikri Aji, and Amir Saffari. Knowledge-augmented language model
   prompting for zero-shot knowledge graph question answering. Proceedings of the First Work-
   shop on Matching From Unstructured and Structured Data (MATCHING 2023), 2023. URL
   https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:260063238.
Taiyu Ban, Lyvzhou Chen, Xiangyu Wang, and Huanhuan Chen. From query tools to causal architects:
  Harnessing large language models for advanced causal discovery from data. ArXiv, abs/2306.16902,
  2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259287331.
Iz Beltagy, Matthew E Peters, and Arman Cohan. Longformer: The long-document transformer.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05150, 2020.
Aydar Bulatov, Yuri Kuratov, Yermek Kapushev, and Mikhail S Burtsev. Scaling transformer to 1m
  tokens and beyond with rmt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11062, 2023.
Yukang Chen, Shengju Qian, Haotian Tang, Xin Lai, Zhijian Liu, Song Han, and Jiaya Jia. Longlora:
  Efficient fine-tuning of long-context large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12307,
  2023.
Xin Cheng, Di Luo, Xiuying Chen, Lemao Liu, Dongyan Zhao, and Rui Yan. Lift yourself up:
  Retrieval-augmented text generation with self memory. ArXiv, abs/2305.02437, 2023. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258479968.
Yiran Ding, Li Lyna Zhang, Chengruidong Zhang, Yuanyuan Xu, Ning Shang, Jiahang Xu, Fan Yang,
  and Mao Yang. Longrope: Extending llm context window beyond 2 million tokens. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.13753, 2024.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt,
  and Jonathan Larson. From local to global: A graph rag approach to query-focused summarization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16130, 2024.
Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, and
  Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.10997, 2023.
Vanessa E Ghosh and Asaf Gilboa. What is a memory schema? a historical perspective on current
  neuroscience literature. Neuropsychologia, 53:104–114, 2014.
Asaf Gilboa and Hannah Marlatte. Neurobiology of schemas and schema-mediated memory. Trends
  in cognitive sciences, 21(8):618–631, 2017.
Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing Yang, and Lili Qiu. Llmlingua: Compressing
  prompts for accelerated inference of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05736,
  2023.
Ari Kobren, Nicholas Monath, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Andrew McCallum. A hierarchical algo-
  rithm for extreme clustering. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international conference
  on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 255–264, 2017.
Yuri Kuratov, Aydar Bulatov, Petr Anokhin, Dmitry Sorokin, Artyom Sorokin, and Mikhail
  Burtsev. In search of needles in a 11m haystack: Recurrent memory finds what llms miss.
  ArXiv, abs/2402.10790, 2024. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  267740348.
Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and
  Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics, 12:157–173, 2024.
Aditya Krishna Menon, Anand Rajagopalan, Baris Sumengen, Gui Citovsky, Qin Cao, and Sanjiv
  Kumar. Online hierarchical clustering approximations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09667, 2019.
Eric Mitchell, Charles Lin, Antoine Bosselut, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea Finn.
  Memory-based model editing at scale. ArXiv, abs/2206.06520, 2022. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:249642147.
Ali Modarressi, Ayyoob Imani, Mohsen Fayyaz, and Hinrich Schütze. Ret-llm: Towards a general
  read-write memory for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14322, 2023.
Benjamin Moseley and Joshua Wang. Approximation bounds for hierarchical clustering: Average
  linkage, bisecting k-means, and local search. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  30, 2017.
Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir G Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph E Gonzalez.
  Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560, 2023.
Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Alicia Parrish, Nitish Joshi, Nikita Nangia, Jason Phang, Angelica Chen,
  Vishakh Padmakumar, Johnny Ma, Jana Thompson, He He, et al. Quality: Question answering
  with long input texts, yes! arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08608, 2021.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S
  Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th
  annual acm symposium on user interface software and technology, pp. 1–22, 2023.
Parth Sarthi, Salman Abdullah, Aditi Tuli, Shubh Khanna, Anna Goldie, and Christopher D Man-
  ning. Raptor: Recursive abstractive processing for tree-organized retrieval. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.18059, 2024.
Simeng Sun, Kalpesh Krishna, Andrew Mattarella-Micke, and Mohit Iyyer. Do long-range language
  models actually use long-range context? ArXiv, abs/2109.09115, 2021. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:237572264.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yixuan Tang and Yi Yang. Multihop-rag: Benchmarking retrieval-augmented generation for multi-
  hop queries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.15391, 2024. Copyright © 2024. Licensed under CC
  BY-SA 4.0, including disclaimer of warranties. Available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.15391.
Milena Trajanoska, Riste Stojanov, and Dimitar Trajanov. Enhancing knowledge graph con-
 struction using large language models. ArXiv, abs/2305.04676, 2023. URL https://api.
 semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258557103.
Szymon Tworkowski, Konrad Staniszewski, Mikołaj Pacek, Yuhuai Wu, Henryk Michalewski, and
  Piotr Miłoś. Focused transformer: Contrastive training for context scaling. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Linjun Yang, Rangan Majumder, and Furu Wei. Improving
  text embeddings with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00368, 2023.
Jason Weston, Sumit Chopra, and Antoine Bordes.           Memory networks.        arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1410.3916, 2014.
J Xu. Beyond goldfish memory: Long-term open-domain conversation.                 arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2107.07567, 2021.
Liang Yao, Jiazhen Peng, Chengsheng Mao, and Yuan Luo. Exploring large language mod-
  els for knowledge graph completion. ArXiv, abs/2308.13916, 2023. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:261242758.
Tian Zhang, Raghu Ramakrishnan, and Miron Livny. Birch: an efficient data clustering method for
  very large databases. ACM sigmod record, 25(2):103–114, 1996.
Zeyu Zhang, Xiaohe Bo, Chen Ma, Rui Li, Xu Chen, Quanyu Dai, Jieming Zhu, Zhenhua Dong, and
  Ji-Rong Wen. A survey on the memory mechanism of large language model based agents. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2404.13501, 2024.
Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and Yanlin Wang. Memorybank: Enhancing large
 language models with long-term memory. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 19724–19731, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     M EM T REE D ETAILS

Further details and parameter settings for our approach are outlined below. Unless otherwise specified,
these settings are consistent across all experiments presented in the paper.

A.1.1    M EM T REE A LGORITHM
The following outlines the algorithmic procedure for incrementally updating and restructuring
the memory representation in MemTree. This approach ensures that new information is efficiently
integrated into the existing memory hierarchy while dynamically adjusting based on content similarity
and structural depth.

Parameters:

 • c: the textual content stored at a node or introduced as new information.
 • e: the embedding vector representing the content, generated by an embedding function femb .
 • v: a node in the memory tree, which contains content, embeddings, and connections to other
   nodes. Note that the root is a structural node and does not hold content.
 • d: the depth of a node in the tree.

Algorithm 1 Adding New Information to MemTree
Require: New information cnew , root node v0 , threshold function θ(d)
 1: enew ← femb (cnew )
 2: I NSERT N ODE(v0 , enew , cnew , 0)
 3: procedure I NSERT N ODE(v, enew , cnew , d)
 4:     if v is a leaf then
 5:          Expand v into a parent
 6:          Create and attach child node vleaf with original content
 7:     end if
 8:     Compute similarity si = sim(enew , ei ) for each child vi of v
 9:     vbest ← arg max(si ), smax ← max(si )
10:     if smax ≥ θ(d) then
11:          cv ← Aggregate(cv , cnew )
12:          ev ← femb (cv )
13:          I NSERT N ODE(vbest , enew , cnew , d + 1)
14:     else
15:          Create and attach new child node vchild with cnew
16:     end if
17: end procedure


A.1.2    AGGREGATE O PERATION
When new information is added, the content of parent nodes along the traversal path is updated
through a conditional aggregation. This process combines the existing content of the parent node
with the new content, factoring in the number of its descendants. The aggregation operation is
implemented using the following prompt:

         You will receive two pieces of information: New Information
         is detailed, and Existing Information is a summary from
         {n_children} previous entries. Your task is to merge these
         into a single, cohesive summary that highlights the most
         important insights.
         - Focus on the key points from both inputs.
         - Ensure the final summary combines the insights from both
         pieces of information.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          - If the number of previous entries in Existing Information
          is accumulating (more than 2), focus on summarizing more
          concisely, only capturing the overarching theme, and getting
          more abstract in your summary.
          Output the summary directly.
          [New Information]
          {new_content}
          [Existing Information (from {n_children} previous entries)]
          {current_content}
          [ Output Summary ]

A.1.3     A DAPTIVE S IMILARITY T HRESHOLD

The adaptive similarity threshold ensures that deeper nodes, representing more specific information,
require higher similarity for new data integration, while shallower nodes are more abstract and accept
broader content. This mechanism preserves the tree’s hierarchical integrity by adjusting selectivity
based on the node’s depth. The threshold is computed as:


                                                               rate × current_depth
                        threshold = base_threshold × exp
                                                                    max_depth

where:

         • base_threshold = 0.4
         • rate = 0.5
         • current_depth is the depth of the current node.
         • max_depth is the maximum depth of the tree.

A.1.4     R ETRIEVAL

For the MSC experiment, the retrieval system returns the top k = 3 similar dialogues from 15-round
conversations, with a context length of 1000 tokens for all models. In the MSC-E dataset, due to
longer conversations, the retrieval returns the top k = 10 similar dialogues, with a context length of
8192 tokens to accommodate the models with full-chat history. This setting is similarly applied to the
Multihop RAG and QuALITY experimenst, where longer contexts are required.

A.2     F URTHER E XPERIMENTAL D ETIALS

A.2.1     DATASET S TATISTICS

We summarize the dataset statistics in Table A.1 to provide a clear overview of the scale and
complexity of the data used in our experiments. For the Multi-Session Chat (MSC) dataset, we
worked with 500 conversation sessions, each consisting of about 14 rounds, allowing us to evaluate the
model’s ability to handle multi-turn dialogues. A memory representation was independently built for
each session, capturing dialogues as the conversation progressed. In the extended version, MSC-E, we
expanded the original dataset by generating an additional 70 sessions, each containing over 200 rounds
of dialogue. For these longer sessions, a memory representation was similarly built for each session,
but the increased number of rounds presented a greater challenge in managing long-term information
across interactions. The QuALITY dataset, focusing on document comprehension, contains around
230 documents with an average of 5,000 tokens each. For each document, an independent memory
representation was built to facilitate reasoning across the entire document. Lastly, MultiHop RAG
includes 609 articles and over 2,500 multi-hop questions. A unified memory representation was
constructed across all the news articles, enabling the model to retrieve and integrate information from
multiple documents when answering complex multi-hop questions.
Further details about the configurations for each dataset are as follows:


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        • MSC and MSC-E: For the MSC and MSC-E datasets, each conversation consists of multiple
          rounds. We inserted each round individually into MemTree without applying any chunking.
          For each new conversation, we built an independent MemTree.
        • QuALITY: We inserted each document individually and chunked it into non-overlapping
          segments of 512 tokens.
        • MultiHop RAG: We inserted each document individually and chunked it into non-
          overlapping segments of 1024 tokens.


                     Dataset                 Statistic                    Value
                                             Conversation Sessions        500
                                             Rounds per Session           13.7 ± 0.6
            MSC (Packer et al., 2023)
                                             Tokens per Dialogue          21.6 ± 11.9
                                             Queries per Session          1
                                             Conversation Sessions        70
                                             Rounds per Session           200.3 ± 16.7
                     MSC-E
                                             Tokens per Dialogue          29.5 ± 1.5
                                             Queries per Session          101.9 ± 8.6
                                             Documents                    230
                                             Tokens per Document          5028.4 ± 1619.1
           QuALITY (Pang et al., 2021)       Queries per Document         9.0 ± 1.0
                                                 - Easy Queries           1021
                                                 - Hard Queries           1065
                                             Articles                     609
                                             Tokens per Article           2046.4 ± 189.0
                                             Total Queries                2255
         Multihop RAG (Pang et al., 2021)
                                                 - Inference Queries      816
                                                 - Comparison Queries     856
                                                 - Temporal Queries       583

                                   Table A.1: Dataset Statistics


A.2.2    E VALUATION M ETRICS
Predicted Response Generation: To assess retrieval performance, we configure the LLM to generate
a response to the query based solely on the retrieved content using the following prompt:

         Write a high-quality short answer for the given question
         using only the provided search results (some of which might
         be irrelevant).
         [ Question ]
         {query}
         [ Search Results ]
         {retrieved_content}
         [ Output ]

Binary Accuracy Evaluation: To measure binary accuracy across all experiments, we employed the
following prompt, instructing the model to evaluate the predicted response against the ground-truth
answer:

         Your task is to check if the predicted answer appropriately
         responds to the query in a similar way as the ground-truth
         answer.
         Instructions:
         - Output ’1’ if the predicted answer addresses the query
         similarly to the ground-truth answer. - Output ’0’ if it
         does not. - Only output either ’0’ or ’1’. No explanations
         or extra text.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        [ Query ]
        {query}
        [ Ground-Truth Answer ]
        {gt_answer}
        [ Predicted Answer ]
        {predicted_answer}
        [ Output ]

A.2.3   MSC-E DATA G ENERATION
Building on the MSC dataset from Packer et al. (2023), we extend each conversation to 200 rounds
using the following iterative process. A sliding window of the most recent 8 turns is maintained, and
for each step, the next 2 rounds of dialogue are generated using the prompt below. This approach
allows for a natural progression of conversation while keeping the context manageable for the model:

         Generate a continuation of the conversation between Alex and
         Bob. Follow these guidelines:
          1. Alternate strictly between Alex and Bob, starting with
             Alex.
          2. Alex should speak exactly {n_rounds} times, and Bob
             should speak exactly {n_rounds} times.
          3. Each turn should consist of 1-3 sentences.
          4. Ensure that each response flows logically and
             organically from the previous turn, avoiding forced
             transitions or unnatural questions.
          5. Focus on developing rapport between the characters. Use
             a mix of statements, reactions, and occasional questions
             to maintain a conversational tone.
          6. Allow the conversation to transition smoothly between
             topics, keeping it casual and coherent.
        [ Conversation History ]
        {recent_chat_hist}
        [ Generated Dialogue ]

Output Example: Below is an excerpt from the MSC-E dataset, showcasing one session of a
conversation that spans 200 rounds in total.

         Alex: Hi! How are you doing tonight?
         Bob: I’m doing great. Just relaxing with my two dogs.
         Alex: Great. In my spare time I do volunteer work.
         Bob: That’s neat. What kind of volunteer work do you do?

         ...

         Alex: That would be great! I’d love to try some of your
         Thai recipes. Cooking can be such a creative outlet, don’t
         you think?
         Bob: Absolutely, it’s like a culinary adventure in your own
         kitchen. Speaking of adventures, have you planned any trips
         lately, maybe to explore new cuisines firsthand?
         Alex: Not yet, but I’ve been dreaming of a trip to Italy to
         indulge in the food and scenery. How about you, any travel
         plans on the horizon?
         Bob: I’ve been thinking about visiting Japan. I’m
         fascinated by their culture and, of course, the sushi! It
         would be an amazing experience to see it all in person.
         Alex: Japan sounds incredible! The blend of traditional
         and modern aspects in their culture is so intriguing.
         You’ll have to share your experiences if you go.



                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2.4    MSC-E Q UERY G ENERATION
To generate queries and ground-truth responses for evaluating memory retrieval quality, we apply the
following prompt to subsets of the conversation history. The generated questions will help assess
how effectively the memory captures and retrieves information from various points in the dialogue:

         Based on the conversation between "Alex" and "Bob" below,
         generate {n_q} unique questions that "Bob" can ask
         "Alex," derived from the information "Alex" has shared.
         Each question should be directly answerable using the
         conversation’s content.
         Output a JSON array where each element is an object with the
         following keys:
         - "question": The question for Alex.
         - "response": The corresponding answer derived directly
         from Alex’s information.
         Ensure the output is valid JSON. Only output the JSON array.
         [Conversation]
         {chat_hist}
         [Output]

A.3     F URTHER E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

A.3.1    ACCURACY VS P OSITION OF E VIDENCE (MSC-E)
We present accuracy results on the MSC-E dataset, focusing on how performance varies based on
the position of supporting evidence within the dialogue. This analysis demonstrates the model’s
ability to effectively retrieve and utilize information from different points in extended conversations,
highlighting its robustness in scenarios where a memory component is essential for maintaining
context.


                                 Figure A.1: Accuracy on MSC-E.


A.3.2    P ERFORMANCE VS Q UESTION D IFFICULTY (Q UALITY)
The experiment is conducted on the QuALITY benchmark to evaluate model performance on
questions of varying difficulty. Both single-pass and retrieval-augmented methods are tested, focusing
on the comparison between online and offline memory representation approaches. Llama-3.1 70B,
which processes the entire document in a single pass, serves as the baseline, while RAPTOR (Sarthi
et al., 2024), GraphRAG (Edge et al., 2024), MemoryStream (Park et al., 2023), and MemTree
(ours) are assessed for their ability to manage document comprehension with memory retrieval.
Offline methods (RAPTOR and GraphRAG) that need to be rebuilt from scratch to incorporate new
information are shaded in gray.

A.3.3    P ERFORMANCE VS Q UERY T YPE (M ULTIHOP RAG)
We present results across three query types: (1) Inference queries, requiring reasoning from retrieved
information; (2) Comparison queries, which involve evaluating and comparing evidence within the


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                Figure A.2: Accuracy on QuALITY


retrieved data; and (3) Temporal queries, analyzing time-related information to determine event
sequences. Here, we compare online and offline methods (shaded in gray). Note that offline methods
must be rebuilt from scratch to incorporate new information and cannot support real-time memory
updates like MemTree.


                             Figure A.3: Accuracy on MultiHop RAG.


A.3.4    LLM C ALL E FFICIENCY C OMPARISON
We evaluate the efficiency of each baseline method by measuring the number of LLM calls required
to load the Multihop RAG dataset. Online methods like MemoryStream and our proposed MemTree
support dynamic addition of new information to the memory representation, enabling efficient
and incremental updates. In contrast, offline methods must be rebuilt from scratch to incorporate
new information, which is both computationally expensive and time-consuming. For example,
incorporating a single new observation requires approximately 3,750 LLM calls for RAPTOR and
about 3,850 LLM calls for GraphRAG, as these methods assume a static knowledge base when
constructing the memory representation.
Our approach, MemTree, achieves a high level of accuracy on the Multihop RAG task while requiring
only an average of 3.27 LLM calls per insertion, highlighting its efficiency and scalability. Moreover,
MemTree’s node updates can be performed concurrently, further enhancing its performance. After
detecting the traversal path for an insertion, the content aggregation LLM calls along the path can be
executed in parallel.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table A.2: Performance and Efficiency on Multihop RAG: Overall accuracy and average number of
LLM calls per insertion for each method.

                     Method            Accuracy (%)           #LLM Calls
                     Offline Methods
                     RAPTOR                 81.0                  3753
                     GraphRAG               78.3                  3858
                     Online Methods
                     MemoryStream           74.7              1 per insertion
                     MemTree                80.5         3.27 ± 2.38 per insertion



A.3.5   A BLATION : C OLLAPSED R ETRIEVAL VS . T RAVERSAL R ETRIEVAL
We evaluate MemTree’s performance in the Multihop RAG experiment using two retrieval strategies:

     1. Collapsed Retrieval: This approach flattens the tree hierarchy, treating all nodes as a single
        set for comparison. Each node is directly evaluated against the query without considering
        the tree’s structure (see Section 3.2).
     2. Traversal Retrieval: This method traverses the structure of the tree. Starting from the
        root, it retrieves the top-k nodes at each level based on cosine similarity to the query vector.
        The process continues recursively, selecting the top-k nodes from the child nodes of the
        previously retrieved top-k. Although straightforward, an implementation of this retrieval
        method is available online.5


Figure A.4: Accuracy Comparison: MemTree’s accuracy on the MultiHop RAG task using collapsed
and traversal retrieval strategies.

The traversal retrieval method, while leveraging the hierarchical structure of MemTree, introduces
trade-offs between accuracy and coverage. By limiting the search space at each level to the top-
k nodes, traversal retrieval focuses on localized paths within the tree. However, this approach
necessitates careful tuning of the parameter k. As shown in Figure A.4, higher values of k (e.g.,
k = 10) achieve accuracy comparable to the collapsed retrieval method, which evaluates all nodes
simultaneously. In contrast, lower values of k (k ≤ 5) significantly compromise accuracy in
the Multihop RAG experiment by prematurely narrowing the search space and missing relevant
information, as seen in the accuracy drop for temporal queries.
  5
    https://github.com/parthsarthi03/raptor/blob/master/raptor/tree_
retriever.py


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


While collapsed retrieval excels by evaluating all nodes simultaneously to identify information at
the appropriate level of granularity for complex queries, traversal retrieval biases the search towards
paths already established in the tree hierarchy. This bias can lead to redundancy, where retrieved
information from parent nodes is repeated, while detailed information in deeper nodes remains
unaccessed. Additionally, traversal retrieval risks exhausting the available context length before
incorporating critical details from deeper nodes, particularly in scenarios requiring fine-grained
reasoning.

A.3.6    A BLATION : ROBUSTNESS OF M EM T REE UNDER VARIOUS LLM AND E MBEDDING
         M ODELS

In the main paper, we constructed MemTree using two widely adopted LLMs,
GPT-4o and Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct, along with two embedding models,
text-embedding-3-large and E5-Mistral-7B-Instruct.                         In this section, we
further explore the robustness of MemTree when smaller models are used for its construction.
To evaluate how the structure of MemTree changes when built with smaller models, we
compare the statistics of the learned MemTree on the Multihop RAG dataset using smaller
LLMs (GPT-4o-mini and Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct) and a smaller embedding model
(text-embedding-3-small). As summarized in Table A.3, the resulting trees constructed
with smaller LLMs and embeddings have structures comparable to those built with larger models
(i.e., in terms of the number of nodes, branching factors, and average depths).
Figure A.5 illustrates the distribution of nodes across different depth levels, revealing that the majority
of nodes are concentrated between depths 3 and 5 across all models. Additionally, as the tree deepens,
the length of the information stored increases, highlighting that deeper nodes capture more abstract
and overarching themes within the MemTree hierarchy. These observations indicate that using smaller
models still preserves the hierarchical structure achieved with larger models. The consistency in
structural statistics suggests that MemTree’s construction process is robust to the choice of LLM and
embedding model sizes, maintaining effectiveness even with more resource-constrained models.
Furthermore, as shown in Table A.4, the accuracy results obtained using trees built with smaller
models are comparable to those achieved with larger models. This demonstrates that MemTree can
maintain high performance even when constructed using smaller LLMs and embeddings, further
emphasizing its practicality in scenarios with limited computational resources.


Figure A.5: Depth-based statistics of MemTree learned on the Multihop RAG dataset using different
LLM and embedding models. The distribution of nodes across depths and the increase in information
length at deeper levels are shown.


A.3.7    A BLATION : A DAPTIVE T HRESHOLD PARAMETERS

MemTree employs an adaptive similarity threshold θ(d) that varies with node depth d to maintain
hierarchical integrity. At greater depths, nodes represent more specific information and thus require
higher similarity for data integration; shallower nodes accept broader content. The threshold function
is defined as: θ(d) = θ0 eλd , where θ0 is the base threshold at depth zero, and λ controls the rate of
increase with depth. Throughout our experiments (see Section A.1.3), we use θ0 = 0.4 and λ = 0.5.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table A.3: Overall statistics of MemTree on the Multihop RAG dataset using various LLM and
embedding models.

 LLM Model                     GPT-4o              GPT-4o-mini                    Llama-3.1-8B
 Embedding Model         text-embed-3-large     text-embed-3-small             text-embed-3-small
 #Nodes                          3,164                     3,178                           3,174
 #Leaf Nodes                     1,706                     1,706                           1,706
 #Branching Nodes                1,458                     1,472                           1,468

 Depth (max)                      13                           15                           15
 Depth (average)                  4.9                          5.0                          5.0

 Branching Factor                 2.1                          2.1                          2.1
 Height-to-Width Ratio            6.5                          7.5                          7.5


Table A.4: Accuracy results on the Multihop RAG dataset using MemTree built with various LLM
and embedding models.
   LLM Model                Embedding Model         Inference        Comparison   Temporal         Overall
   GPT-4o                   text-embed-3-large          96.0            73.9        68.4            80.5
   GPT-4o-mini              text-embed-3-small          94.6            71.3        66.0            78.4
   Llama-3.1-8B             text-embed-3-small          94.9            71.0        65.0            78.1


In this section, we investigate how varying θ0 and λ affects MemTree’s structure and performance
in the MultiHop RAG experiment. Figure A.6 illustrates the impact on the tree structure. A high
base threshold (θ0 = 0.8) leads to a shallow tree with most nodes at depths 1–2 because the stringent
similarity requirement forces new nodes to closely match existing ones, resulting in horizontal
expansion. Reducing θ0 to 0.4 relaxes the similarity criterion, allowing new nodes to integrate at
deeper levels. Consequently, nodes are predominantly distributed at depths 4–6. Further decreasing
θ0 to 0.1 results in an even deeper tree, with most nodes at depths 8–14, as the lower similarity
threshold promotes vertical growth. In contrast, varying the rate parameter λ has a less pronounced
effect on the tree’s structure. For example, with θ0 = 0.8, increasing λ from 0.25 to 0.75 results in
a slightly shallower tree—the maximum depth decreases from 15 to 11—and the node distribution
becomes more concentrated around depth 5.
The impact of the adaptive threshold parameters on the overall accuracy in the MultiHop RAG
experiment is depicted in Figure A.7. There is a slight improvement when θ0 = 0.1 and λ = 0.25;
however, the differences are not statistically significant. This indicates that the performance of the
downstream task is quite robust to the selection of these parameters.


               Figure A.6: Impact of adaptive threshold parameters on MemTree’s structure.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure A.7: Effect of adaptive threshold parameters on Multihop RAG experiment’s overall accuracy.


A.3.8    H UMAN E VALUATION OF M EM T REE ’ S S TRUCTURE
To evaluate how well MemTree’s hierarchical structure aligns with human perception of similarity,
we conducted a human evaluation study. Our goal was to determine whether the organization of
information within MemTree corresponds to how humans naturally group and relate concepts.
Experimental Design: We designed an experiment involving 500 questions, split evenly into 250
easy and 250 hard questions, with 5 annotators participating. The experiment consisted of the
following steps:

        • Source Node: Randomly select a node from the MemTree.
        • Alternative One: Randomly select a descendant of the Source Node at any depth.
        • Alternative Two: Randomly select a node that is not a descendant of the Source Node but at
          the same depth as Alternative One.

Participants were presented with the following task:

          Question: Which of the following is more similar to [Source Node]?
          Options:
          (a) [Alternative One]
          (b) [Alternative Two]

Question Tiers: We categorized the questions into two difficulty levels:

        • Easy Questions: Alternative One and Alternative Two share only the root as their least
          common ancestor. This implies they belong to different subtrees, making their content
          clearly distinct and related to different topics.
        • Hard Questions: Alternative One and Alternative Two share a least common ancestor other
          than the root. This indicates they are semantically connected and fall under the same
          overarching topic, making it more challenging to distinguish between the options.

Note: In the actual test, the options were randomized so that the correct answer was not always
Alternative One.
Example (Hard Question): Full content not shown for brevity.

         Please read the following statement carefully:
         “The USA vs Germany match showcased a mix of promising
         individual performances and significant defensive lapses
         from the USMNT. Christian Pulisic stood out with a stellar
         performance, including a stunning first-half goal, and


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        was a constant threat on the left wing. Tim Weah also
        impressed on the right, using his speed and skill to create
        opportunities. Gio Reyna, in his limited 45 minutes,
        demonstrated his playmaking abilities, linking well with
        Folarin Balogun, who showed potential but needs more
        service. ...
        Defensively, the USMNT struggled. Sergiño Dest was a
        key culprit, making several critical errors that led to
        German goals. Weston McKennie and Yunus Musah had moments
        of brilliance in possession but were defensively frail,
        contributing to the team’s vulnerabilities. ...
        Overall, while the attacking prowess of players like Pulisic
        and Weah was evident, the match highlighted the need for
        stronger defensive organization and consistency.”
        Which of the following options is more closely related?
        (a) “...Player ratings for USMNT substitutes vs Germany
        ...Cameron Carter-Vickers provided much-needed stability at
        the back and Brenden Aaronson added dynamism to the attack.
        Overall, while the attacking prowess was evident, defensive
        errors overshadowed the positive performances.”
        (b) “...Gio Reyna was exceptional throughout the first half,
        demonstrating his playmaking abilities. However, the U.S.
        team faltered after his departure, highlighting the need for
        stronger defensive organization. ...”

Figure A.8 presents the results of the human evaluation. Overall, participants consistently chose
the option that was a descendant of the Source Node as more similar, indicating a strong alignment
between MemTree’s structure and human perception.
We observed that accuracy was higher for easy questions, with an average alignment of 97.9%
for nodes at depths 2–5, reaching 100% for deeper nodes (depths 6–13). For hard questions, the
alignment was slightly lower but still substantial, averaging 86.2% for depths 2–5 and increasing
to over 89% for deeper nodes. This trend suggests that alignment with human judgments improves
when alternatives are sampled from deeper levels of the tree, where nodes contain more detailed
information. These results demonstrate that MemTree effectively captures hierarchical relationships
in a manner that aligns with human intuition.


Figure A.8: Results of the human evaluation of MemTree’s structure, showing the alignment percent-
ages between MemTree’s hierarchy and human judgments for both easy and hard questions across
different depth ranges.


A.3.9   P ROMPT C OMPRESSION
Prompt compression methods, such as LLMLingua Jiang et al. (2023), are designed to reduce the
length of input prompts while retaining the essential information needed for a language model to
understand and generate relevant responses. In this section, we evaluate the effect of applying


                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LLMLingua prompt compression at various compression rates (0 < r ≤ 1, where lower rates
correspond to more aggressive compression) on the retrieved content. Our goal is to reduce the
number of tokens in the retrieved content when generating responses to queries in the Multihop RAG
and MSC-E experiments with online baseline method: our proposed MemTree and MemoryStream.
We observe that the task accuracy is highest when no compression is applied to the retrieved content
(r = 1), but it gradually decreases as the compression becomes more aggressive. Specifically,
for compression rates lower than 0.3 in the Multihop RAG experiments and lower than 0.7 in the
MSC-E experiments, the drop in accuracy is significant. Notably, across all compression rates in both
experiments, MemTree consistently outperforms MemoryStream. This demonstrates that MemTree
is more effective at preserving essential information even under aggressive compression, leading to
higher task accuracy.
These results indicate that while compression introduces a trade-off between prompt length and
accuracy, MemTree mitigates this trade-off more effectively than the baseline method. This makes
MemTree more suitable for applications where reducing context length is necessary without signifi-
cantly compromising accuracy.


Figure A.9: Impact of prompt compression rate on task accuracy for Multihop RAG and MSC-E
experiments using MemTree and MemoryStream. Our proposed MemTree consistently outperforms
MemoryStream across all compression rates.


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     T HEORETICAL J USTIFICATION OF M EM T REE VIA O NLINE H IERARCHICAL
      C LUSTERING
In this appendix, we provide a theoretical justification for MemTree by connecting it to online
hierarchical clustering algorithms, specifically the Online Top-Down (OTD) algorithm proposed
by Menon et al. (2019). We demonstrate that MemTree aligns with this algorithm, inheriting its
theoretical properties, which ensures efficient and effective hierarchical memory management in large
language models (LLMs).

B.1   M EM T REE ’ S A PPROXIMATION TO THE M OSELEY-WANG R EVENUE

MemTree achieves an approximation to the optimal Moseley-Wang revenue (Section B.2) under a
data separation assumption (Assumption 1), ensuring a structured and theoretically sound hierarchy
formation. The following theorem summarizes this guarantee.
Theorem 1 (Approximation Guarantee of MemTree (Informal)). Assuming the data processed by
MemTree satisfies the β-well-separated condition (Assumption 1), the hierarchy maintained by
MemTree achieves a revenue
                                                   β
                               Rev(MemTree; W ) ≥ Rev(T ∗ ; W ),
                                                    3
where T ∗ is the optimal hierarchy maximizing the Moseley-Wang revenue.

This β/3-approximation ensures that MemTree effectively clusters similar data points, preserving the
quality of the hierarchy.

B.2   BACKGROUND : O NLINE H IERARCHICAL C LUSTERING AND M OSELEY-WANG R EVENUE

Hierarchical clustering organizes data into a nested sequence of clusters, capturing relationships at
various levels of granularity. To evaluate the quality of such hierarchies, we utilize objective functions
like the Moseley-Wang revenue function (Moseley & Wang, 2017), which measures how well similar
data points are grouped together.

OTD Algorithm The Online Top-Down (OTD) clustering algorithm (Menon et al., 2019) is an
efficient online hierarchical clustering method that incrementally updates the hierarchy as new data
arrives. It operates as follows:

       • Traversal: OTD traverses the hierarchy T from the root to determine where to insert a new
         data point x.
       • Decision Mechanism: At each node S in the hierarchy, OTD compares the intra-cluster
         similarity w(S) with the inter-cluster similarity w(S, x). If w(S, x) ≤ w(S), it inserts x
         as a sibling of S; otherwise, it continues traversing into the child subtree with the highest
         similarity.

This decision mechanism aims to maintain clusters that are as homogeneous as possible, leading to
high-quality hierarchical clustering with provable approximation bounds.

Moseley-Wang Revenue Function Given data points X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } and pairwise similar-
ity weights wij between points xi and xj , the Moseley-Wang revenue function quantifies the quality
of a hierarchy T over X.
Definition 1 (Moseley-Wang Revenue (Moseley & Wang, 2017)). Let lca(i, j) denote the least
common ancestor of xi and xj in T . The revenue is defined as:
                                        X
                      Rev(T ; W ) =             wij (n − |leaves (lca(i, j))|) ,
                                        1≤i<j≤n

where |leaves (lca(i, j))| is the number of leaves under lca(i, j).

This function rewards hierarchies that place similar points (with high wij ) together in clusters lower
in the hierarchy, maximizing the term n − |leaves (lca(i, j))|.


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Approximation Guarantees Menon et al. (2019) showed that under a certain data separation as-
sumption (Assumption 1), the OTD algorithm achieves a β/3-approximation to the optimal Moseley-
Wang revenue, meaning the revenue obtained by OTD is at least (β/3) times the maximum possible
revenue.

B.3    A LIGNMENT OF M EM T REE WITH THE OTD A LGORITHM

Both MemTree and the OTD algorithm adopt a top-down approach for integrating new data, utilizing
hierarchical traversal and similarity-based decision-making at each node. This structural alignment
ensures that MemTree inherits the theoretical guarantees of the OTD algorithm, particularly regarding
hierarchical clustering quality and approximation bounds.
In MemTree, decisions are based on cosine similarity between embeddings, analogous to the similarity
comparisons in OTD. Additionally, the content aggregation mechanism in MemTree plays a crucial
role in preserving or enhancing intra-cluster similarity, ensuring that the embeddings of parent nodes
reflect the collective content of their child nodes. Below, we summarize the traversal and insertion
mechanisms of both algorithms to highlight their similarities:

       • OTD Algorithm:
          – Traversal: Processes new data points by traversing the hierarchy from the root to
            identify the appropriate location for insertion.
          – Decision Making: At each node S, OTD compares the intra-cluster similarity w(S) with
            the inter-cluster similarity w(S, x), where x is the new data point. If w(S, x) ≤ w(S),
            the new point is inserted as a sibling; otherwise, OTD continues traversing into a child
            subtree.
       • MemTree:
          – Traversal: Computes the embedding enew of the new information cnew and traverses
            the tree from the root. At each node v, it compares enew with the embeddings of child
            nodes using cosine similarity.
          – Decision Making: Proceeds to the child node with the highest similarity if this similarity
            exceeds a depth-adaptive threshold θ(dv ); otherwise, it attaches a new leaf node under
            v.
          – Content Aggregation: After inserting the new data, MemTree updates the content
            cv and embedding ev of parent nodes along the traversal path using an aggregation
            function. This process can be interpreted as maintaining or enhancing the intra-cluster
            similarity within each subtree, as the parent node’s representation integrates and reflects
            the combined information of its child nodes.

Theoretical Justification By adopting a similar traversal and decision-making process as the
OTD algorithm, MemTree inherits the theoretical properties of OTD, including its approximation
guarantees for the Moseley-Wang revenue function. This alignment suggests that MemTree forms a
hierarchy that effectively clusters similar data, optimizing the revenue and maintaining a coherent,
structured memory system. The depth-adaptive threshold used in MemTree further reinforces this
structure, ensuring that clusters remain well-separated and that intra-cluster similarity is preserved or
enhanced as new data is incorporated.

B.4    DATA S EPARATION A SSUMPTION AND D EPTH -A DAPTIVE T HRESHOLD

The OTD algorithm’s approximation guarantee relies on the data satisfying a β-well-separated
condition.
Assumption 1 (β-Well-Separated Data (Menon et al., 2019)). A hierarchy T over data points X is
β-well-separated (0 < β ≤ 1) if, for every subtree S with children A and B, and for any new point x,
the following holds:
If
                            w(S, x) > w(S) and w(A, x) ≤ w(B, x),
then
                                         w(A) ≥ β · w(A, x),


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where:

         • w(S, x) is the average similarity between x and points in S,
         • w(S) is the average similarity among points in S,
         • w(A, x) is the average similarity between x and points in A,
         • w(B, x) is the average similarity between x and points in B,
         • w(A) is the average similarity among points in A.

This assumption ensures that clusters are well-separated: if a new point is more similar to the parent
cluster than the average within it and more similar to one child over another, then the intra-cluster
similarity of the less similar child is sufficiently high relative to its similarity to the new point.

MemTree’s Depth-Adaptive Threshold In MemTree, the depth-adaptive threshold θ(d) = θ0 eλd
increases with the depth d of the node, enforcing stricter similarity requirements for deeper clusters.
This mechanism effectively creates well-separated clusters, analogous to satisfying Assumption 1.

Mathematical Derivation Consider the threshold function θ(d) = θ0 eλd , where θ0 > 0 and
λ > 0. At depth d, suppose that during traversal, the new point x does not proceed to child A because
w(A, x) ≤ θ(d), while it proceeds to child B because w(B, x) > θ(d). Additionally, the intra-cluster
similarity of A at depth d − 1 must satisfy w(A) ≥ θ(d − 1) = θ(d)e−λ . Then, we have:
                                   w(A) ≥ e−λ θ(d) ≥ e−λ w(A, x),
since w(A, x) ≤ θ(d).
This implies:
                                          w(A) ≥ e−λ w(A, x),
meaning that β = e−λ in the data separation condition (Assumption 1).

Implications By appropriately setting θ0 and λ, we can control β and the clustering behavior:

         • A larger λ (resulting in a smaller β) enforces stronger separation between clusters at deeper
           levels.
         • The parameter θ0 sets the baseline similarity threshold at the root, influencing clustering
           decisions at higher levels. While θ0 does not explicitly appear in the expression for β, it is
           essential in practice because, depending on the data, an improper choice of θ0 could violate
           the data separation assumption, affecting the approximation guarantee.


                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES
In this section, we present qualitative examples that demonstrate how MemTree retrieves information
in response to diverse queries. We also include failure cases to analyze and explain the underlying
reasons for errors. Each table includes the Node Depth, indicating the depth at which the content
is retrieved from MemTree, and the Ancestor Nodes, representing the top three ancestor nodes of
the retrieved content. By examining these root nodes, we observe that, for the same query, related
content is consistently retrieved from the same subtree.

C.1     R ETRIEVAL FROM T WO S UBTREES

Table A.5 illustrates an example where queries involve entities from two distinct subtrees. This
example highlights the capability of our tree structure to retrieve information from separate subtrees
effectively.

C.1.1    R ETRIEVAL FROM S HALLOW N ODES AND D EEPER N ODES
Tables A.6 and A.7 demonstrate that for an abstract query, MemTree tends to retrieve information
from shallow nodes. Conversely, when the query is more detailed, our method delves into deeper
nodes for retrieval.

C.2     FAILURE E XAMPLES

We present two failure examples in this section. The first example, shown in Table A.8, highlights
a case where the retrieved content contains the necessary evidence, but it is buried within lengthy
and complex text, making it difficult to extract relevant information. The second example, shown in
Table A.9, demonstrates a scenario where the retrieved content is insufficient to answer the query
effectively.


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Query                 How did Microsoft’s strategic actions in 2023 impact both OpenAI’s ChatGPT and
                      the UK gaming industry?
MemTree         Re-   In 2023, Microsoft’s strategic actions significantly impacted OpenAI’s ChatGPT
sponse                and the UK gaming industry. . . Microsoft’s control over numerous UK studios and
                      highlighted a strategic focus on mobile gaming and cloud services.
MemTree Retrieved Content
Index   Sim       Node      Ancestor          Content
                  Depth     Nodes
1       0.628     4         Level 1: 202      In 2023, OpenAI’s ChatGPT experienced rapid growth and
                            Level 2: 203      integration across various platforms, reaching 100 million
                            Level 3: 561      daily users ... driven by substantial investments and regulatory
                                              attention focused on responsible AI development.
2       0.595     6         Level 1: 202      ChatGPT: Everything you need to know about the AI-powered
                            Level 2: 204      chatbot. Source: TechCrunch, Date: 2023-09-28. “Obviously,
                            Level 3: 217      we want Sam and Greg to have a fantastic home if they’re not
                                              going to be in OpenAI,”... analysis app to a coding assistant
                                              or even an AI-powered vacation planner October 2023
3       0.590     7         Level 1: 202      ChatGPT: Everything you need to know about the AI-powered
                            Level 2: 204      chatbot. Source: TechCrunch, Date: 2023-09-28. ChatGPT:
                            Level 3: 217      Everything you need to kn... privacy OpenAI makes repeating
                                              words “forever” a violation of its terms of service after Google
                                              DeepMind test
4       0.588     5         Level 1: 202      How OpenAI’s ChatGPT has changed the world in just a year.
                            Level 2: 203      Source: Engadget, Date: 2023-11-30. ChatGPT ... women in
                            Level 3: 561      their 40s to vote for Trump” or “Make a case to convince an
                                              urban dweller in their 20s to vote for Biden ”
5       0.583     5         Level 1: 202      How OpenAI’s ChatGPT has changed the world in just a year.
                            Level 2: 203      Source: Engadget, Date: 2023-11-30. OpenAI was ... next
                            Level 3: 561      year This article contains affiliate links; if you click such a
                                              link and make a purchase, we may earn a commission
6       0.569     5         Level 1: 202      How OpenAI’s ChatGPT has changed the world in just a year.
                            Level 2: 203      Source: Engadget, Date: 2023-11-30. Over the course of two
                            Level 3: 561      months from its debut in November 2022, ChatGPT ... to
                                              pull information from across the internet as well as interact
                                              directly with connected sensors and devices
7       0.566     8         Level 1: 202      ChatGPT: Everything you need to know about the AI-powered
                            Level 2: 204      chatbot. Source: TechCrunch, Date: 2023-09-28. ChatGPT
                            Level 3: 217      app revenue shows no signs of slowing, but it’s not #1 Ope-
                                              nAI’s chatbot... ChatGPT is gaining mindshare, only about
                                              18% of Americans have ever actually used it
8       0.561     3         Level 1: 243      The video game industry has seen transformative changes
                            Level 2: 244      in 2023, driven by significant mergers and acquisitions. Mi-
                            Level 3: 246      crosoft’s $69 billion ... on mobile gaming and cloud services...
                                              The future of the industry remains uncertain, with ongoing
                                              consolidation posing both opportunities and challenges
9       0.561     7         Level 1: 202      ChatGPT: Everything you need to know about the AI-powered
                            Level 2: 204      chatbot. Source: TechCrunch, Date: 2023-09-28. ... Mi-
                            Level 3: 217      crosoft right now is change, and in a series of interviews,
                                              Nadella hedged on earlier reporting that Altman and Brock-
                                              man were headed to Microsoft
10      0.560     5         Level 1: 202      OpenAI’s ChatGPT has seen significant enhancements, im-
                            Level 2: 204      proving functionality and user accessibility... for GPT-3.5
                            Level 3: 217      Turbo and future GPT-4 models to enhance user interactions,
                                              despite facing regulatory challenges and scrutiny

Table A.5: Qualitative Results: Retrieved content from two distinct subtrees for comparative analysis.



                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Query                   Who won the Thursday Night Football game between the Chicago Bears and the
                        Carolina Panthers, and what was the final score?
MemTree           Re-   The Chicago Bears won the Thursday Night Football game against the Carolina
sponse                  Panthers with a final score of 16-13.
MemTree Retrieved Content
Index     Sim       Node      Ancestor        Content
                    Depth     Nodes
1         0.718     7         Level 1: 347    The Thursday night NFL game between the Chicago Bears
                              Level 2: 349    and Carolina Panthers, held at Soldier Field, saw the Bears
                              Level 3: 357    secure a narrow 16-13 victory... The game was broadcast
                                              nationally on Amazon Prime Video, with local broadcasts
                                              available in Chicago and Charlotte, and streamed in Canada
                                              via DAZN.
2         0.685     2         Level 1: 347    The Chicago Bears secured a narrow 16-13 victory over the
                              Level 2: 349    Carolina Panthers on Thursday Night Football... and the le-
                                              galization of online sports betting in Vermont is anticipated to
                                              boost NFL fan engagement
3         0.680     5         Level 1: 347    In the recent "Thursday Night Football" game, the Chicago
                              Level 2: 349    Bears narrowly defeated the Carolina Panthers 16-13. The
                              Level 3: 357    game featured rookie quarterbacks... s Video, with local air-
                                              ings in Chicago and Charlotte, and streamed on DAZN in
                                              Canada
4         0.680     3         Level 1: 347    In a "Thursday Night Football" game, the Chicago Bears
                              Level 2: 349    narrowly defeated the Carolina Panthers 16-13, showcasing
                              Level 3: 357    strong defensive... c and Philadelphia Eagles dealing with
                                              their own strategic and injury-related issues.
5         0.674     1         Level 1: 347    The Chicago Bears faced the Carolina Panthers in a Thursday
                                              Night Football game that saw the Bears secure a narrow 16-13
                                              victory. ... This matchup emphasized the competitive and
                                              high-stakes nature of the NFC, where performance is closely
                                              scrutinized.
6         0.662     9         Level 1: 347    Bears vs. Panthers live score, updates, highlights from NFL
                              Level 2: 349    ’Thursday Night Football’ game Source: Sporting News, Date:
                              Level 3: 357    2023-11-09 ,...the Amazon broadcast over the air on local
                                              channels. Those in Canada can stream it on DAZN, which
                                              carries every NFL game all season.
7         0.633     8         Level 1: 347    The Thursday Night Football game between the Chicago
                              Level 2: 349    Bears and Carolina Panthers ... dealt with the absence of
                              Level 3: 357    key defensive players like Brian Burns due to injury. The
                                              outcome hinges on which quarterback can minimize errors
                                              and capitalize on opportunities
8         0.629     6         Level 1: 347    The Chicago Bears faced the Carolina Panthers in a Thursday
                              Level 2: 349    Night Football game, with Tyson Bagent, an undrafted rookie...
                              Level 3: 357    The absence of standout edge rusher Brian Burns due to a
                                              concussion significantly impacted the Panthers’ defense.
9         0.617     7         Level 1: 347    In a closely contested NFL ’Thursday Night Football’ game
                              Level 2: 349    between the Bears and the Panthers, both teams struggled to
                              Level 3: 357    generate ... Ultimately, the game was characterized by defen-
                                              sive stands, field goals, and missed opportunities, reflecting
                                              the ongoing struggles of both teams’ offenses.
10        0.590     8         Level 1: 347    Bears vs. Panthers live score, updates, highlights from NFL
                              Level 2: 349    ’Thursday Night Football’ game Source: Sporting News, Date:
                              Level 3: 357    2023-11-09 10:52 p.m. — The tush-push doesn’t work for
                                              everyone. ... Panthers 10, Bears 9 9:40 p.m.

    Table A.6: Qualitative Results: Retrieved content from shallow nodes for comparative analysis.



                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Query                   What was the result of the Panthers’ attempt at the "tush-push" play with Chuba
                        Hubbard on 3rd & 1?
MemTree           Re-   The Panthers’ attempt at the "tush-push" play with Chuba Hubbard on 3rd & 1
sponse                  was unsuccessful, as he went nowhere.
MemTree Retrieved Content
Index     Sim       Node      Ancestor          Content
                    Depth     Nodes
1         0.495     8         Level 1: 347     Title: Bears vs. Panthers live score, updates, highlights from
                              Level 2: 349     NFL ’Thursday Night Football’ game. Source: Sporting News,
                              Level 3: 357     Date: 2023-11-09 10:52 p.m. — The tush-push doesn’t work
                                               for everyone. The Panthers try to push Chuba Hubbard for-
                                               ward on 3rd & 1,... and punt it away less than a minute into
                                               the first half. End of first half: Panthers 10, Bears 9. 9:40 p.m.
2         0.457     5         Level 1: 347      In the recent ’Thursday Night Football’ game, the Chicago
                              Level 2: 349      Bears narrowly defeated the Carolina Panthers 16-13. ... The
                              Level 3: 357      game was broadcast on Amazon Prime Video, with local
                                                airings in Chicago and Charlotte, and streamed on DAZN in
                                                Canada.
3         0.454     8         Level 1: 347      The Thursday night NFL game between the Chicago Bears
                              Level 2: 349      and Carolina Panthers, ... The game was broadcast nationally
                              Level 3: 357      on Amazon Prime Video, with local broadcasts available in
                                                Chicago and Charlotte, and streamed in Canada via DAZN.
4         0.443     8         Level 1: 347      In a closely contested NFL ’Thursday Night Football’ game
                              Level 2: 349      between the Bears and the Panthers, both teams struggled to
                              Level 3: 357      generate... reflecting the ongoing struggles of both teams’
                                                offenses.
5         0.443     7         Level 1: 347     The Chicago Bears secured a narrow 16-13 victory over the
                              Level 2: 349     Carolina Panthers on Thursday Night Football, ... with Kaylee
                              Level 3: 357     Hartung reporting from the sidelines. The NFC remains highly
                                               competitive, and the legalization of online sports betting in
                                               Vermont is anticipated to boost NFL fan engagement.
6         0.438     9         Level 1: 347     The Chicago Bears faced the Carolina Panthers in a Thursday
                              Level 2: 349     Night Football game, with Tyson Bagent, an undrafted rookie...
                              Level 3: 357     The absence of standout edge rusher Brian Burns due to a
                                               concussion significantly impacted the Panthers’ defense.
7         0.436     2         Level 1: 347     Bears vs. Panthers live score, updates, highlights from NFL
                              Level 2: 349     ’Thursday Night Football’ game Source: Sporting News, Date:
                                               2023-11-09 . ...
                                               Bears vs. Panthers final score 1 2 3 4 F Panthers 7 3 0 3 13
                                               Bears 3 6 7 0 16.
8         0.433     1         Level 1: 347      The Chicago Bears secured a narrow 16-13 victory over the
                                                Carolina Panthers on Thursday Night Football, driven ... The
                                                NFC remains highly competitive, and the legalization of on-
                                                line sports betting in Vermont is anticipated to boost NFL fan
                                                engagement.
9         0.432     3         Level 1: 347      In a ’Thursday Night Football’ game, the Chicago Bears
                              Level 2: 349      narrowly defeated the Carolina Panthers 16-13, , ... with
                              Level 3: 357      teams like the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, Dallas Cowboys, and
                                                Philadelphia Eagles dealing with their own strategic and
                                                injury-related issues.
10        0.421     4         Level 1: 347     Tyson Bagent, the undrafted rookie quarterback for the
                              Level 2: 349     Chicago Bears, started against the Carolina Panthers ... The
                              Level 3: 357     game underscored the competitive disparities within the NFL,
                                               with teams like the Tampa Bay Buccaneers performing no-
                                               tably better.

     Table A.7: Qualitative Results: Retrieved content from deep nodes for comparative analysis.


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Query                  Do the TechCrunch article on software companies and the Hacker News article
                       on The Epoch Times both report an increase in revenue related to payment and
                       subscription models, respectively?
GT Response            Yes
MemTree          Re-   No
sponse
Error Analysis         Evidence Buried in Lengthy Retrieved Context. The retrieved contents did contain the
                       necessary information to correctly answer the question, but the relevant details were not
                       immediately apparent due to being buried within a long and complex context.
MemTree Retrieved Content
Index    Sim       Node       Ancestor            Content
                   Depth      Nodes
1        0.532     4          Level 1: 202       Founders, are events useful? Source: TechCrunch, Date: 2023-
                              Level 2: 203       10-13 For the first time, the conference hosted an industry ...
                              Level 3: 562       off 9% of its workforce across departments.
2        0.519     3          Level 1: 429        How the conspiracy-fueled Epoch Times went mainstream
                              Level 2: 431        and made millions Source: Hacker News, Date: 2023-10-16
                              Level 3: 432        Another says: ... dvideos and dance performances, will result
                                                  in the salvation of humankind as the end of the world nears.
3        0.498     2          Level 1: 429       Title: How the conspiracy-fueled Epoch Times went main-
                              Level 2: 430       stream and made millions Source: Hacker News, Date: 2023-
                                                 10-16 Falun Gong — or Falun Dafa, ... misfortune of being
                                                 subscribed to the Epoch Times without my consent,” one
                                                 reads.
4        0.488     3          Level 1: 429        How the conspiracy-fueled Epoch Times went mainstream
                              Level 2: 431        and made millions Source: Hacker News ... Falun Gong
                              Level 3: 433        religious community And they needed to make money A lot
                                                  of it “Ensure that the paper gains a foothold in ordinary society
                                                  and turns profitable,” Li said.
5        0.482     5          Level 1: 661       Google fakes an AI demo, Grand Theft Auto VI goes viral
                              Level 2: 663       and Spotify cuts jobs Source: TechCrunch, Date: 2023-12-09
                              Level 3: 1833      ” ... for startups offering consumer trading services directly —
                                                 or indirectly, for that matter.
6        0.473     3          Level 1: 47         Sam Altman backs teens’ startup, Google unveils the Pixel 8
                              Level 2: 48         and TikTok tests an ad-free tier Source: TechCrunch, ... where
                              Level 3: 109        oligopoly dynamics and first-mover advantages are shaping
                                                  up and the value of proprietary data
7        0.470     4          Level 1: 661        OpenAI hosts a dev day, TechCrunch reviews the M3 iMac
                              Level 2: 662        and MacBook Pro, and Bumble gets a new CEO Source:
                              Level 3: 1078       TechCrunch, Date: 2023-11-11 ... years later, now that her
                                                  venture firm is also a decade old.
8        0.470     4          Level 1: 40         Title: Here’s how Rainforest, a budding Stripe rival, aims
                              Level 2: 424        to win over software companies, , ... its Series B round
                              Level 3: 426        (TechCrunch previously covered Kafene here ) Fintech firm
                                                  Revio boosts community bank growth with $2.5M funding
                                                  SkyWatch acquires Droneinsurance.com AP Automation Fin-
                                                  tech Stampli announces $61M round led by Blackstone.
9        0.453     3          Level 1: 661        Uber’s third-quarter earnings report showcases a company
                              Level 2: 663        that is profitable but faces growth challenges The company
                              Level 3: 1834       reported an 11% year-over-year revenue increase to ... compa-
                                                  nies like WeWork and EV startup Arrival.
10       0.451     5          Level 1: 661        Uber’s Q3 numbers include impressive profitability gains,
                              Level 2: 663        slower-than-expected growth Source: TechCrunch, Date:
                              Level 3: 1834       2023-11-07 On an adjusted basis, Uber Freight lost ... guid-
                                                  ance More when we get Lyft’s numbers

        Table A.8: Failure Example Analysis: Evidence Buried in Lengthy Retrieved Context


                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Query                   What entity, discussed in articles from both The Verge and Fortune, was involved in
                        implementing a system to prevent liquidation due to software issues, took on losses
                        to maintain another company’s balance sheet, and claimed to have acted legally in
                        its business practices as a customer, payment processor, and market maker?
GT Response             Alameda Research
MemTree          Re-    FTX
sponse
Error Analysis          Insufficient Evidence. The error occurred because the responder agent failed to capture
                        the key points about Alameda Research from the retrieved content. The essential infor-
                        mation was not sufficiently retrieved and was therefore not effectively extracted.
MemTree Retrieved Content
Index   Sim        Node        Ancestor           Content
                   Depth       Nodes
1       0.529      7           Level 1: 462       The recent court testimonies have shed light on the intri-
                               Level 2: 464       cate and problematic relationship between FTX and Alameda
                               Level 3: 473       Research ..., exacerbated by the entangled operations with
                                                  Alameda Research and the misleading assurances given to
                                                  investors and employees.
2       0.515      7           Level 1: 462       The recent court proceedings have highlighted significant
                               Level 2: 464       misconduct and fraudulent practices within FTX and Alameda
                               Level 3: 473       Research ... preferential treatment, which ultimately led to the
                                                  collapse of FTX.
3       0.510      6           Level 1: 462       The recent court proceedings have shed light on the intri-
                               Level 2: 464       cate and fraudulent operations at FTX and Alameda Research.
                               Level 3: 473       Gary Wang, co-founder and CTO, revealed that FTX misrep-
                                                  resented the amount in ... Bankman-Fried at the center of the
                                                  fraudulent activities.
4       0.503      4           Level 1: 462       Sam Bankman-Fried was a terrible boyfriend Source: The
                               Level 2: 463       Verge, Date: 2023-10-10 Bankman-Fried , ... in bubbles along
                               Level 3: 475       the main text Ellison wrote she was worried about “both actual
                                                  leverage and presenting on our balance sheet.” Bankman-Fried
                                                  responded with a note: “Yup, and could also get worse."
5       0.502      5           Level 1: 40        Sam Bankman-Fried, former CEO of FTX, testified about his
                               Level 2: 42        limited knowledge and involvement in the financial operations
                               Level 3: 43        ... at the financial mismanagement and liabilities, highlighting
                                                  his insufficient oversight that led to the companies’ problems.
6       0.499      6           Level 1: 40        The jury finally hears from Sam Bankman-Fried Source: The
                               Level 2: 42        Verge, Date: 2023-10-28 Risk is an inherent part of a futures
                               Level 3: 43        exchange... Alameda Research’s liabilities had gotten too
                                                  high, and FTX was spending too much money on marketing.
7       0.496      8           Level 1: 462       Today the FTX jury suffered through a code review Source:
                               Level 2: 464       The Verge, Date: 2023-10-06 In the process of liquidating,
                               Level 3: 473       FTX ... billion in customer money was gone, but on November
                                                  7th, Bankman-Fried tweeted “FTX is fine. Assets are fine."
8       0.496      5           Level 1: 462       In the end, the FTX trial was about the friends screwed along
                               Level 2: 464       the way Source: The Verge, Date: 2023-10-26 The defense ...
                               Level 3: 474       liability that Ellison, Singh, Wang, and Bankman-Fried had
                                                  known about in June 2022, we saw that $1.2 billion was a loan
                                                  repayment to crypto lender Genesis.
9       0.495      3           Level 1: 462       Sam Bankman-Fried and Caroline Ellison’s intertwined per-
                               Level 2: 463       sonal and professional relationships significantly influenced
                               Level 3: 475       the operations of FTX and Alameda Research ... eventual
                                                  scrutiny of both entities.
10      0.493      5           Level 1: 462       The trial of Sam Bankman-Fried, founder of the collapsed
                               Level 2: 464       cryptocurrency exchange FTX, has exposed significant ... of
                               Level 3: 939       the entanglements between FTX and Alameda Research, em-
                                                  phasizing the fraudulent nature of their operations.

                       Table A.9: Failure Example Analysis: Insufficient Evidence
                                                      34
