Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           T OWARDS F EDERATED RLHF WITH AGGREGATED
                                           C LIENT P REFERENCE FOR LLM S
                                              Feijie Wu1 , Xiaoze Liu1 , Haoyu Wang2 , Xingchen Wang1 , Lu Su1 , Jing Gao1
                                              1
                                               Purdue University 2 State University of New York at Albany
                                              {wu1977, xiaoze, wang2930, lusu, jinggao}@purdue.edu
                                              hwang28@albany.edu



                                                                                                          A BSTRACT
                                                             Reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) fine-tunes a pretrained
                                                             large language model (LLM) using user preference data, enabling it to generate
                                                             content aligned with human preferences. However, due to privacy concerns, users
                                                             may be reluctant to share sensitive preference data. To address this, we propose
                                                             utilizing Federated Learning (FL) techniques, allowing large-scale preference
                                                             collection from diverse real-world users without requiring them to transmit data
                                                             to a central server. Our federated RLHF methods (i.e., FedBis and FedBiscuit)
                                                             encode each client’s preferences into binary selectors and aggregate them to capture
                                                             common preferences. In particular, FedBiscuit overcomes key challenges, such
                                                             as preference heterogeneity and reward hacking, through innovative solutions like
                                                             grouping clients with similar preferences to reduce heterogeneity and using multiple
                                                             binary selectors to enhance LLM output quality. To evaluate the performance of
                                                             the proposed methods, we establish the first federated RLHF benchmark with
                                                             a heterogeneous human preference dataset. Experimental results show that by
                                                             integrating the LLM with aggregated client preferences, FedBis and FedBiscuit
                                                             significantly enhance the professionalism and readability of the generated content.
                                                             § https://github.com/HarliWu/FedBiscuit

                                           1        I NTRODUCTION
                                                     Large language models (LLMs) exhibit broad knowledge coverage as they are pretrained on a
                                                     large corpus (Zhao et al., 2023a; Singhal et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Liu et al., 2024a). To
                                                     elevate the quality of their generated content to match the professionalism and readability of hu-
                                      Step #1: Question         and Label Collection
                                                     man writing,            a common Input
                                                                                          approach               Step #2:
                                                                                                      is to fine-tune     Judge models
                                                                                                                       these    Model Training
                                                                                                                                           using reinforcement learning with
 True                                                                                         Data
 False
                 Sample                              human          feedback
                                                               Triple 1          (RLHF)    (Ziegler   et al., 2019;  Christiano    et  al.,  2017; Ouyang et al., 2022). This                          Which high school did Kobe
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Bryant attend? Choose from
 IDK                                         Negative
                                                     process          relies on preference datasets, which are constructed through two main methods: human
                                                               Triple 2                                                                                                                                (A) Whitney High School; (B)
                              Facts                                                                                                                                                             User
       Knowledge                             Samplingevaluation          (Bai et al., 2022; Ganguli et al., 2022; Stiennon et al.,Labels      2020) and ChatGPT-based rank-                            Preuss School UCSD; (C)
                                                              Triple 3                                                                                                                                 Lower Merion High School.
          Graphs                Filling triple
                                                     ing         ……
                                                             (Dubois        et al.,  2024b).  In   the human-effort     approach,     a  set    of instructions (a.k.a. prompts
 fic LM.             (Barack Obama, birthplace, Hawaii)                                                                                    True

r the statement
                                     with            or
                    {Barack Obama} was born in {Hawaii}.
                                                           user       queries)
                                                               Triple K          is  paired  with   multiple   model   completions        (a.k.a.
                                                                                                                                           False          generated responses), and
                                                     a team of labelers ranks completions of each instruction fromIDKbest to worst. In the ChatGPT-
         Template                  {Barack Obama} was born in {Hawaii}.
born in {Hawaii}.                                    based method, the dataset is developed by feeding ChatGPT with multiple inputs encompassing
       Generation            Question
                   Prompt Encoder                    antriple
                                                 Input        LLM
                                                           instruction        and a pair of completions, where it selects the superior completion for each input.
                            Templates
                                                     As LLMs are deployed to serve diverse users, there could                                                      Server
                     Prompt                                                                                                                       Preference                      Preference
                  Step   #3: Evaluation on Whole KGs
                     Encoder
                                                     be a gap between the preferences of real-world users and                                   Optimization                     Optimization
                     Training             LLM        those of lablers/ChatGPT, hindering the LLM’s ability to
                                                                                                                                        Client’s                         Aligned
                                                     generate responses that align with the users’ preferences.                                           Aligned LLM
                                                                                                                                        Private                            LLM
cause…                                             Judge    model training
                                                    Therefore,            there  is  a need for  a  preference   dataset   that       Preference           Privacy
                   substitution
cause…                                                  Negative Sampling                                                                                 Leakage!       Privacy Aggregated
                                                     accurately          reflects real world users’ preferences in order                                                            Selector
                             Yes, the statement is true. Because…                                                                                Private Question…     Preserved
                                                     to enhance the ability of LLM in content generation.                              User
                                                                                                      …                                                                  Trains
                                         Filling triple                                                                                   Please Select from
                               (Barack Obama, birthplace, Hawaii) Private Question…
                                           One straightforward
                                              with
                                                                       approach         to meeting this need is to             Answer A   Answer B
                                                         Client Generation                                                                                Client’s     Client
                                           directly collect  preference data from
                              {Barack Obama} was born in {Hawaii}.                            a large number of real-
                                                                                           Training                                                       Private    Preference                                          Binary Selecto
LLM                                                                                                                      User Answer B is Better       Preference
                                           world users and build a comprehensive preference dataset,
                                                                      Response 1                                                                                      Selector
ained Judge Model                                                                                                                                  Client
                                           which can be used to Response       2
                                                                       fine-tune       anPreferences
                                                                                           LLM on a central server.          Standard RLHF                    Federated RLHF
                                                                                          My answer is C.
g and Preference Alignment                 This strategy has been implemented       LLM        in recent projects like Figure 1: Comparison between standard
                                           OASST (Köpf et al., 2024). However, this approach is and federated RLHF


                                                                                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


often impractical because it involves collecting LLM users’ inputs and preferences – both highly
private and sensitive (shown in the left part of Figure 1). Most users are unwilling to share their
data, and such practices may also violate regulations like the GDPR (2016) and CCPA (2023), which
prohibit the use of users’ private data for model training without explicit consent.
To address privacy concerns, we propose utilizing Federated Learning (FL) techniques to enable
large-scale preference collection from diverse real-world users without requiring them to transmit
their preference data to a central server. In our design, we adopt FedAvg, a well-established FL
algorithm (Konečn‘y et al., 2016; McMahan et al., 2017), to learn user preferences without directly
collecting their data. In line with the reward model training used in RLHF (Stiennon et al., 2020;
Ouyang et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2023), each LLM user works as a FL client and locally trains a
reward model that can evaluate the quality of model completions. The server then aggregates these
client-trained reward models into a global model. While this approach appears effective, we observe
the following two limitations during training:
• Excessive Computation Overhead: Typically, the reward model is a regression model designed
  to output a scalar value that represents the quality of a model completion (Stiennon et al., 2020).
  Its optimization is based on comparing reward differences between preferred and dispreferred
  completions, where preferred completions should receive higher rewards. However, during opti-
  mization, each data sample requires the retention of two computation graphs (one for the preferred
  and one for the dispreferred completion) throughout the forward and backward passes. This results
  in significant computational overhead and heavy GPU demands.
• Preference Heterogeneity and Reward Hacking: Client preferences are heterogeneous, as
  both instructions and preferences vary across clients. As a result, each client tends to train their
  reward model toward a local minimum, which deviates from the global optimum, leading to longer
  convergence times compared to centralized training. Moreover, fine-tuning the pretrained model
  using the reward model can lead to overfitting, where the proxy reward (the reward model’s output)
  improves while the actual performance worsens. This phenomenon, known as reward hacking or
  reward overfitting, has been discovered in several studies (Askell et al., 2021; Michaud et al., 2020;
  Tien et al., 2022; Skalse et al., 2022).
In this paper, we propose to address these two limitations and propose effective and computationally
efficient methods for preference collection and subsequent fine-tuning. We start with a solution
that addresses computation costs. The key idea is to train a binary selector that identifies the
superior response between two model completions. Compared with traditional reward model training,
the binary selector requires significantly less computation. Casting binary selector training into a
federated learning setting, we develop a federated binary selector training (FedBis) framework, as
depicted in the right part of Figure 1. The aggregated binary selector captures the common preferences
of a large group of users, and thus can simulate a comprehensive preference dataset, facilitating
RLHF approaches (e.g., DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023)) to fine-tune the LLM without the need for the
real client preference data.
To further address the performance deterioration due to preference heterogeneity and reward hacking,
we propose a method named FedBis with cluster-wise aggregation (FedBiscuit). This approach
ensembles multiple binary selectors, each trained by clients with similar preferences. Since privacy
concerns prevent the explicit sharing of client data, the server intermittently collects the training loss
of all binary selectors on the clients. Using this data, clients are grouped into disjoint clusters, and
when comparing two completions, the one favored by the majority of selectors is deemed superior.
This method has two main advantages: (1) Clients with similar preferences collaboratively train a
binary selector, reducing data heterogeneity and improving performance stability, and (2) Reward
hacking is mitigated by employing multiple binary selectors, as it becomes difficult for the LLM to
generate content that satisfies all binary selectors without making genuine improvements.
Contributions. In this paper, our contributions are highlighted as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to employ federated learning technique to
  enable large-scale user preference collection for RLHF without jeopardizing user privacy. Our
  proposed federated RLHF model (i.e., FedBis) encodes each client’s preference information into a
  binary selector and aggregates all clients’ binary selectors to capture their common preferences. By
  aligning the LLM with the aggregated client preference, we can improve the professionalism and
  readability of LLM’s generated content.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• We identify the inherent challenges of federated RLHF, such as preference heterogeneity and
  reward hacking, and extend FedBis into FedBiscuit with innovative solutions to address these
  challenges, including grouping the binary selectors of clients with similar preferences to reduce
  data heterogeneity and employing multiple binary selectors to force the LLM to improve the quality
  of its generated content.
• We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the performance of the proposed FedBis and
  FedBiscuit. Since no prior work has addressed RLHF in a federated learning setting, we es-
  tablish the first FL benchmark by creating a heterogeneous human preference dataset. As expected,
  both FedBis and FedBiscuit show significant performance improvements over the base models,
  Gemma and LLaMA.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Federated Fine-Tuning for LLM. Recent studies have increasingly focused on fine-tuning large
language models (LLMs) using federated datasets (Sun et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; 2023; Yi et al.,
2023; Qin et al., 2023; 2024; Bai et al., 2024). However, these approaches often suffer from high
computation and communication costs due to the necessity of training and synchronizing the model
with clients. To mitigate these issues, lightweight methods such as black-box fine-tuning (Sun et al.,
2023; Lin et al., 2023) and offsite-tuning (Wu et al., 2024a; Kuang et al., 2023) have emerged. Despite
their advancements, these methods primarily focus on fine-tuning LLMs for specific downstream
tasks, neglecting user preferences in the generated responses. A recent benchmark, OpenFedLLM (Ye
et al., 2024), introduces FedDPO, which allows federated clients to optimize their local LLMs using
DPO loss. While this approach can potentially align LLMs with human preferences, it faces three
key challenges: excessive computational overhead, preference heterogeneity, and the risk of reward
hacking. To address these limitations, our work aims to enable LLMs alignment with a feasible and
sustainable training framework in FL.
Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF). RLHF typically involves supervised
fine-tuning, reward modeling, and reward optimization, initially proposed by Christiano et al. (2017).
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) is a common RLHF algorithm, yet it
struggles with instability, inefficiency, and high resource demands (Choshen et al., 2019; Engstrom
et al., 2020). These challenges have led to the development of alternative methods, such as Direct
Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023) and others (Dong et al., 2023; Zhao et al.,
2023b; Azar et al., 2024; Ethayarajh et al., 2024; Gulcehre et al., 2023), which offer more stable and
efficient solutions. However, these methods typically operate within a centralized training framework,
where the LLM owner retains control over the preference data. In contrast, our work aims to expand
data sources and integrate real user preferences without directly collecting their personal data.

3    P RELIMINARY
3.1 F EDERATED L EARNING (FL)
FL is a distributed training paradigm where a server coordinates various clients toward the same goal,
i.e., training a generalized model ϕ ∈ Rd (Konečn‘y et al., 2016; McMahan et   Pal., 2017). Consider
an FL system with M clients. Denote the weight of client m as pm such that m∈[M ] pm = 1, and
we aim to optimize the following objectives:
                                                △ X
                                   min F (ϕ) =           pm Fm (ϕ),                               (1)
                                  ϕ∈Rd
                                                    m∈[M ]
where Fm (ϕ) is the expected loss on client m given the model ϕ. As a classical FL algorithm, FedAvg
can solve the optimization problem by multiple communications between the server and the clients,
followed by a number of recent works (Wang et al., 2021; 2022; 2023c; 2024b;c; Zhang et al., 2021).
In each communication round r ∈ [R] with the global model ϕr , the following steps are conducted:
• Model broadcast: The server uniformly samples A clients without replacement, denoted by A,
  broadcasts the global model ϕr to the sampled clients.
• Local training on client m ∈ A: The client initializes the local model ϕm  r,0 with the received ϕr . In
  the next K iterations, the client updates its local model via ϕm         m                m
                                                                 r,k+1 = ϕr,k − η∇Fm (ϕr,k ), k ∈ [K],
                                        m                             m
  where η is learning rate, and ∇Fm (ϕr,k ) is the local gradient on ϕr,k and estimated by a mini-batch.
  We denote this K-iteration local training by ϕm  r,K = O PTIM (m, ϕr , K), which optimizes the model
  ϕr with the data of client m.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                    Client 1
                                                                                                                                      Product
                          Response 1 Compare                  Trains                                         Unlabeled                 Team
                                                                                                             Prompts
                                                                                                  Server
    Client 1 Pretrained                  Client 1     Client 1
                                        Preference                      Binary                               Pretrained
    Prompts     LM                                   Preference                                                                            Reader
                          Response 2     dataset                       Selector                                 LM
                                                      dataset                                                                              friendly
                                                                              × R rounds
                                                                                             Aggregated
                                                                                           Binary Selector   Response 1 Response 2
                          Response 1 Compare                  Trains
                                                                                                                                     DPO

    Client M Pretrained                  Client M      Client M                                                                       Selector
                                                                        Binary                                 Binary
    Prompts     LM                      Preference    Preference                                                                     Preference
                                                                       Selector                               Selector
                          Response 2     dataset       dataset                      Client M                                          dataset
      Step 1: Clients’ Preference Data Creation      Step 2: Federated Preference Selector Training          Step 3: LLM Fine-tuning with RLHF

            Figure 2: An outline of the proposed FedBis, an RLHF method in federated learning.
• Global aggregation: The server collects the local model ϕm
                                                           r,K from clients m ∈ A and updates the
  global model via weighted average aggregation, i.e., ϕr+1 = M               m
                                                                  P
                                                               A    m∈A pm ϕr,K .

3.2 R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING WITH H UMAN F EEDBACK (RLHF)
The objective of RLHF is to align a pretrained language model with human preferences so that the
model can generate text that is as professional and readable as human writing. DPO (Rafailov et al.,
2023) is one of the most effective ways to achieve the goal. There is a human-annotated dataset
D comprising multiple samples (x, y0 , y1 , i), where y0 and y1 are two completions under a given
instruction x, and i ∈ {0, 1} indicates that yi is the preferred completion out of the pair of y0 and
y1 . Motivated by the Bradley-Terry model (Bradley & Terry, 1952) on the formulation of human
preference distrition p∗ (yi ≻ y1−i |x), DPO aims to optimize the model θ starting from θ0 via
                      h                        △
                                                                                                   i
                                                                       i |x)         πθ (y1−i |x)
 min E(x,y0 ,y1 ,i)∼D LDP O (θ|x, y0 , y1 , i) = − log σ β log ππθθ (y
                                                                     (yi |x) − β log πθ (y1−i |x)    . (2)
     θ                                                                                            0                       0



4        F ED B IS : A VANILLA AND F EASIBLE F RAMEWORK FOR ACHIEVING
         F EDERATED RLHF
We aim to fine-tune an LLM using clients’ preference data, enabling it to generate reader-friendly
responses. Since preference data contain sensitive personal information, some clients may be hesitant
to share this information due to privacy concerns. Recently, companies have developed on-device
pretrained language models (e.g., Phi-3 (Abdin et al., 2024) and Qwen (Bai et al., 2023)), with the
latest iPhone release integrating this technology (Gunter et al., 2024). This on-device feature allows
clients to ask private and sensitive questions directly on their smartphones, ensuring that even the
server (i.e., LLM owner) cannot access the input prompts (Wu et al., 2024a).
The proposed FedBis provides a simple yet effective solution through a three-step process to enable
model fine-tuning with clients’ preference data while preserving clients’ privacy, as depicted in
Figure 2: In the first step, each client builds their own preference dataset, which is originated from
the daily queries (a.k.a. prompts or instructions) to a pretrained language model (LM), the model
generated a pair of responses to each query, and the client chooses the preferred one. After the
construction of the preference dataset, each client independently trains a binary selector, and the
server aggregates these selectors into a global one and broadcasts it to the clients. This communication
process repeats for a total of R times, and the clients keep the preference dataset unchanged during the
training. In contrast to traditional RLHF methods that train a regression-based reward model, this step
employs a binary selector to alleviate computational constraints on edge devices (Wu et al., 2023b;
2024b; Wang et al., 2023b; 2024a; Li et al., 2024). Additionally, the selector enables comprehensive
pairwise comparisons between completions, thereby facilitating more efficient training (Liu et al.,
2024b; Dubois et al., 2024b). Afterward, we utilize the well-trained binary selector to enhance the
performance of LLM. Specifically, we assume the server holds a set of instructions, together with
pairwise responses generated by an LLM. Then, we build a preference dataset with the help of the
binary selector and boost the LLM by means of DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023). This section highlights
the key steps of the proposed FedBis, while Appendix A offers a detailed description.
Local Training in FL. Suppose client m ∈ [M ] holds a set of pairwise data with the size of
nm , i.e., D̂m = {(xi , yi,w , yi,l )}i∈[nm ] , where xi is the prompt, yi,w is the preferred completion
out of the pair of yi,w and yi,l . We reorganize these data and build a preference dataset Dm to
be {(xi , yi,w , yi,l , 0), (xi , yi,l , yi,w , 1)|(xi , yi,w , yi,l ) ∈ D̂m } for training, in which each contains


                                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the prompt, a pair of completions and preference selection. Apparently, this dataset eliminates
the position effects, and we can train the selector as a classification task. Therefore, we utilize
cross-entropy (CE) loss ℓCE to optimize the selector and formulate the expected loss as
                            Fm (ϕ) = E(x,y0 ,y1 ,i)∼Dm [ℓCE (i|ϕ; x, y0 , y1 )] .                        (3)

Generating synthetic preference data for DPO. Suppose the server holds a set of instructions D̂.
With the LLM θ0 , we can generate multiple completions for an instruction x ∈ D̂, resulting in          a set
of n completions (y0 , . . . , yn−1 ) ∼ πθ0 (y|x). For each instruction, we can form a total of n2 pairs
of completions. We then use the binary selector ϕR to choose the optimal completion for each pair
(yj , yl ) where 0 ≤ j < l ≤ n − 1. The pair is labeled with i = 0 if the first logit output is greater
than the second, i.e., πϕR (0|x, yj , yl ) > πϕR (1|x, yj , yl ), or i = 1 otherwise. This process builds the
preference dataset Dgen .
Limitations. While the proposed FedBis effectively achieves RLHF in FL with low computational
costs, there are two key limitations that remain unsolved. The first limitation is preference heterogene-
ity. The proposed work effectively aggregates client preferences via clients’ preference models, but it
does not address the preference gap across clients when there is a huge difference in client preferences
and prompts. As a result, the clients optimize their local models for their own data instead of a global
objective. This leads to global aggregation diverging from the global optimum, which lengthens the
training time to obtain the desired performance (Karimireddy et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2023a). Another
limitation is reward hacking. The proposed FedBis relies on training a single selector and using it
to fine-tune the LLM. This procedure introduces an adversarial dynamic where the model "cheats"
the selector into favoring certain responses without genuinely improving. Eventually, as the LLM is
trained across more iterations, its performance degrades significantly, making the approach inefficient
and unsustainable. In the coming section, we propose a new algorithm that is able to address both
limitations while maintaining low computational costs.

5    F ED B ISCUIT : F ED B IS WITH C LUSTER - WISE AGGREGATION
In this section, we aim to address the issues of preference heterogeneity and reward hacking in FedBis.
To mitigate reward hacking, Eisenstein et al. (2023) and Coste et al. (2024) propose a promising
method that trains multiple reward models simultaneously. Aggregating outputs from several models
can lead to a more robust reward estimate. Additionally, recognizing that some clients may share
similar preferences, we utilize clustered FL (Sattler et al., 2020; Ghosh et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2023) to
group clients with common preferences for joint selector training. These two strategies complement
each other, motivating us to combine them into a novel algorithm, FedBiscuit, which addresses both
reward hacking and preference heterogeneity.
However, integrating these approaches is non-trivial, particularly when using existing clustered FL
algorithms. Current algorithms predetermine the number of models and partition clients into groups,
with each group training its own model. This one-to-one mapping assumes a fixed number of groups,
but in practice, predefining the number of groups is challenging, and some models may end up
untrained if no clients are assigned to them. If these untrained selectors are excluded, it could reduce
the complexity of reward hacking, making it easier for the LLM to "cheat" the selector by favoring
certain responses without genuine improvement. On the other hand, including untrained selectors
could misalign the LLM, leading to incorrect alignments. Therefore, there is a need for a sustainable
algorithm that ensures every selector contributes meaningfully to resisting reward hacking.
Problem Formulation. In this work, we consider training multiple binary selectors ϕ[U ] , which
independently decide on a better completion out of a pair. It is noted that U should be an odd number
because this guarantees one completion is preferred by more selectors. Moreover, to ensure that all
selectors are trained without bias towards a small specific group, we mandate that these selectors be
trained using evenly disjoint clusters of clients. Additionally, a client’s preference should align more
closely with those within the same cluster than with those in different clusters. To this end, we can
formulate the following objective:

                                               △ X
                          min       F (ϕ[U ] ) =       pm min Fm (ϕu )                               (4)
                       ϕ[U ] ∈RU ×d                            u∈[U ]
                                                  m∈[M ]

                            s.t.      max{|Mu |}u∈[U ] − min{|Mu |}u∈[U ] ≤ 1,                           (5)


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 FedBiscuit
Input: local learning rate ηl , global learning rate ηs , local updates K, warm-up rounds T for each
binary selector, total communication rounds R, client regrouping interval τ , pretrained LLM ϕ̃.
Require: O PTIM(m, ϕ, K) fine-tunes model ϕ with the data of a client m ∈ [M ] for K iterations
and returns an optimized model.
Require: CG(ϕ[U ] ) assigns each client m ∈ [M ] to train one of the models ϕ[U ] and returns a list
{Um }m∈[M ] indicating that a client m should train the model ϕUm .
    ▷ Warm-up                                                ▷ Clustered FL Training
 1: for each u ∈ [U ] do                                 14: Initialize ϕu,0 = ϕu for each u ∈ [U ]
 2:     Initialize the binary selector ϕu,0 = ϕ̃         15: for r = 0, 1, . . . , R − 1 do
 3:     for t = 0, 1, . . . , T − 1 do                   16:     if r%τ == 0 then
 4:         Sample clients A ⊆ [M ]                      17:          {Um }m∈[M ] = CG(ϕ[U ],r )
 5:         Send ϕu,t to clients m ∈ A                   18:     end if
 6:         for m ∈ A in parallel do                     19:     Sample clients A ⊆ [M ]
 7:              ϕm
                  u,t,K = O PTIM (m, ϕu,t , K)
                                                         20:     Send ϕUm ,r to clients m ∈ A
                 Send ϕm                                 21:     for m ∈ A in parallel do
 8:                      u,t,K to the server
 9:         end for                                      22:          ϕm
                                                                       Um ,r,K = O PTIM (m, ϕUm ,r , K)
            ϕu,t+1 = M
                             P        m                  23:          Send ϕm Um ,r,K to the server
10:                      A      m∈A ϕu,t,K
11:     end for                                          24:     end for
12:     ϕu = ϕu,T                                        25:     Calculate each ϕ[U ],r+1 via Equation (6)
13: end for                                              26: end for

where the function Fm follows the same definition of Equation (3). ϕu indicates the u-th binary
selector, and Mu means a set of clients using the u-th selector. By definition, ∪u∈[U ] Mu = [M ], and
∩u∈[U ] Mu = ∅. Next we explore how the proposed FedBiscuit optimizes Equation (4) under the
constraint of Equation (5).
5.1 A LGORITHM D ESIGN
Section 4 mentions that a client m ∈ [M ] holds a preference dataset Dm . Before the model training,
client m splits her dataset into two disjoint sets, namely, a training set Dm,train and a validation set
Dm,val , where |Dm,train | >> |Dm,val |.
The proposed FedBiscuit consists of two phases: 1) We train each selector for a couple of rounds so
that all U selectors have basic capacities in selecting the preferred completion, and 2) we divide the
clients into disjoint clusters of size U and train each binary selector with a specific cluster. A full
pseudocode implementation is provided in Algorithm 1.
Phase 1: Warm-up. In the beginning, we initialize each binary selector ϕu (u ∈ [U ]) with an
identical pretrained LLM ϕ̃. Subsequently, starting from u = 0, we train each selector ϕu for T
consecutive communication rounds following the steps of FedBis: In each round, the server samples
a subset of clients A and broadcasts the selector ϕu to them. Each client m ∈ A then locally trains
the selector for K iterations using the dataset Dm,train . At the end of the communication round, the
server aggregates and updates the selector ϕu . After completing the training of ϕu , the server initiates
the training of a new selector ϕu+1 by repeating the above steps until all selectors are trained.
The selectors are trained with different data distributions because the clients participating in each
training round are randomly selected. Consequently, all the selectors ϕ[U ] have distinct model
parameters, leading to varied performance in terms of final logit output when given an instruction
and a pair of completions.
Phase 2: Clustered FL Training. After the first phase, we obtain U different selectors, denoted by
ϕ[U ],0 . Unlike FedBis, this phase includes an additional step called client grouping, which partitions
the clients into multiple disjoint clusters based on their preferences. In each communication round
r ∈ [R], FedBiscuit optimizes all the selectors ϕ[U ],r using the following four steps:
Step 2.1: Client Grouping CG(ϕ[U ],r ). This step is executed every τ communication rounds, i.e.,
when r can be divided by τ , or τ |r. During this step, the server broadcasts all selectors ϕ[U ],r to
all clients [M ]. Then, a client
                             P m calculates the averaged loss for each selector ϕu,r using local
                      1
validation set via |Dm,val |  (x,y0 ,y1 ,i)∼Dm,val [ℓCE (i|ϕu,r ; x, y0 , y1 )]. The server thereby collects


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


all these losses and adopts a greedy clustering approach (Sattler et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2023) to assign
each client to the selector where they achieve the minimum loss. However, an obvious deficiency is
an imbalance where some selectors are chosen by many clients and others by few. It is noted that the
selectors trained with more clients achieve remarkable performance, while some may be overfitted to
a specific group of clients. Therefore, the greedy clustering approach negatively impacts the overall
performance when building a global preference dataset. To tackle the limitation, we propose to
balance the clusters using the following steps repeatedly until the clients are evenly distributed: (i)
Choose the cluster selected by the most clients, and (ii) If the cluster can accommodate n clients,
cap the cluster at n clients and reassign the rest to other clusters where they achieve suboptimal loss.
Finally, we obtain balanced and disjoint clusters. Let a client m train the Um -th selector ϕUm for the
next τ rounds. After this client grouping step, FedBiscuit proceeds to the following three steps.
Step 2.2: Model Broadcast. Similar to FedBis, the server samples A clients from all clients [M ],
denoted by A. For each selected client m ∈ A, the server transmits the selector ϕUm ,r . This process
can be characterized by defining Au as the group of clients chosen to train the selector ϕu . This
ensures that ∪u∈[U ] Au = A and ∩u∈[U ] Au = ∅.
Step 2.3: Local Training. The client m ∈ A receives a binary selector
                                                                     ϕUm ,r from
                                                                                 the server and
trains the selector for K iterations via ϕm              m                    m
                                          Um ,r,k+1 = ϕUm ,r,k − η∇Fm ϕUm ,r,k , k ∈ [K]. Finally,
                                    m
let the updated local selector be ϕUm ,r,K , and the client pushes it to the server.
Step 2.4: Global Aggregation. The server collects updated selectors from all participants A. Since
there are several binary selectors, the server updates each selector with a designated group of clients.
For instance, the aggregation rule for the selector u ∈ [U ] follows
                                                    !
                                            X                  X
                        ϕu,r+1 = 1 −             pm ϕu,r +           pm ϕm
                                                                         u,r,K .                    (6)
                                          m∈Au                m∈Au

It is noted that performance degradation occurs when a model is trained by clients with time-varying
sizes in FedAvg (Gu et al., 2021; Wang & Ji, 2023). In other words, the weighted average aggregation
strategy is no longer suitable for multi-selector aggregation due to the fluctuation in the number of
clients training a specific selector in each communication round. Therefore, FedBiscuit adopts a new
aggregation rule as formulated in Equation (6).
FedBiscuit finally produces a set of well-trained selectors ϕ[U ],R and the subsequent objective is to
enhance LLM performance with the help of these selectors, as explored below.
Reinforcement-learning Fine-tuning with Multiple Selectors. We can leverage the methodology
described in Section A.2, and one of the key steps involves constructing a preference dataset incor-
porating multiple selectors. For this, we employ a strategy of majority voting. Given an instruction
x ∈ D̂ and a pair of generated completions (y0 , y1 ), we assume a selector u ∈ [U ] prefers yiu ,
where iu ∈ {0, 1}. Therefore, the pair is assigned a label i = arg max{iu }u∈[U ] , meaning that the
completion yi is favored by most of the clients.
5.2 D ISCUSSION : I NTEGRATION WITH L O RA
As all binary selectors are LLM, training them may consume significant communication and compu-
tation overheads. Besides, multiple LLMs lead to considerable storage burdens shouldered by the
server. To reduce the costs, we adopt a parameter-efficient fine-tuning approach LoRA (Hu et al.,
2021), where all binary selectors share the same base model while using different adapters.
In comparison with FedBis, FedBiscuit requires extra costs, i.e., O(M U ⌊R/τ ⌋ · C), where C is the
communication cost of a selector. This is because FedBiscuit involves client grouping periodically,
unilaterally transferring all selectors from the server to the clients. Despite the extra costs, extensive
experiments demonstrate non-trivial improvement by comparing FedBiscuit with FedBis.

6    F EDERATED H UMAN P REFERENCE B ENCHMARK
In this section, we describe the preparation of federated human preference datasets, while the next
section presents the experimental setup and quantitative analysis. We explore two open-ended text
generation tasks, i.e., summarization and question-answering, based on publicly available datasets.
Each task comprises two components: client preference data and unlabeled prompts. Below, we


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


outline the process of constructing a federated preference dataset. Detailed information on the datasets
is provided in Table 5 in Appendix B.
Summarization. Stiennon et al. (2020) introduces a summarization dataset that consists of Reddit
posts with human-written TL;DR (Völske et al., 2017). This dataset consists of two parts, one is a
pretrained dataset, while the other is a dataset with human preference. As suggested by Ouyang et al.
(2022), we ensure a post does not appear in both datasets. We assume the pretrained dataset is stored
on the server side, and 60% of data are reserved for supervised fine-tuning (SFT). The remaining
40% are used for the RLHF process to improve LLM performance and generate human-preferred
content. Since the human-preference dataset contains the worker ID, we partition the dataset based
on the worker ID so that the dataset can be partitioned into 53 workers.
Question-Answering (QA). We reconstruct the public dataset SHP, which comprises numerous
questions from Reddit posts and their corresponding user answers. The preference indicator is based
on the number of likes an answer receives. Following the training of StreamSHP (Ethayarajh et al.,
2022), we utilize the data with no more than 512 tokens. Given that the dataset spans 18 domains, we
partition the dataset using a Dirichlet distribution with a parameter of 0.3, ensuring that no questions
overlap between clients. In our experiment, we consider training the binary selector with 200 clients,
which is a common setting when evaluating the performance of an FL algorithm (Jhunjhunwala et al.,
2023). Figure 3 visualizes the data distribution on the selected clients. For the RLHF process, we
incorporate 2.6K Reddit questions and 44.6K SafeRLHF prompts (Dai et al., 2023).

7    E XPERIMENTS
7.1 E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Model and computation environment. We initialize the binary selector(s) using three pretrained
base models, i.e., Qwen-2-0.5B (Bai et al., 2023), Gemma-2B (Team et al., 2024), and LLaMA-2-
7B (Touvron et al., 2023), configuring the final layer to produce binary outputs "A" and "B" only.
We adopt Gemma-2B and LLaMA-2-7B models for the summarization and QA tasks, where both
models are fine-tuned on the Alpaca dataset (Taori et al., 2023). Our implementation is built upon
FederatedScope (Xie et al., 2023; Kuang et al., 2023). The experiments are conducted on machines
with one Nvidia A100 GPU card, Intel Xeon Platinum 8369B CPUs, and 256GB RAM.
Baselines. Since no prior work systematically enables RLHF in FL, we propose the following
baselines, which extend previous studies to fit the FL and RLHF objectives. In each case, we directly
optimize the pretrained model.
• FedAvg: Given that preference data on clients is pairwise, each client trains its local model to
  improve completions based on specific instructions. To minimize training costs, we employ LoRA
  for training and aggregation, following the approach in Sun et al. (2024).
• FedDPO: Clients train their local models using the DPO loss (as defined in Equation 2), and the
  server aggregates these local models into a global model using a weighted average. This method,
  incorporated in the OpenFedLLM benchmark (Ye et al., 2024), requires substantial computational
  resources and results in long local training wall-clock times.
Evaluation. We evaluate summarization and QA tasks using different datasets and methodologies:
• Summarization task: We use a test dataset consisting of 6,553 samples, all sourced from the
  TL;DR dataset and excluded from the training data. The model is tasked with generating summaries
  for each sample. Since human-labeled summaries are available, we measure the win rate of the
  model-generated summaries against the human ones using the Auto-J model (Li et al., 2023a).
• QA task: For question answering, we use AlpacaEval 2.0 (Li et al., 2023b; Dubois et al., 2024a;b)
  to assess model performance on 805 instructions. The model’s responses are compared with those
  of GPT-4, and the win rate is calculated based on evaluations conducted by GPT-4-turbo-20240409.
Implementation. In our experiments, we train the binary selector for 500 communication rounds.
In each round, we sample 5 clients for the summarization task and 10 for the QA task, and the selected
clients fine-tune the binary selector locally for 30 iterations. As for FedBiscuit, the warm-up phase
takes 50 communication rounds for each adapter, which is counted as part of 500 communication
rounds. After the training of binary selectors, we fine-tune the LLM for three epochs, and we store
the checkpoint when finishing one epoch of training. By default, the evaluation result reports the
best-saved checkpoints. Due to the limited space, the details related to the hyperparameters are
deferred to Appendix B.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Gemma-2B Win Rate        LLaMA-2-7B Win Rate
      Binary Selector   Methods
                                               (# Wins / # Ties)         (# Wins / # Ties)
                        Raw Model             67.27% (4408 / 28)        76.79% (5032 / 31)
      NA                FedAvg                28.66% (1878 / 10)        28.23% (1850 / 10)
                        FedDPO                49.03% (3213 / 23)        77.02% (5047 / 30)
                        FedBis                86.69% (5681 / 26)        89.63% (5874 / 38)
      Qwen-2
                        FedBiscuit (U = 3)    78.45% (5141 / 29)        83.29% (5458 / 48)
      (0.5B)
                        FedBiscuit (U = 5)    73.97% (4847 / 22)        82.04% (5376 / 37)
                        FedBis                77.34% (5068 / 39)        86.22% (5650 / 39)
      Gemma
                        FedBiscuit (U = 3)    83.81% (5492 / 43)        91.32% (5984 / 28)
      (2B)
                        FedBiscuit (U = 5)    83.12% (5447 / 33)        89.93% (5893 / 31)
                        FedBis                82.56% (5410 / 28)       91.87% (6020 / 40)
      LLaMA-2
                        FedBiscuit (U = 3)    81.90% (5367 / 41)        90.84% (5951 / 37)
      (7B)
                        FedBiscuit (U = 5)    79.31% (5197 / 41)        90.54% (5933 / 47)
Table 1: Performance under summarization task. Bold means the best result under the pretrained
model; Underline means the best result under a binary selector.
7.2   Q UANTITATIVE E VALUATION ON S UMMARIZATION TASK
Table 1 presents a comparative analysis of human-written and model-generated summaries, where the
win rate indicates the likelihood that a generated summary surpasses its human counterpart, evaluated
using the Auto-J metric. It is evident that both our proposed baseline and algorithm significantly
outperform the raw model and other baselines. For both base LLMs – Gemma-2B and LLaMA-2-
7B – all our methods demonstrate a performance improvement of at least 6% over the raw model,
underscoring the effectiveness of our approach irrespective of the binary selector used. Notably, all
baseline approaches exhibit a substantial decline in performance compared to the raw model, with a
decrease of at least 20% in the win rate measurement.

We offer a plausible explanation for the performance drop of FedDPO, thereby highlighting the
effectiveness of FedBis and FedBiscuit. Our proposed methods also incorporate DPO, differing
significantly from FedDPO in terms of data distribution. While FedDPO relies directly on client
preference datasets, our methods create a set of preference data comprising three components:
unlabeled prompts, a pair of responses generated by the base model for each prompt, and preference
selections simulated by the aggregated binary selector. Consequently, our generated responses align
more closely with model outputs, facilitating easier guidance for the model to refine its responses
into user-acceptable expressions. In contrast, FedDPO may confuse the model since it lacks outputs
similar to those in the client preference datasets, leaving the LLM unsure of how to enhance the
generated responses. An implicit assumption of DPO is that preference data should closely resemble
model outputs; however, our proposed method may not be bound by this assumption.

Performance analysis on various binary selectors. Table 1 presents the importance that a selector
trained with a proper method can significantly enhance the performance of base models (i.e., Gemma-
2B and LLaMA-2-7B). A powerful selector does not mean that it can significantly boost the base
model performance after alignment. For example, the smallest binary selector, Qwen-2, achieves a
win rate of 86.69% under the Gemma-2B model, performing much better than the other two types.
Different training methods on different binary selectors may lead to different effects. For instance,
training Qwen-2 and LLaMA-2 with FedBis is always better than that of FedBiscuit, while training
the Gemma selector with FedBiscuit (U = 3) would achieve the best performance.

7.3   Q UANTITATIVE E VALUATION ON QA TASK
Table 2 shows that our methods, FedBis and FedBiscuit, consistently outperform the baseline ap-
proaches in terms of length-controlled win rate for both the Gemma-based model and the LLaMA-2
model. The baseline FedAvg performs worse than the Raw Model, with FedAvg showing a win rate
of only 1.88% for the Gemma-based model and 3.93% for the LLaMA-2 model, compared to the Raw
Model’s 2.40% and 4.80%, respectively. FedDPO offers a slight improvement over the Raw Model,
achieving a win rate of 3.28% for the Gemma-based model and 4.98% for the LLaMA-2 model, but
it remains inferior compared to our methods. Specifically, FedBis achieves win rates of up to 4.58%
for the Gemma-based model and 5.25% for the LLaMA-2 model, while FedBiscuit (U = 3) reaches


                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Unlabeled Prompts   Methods              Gemma-2B LC Win-rate (%)    LLaMA-2-7B LC Win-rate (%)
                        Raw Model                  2.40 ± 0.16                  4.80 ± 0.41
    NA                  FedAvg                     1.88 ± 0.12                  3.93 ± 0.23
                        FedDPO                     3.28 ± 0.23                  4.98 ± 0.30
                        FedBis                     3.85 ± 0.25                  5.06 ± 0.30
    Reddit Posts
                        FedBiscuit (U = 3)         3.70 ± 0.24                  5.04 ± 0.31
    (2 completions)
                        FedBiscuit (U = 5)         3.98 ± 0.24                  5.42 ± 0.32
                        FedBis                     3.66 ± 0.25                  5.08 ± 0.31
    Reddit Posts
                        FedBiscuit (U = 3)         4.14 ± 0.27                  5.34 ± 0.32
    (4 completions)
                        FedBiscuit (U = 5)         3.80 ± 0.27                  4.81 ± 0.28
                        FedBis                     4.58 ± 0.30                  5.25 ± 0.32
    SafeRLHF            FedBiscuit (U = 3)         4.03 ± 0.28                  5.63 ± 0.34
                        FedBiscuit (U = 5)         3.85 ± 0.27                  5.42 ± 0.35

Table 2: Performance under QA task using AlpacaEval 2.0. "LC" in the table means "length-control."
FedBis and FedBiscuit adopt the reward model of Gemma-2B fine-tuned on SHP dataset. Bold
highlights the best result under each column, while Underline visualizes the best result under different
sources of unlabeled prompts.
up to 4.14% and 5.63%, respectively. These results confirm that our methods provide significant
improvements over the baselines, enhancing the length-controlled win rates for both models.

Performance analysis on various unlabeled prompts. Table 2 also shows that the use of different
unlabeled prompts, such as Reddit posts and SafeRLHF, significantly affects the performance of
our methods. When using Reddit prompts, generating 2 or 4 completions leads to variations in win
rates. For example, with two completions, FedBiscuit (U = 5) achieves 3.98% for the Gemma-based
model and 5.42% for the LLaMA-2 model. However, increasing to four completions slightly shifts
the best performance for the Gemma model to FedBiscuit (U = 3) with 4.14%, while the win rate
for the LLaMA-2 model slightly drops to 5.34%. On the other hand, SafeRLHF prompts consistently
yield the best results overall, with FedBis achieving 4.58% for the Gemma model and FedBiscuit
(U = 3) reaching 5.63% for the LLaMA-2 model. These findings demonstrate that SafeRLHF is the
most effective prompt source, outperforming Reddit-based prompts.

7.4      A BLATION S TUDY
Considering both tasks, the results reveal that the performance of FedBis and FedBiscuit varies
across datasets. In the summarization task (Table 1), FedBis outperforms FedBiscuit across most
binary selectors, achieving the highest win rates for both the Gemma-2B and LLaMA-2-7B models.
For instance, under the Qwen-2 selector, FedBis reaches 86.73% for Gemma-2B and 89.67% for
LLaMA-2-7B, while FedBiscuit (U = 3 and U = 5) are lower than those values. This is because
preference heterogeneity is not critical in the summarization task. As described in Stiennon et al.
(2020), the dataset is collected from a group of labelers who have a meeting from time to time to
ensure they reach a consensus. However, in the QA task (Table 2), FedBiscuit proves to be the
better method, particularly for the LLaMA-2-based model, where FedBiscuit (U = 3) achieves the
highest win rate at 5.63% under SafeRLHF prompts, outperforming FedBis and other configurations.
Although FedBis shows strength in some QA scenarios, such as the Gemma model with a 4.58%
win rate, FedBiscuit demonstrates superior overall performance in the QA task. Therefore, FedBis is
more effective in the summarization task, while FedBiscuit excels in the QA task.

8      C ONCLUSION
In this work, we explore a feasible framework to employ a federated learning technique to enable
large-scale user preference collection for RLHF without jeopardizing user privacy. Specifically, we
train a binary selector across different clients using their local preference datasets, and then use
the well-trained selector to align an LLM with human preferences. We propose two approaches
to enable selector training: FedBis and FedBiscuit. FedBis provides a framework to train a single
selector, while FedBiscuit ensembles multiple selectors to address preference heterogeneity and
reward hacking. We conduct empirical studies with the proposed federated human preference datasets
to validate our statements and demonstrate the superiority of FedBis and FedBiscuit when aligning
Gemma-2B and LLaMA-2-7B with human preference.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E THICS S TATEMENTS
This paper investigates clients’ preferences using a publicly available dataset, ensuring that all data
sources are appropriately cited to maintain academic integrity and transparency. By leveraging this
public dataset, we avoid using private or sensitive client data, thus upholding ethical standards in data
usage and research practices. Furthermore, this work prioritizes the protection of clients’ privacy and
strictly avoids any disclosure of local data. When clients utilize their own data to fine-tune the model,
robust privacy measures are in place to ensure that no other clients can access or infer any information
related to their data. This approach not only safeguards individual privacy but also fosters trust and
security in the application of the model.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments. This work
is supported in part by the US National Science Foundation under grants NSF CNS-2154059, NSF
IIS-2141037, and NSF IIS-2226108. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Science Foundation.

R EFERENCES
Marah Abdin, Sam Ade Jacobs, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Jyoti Aneja, Ahmed Awadallah, Hany
 Awadalla, Nguyen Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Harkirat Behl, et al. Phi-3 technical report:
 A highly capable language model locally on your phone. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14219, 2024.
Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Andy Jones,
 Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Nova DasSarma, et al. A general language assistant as a laboratory
 for alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00861, 2021.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland, Michal
 Valko, and Daniele Calandriello. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learning from
 human preferences. In Proc. of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics
 (AISTATS’24), pp. 4447–4455, 2024.
Jiamu Bai, Daoyuan Chen, Bingchen Qian, Liuyi Yao, and Yaliang Li. Federated fine-tuning of large
   language models under heterogeneous tasks and client resources. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11505,
   2024.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge,
   Yu Han, Fei Huang, et al. Qwen technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609, 2023.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
  Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with
  reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022.
Keith Bonawitz, Vladimir Ivanov, Ben Kreuter, Antonio Marcedone, H Brendan McMahan, Sarvar
  Patel, Daniel Ramage, Aaron Segal, and Karn Seth. Practical secure aggregation for federated
  learning on user-held data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.04482, 2016.
Keith Bonawitz, Vladimir Ivanov, Ben Kreuter, Antonio Marcedone, H Brendan McMahan, Sarvar
  Patel, Daniel Ramage, Aaron Segal, and Karn Seth. Practical secure aggregation for privacy-
  preserving machine learning. In Proc. of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Commu-
  nications Security (SP’17), pp. 1175–1191, 2017.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
CCPA. California consumer privacy act (ccpa), 2023. URL https://oag.ca.gov/privacy/
  ccpa.
Wei-Ning Chen, Christopher A Choquette Choo, Peter Kairouz, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. The
 fundamental price of secure aggregation in differentially private federated learning. In Prof. of the
 International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML’22), pp. 3056–3089, 2022.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Leshem Choshen, Lior Fox, Zohar Aizenbud, and Omri Abend. On the weaknesses of reinforcement
  learning for neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.01752, 2019.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. In Proc. of the Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS’17), 2017.
Thomas Coste, Usman Anwar, Robert Kirk, and David Krueger. Reward model ensembles help
  mitigate overoptimization. In Proc. of the International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR’24), 2024.
Josef Dai, Xuehai Pan, Ruiyang Sun, Jiaming Ji, Xinbo Xu, Mickel Liu, Yizhou Wang, and
  Yaodong Yang. Safe rlhf: Safe reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.12773, 2023.
Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Deepanshu Goyal, Yihan Zhang, Winnie Chow, Rui Pan, Shizhe Diao,
  Jipeng Zhang, Kashun Shum, and Tong Zhang. Raft: Reward ranked finetuning for generative
  foundation model alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06767, 2023.
Yann Dubois, Bal’azs Galambosi, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Length-controlled
  alpacaeval: A simple way to debias automatic evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04475, 2024a.
Yann Dubois, Chen Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy Ba, Carlos
  Guestrin, Percy S Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Alpacafarm: A simulation framework
  for methods that learn from human feedback. In Proc. of the Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS’24), 2024b.
Jacob Eisenstein, Chirag Nagpal, Alekh Agarwal, Ahmad Beirami, Alex D’Amour, DJ Dvijotham,
  Adam Fisch, Katherine Heller, Stephen Pfohl, Deepak Ramachandran, et al. Helping or herd-
  ing? reward model ensembles mitigate but do not eliminate reward hacking. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2312.09244, 2023.
Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Firdaus Janoos, Larry Rudolph,
  and Aleksander Madry. Implementation matters in deep policy gradients: A case study on ppo and
  trpo. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.12729, 2020.
Kawin Ethayarajh, Yejin Choi, and Swabha Swayamdipta. Understanding dataset difficulty with
  V-usable information. In Proc. of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML’22),
  pp. 5988–6008, 2022.
Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. Kto: Model
  alignment as prospect theoretic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01306, 2024.
Wenzhi Fang, Dong-Jun Han, Evan Chen, Shiqiang Wang, and Christopher G Brinton. Hierarchical
 federated learning with multi-timescale gradient correction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.18448,
 2024.
Deep Ganguli, Liane Lovitt, Jackson Kernion, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Ben
  Mann, Ethan Perez, Nicholas Schiefer, Kamal Ndousse, et al. Red teaming language models to
  reduce harms: Methods, scaling behaviors, and lessons learned. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07858,
  2022.
GDPR. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council, 2016. URL
 https://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj.
Avishek Ghosh, Jichan Chung, Dong Yin, and Kannan Ramchandran. An efficient framework for
  clustered federated learning. In Proc. of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS’20), volume 33, pp. 19586–19597, 2020.
Xinran Gu, Kaixuan Huang, Jingzhao Zhang, and Longbo Huang. Fast federated learning in the
  presence of arbitrary device unavailability. In Proc. of the Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS’21), volume 34, pp. 12052–12064, 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Caglar Gulcehre, Tom Le Paine, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Ksenia Konyushkova, Lotte Weerts, Abhishek
  Sharma, Aditya Siddhant, Alex Ahern, Miaosen Wang, Chenjie Gu, et al. Reinforced self-training
  (rest) for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08998, 2023.

Tom Gunter, Zirui Wang, Chong Wang, Ruoming Pang, Andy Narayanan, Aonan Zhang, Bowen
  Zhang, Chen Chen, Chung-Cheng Chiu, David Qiu, et al. Apple intelligence foundation language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21075, 2024.

Shiqi He, Qifan Yan, Feijie Wu, Lanjun Wang, Mathias L’ecuyer, and Ivan Beschastnikh. Gluefl:
  Reconciling client sampling and model masking for bandwidth efficient federated learning. In
  Proc. of Machine Learning and Systems (MLSys’23), 2023.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.

Divyansh Jhunjhunwala, Shiqiang Wang, and Gauri Joshi. Fedexp: Speeding up federated averaging
  via extrapolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.09604, 2023.

Peter Kairouz, Ziyu Liu, and Thomas Steinke. The distributed discrete gaussian mechanism for
  federated learning with secure aggregation. In Proc. of the International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML’21), pp. 5201–5212, 2021.

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning. In Proc.
  of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR’20), pp. 5132–5143, 2020.

Jakub Konečn‘y, H Brendan McMahan, Felix X Yu, Peter Richt’arik, Ananda Theertha Suresh,
  and Dave Bacon. Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1610.05492, 2016.

Andreas Köpf, Yannic Kilcher, Dimitri von Rütte, Sotiris Anagnostidis, Zhi Rui Tam, Keith
  Stevens, Abdullah Barhoum, Duc Nguyen, Oliver Stanley, Rich’ard Nagyfi, et al. Openassistant
  conversations-democratizing large language model alignment. In Proc. of the Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS’24), 2024.

Weirui Kuang, Bingchen Qian, Zitao Li, Daoyuan Chen, Dawei Gao, Xuchen Pan, Yuexiang Xie,
 Yaliang Li, Bolin Ding, and Jingren Zhou. Federatedscope-llm: A comprehensive package for
 fine-tuning large language models in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00363, 2023.

Junlong Li, Shichao Sun, Weizhe Yuan, Run-Ze Fan, Hai Zhao, and Pengfei Liu. Generative judge
  for evaluating alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05470, 2023a.

Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. On the convergence of
  fedavg on non-iid data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02189, 2019.

Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following
  models. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval, 2023b.

Yichen Li, Haozhao Wang, Wenchao Xu, Tianzhe Xiao, Hong Liu, Minzhu Tu, Yuying Wang, Xin
  Yang, Rui Zhang, Shui Yu, et al. Unleashing the power of continual learning on non-centralized
  devices: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.13840, 2024.

Zihao Lin, Yan Sun, Yifan Shi, Xueqian Wang, Lifu Huang, Li Shen, and Dacheng Tao. Efficient
  federated prompt tuning for black-box large pre-trained models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03123,
  2023.

Xiaoze Liu, Ting Sun, Tianyang Xu, Feijie Wu, Cunxiang Wang, Xiaoqian Wang, and Jing Gao.
  Shield: Evaluation and defense strategies for copyright compliance in llm text generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2406.12975, 2024a.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xiaoze Liu, Feijie Wu, Tianyang Xu, Zhuo Chen, Yichi Zhang, Xiaoqian Wang, and Jing Gao.
  Evaluating the factuality of large language models using large-scale knowledge graphs. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2404.00942, 2024b.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.      Decoupled weight decay regularization.       arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Jie Ma, Tianyi Zhou, Guodong Long, Jing Jiang, and Chengqi Zhang. Structured federated learning
   through clustered additive modeling. In Proc. of the Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems (NeurIPS’23), 2023.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Proc. of the
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS’17), pp. 1273–1282, 2017.
Eric J Michaud, Adam Gleave, and Stuart Russell. Understanding learned reward functions. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2012.05862, 2020.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. In Proc. of the Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS’22), volume 35, pp. 27730–27744, 2022.
Zhen Qin, Daoyuan Chen, Bingchen Qian, Bolin Ding, Yaliang Li, and Shuiguang Deng. Federated
  full-parameter tuning of billion-sized language models with communication cost under 18 kilobytes.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06353, 2023.
Zhen Qin, Zhaomin Wu, Bingsheng He, and Shuiguang Deng. Federated data-efficient instruction
  tuning for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10926, 2024.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In A. Oh,
  T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Proc. of the Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS’23), pp. 53728–53741. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2023.
Mayank Rathee, Conghao Shen, Sameer Wagh, and Raluca Ada Popa. Elsa: Secure aggregation for
 federated learning with malicious actors. In Proc. of the IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
 (SP’23), pp. 1961–1979, 2023.
Felix Sattler, Klaus-Robert Müller, and Wojciech Samek. Clustered federated learning: Model-
  agnostic distributed multitask optimization under privacy constraints. IEEE transactions on neural
  networks and learning systems, 32(8):3710–3722, 2020.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan
  Scales, Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, et al. Large language models encode
  clinical knowledge. Nature, 620(7972):172–180, 2023.
Joar Skalse, Nikolaus Howe, Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, and David Krueger. Defining and characterizing
  reward gaming. In Proc. of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS’22),
  pp. 9460–9471, 2022.
Jinhyun So, Chaoyang He, Chien-Sheng Yang, Songze Li, Qian Yu, Ramy E Ali, Basak Guler, and
   Salman Avestimehr. Lightsecagg: a lightweight and versatile design for secure aggregation in
   federated learning. Proc. of Machine Learning and Systems (MLSys’22), 4:694–720, 2022.
Jinhyun So, Ramy E Ali, Başak Güler, Jiantao Jiao, and A Salman Avestimehr. Securing secure
   aggregation: Mitigating multi-round privacy leakage in federated learning. In Proc. of the AAAI
   Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI’23), volume 37, pp. 9864–9873, 2023.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M. Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul Christiano. Learning to summarize from human feedback. In Proc. of the
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS’20), 2020.
Jingwei Sun, Ziyue Xu, Hongxu Yin, Dong Yang, Daguang Xu, Yiran Chen, and Holger R Roth.
   Fedbpt: Efficient federated black-box prompt tuning for large language models. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2310.01467, 2023.
Youbang Sun, Zitao Li, Yaliang Li, and Bolin Ding. Improving lora in privacy-preserving federated
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12313, 2024.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
Gemma Team, Thomas Mesnard, Cassidy Hardin, Robert Dadashi, Surya Bhupatiraju, Shreya Pathak,
  Laurent Sifre, Morgane Rivi‘ere, Mihir Sanjay Kale, Juliette Love, et al. Gemma: Open models
  based on gemini research and technology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08295, 2024.
Jeremy Tien, Jerry Zhi-Yang He, Zackory Erickson, Anca D Dragan, and Daniel S Brown. Causal
  confusion and reward misidentification in preference-based reward learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.06601, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Michael Völske, Martin Potthast, Shahbaz Syed, and Benno Stein. Tl; dr: Mining reddit to learn
 automatic summarization. In Proc. of the Workshop on New Frontiers in Summarization, pp. 59–63,
 2017.
Cunxiang Wang, Xiaoze Liu, Yuanhao Yue, Xiangru Tang, Tianhang Zhang, Cheng Jiayang, Yunzhi
  Yao, Wenyang Gao, Xuming Hu, Zehan Qi, et al. Survey on factuality in large language models:
  Knowledge, retrieval and domain-specificity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07521, 2023a.
Haoyu Wang, Handong Zhao, Yaqing Wang, Tong Yu, Jiuxiang Gu, and Jing Gao. Fedkc: Federated
  knowledge composition for multilingual natural language understanding. In Proc. of the ACM Web
  Conference (WWW’22), pp. 1839–1850, 2022.
Haozhao Wang, Zhihao Qu, Song Guo, Ningqi Wang, Ruixuan Li, and Weihua Zhuang. Losp:
  Overlap synchronization parallel with local compensation for fast distributed training. IEEE
 Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 39(8):2541–2557, 2021.
Haozhao Wang, Yichen Li, Wenchao Xu, Ruixuan Li, Yufeng Zhan, and Zhigang Zeng. Dafkd:
  Domain-aware federated knowledge distillation. In Proc. of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’23), pp. 20412–20421, 2023b.
Haozhao Wang, Haoran Xu, Yichen Li, Yuan Xu, Ruixuan Li, and Tianwei Zhang. Fedcda: Federated
  learning with cross-rounds divergence-aware aggregation. In Proc. of the International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR’23), 2023c.
Haozhao Wang, Yabo Jia, Meng Zhang, Qinghao Hu, Hao Ren, Peng Sun, Yonggang Wen, and
  Tianwei Zhang. Feddse: Distribution-aware sub-model extraction for federated learning over
  resource-constrained devices. In Proc. of the ACM Web Conference (WWW’24), pp. 2902–2913,
  2024a.
Haozhao Wang, Peirong Zheng, Xingshuo Han, Wenchao Xu, Ruixuan Li, and Tianwei Zhang. Fednlr:
  Federated learning with neuron-wise learning rates. In Proc. of the ACM SIGKDD Conference on
  Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD’24), pp. 3069–3080, 2024b.
Shiqiang Wang and Mingyue Ji. A lightweight method for tackling unknown participation probabili-
  ties in federated averaging. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03401, 2023.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xingchen Wang, Haoyu Wang, Feijie Wu, Tianci Liu, Qiming Cao, and Lu Su. Towards efficient
  heterogeneous multi-modal federated learning with hierarchical knowledge disentanglement. In
  Proc. of the ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (SenSys’24), pp. 592–605,
  2024c.
Feijie Wu, Song Guo, Zhihao Qu, Shiqi He, Ziming Liu, and Jing Gao. Anchor sampling for federated
  learning with partial client participation. In Proc. of the International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML’23), pp. 37379–37416, 2023a.
Feijie Wu, Song Guo, Haozhao Wang, Haobo Zhang, Zhihao Qu, Jie Zhang, and Ziming Liu.
  From deterioration to acceleration: A calibration approach to rehabilitating step asynchronism in
  federated optimization. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 34(5):1548–1559,
  2023b.
Feijie Wu, Zitao Li, Yaliang Li, Bolin Ding, and Jing Gao. Fedbiot: Llm local fine-tuning in federated
  learning without full model. In Proc. of the ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery
  and Data Mining (KDD’24), pp. 3345–3355, 2024a.
Feijie Wu, Xingchen Wang, Yaqing Wang, Tianci Liu, Lu Su, and Jing Gao. Fiarse: Model-
  heterogeneous federated learning via importance-aware submodel extraction. In Proc. of the
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS’24), volume 37, 2024b.
Yuexiang Xie, Zhen Wang, Dawei Gao, Daoyuan Chen, Liuyi Yao, Weirui Kuang, Yaliang Li, Bolin
  Ding, and Jingren Zhou. Federatedscope: A flexible federated learning platform for heterogeneity.
  Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 16(5):1059–1072, 2023.
Haibo Yang, Minghong Fang, and Jia Liu. Achieving linear speedup with partial worker participation
  in non-iid federated learning. In Proc. of the International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR’20), 2020.
Rui Ye, Wenhao Wang, Jingyi Chai, Dihan Li, Zexi Li, Yinda Xu, Yaxin Du, Yanfeng Wang, and
  Siheng Chen. Openfedllm: Training large language models on decentralized private data via
  federated learning. In Proc. of the ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
  Mining (KDD’24), pp. 6137–6147, 2024.
Liping Yi, Han Yu, Gang Wang, and Xiaoguang Liu. Fedlora: Model-heterogeneous personalized
  federated learning with lora tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13283, 2023.
Jianyi Zhang, Saeed Vahidian, Martin Kuo, Chunyuan Li, Ruiyi Zhang, Tong Yu, Guoyin Wang,
   and Yiran Chen. Towards building the federatedgpt: Federated instruction tuning. In Proc. of
   the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP’24), pp.
   6915–6919, 2024.
Jie Zhang, Song Guo, Xiaosong Ma, Haozhao Wang, Wenchao Xu, and Feijie Wu. Parameterized
   knowledge transfer for personalized federated learning. In Proc. of the Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS’21), pp. 10092–10104, 2021.
Zhuo Zhang, Yuanhang Yang, Yong Dai, Qifan Wang, Yue Yu, Lizhen Qu, and Zenglin Xu. Fed-
  petuning: When federated learning meets the parameter-efficient tuning methods of pre-trained
  language models. In Proc. of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (ACL’23), pp. 9963–9977, 2023.
Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min,
 Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, et al. A survey of large language models. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2303.18223, 1(2), 2023a.
Yao Zhao, Rishabh Joshi, Tianqi Liu, Misha Khalman, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J Liu. Slic-hf:
  Sequence likelihood calibration with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10425, 2023b.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. In Proc.
  of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS’19), 2019.



                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A D ETAILED I MPLEMENTATION OF F ED B IS
The objective of RLHF is to align a pretrained language model with human preferences. RLHF
comprises two phases: (i) preference modeling and (ii) reinforcement-learning fine-tuning. The first
phase aims to develop a model that simulates human preferences to select the superior options from
numerous pairwise completions. Subsequently, the second phase enhances the language model’s
performance by creating a preference dataset, enabling the model to generate responses preferred by
humans. The following describes the proposed FedBis that achieves RLHF in FL.
A.1 P REFERENCE M ODELING
We consider a practical and efficient FL scenario where not all clients but only a sampled subsets
of clients participate in each communication round (Yang et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2023a; He et al.,
2023; Fang et al., 2024). Before the commencement of FL training, we initialize the binary selector
with a pretrained LLM such as LLaMA-2 (Touvron et al., 2023), and set the hyperparameters. An FL
algorithm requires multiple communication rounds and consists of three phases in each round, i.e.,
model broadcast, local training, and global aggregation. Following this paradigm, we design FedBis
and optimize the selector ϕ, i.e., in the communication round r ∈ [R], as discussed as follows.
Step 1: Model Broadcast. The server uniformly samples A clients without replacement, denoted
by A. Let the selector be ϕr in the r-th communication round, and the server broadcasts it to the
sampled clients.
Step 2: Local Training. At this step, client m ∈ A optimizes the selector based on local preference
data. First, the client initializes the local selector ϕm
                                                        r,0 with the global selector ϕr received from the
server. Subsequently, the client trains the selector for K iterations, where the update rule between
consecutive iterations follows:
                                ϕm        m            m
                                 r,k+1 = ϕr,k − η∇Fm (ϕr,k ), k ∈ [K]                                    (7)

where the gradient ∇Fm (ϕm r,k ) is approximated using a data batch sampled from the local preference
dataset Dm and can incorporate optimizers such as AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017). Finally, the
client m transmits the updated local selector ϕmr,K back to the server.

Step 3: Global Aggregation. After receiving the local selectors from the sampled clients A, the
server updates the global selector:
                                           M X
                                    ϕr+1 =        pm ϕmr,K .                                (8)
                                           A
                                                     m∈A

This aggregation method, based on Li et al. (2019) where the clients are uniformly sampled to train
a global model, ensures consistency with Problem (1) in mathematical expectation. To prevent the
server from inferring a client’s preferences from their local model, a practical solution is secure
aggregation, which ensures the server only accesses the aggregated results (Bonawitz et al., 2016;
2017; Kairouz et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; So et al., 2022; 2023; Rathee et al., 2023).
After R communication rounds of training, FedBis outputs a binary selector ϕR that reflects the
overall preferences of all clients. The selector can then be used to enhance the performance of the
LLM, as discussed in the next section.
A.2 R EINFORCEMENT- LEARNING F INE - TUNING
The reinforcement-learning fine-tuning takes place on the server and includes two phases: 1) a
preference dataset is created with a pretrained LLM θ0 and a well-trained selector ϕR from FedBis.
2) LLM is optimized according to the objective defined in Equation (2) with the generated dataset.

Step 1: Preference Dataset Generation. Suppose the server holds a set of instructions D̂. With
the LLM θ0 , we can generate multiple completions for an instruction x ∈ D̂, resulting in a set of
n completions (y0 , . . . , yn−1 ) ∼ πθ0 (y|x). For each instruction, we can form a total of n2 pairs
of completions. We then use the binary selector ϕR to choose the optimal completion for each pair
(yj , yl ) where 0 ≤ j < l ≤ n − 1. The pair is labeled with i = 0 if the first logit output is greater
than the second, i.e., πϕR (0|x, yj , yl ) > πϕR (1|x, yj , yl ), or i = 1 otherwise. This process builds the
preference dataset Dgen .


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Step 2: LLM Fine-tuning. With the constructed preference dataset Dgen , we evolve the LLM to
align with clients’ preferences. Specifically, in the t-th training round, where t ∈ {0, 1, . . . }, we
sample a data batch (x, y0 , y1 , i) from Dgen , and update the LLM using the following rule:
                                θt+1 = θt − η∇LDP O (θt |x, y0 , y1 , i) ,                           (9)
where η is the learning rate. The gradient computation ∇LDP O is given by Rafailov et al. (2023).
In a nutshell, we distill the binary selector’s preferences into the LLM, allowing it to function as a
binary selector itself implicitly.

B        I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS AND H YPERPARAMETERS
In this section, we include various settings, such as the prompt and the hyperparameters.
B.1 H YPERPARAMETER S ETTINGS
In our work, we fine-tune all models using LoRA, which is consistently set to rank 8, α = 16, and
the dropout rate 0.05. For the generation, we apply these parameters:
• If it is required to generate multiple completions, then we set the temperature to 0.7. We set the
  maximum new tokens for 80 under the summarization task and 300 for QA tasks.
• If it is required to generate a single completion, then we adopt greedy search by setting the
  temperature to 0.0.
In the following part, we show the hyperparameter setting for different tasks:
                        Selector Training       RLFT                                           Selector Training       RLFT
  Participation Rate          5/53                 -                  Participation Rate            10/200                -
  Local Iterations              30                 -                  Local Iterations                 30                 -
  Batch Size                    32                32                  Batch Size                       32                32
  Rounds                       500             5 epochs               Rounds                          500             5 epochs
  Optimizer                 AdamW              RMSprop                Optimizer                    AdamW              RMSprop
  Hyperparameters          (0.9, 0.95)             -                  Hyperparameters             (0.9, 0.95)             –
  Learning rate              1e − 5             1e − 6                Learning rate                 1e − 5             1e − 6

Table 3: Hyperparameter Settings for the Sum-                      Table 4: Hyperparameter Settings for the QA
marization Task                                                    Task

B.2 DATASET D ETAILS
In Section 6, we discuss how to partition the dataset for two tasks, namely, summarization and QA.
Table 5 comprehensively presents the dataset details of both tasks, while Figure 3 visualizes the data
distribution of the selected clients.
                       Preference   # preference                 Partition                               Unlabelled   # unlabelled
  Task                                             # clients                    Max.    Min.     Std.
                         Dataset      samples                     Rules                                    Dataset      prompts
                         TL;DR                                                                            Open-AI
  Summarization                       92858           53        Worker ID       12985    1     2284.33                  42782
                       comparison                                                                          TL;DR
                                                               Dirichlet(0.3)                             SHP Test       4293
  Question Answering      SHP         260814         200                        4393    260     832.39
                                                               on categories                             SafeRLHF       44578


                   Table 5: Dataset details for federated human preference benchmark

Special Setting for FedBiscuit. For the above two tasks, we ensemble three binary selectors (i.e.,
LoRAs). In the warmup round, we train the selector for 50 rounds under an FL framework. FedBiscuit
performs regrouping every 50 rounds in the summarization task, while regrouping every 100 rounds
in the QA task.
B.3 M ORE E XPERIMENTS
Comparison between two different model sizes. Table 6 compares the performance between
two Qwen-2 models as the selectors with different sizes (i.e., 0.5B and 1.5B) when using them to
fine-tune a Gemma-2B model for the summarization task. These results show that while larger binary
selectors (e.g., Qwen-2-1.5B) sometimes provide slight performance improvements, smaller selectors
like Qwen-2-0.5B remain competitive, particularly when applying FedBis. These findings suggest
that both model type and size influence the selector’s effectiveness, and they need to be carefully
balanced based on task requirements and resource constraints.


                                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   19
                   39
                   59
                   79
                   99
      Client ID



                  119
                  139
                  159
                  179
                  199
                 tor s
           ask baki y
           ask argu g

        ask ask ry
        ask ngin cs


               ilo hr
                 p y
        s s cs
        soc efic e



              ik ew
               ala ve
                      ice
                op ia



                cu ys


       ask ians


                sci n
      ch a ence
       pla m et
             his eer
             ask olog


            ask soph

    ask cienc cienc
                c n


             ial tio
            thr m


                      a


    ex ange skv
            ph ask
             e o


    ask ask hysi


           leg eimfi
           inl yvi

                   dv
                  lin
                    d
        an ade
    ask skac
         a


         Figure 3: Data distribution across different question domains on the selected clients.
                                             Win Rate on Qwen-2 (0.5B)   Win Rate on Qwen-2 (1.5B)
                        Methods
                                                  (# Wins / # Ties)           (# Wins / # Ties)
                        FedBis                  86.69% (5681 / 26)          82.45% (5401 / 34)
                        FedBiscuit (U = 3)      78.45% (5141 / 29)          80.18% (5254 / 29)
                        FedBiscuit (U = 5)      73.97% (4847 / 22)          76.22% (4995 / 43)

Table 6: Performance using Gemma-2B to summarize a Reddit post (i.e., summarization task). Bold
means the best result under the selector.
B.4 I NSTRUCTION T UNING P ROMPT
The proposed work follows a previous study (Zhang et al., 2024) to fine-tune the model following a
given prompt template. This is also known as instruction tuning. The prompt template is different
between tasks and between the selector and base model. As a result, we provide the prompts in Figure
4 for detailed study.

C    S AMPLE D IALOGS
We provide sample dialogs for our methods, FedBiscuit and FedBis, compared against the baselines
FedDPO, FedAvg, and the raw model, highlighting their performance in summarization and question-
answering tasks. Our methods consistently deliver superior results, as demonstrated by the provided
samples.
FedBiscuit generates precise and well-organized summaries, making it particularly effective in
distilling complex information into clear and actionable insights. FedBis, while maintaining a similar
level of clarity, offers more nuanced and in-depth responses, making it versatile for a wider range of
queries. In contrast, the baseline models—FedDPO, FedAvg, and the raw model—tend to produce
less coherent responses. FedDPO sometimes lacks structure, FedAvg oversimplifies the content, and
the raw model can miss critical details, leading to less accurate results.
These samples provide clear evidence that FedBiscuit and FedBis offer better summarization and
question-answering performance by consistently striking the right balance between conciseness,
accuracy, and detail, proving to be more reliable and contextually appropriate than the baselines.



                                                             19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Prompts template of LLM generation for summarization task.
 Below is an instruction that describes a task, paired with an input that provides further context. Write a
 response that appropriately completes the request.

 ### Instruction:
 Summarize the following Reddit post in a paragraph of 50 words or less.

 ### Input:
 SUBREDDIT: r/{subreddit}
 TITLE: {title}
 POST: {post}

 ### Response:

Prompt template when training a binary selector for summarization task.
 Below is a forum post followed by two summaries. Pick a more precise and concise one that summarizes
 the most important points in the given forum post, without including unimportant or irrelevant details.
 State your choice with a single capital letter, i.e., “A” if SUMMARY A is better, “B” if SUMMARY B is better.

 ### SUBREDDIT: r/{subreddit}
 ### TITLE: {title}
 ### POST: {post}
 ### SUMMARY A: {output_A}
 ### SUMMARY B: {output_B}
 ### YOUR CHOICE:

Prompts template of LLM generation for QA task with an additional input.
 Below is an instruction that describes a task, paired with an input that provides further context. Write a
 response that appropriately completes the request.

 ### Instruction:
 {instruction}

 ### Input:
 {input}

 ### Response:

Prompts template of LLM generation for QA task without an additional input.
 Below is an instruction that describes a task. Write a response that appropriately completes the request.

 ### Instruction:
 {instruction}

 ### Response:

Prompt template when training a binary selector for QA task with SHP dataset.
 Below is a query followed by two responses. Pick a helpful response that is precise, concise, and casual.
 State your choice with a single capital letter, i.e., “A” if RESPONSE A is better, “B” if RESPONSE B is better.

 ### QUERY: {instruction}
 ### RESPONSE A: {output_A}
 ### RESPONSE B: {output_B}
 ### YOUR CHOICE:

                                       Figure 4: Prompt Templates.



                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


User Input
 Give me a brief scenario of a persona that would search this information and find this content helpful: {NSW
 Residential Building Contract for Small Works over $20,000 Designed for residential building work which is
 not complex over $20,000. Suitable for smaller alteration and renovation projects. Small Works Contracts
 (Form 10A) Pricing structure Fixed price Value range Under $7,500 Use for Minor residential alterations
 and additions work Includes Succinct, plain-language conditions suitable for very small, low-risk projects in
 place of a quotation}

                                                                                                    FedBiscuit
 Imagine you are a homeowner who wants to make some changes to your home, but you don’t want to spend
 a lot of money on a major renovation. You come across a small works contract that is designed for residential
 building work that is not complex and has a value range of under $7,500. This contract is suitable for smaller
 alteration and renovation projects. It is a fixed price contract, meaning the price is set and there are no hidden
 costs or additional fees.
 The contract is written in plain language, making it easy to understand and use. It includes succinct conditions
 that are suitable for very small, low-risk projects. This means that if something goes wrong, you can easily
 resolve the issue and the contract will protect you.
 Overall, this small works contract for residential building work is a great option for homeowners who want
 to make some changes to their home without spending a lot of money. It is a simple, straightforward solution
 that provides peace of mind and protection for your project.

                                                                                                        FedBis
 Imagine you are a homeowner who wants to make some changes to your home, but you don’t want to spend
 a lot of money on a major renovation. You come across a small works contract that is designed for residential
 building work that is not complex and has a value range of under $7,500. This contract is suitable for smaller
 alteration and renovation projects. It is a fixed price contract, meaning the price is set and there are no hidden
 costs or additional fees.
 The contract is written in plain language, making it easy to understand and use. It includes succinct conditions,
 which are suitable for very small, low-risk projects. The contract is intended for residential work, meaning it
 is not suitable for larger, more complex projects.
 Overall, this small works contract for residential building work is a cost-effective and straightforward option
 for making small changes to your home without breaking the bank.

                                                                                                      FedDPO
 A persona that would find this information helpful is a homeowner who is planning to make some minor
 changes to their home, such as adding a new room or making some renovations. They are looking for a
 simple and straightforward contract that outlines the terms and conditions of the work, with a fixed price
 and a value range of under $7,500. They want to ensure that the contract is suitable for their small, low-risk
 project and that it is concise and easy to understand.

                                                                                                       FedAvg
 I’m not sure if this is helpful, but I’m a lawyer and I’ve been looking for a similar contract for a while now.
 I’ve found a few, but they’re not quite what I’m looking for.

                                                                                                   Raw Model
 A persona that would search this information and find it helpful is a small residential building contractor who
 is looking to complete a small works project on their home. They are looking for a fixed price contract that
 is suitable for their project, which is not complex and will not exceed $20,000. They want a contract that
 is simple and easy to understand, with concise conditions that outline the scope of work and the expected
 timeline. They are looking for a contract that is suitable for small, low-risk projects, and they want to avoid
 the need for a quotation.

                                       Figure 5: Gemma QA Sample.



                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


User Input
 Hi, I have some falafel, but no tahini to put on them. Can you give me a recipe for making tahini?

                                                                                                       FedBiscuit
 Sure, here is a recipe for making tahini at home:

 Ingredients:
 - 1 cup of sesame seeds
 - 2 tablespoons of water
 - 2 tablespoons of honey
 - 2 tablespoons of lemon juice

 Instructions:
 1. Place the sesame seeds in a food processor and process until they become a paste.
 2. Add the water, honey, and lemon juice and process until the mixture is smooth.
 3. Taste and adjust the seasoning if necessary.
 4. Transfer the tahini to an airtight container and store it in the refrigerator for up to 1 month.


                                                                                                          FedBis
 Sure, here is a recipe for making tahini at home:

 Ingredients:
 - 1 cup of sesame seeds
 - 2 tablespoons of water
 - 2 tablespoons of honey
 - 2 tablespoons of lemon juice
 - 1 teaspoon of garlic
 - 1/2 teaspoon of salt

 Instructions:
 1. Place the sesame seeds in a food processor and process until they become a paste.
 2. Add the water, honey, lemon juice, garlic, and salt and process until the mixture is smooth.
 3. Taste and adjust the seasoning if necessary.
 4. Transfer the tahini to an airtight container and store it in the refrigerator for up to 1 month.


                                                                                                        FedDPO
 You can make tahini at home by soaking a few tablespoons of sesame seeds in a small amount of water for
 30 minutes, then grinding them in a food processor.
 Add a tablespoon of the resulting paste to your falafel to give them a delicious, nutty flavor.


                                                                                                         FedAvg
 I’ve been making tahini with a blender.
 I put a cup of sesame seeds in a blender, add a cup of water, and blend until smooth.
 I then strain the mixture through a cheesecloth-lined strainer.
 I’ve been using the tahini for a few weeks now and it’s been great.


                                                                                                   Raw Model
 You can make tahini at home by soaking a few tablespoons of sesame seeds in a small amount of water for
 30 minutes, then grinding them in a food processor.
 Add a tablespoon of the resulting paste to your falafel to give them a nutty flavor.


                                       Figure 6: LLaMA QA Sample.


                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Reddit Post: What is your most memorable act of kindness and why?
 Random or otherwise.
 I was walking to school one morning when I was about 15 when I heard a voice call out "Hello? Excuse me?
 Young man?".
 I turned and saw a frail old man who must have been in his 90s standing in the doorway of his house.
 I walked over and he asked if I could help him with something. I said I would help, so I followed him to a
 step-ladder in his kitchen.
 He said that he needed to change the bulb but he couldn’t get up the ladder.
 After I changed the bulb, he said that he’d give me something for helping out.
 He reached for a small tray of change on his kitchen table and picked out the only 50p coin in his tray of 1p
 and 2p coins.
 I told him he didn’t have to give me anything but he said that it was only right to reward helping out an old
 man.

                                                                                               FedBiscuit
 A Reddit user recounts a heartwarming act of kindness where they helped an elderly man change a lightbulb
 in his kitchen.
 The stranger gave them a 50p coin as a reward for their help.
 The act of kindness was memorable because it brought a smile to the elderly man’s face and showed that
 even in their old age, people can still do good deeds for others.

                                                                                                    FedBis
 A Reddit user recounts a heartwarming act of kindness where they helped an elderly man change a lightbulb
 in his kitchen. The stranger gave them a 50p coin as a reward for their help. The act of kindness was
 memorable because it brought a smile to the elderly man’s face and showed that even in their old age, people
 can still do good deeds for others.

                                                                                                  FedDPO
 A Reddit user recounts a heartwarming story of a 90-year-old man who needed help changing a lightbulb in
 his kitchen.
 The user, who was 15 at the time, heard the man’s plea for help and went to his aid. The man gave the user

                                                                                                   FedAvg
 Old man in his 90s needed help changing a bulb. I helped him and he gave me a 50p coin.

                                                                                              Raw Model
 A Reddit user recounts a heartwarming story of a stranger who helped an elderly man change a lightbulb in
 his kitchen.
 The stranger, who was walking to school at 15, heard a voice call out for help and followed the old man to
 his house.
 He changed the lightbulb and the old man gave him a 50p coin as a reward.
 The stranger didn’t have

                               Figure 7: Gemma Summarization Sample.


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Reddit Post: TIFU by locking myself out of my room.
 It all started with a cultural tour. Being active duty military and stationed overseas in Japan we were voluntold
 to partake in a tour of the local area. Fun and dandy right?
 I was ecstatic about the free tour of the local area. Except when I woke up five minutes before the tour starts.
 Luckily the meeting area was a Starbucks just outside of my room.
 Que the rushing, the frantic panic to dress up, and get down in time. I left my ID which is also conveniently
 my room key. Two more mistakes. (Straying away from the story, the military is all about being on time and
 integrity. Hence "excellence in all we do".)
 Realizing I fucked up bad, I told the host that I had left my REQUIRED ID in my room, which is my room
 key locking myself out.
 I couldn’t go on the tour and now I’m stuck in the Starbucks waiting until one of my supervisors picks me up
 and lets me into my room. I’m expecting more than just a little scolding, paperwork even.

                                                                                                   FedBiscuit
 The poster was locked out of their room due to leaving their ID, which was also their room key, in their rush
 to make it on time for a cultural tour.
 They are now stuck in a Starbucks waiting for someone to pick them up and let them into their room.
 They expect to receive a scolding and possibly even paperwork for the mistake.

                                                                                                       FedBis
 While on a cultural tour in Japan, the poster locked themselves out of their room, leading to them being stuck
 in a Starbucks and expecting a scolding from their supervisors.

                                                                                                     FedDPO
 While on a cultural tour in Japan, the poster was locked out of their room due to leaving their ID and room
 key in the room. They are now stuck in a Starbucks waiting for a supervisor to pick them up and let them
 into their room. They expect to receive a scolding and possibly paperwork for the mistake.

                                                                                                      FedAvg
 I locked myself out of my room and now I’m stuck in Starbucks waiting for a supervisor to pick me up and
 let me into my room.

                                                                                                  Raw Model
 While on a cultural tour in Japan, the poster was locked out of their room due to leaving their ID and room
 key in the room.
 They were stuck in a Starbucks until one of their supervisors picked them up and let them into their room.
 They expect to receive a scolding and possibly paperwork for the mistake.

                                Figure 8: LLaMA Summarization Sample.


                                                       24
