Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B EYOND M ODEL C OLLAPSE : S CALING U P WITH S YN -
THESIZED DATA R EQUIRES V ERIFICATION

 Yunzhen Feng1,2,∗,∥ Elvis Dohmatob1,3,4,∗ Pu Yang5,∗ Francois Charton1 Julia Kempe1,2
 1
   Meta FAIR 2 New York University 3 Concordia University 4 Mila 5 Peking University
 ∗
   Equal Contribution. ∥ Part of the work was done during an internship at Meta.
 Correspondence to yf2231@nyu.edu



                                             A BSTRACT
         Large Language Models (LLM) are increasingly trained on data generated by other
         LLMs, either because generated text and images become part of the pre-training
         corpus, or because synthetized data is used as a replacement for expensive human-
         annotation. This raises concerns about model collapse, a drop in model performance
         when their training sets include generated data. Considering that it is easier for
         both humans and machines to tell between good and bad examples than to generate
         high-quality samples, we investigate the use of verification on synthesized data to
         prevent model collapse. We provide a theoretical characterization using Gaussian
         mixtures, linear classifiers, and linear verifiers to derive conditions with measurable
         proxies to assess whether the verifier can effectively select synthesized data that
         leads to optimal performance. We experiment with practical tasks – computing
         matrix eigenvalues with transformers and news summarization with LLMs – which
         both exhibit model collapse when trained on generated data, and show that verifiers,
         even imperfect ones, can indeed be harnessed to prevent model collapse and that
         our proposed proxy measure strongly correlates with performance.

1    I NTRODUCTION
As generative models for language, images, and video continue to achieve human-level performance
(Touvron et al., 2023; Achiam et al., 2023; Ramesh et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2024),
they are increasingly used to synthesize data across diverse domains, including coding (Haluptzok
et al., 2022) and mathematics (Trinh et al., 2024). With this rise in AI-generated data, there is growing
interest in its potential to replace expensive human annotators.
This gradual replacement of human-written corpora by machine-generated tokens gives rise to a
number of concerns, notably the risk of “model collapse” (Shumailov et al., 2023; 2024), where
iterated training on synthesized data brings a drop in model performance, and, ultimately, “dumber
models”. The phenomenon was observed empirically in (Hataya et al., 2023; Martı́nez et al.,
2023a;b; Bohacek & Farid, 2023; Briesch et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2023; Taori & Hashimoto, 2023)
and theoretically analyzed in (Alemohammad et al., 2023; Bertrand et al., 2023; Dohmatob et al.,
2024c;a). In particular, Dohmatob et al. (2024c;a) show that model collapse is an effective change
of scaling law: as data becomes more synthetic, larger training sets do not enhance performance.
Current thinking around model collapse recommends that synthetic data is to be avoided for model
training lest the system deteriorate completely.
This raises a critical question: are synthesized data so fundamentally flawed that they must be
identified and discarded using detection techniques (Zhang et al., 2024b), corrected through various
refinement methods (Gillman et al., 2024) or used as negative feedback (Alemohammad et al., 2024)?
In this work, we argue that synthesized data contain abundant valuable information that can be
effectively leveraged. We advocate for a paradigm of verifier-based selection of synthesized data and
provide criteria for when this process is successful - even with imperfect verifiers.
Throughout this paper, we focus on a scenario where synthesized data serve as the labels (answers)
to questions—a common framework in tasks such as question answering, code generation, and
mathematical reasoning. To begin, we explore the information contained in synthesized data through
a controlled experiment: training transformers on a linear algebra task. This setting allows us to


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

                               Verifier
                                                                                                                       Ground Truth                            Ground Truth

                                                                      Oracle Verification
                                 Oracle
                                                                                                                                                                    Pruner


                                              Performance
                                                                       Model Verification


                 Synthesized
                                                                                                                       Trained Model                            Verification
                                                                              Generator


                    Data
                                                                                                                         (Generator)                             Generator

     Generator                 Good Model                                                                                      Final Model
                                                                     Without Verification
                                                                      (Model Collapse)


                                Without
                                                                                                                                             Selected Synthesized Data
                                                            Number of Synthesized Data                 Original Data
                               Verification                                                                                                  Discarded Synthesized Data


    (a) The generator is capable of producing high-                                             (b) In theory, we consider a Gaussian mixture
    quality data, and verifiers can extract this data                                           model with a linear generator and linear pruner.
    through selection to prevent model collapse, which                                          The pruner improves synthesized data through se-
    occurs in the absence of such selection.                                                    lection, resulting in improved performance.

       Figure 1: Illustrative figures for our proposal (a) and for the theoretical and simulation settings (b).
both understand the solutions and easily synthesize data, placing it into a long established corpus
of works that study interesting phenomena in a controlled setting to advance our understanding of
the underlying mechanisms in larger models in the wild. For example, see (Power et al., 2022; Garg
et al., 2022; Charton, 2024; Dohmatob et al., 2024c). In this context, we find that the accuracy of the
most accurate synthesized solution among the top candidates is three times higher than that of the
solution selected by the model itself based on perplexity — its own measure of quality. This finding
provides a positive answer to our question: the model is indeed capable of generating high-quality
solutions. However, it cannot intrinsically identify the best solution using perplexity alone. Thus,
effectively scaling with synthesized data requires a robust selection and verification process.
We proceed to provide a theoretical characterization using Gaussian mixtures and linear classifiers,
employing an external verifier to select the generated data. In the limit of infinite synthesized data, we
analyze the conditions required for the generator and verifier to enable the model, trained on selected
synthesized data, to achieve Bayes-optimal results. Notably, there is a sharp phase transition — from
zero accuracy due to errors in the synthesized data to optimal accuracy. Our theory confirms that there
is abundant information within the synthesized data, and that proper, not necessarily perfect, selection
can overcome model collapse. We also identify a measurable proxy function that characterizes the
ability of the verifier to select synthesized data that results in good models when retraining on it.
We further conduct large-scale experiments to test our theoretical insights : (1) the above mentioned
transformers on a linear algebra task and (2) news summarization using the LLM Llama-2 (Touvron
et al., 2023). In both experiments, we apply various verifiers for selection and compute our theoretical
proxy function. Our results show that relying solely on generated data leads to poorer performance
than that of the generator itself, even with increased data volume, indicating model collapse. However,
even with noisy and imperfect selection methods, synthesized data can be improved to yield models
that outperform the original generator. Our proxy function strongly correlates with final performance
across all cases. In particular it elucidates the counter-intuitive fact that a stronger model is not
automatically a better selector — as we demonstrate by showing inferior performance when selecting
with Llama-3 compared to self-selection with Llama-2 for Llama-2-generated text.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
     • We provide a theoretical analysis in the high-dimensional limit with infinite data proving that
       synthesized data with appropriate selection can lead to optimal performance, and provide a
       characterization of necessary conditions via a measurable proxy function (Section 4).
     • We validate our theoretical findings in three empirical settings of increasing departure from our
       theoretical assumptions:
          – Simulation results with linear classifiers, tested in a finite-data regime (Section 5),
          – Linear algebra tasks with transformers trained in a generative way (Section 6.1),
          – News summarization using Llama-2 (Section 6.3).

2      R ELATED W ORK

We here only list works of direct relevance to ours, with an extensive reference list in Appendix A.
Model Collapse. With the advancement of generative models, synthesized data generated by these
models has become increasingly prevalent online, mixing irreversibly into our training corpora.
Recent studies have highlighted the potential for dramatic deterioration in downstream models, a


                                                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


phenomenon known as “model collapse” (Shumailov et al., 2023). Empirical studies have demon-
strated this issue in various settings (Hataya et al., 2023; Martı́nez et al., 2023a;b; Bohacek & Farid,
2023; Briesch et al., 2023; Dohmatob et al., 2024b; Yang et al., 2025; Askari-Hemmat et al., 2025).
Synthetic data can also amplify biases through feedback loops (Taori & Hashimoto, 2023). Syn-
thesized datasets have been shown to reduce diversity (Padmakumar & He, 2024; Guo et al., 2023)
and cause distributional distortions (LeBrun et al., 2021). Theoretical analysis also examines the
effects of iterative training on self-generated data (Alemohammad et al., 2023; Bertrand et al., 2023;
Dohmatob et al., 2024a; Seddik et al., 2024). Notably, Dohmatob et al. (2024c) warn that model
collapse signifies a break in customary neural scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al.,
2022), where increasing synthesized data volume does not enhance performance as effectively as
scaling with human-generated data. As a result, recent works have focused on avoiding or correcting
synthetic data to prevent model collapse. Gillman et al. (2024) propose using a correction function
informed by expert knowledge to modify the synthesized data. Alemohammad et al. (2024) leverage
a model trained on synthetic data as negative guidance for diffusion models. Zhang et al. (2024b)
employ the confidence score and an AI detection classifier to discard synthesized data. In contrast,
we propose leveraging the synthesized data through selection techniques.
Benefits of Synthesized Data. Synthetic data holds great potential, as it is much easier and cheaper
to scale compared to human-labeled data. Numerous empirical studies have demonstrated the benefits
of synthesized data across a wide range of settings. Common practices include cases where the
downstream task slightly differs from that of the data-generating model, where the generating model
is significantly stronger than the consuming one, or when better prompt engineering and external
information are utilized. In Appendix A.1, we provide a taxonomy that outlines when and how
synthesized data can be advantageous. Data selection is already employed in some works, particularly
in code generation and mathematics, where natural verifiers such as compilers, solutions, or heuristic
verifiers exist. For instance, Haluptzok et al. (2022) generate synthesized code and filter out incorrect
samples. Ulmer et al. (2024) use conversational metrics to filter synthetic dialogue data. Trinh
et al. (2024) utilize a symbolic deduction engine to verify correct solutions for Olympiad geometry
problems. Setlur et al. (2024) apply a final answer verifier to distinguish between good and bad
synthetic data. Although verifiers are used in these cases, their effects on performance have not been
systematically explored, especially in terms of how different types of verifiers influence outcomes.
Data Selection. Data selection is a preprocessing technique typically applied to original datasets with
human labels, as discussed in various related works (see Appendix A.3). In contrast, our work focuses
on data selection for synthesized data, which does not represent a noisy version of the ground truth
but rather a skewed distribution. Our aim is not to propose new selection methods but to demonstrate
how selection can prevent model collapse and to analyze the conditions under which it is effective.

3    WARMUP
We first focus on transformer models on a mathematical task, which offers an interpretable setting to
understand the generation quality since we have a clear metric for error and a computable ground
truth, as well as the ability to generate as much (original) data as desirable.
Setting. We follow Charton (2022), who
showed that transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) Table 1: Generator accuracy for different beam sizes.
can learn to predict the eigenvalues of 5 × 5 Left: the most accurate solution in the beam is evaluated.
real symmetric matrices with independent and Right: the solution with lowest perplexity is evaluated.
identically distributed entries, rounded to three
significant digits. All training, test, and synthe-                 Verify                Verify
                                                                  all beams           the best beam
sized data are generated by sampling matrices
with independent entries from U[−10, 10]. A Tolerance τ 2% 1% 0.5% 2% 1% 0.5%
prediction is considered correct if the relative Beam 50      90.4 60.4 22.9 65.9 19.2 2.4
error in the L1 norm is below a certain tolerance Beam 25     88.0 53.2 16.8 66.1 19.3 2.4
τ . The synthesized data generator is trained Beam 10         83.7 43.1 10.5 66.2 19.5 2.5
on a limited sample of 200,000 examples with Beam 5           79.3 34.9 7.1         66.5 19.7 2.4
Adam for 65 epochs. Details on the tokenizer Greedy           66.9 20.2 2.4         66.9 20.2 2.4
and optimization can be found in Appendix B.
We aim to evaluate the quality of the generator’s outputs and determine how much useful information
can be extracted from it. To achieve this, we employ beam search, an inference technique that


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


maintains multiple candidate sequences (referred to as ”beams”) during the generation process to
explore a larger portion of the solution space. Beam search tracks the top k candidate sequences
based on their cumulative probability scores, expanding each by considering all possible next tokens.
When k = 1, beam search is equivalent to greedy decoding. The algorithm continues this expansion
until the full generation process is complete, allowing us to assess the upper bound of the generator’s
capabilities and better understand its limitations and strengths.
In Table 1, we report the test accuracy of generated predictions using beam search. We consider two
settings: evaluating only the best beam identified by the model (right) to understand the model’s
actual predictions, and another evaluating all k candidates in the beams, with the best one contributing
to the accuracy (left) to assess the model’s full potential.
For self-selection, increasing the number of beams does not lead to any improvement in accuracy,
despite significantly higher inference costs. However, in the left setting, moving from greedy decoding
(beam 1) to beam 50 improves accuracy from 20.2% to 60.4%, with τ = 1%. This indicates that
the model has considerable potential to generate improved solutions, but it lacks the inherent
capability to autonomously select the best predictions. Among the vast amount of synthesized
data, there may be high-quality data, but effective selection is necessary.

4     T HEORETICAL I NSIGHTS
In this section, we aim to theoretically explore training and verification using synthesized data,
and characterize the conditions under which verification enhances performance. To streamline our
analysis, we focus exclusively on training with synthesized data, since the inclusion of additional
real data is always advantageous. We consider learning with a family of high-dimensional data
distributions. Within this context, the verification process is implemented as a pruning strategy
applied to synthesized data. Crucially, we will not assume that the pruning strategy has access to the
ground truth, as such an assumption would be overly restrictive for practical applications; rather, we
will formulate our theory for general pruners, which could for instance be like another trained model.
A full exposition of our general theory is in Appendix E; for ease of exposition, we specialize here to
Gaussian mixtures.

4.1   S ETTING

Data Distribution. We will consider distributions P over Rd × {0, 1} with certain high dimensional
concentration properties of a general form (Condition E.1). A special case are binary Gaussian
mixtures: features have conditional distribution given by x | y ∼ N (µy , Σ), where µy = (2y − 1)µ,
for some µ ∈ Rd and Σ is a positive-definite matrix with E ∥x∥2 = ∥µ∥22 + tr Σ = 1. For further
ease of exposition we will only consider balanced distributions:
                            P(y = 1) = P(y = 0) = 1/2, for (x, y) ∼ P.

Synthesized Data. Let DN = {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xN , yN )} be a dataset of N i.i.d. pairs from the true
                          ′
distribution P and let DN   = {(x1 , y1′ ), . . . , (xN , yN
                                                           ′
                                                             )} be the synthesized data generated from the
same distribution, but where label yi′ (instead of yi ) has been generated by an AI model. Further,
we shall denote by p ∈ [0, 1), the probability that the label yi′ of a synthesized example (x, yi′ ) is
different from the true label yi , i.e
                                         p := P(yi′ ̸= yi ).                                          (1)
Note that p does not depend on the example index i, due to the i.i.d. assumption. We make no further
assumptions on the synthesize data.
Downstream Model and Pruning. We will model our data selection (whether with or without
feedback) via a pruning strategy q = (q1 , . . . , qN ) where qi is a bit which indicates whether the ith
                        ′
training example from DN   has survived pruning. For the downstream models we consider the family:
                                                                                 1
                  P(y = 1 | x, w) = ŷ := σ(x⊤ w) ∈ (0, 1),         σ(z) :=
                                                                              1 + e−z
parametrized by a vector of weights w ∈ Rd and sigmoid non-linearity σ. Let w bN be obtained via
                               ′
logistic regression fitted on DN with ridge regularization parameter λ > 0. Thus, ŵ is the unique


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


minimizer of the following objective function:
                                      N
                                   1 X                       λ
                        L(w) :=          qi ℓ(σ(x⊤      ′        2
                                                 i w), yi ) + ∥w∥ ,                                  (2)
                                  N i=1                      2
where ℓ is the binary cross-entropy. The corresponding downstream classifier is fbN = fwbN , where
the notation fw refers to the linear classifier induced by a weights vector w ∈ Rd , i.e fw (x) =
(sign(x⊤ w) + 1)/2. Test Accuracy. The test accuracy of the downstream model fbN is defined by
              acc(fbN ) := P(fbN (x) = fBayes (x)), for a random test point (x, y) ∼ P,
where fBayes (z) := E[y|x = z] is the Bayes-optimal classifier. In particular, note that acc(fBayes ) =
100% by construction. The quantity acc(fbN ) will be the main object of our analysis, and we will be
interested in how it depends on errors in the generator P and the choice of pruning strategy q, in the
infinite-sample limit N → ∞.

4.2   P RUNING S TRATEGY

We consider a wide class of parametrized pruning strategies q, which we term Verification-Pruning
(see Appendix E). They satisfy the following reasonable property:
Assumption 4.1 (Independent Selection). The bits q1 , . . . , qN ∈ {0, 1} are independent. Thus, in
particular, whether any training example ei := (xi , yi′ ) ∈ DN
                                                              ′
                                                                survives pruning or not is independent
of what happens to the other examples ej̸=i .
In its most general form, our verification-pruning family (refer to Appendix E for details) is described
by four parameters (ϕ0 , ϕ1 , ψ01 , ψ10 ), defined as follows:
              ϕk = P(q = 1 | y ′ = k, y = k), ψkℓ = P(q = 1 | y ′ = ℓ, y = k).                        (3)
Assumption 4.1 implies that for any class labels k, ℓ ∈ {0, 1}, the random variables (zikℓ )i∈[N ]
defined by zikℓ = 1[yi = k, yi′ = ℓ, qi = 1] are i.i.d. with Bernoulli(pkℓ ) distribution, with
      pkk = (1 − p)ϕk /2, and pkℓ = pψkℓ /2 if k ̸= ℓ, with p ∈ [0, 1) as in equation 1.        (4)
For simplicity of exposition, we will focus on symmetric pruning strategies where ϕ1 = ϕ0 = ϕ and
ψ01 = ψ10 = ψ. Such pruning strategies are therefore described by a pair of parameters (ϕ, ψ).
Let us provide two more notable examples of (symmetric) pruning strategies.
No Pruning. The case (ϕ, ψ) = (1, 1) corresponds to no pruning, i.e using the entire training dataset.
Oracle Pruning. The case (ϕ, ψ) = (1, 0). The pruning strategy only keeps indices corresponding
to examples in the dataset which have correct label (all corrupted labels are discarded).
Supervised Pruning. We shall also consider supervised pruning strategies q defined by
                                   qi = 1[yi′ (x⊤
                                                i wprune ) > 0],                                     (5)
                      d
for some wprune ∈ R . This pruning strategy filters out all examples on which there is disagreement
on the assigned label. In Appendix E we show how we can map this to (ϕ, ψ)-pruning.

4.3   P ERFORMANCE OF M ODELS T RAINED WITH P RUNING : I NSIGHTS FROM
      I NFINITE -S AMPLE R EGIME

The following is our main theoretical result (see Theorem E.3 for full statement). It characterizes test
accuracy acc(fbN ) of the downstream model on pruned data as a function of p (the label disagreement)
and the parameters (ϕ, ψ) of the pruner, in the theoretical limit of infinite training data (N → ∞).
Theorem 4.2 (Simplified version of Theorem E.3). Let Assumption 4.1 be in order. Fix p, ϕ, ψ and
define the breakdown point p⋆ ∈ (0, 1) by p⋆ := 1/(1 + ψ/ϕ). For the family of data distributions
obeying Condition E.1 (including the Gaussian mixture), for a downstream model fbN trained on
data from a generator with error rate p, pruned with an verification-type strategy with parameters
(ϕ, ψ), in the limit N → ∞ it holds a.s that: (i) If p < p⋆ then acc(fbN ) = 100%. (ii) If p > p⋆ then
acc(fbN ) = 0%. The pruner is overwhelmed by so many inaccuracies in the synthesized data, and
the downstream model learns the exact opposite of the true class labels.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thus, there is a sharp phase-transition around the
corruption level p⋆ := 1/(1 + ψ/ϕ): as p is in-
creased past level p⋆ , the downstream model fbN
abruptly switches from being perfectly accurate, to
perfectly inaccurate! The proof (see Appendix E.7
for a sketch) explicitly computes empirical test accu-
                           PN
racy in terms of Nkℓ := i=1 zikℓ , which follow a
binomial distribution, bounding the gap to the popu-
lation accuracy, and using concentration of measureFigure 2: Empirical confirmation of Theorem
type techniques. Note that the sharp transition is due
                                                   4.2. Comparing the breakdown points of differ-
to the infinite-sample regime, where we can avoid  ent generators and pruners of different strengths.
                                                   Synthesized data is generated from a linear model
finite-sample corrections. p∗ could be used as a mea-
surable proxy in the experiment.                   wgen with classification error rate p = θgen /π ∈
                                                   [0, 1]. The data is pruned with another linear model
See Figure 2 (and Figure 6 in Appendix E) for an wprune which has classification error θprune /π.
empirical illustration of the theorem.             Broken lines correspond to the prediction of The-
                                                   orem 4.2, while solid points correspond to exper-
Remark 4.3. Note that the 100% accuracy achiev- iments. Notice the sharp phase transitions where
able in Theorem 4.2 is idealized, and is expected the model suddenly switches from perfect accuracy
to only hold in the infinite sample regime (with a to worse-than-chance, as the theorem predicts.
possibly large but fixed input dimension).

4.4   S OME C ONSEQUENCES OF T HEOREM 4.2

We now present some illustrious applications of Theorem E.3. These examples are empirically
confirmed in Figure 2 (see also Figure 6 in Appendix E).
No Pruning. Here, we have ψ/ϕ = 1 and so the downstream model achieves 100% accuracy for all
values of corruption parameter p up to the breakdown point p⋆ = 1/2 predicted by Theorem E.3 .
Oracle Pruning. For this scenario, ψ/ϕ = 0 and so Theorem E.3 predicts that the downstream
model fbN achieves 100% accuracy for all values of corruption parameter p up to the breakdown point
p⋆ = 1. This is perhaps not so surprising in hindsight. The point is that even for moderately large
values of ψ/ϕ, the breakdown point p⋆ can still be quite close to 1.
Supervised Pruning. Consider isotropic Gaussian mixture data with means ±µ, and a pruning
strategy as in Eq. (5). The parameters (ϕ, ψ) only depend on the angles θgen , θprune , θ ∈ [0, π]:
                         θgen := ∠(wgen , µ), θprune := ∠(wprune , µ),
                                                                                                      (6)
                            θ := ∠(wprune , wgen ).
This is because, the pkℓ ’s defined in equation 4 now correspond to orthant probabilities for a trivariate
normal distribution, with correlation coefficients given by these angles (see also Figure 2). In the
Appendix E.6, we provide the calculation from the angles to ψ and ϕ. In practice, we can directly
measure the proxy p∗ , which encapsulates all the aforementioned correlations.
Decoupling the Generator and Verifier. Although the generator and verifier are coupled together
in supervised pruning, there are some intuitions that help us decouple them: (1) a better generator
always improves performance, (2) when the verifier is poor, such as in cases of no pruning or random
pruning, we have a low breakdown point and require a good generator to achieve good performance,
and (3) when the verifier is sufficiently good, close to an oracle, the breakdown point is high, and any
non-degenerate generator is sufficient.

5     S IMULATIONS ON S YNTHESIZED DATA

The theoretical results are based on the best-case scenario of having unlimited access to synthesized
data and operating in the high-dimensional limit. In this framework, the impact of generator and
verifier on performance is reflected in binary outcomes: 100% or 0%. In this section, we present
simulation results from finite regimes to illustrate the practical implications of our theoretical
framework. Specifically, we explore how the generator and verifier influence performance, and
how performance scales with an increasing, yet finite, volume of synthesized data.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Oracle Data         Oracle Selection                                 Weak Supervision prune = /24               Weak prune = /12         Random Selection
                         Number of Training Data: N0 = 100                                    Number of Training Data: N0 = 300                Number of Training Data: N0 = 900
                 10 1                                                                 10 1                                                               10 1



Relative Error


                                                                     Relative Error


                                                                                                                                        Relative Error
                 10 2                                                                 10 2                                                               10 2


                 10 3                                                                 10 3                                                               10 3


                 10 4                                                                 10 4                                                               10 4
                    101        102       103      104          105                       101        102        103      104       105                       101       102      103      104       105
                           Number of Synthesized Data n0                                        Number of Synthesized Data n0                                     Number of Synthesized Data n0
                  1.0                                                                  1.0                                                                1.0
                  0.8                                                                  0.8                                                                0.8
                  0.6                                                                  0.6                                                                0.6
p*


                                                                     p*


                                                                                                                                        p*
                  0.4                                                                  0.4                                                                0.4
                  0.2                                                                  0.2                                                                0.2
                  0.0                                                                  0.0                                                                0.0
                                      Strategy                                                            Strategy                                                          Strategy

Figure 3: Simulations with Gaussian mixtures. (Top row) Relative error (accuracy relative to optimal
accuracy) scaling as a function number of selected data, n′ , used to train the model. τ = 0.15, N1 = 106 . The
Bayes optimal classifier achieves approximately 94% accuracy on this distribution. (Bottom row) p∗ values for
all settings.

 5.1                      S ETTING

Following the theoretical setting, we consider the same Gaussian mixture and linear models for the
generator and selector. Let w∗ be a fixed unit vector in Rd . The distribution Porig is
                                                        x|y ∼ N (yτ w∗ , Id /d),                                     for y ∈ [−1, +1].
Here, τ is a positive scalar that controls the overlap.
Synthesized Data Generation and Verification. We sample N0 data points from the distribution
Porig to form the original dataset, which is used to train a linear model, ŵN0 , employing ordinary least
squares. We then generate a large synthesized dataset using the trained model ŵN0 with a sigmoid
                                                                       gen,N0
function, which undergoes selection by various verifiers into sets Dvrf       . In our study, these verifiers
are linear models parameterized by various wθprune , where θprune denotes the angle between the
pruner and the ground truth w∗ . Having the verified synthesized data, we then randomly select n′
             gen,N0
data from Dvrf      to train and evaluate the final models.

 5.2                      L ESSONS L EARNED

In Figure 3, we conduct several simulations varying N0 , θprune , and n′ . A larger N0 indicates a
more effectively trained generator, utilizing a greater amount of original data. θprune determines the
verifier’s quality, with θprune = 0 corresponding to the use of the ground truth as an oracle verifier.
We further explore scenarios where θprune = 24    π      π
                                                    and 12 . The variable n′ represents the number of
synthesized samples used to train the final model. We plot the scaling curves as n′ approaches infinity,
a scenario analyzed by our theory. The “random” line represents the process of randomly selecting n′
data points from the synthesized dataset without any verification. The “clean” line indicates training
of the model using n′ data points from the original distribution. We make the following observations:
Oracle Verification Matches Training with Oracle Labels. The oracle verifier achieves the best
performance, matching training with clean data across all settings and attaining Bayes optimal
accuracy. This validates the theory that synthesized data has the full information which can be
extracted with verification.
The Effectiveness of a Weak Verifier Depends on n′ . In practical scenarios, obtaining oracle-level
verification is often challenging, so weaker forms of verification are typically employed. While a
weak verifier generally leads to poorer performance, consistent with the decaying threshold points
predicted by theory, there is a surprising “sweet spot” at a certain data size (for the curves with
            π
θprune = 12   ). Training around 10,000 data outperforms training with more data. Therefore, the
choice of verifier should also take into account the quantity of data selected.
p∗ is strongly correlated with the final performance. Across all settings, the relative values of
p∗ consistently align with the models’ performance. The simulations provide practical validation
of the theoretical results and are consistent with the interpretation presented in Section 4.4. Oracle
supervision yields optimal performance, and, in general, improving both the generator and verifier
leads to enhanced results.

                                                                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Implementation of our three experiments: We progressively explore our insights through three
real-world experiments. First, we conduct simulations in a finite-data regime, where all settings align with
theoretical expectations. Next, we examine transformers trained on generation tasks, evaluated using a 0-1
metric. Finally, we analyze large language models with general metrics.

 Settings                   Data              Task             Model                                     Verifiers                Metric
 Simulation    Gaussian mixture classification linear model linear models classification accuracy
 Arithmetic    synthesized data  generation transformer (noisy) verifiers accuracy w. tolerance
 Summarization XLSUM dataset     generation       Llama        Llamas     similarity w. Rouge-1

6       E XPERIMENTS

In both the theoretical results and the simulations, we examine a classification scenario where oracle
supervision can select “100% correct” synthesized data. However, outside of these controlled settings,
synthesized data may only approximate the ground truth, meaning the selected data might be closer
to the truth rather than exactly correct. In this section, we explore verification for more general
tasks using generative models through two experiments: (1) training a transformer to predict the
eigenvalues of a matrix, and (2) fine-tuning Llama-2-7B on a news summarization task. Table 2
provides an overview of how we gradually relax the setting from theoretical to empirical. For the
purposes of our discussion here, we refer to model collapse whenever the performance of the model
trained on synthetic data is worse than that of the original generator.

6.1       T RANSFORMER FOR A RITHMETIC TASKS

Recall the setting described in Section 3, where a transformer is trained in a generative manner using
200K samples of matrices and their corresponding eigenvalues. This setting allows for the synthesis
of unlimited data by generating random matrices and using the generator to predict their eigenvalues.
We first introduce the oracle verifier that measures the rel-                                                  Generator
                                                                                                    55
ative L1 distance between the model’s predictions and the                                                      data size: 1M
                                                                       Accuracy with 1% tolerance


                                                                                                    50         data size: 5M
correct solutions. We use greedy decoding to generate a                                                        data size: 10M
prediction for each matrix, and only matrices with predic-                                          45
tions within a tolerance of τ = 1% (as determined by the                                            40
oracle verifier) are retained. Additionally, we introduce a                                         35
set of noisy verifiers, where data with predicted solutions
                                                                                                    30
exceeding the 1% tolerance are still included with a prob-
                                                                                                    25
ability of pnoise 1 . Since we are evaluating accuracy in a
binary (0/1) manner for each data point, we can directly                                            20
                                                                                                         0.5      0.6       0.7   0.8   0.9   1.0
compute ψ and ϕ in Equation 3, with y ′ = y replaced by                                           p*
being within 1% relative L1 tolerance. The noisy verifier                Figure 4: Transformers computing eigen-
corresponds to setting ϕ = 1 and ψ = pnoise . Conse-                     values. Correlation between accuracy with
quently, according to our theory, the proxy is given by                  1% tolerance, p∗ , and the number of syn-
                                                                         thesized data. Model collapse is observed
p∗ = 1/(1 + pnoise ). For perfect oracle verifier, pnoise = 0            without verification (p∗ = 0.5), while higher
and p∗ = 1; for random selection without verification,                   values of p∗ result in improved performance.
pnoise = 1 and p∗ = 0.5.                                                 Results are averaged over 5 seeds.
We generate various verified synthesized datasets, with data sizes ranging from 1 million to 5 million,
and up to 10 million samples. Using these datasets, the transformer is trained from scratch and
evaluated with greedy decoding. We report how different verifiers, specifically different proxy values
p∗ , and varying dataset sizes affect the final performance in Figure 4. We observe the following:
Model Collapse is Observed. When using synthesized data without any verification, at p∗ = 0.5,
even with a significantly larger dataset — 10 million samples, or 50 times the size of the generator’s
original training set — the trained model performs worse than the generator itself (represented by the
dashed line). This outcome indicates the occurrence of model collapse.
p∗ as a Reliable Proxy for Final Performance. When leveraging verification, we observe a
consistent increase in performance. With the oracle verifier (p∗ = 1), the accuracy nearly doubles.
This observation aligns with practices in code generation and mathematics (Haluptzok et al., 2022;
    1
        This is equivalent to introducing random noise in the selection of both correct and incorrect data.


                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Trinh et al., 2024), where a natural verifier, such as precomputed solutions, unit tests, or a compiler,
is available. Across all dataset sizes, p∗ shows a strong correlation with the final performance.
Furthermore, using 10 million samples approximates the effect of having infinite synthetic data; the
turning point on the green curve, which surpasses the generator’s performance, occurs around 0.65 in
Figure 4. This value is close to the generator’s error rate (i.e., 1 minus the accuracy, represented by
the dashed line) and reflects the phase transition predicted by our theory.

6.2   G ENERALIZATION OF THE P ROXY

In the theory and the task of predicting eigenvalues, the evaluation is a two-way classification problem.
For synthetic y ′ and ground truth y, the indicator s, which measures the similarity, is a 0/1 variable.
We can rewrite p := 1 − E[s] and define ϕ = P(q = 1 | s = 1), ψ = P(q = 1 | s = 0). For general
problems, we may instead have a distance measure s between y and y ′ . We extend the definition of
p∗ under the assumption that s is normalized to lie in [0, 1], and redefine ϕ and ψ as follows:
                            ϕ = Es [qs]/(1 − p),       ψ = Es [q(1 − s)]/p.

When s takes values in {0, 1}, these definitions are consistent with those in Equation (3). With this
extension, we now move to consider general problems in NLP.
6.3   LLM S FOR N EWS S UMMARIZATION

We now turn to one of the most standard tasks in NLP: news summarization. We utilize the English
summarization subset of the XLSUM dataset (Hasan et al., 2021), the largest publicly available
summarization dataset, consisting of 307,000 training samples and 11,500 test samples. Each sample
in this dataset contains a news article x paired with a professionally annotated summary y. Unlike in
the previous cases, we no longer have infinite (x, y) pairs due to the finite number of news articles
available. Therefore, we fine-tune a Llama-2-7B model (Touvron et al., 2023) on only 12.5% of the
training set to serve as the generator. The synthesized data (news summaries) is generated using the
articles of the entire training set with greedy decoding. This approach reflects real-world conditions
where synthetic data generation can significantly outpace human annotation. In this setting, we use
the Rouge-1 score (Lin, 2004) to evaluate the generated summary y ′ . Rouge-1 assesses the quality
of the generated summary by measuring the overlap of individual words between the generated and
human-written summaries y.
We consider three selection strategies: (1) Selection with Oracle: We calculate the Rouge score
between the generated summary and the ground truth summary, keeping the data with the highest
scores; (2) Selection with Llama-3: We leverage a fine-tuned Llama-3 model with higher Rouge
score than the generator and keep the data with the lowest perplexity; (3) Self-Selection: We use the
generator to keep the data with the lowest perplexity. We apply three selection rates: 12.5% (when
the selected synthesized data is the same size as the original data used to train the generator), 25%,
and 50%. For each combination, we collect the selected synthesized data to finetune the Llama-2
model. We present scaling law curves that illustrate how the Rouge-1 score improves with increasing
amount of selected synthesized data used for training. Throughout the experiments, all finetuning
was performed with full parameter training. Details are provided in Appendix D.
The results and p∗ are shown in Figure 5. We observe the following:
Model Collapse is Observed. The Random Selection curve represent training with synthesized data
directly without verification. In Figure 5 Left, using the same amount of synthesized data results
in worse performance compared to using the original data, indicating model collapse (comparing
‘Random Selection’ with ‘Generator’). Only with more data, the Random Selection lines improve
and nearly match the performance of the generator.
Selection by Oracle Performs Best. The dataset curated with oracle selection surpasses the perfor-
mance of the generator in all settings. Oracle selection with 12.5% of the data selected even surpasses
the model trained with 100% of the training set and original labels. The oracle verifier consistently
has the best p∗ compared with the other methods.
p∗ Strongly Correlates with Performance. Surprisingly, self-selection leads to better performance
than the generator, while Llama-3 verification results in performance similar to random selection.
These findings seem counterintuitive, given that Llama-3 actually achieves a better Rouge-1 score.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Oracle Selection            Llama-3 Selection                    Self Selection          Random Selection                    Generator            Full Origin
                            Select 12.5%                                                 Select 25.0%                                               Select 50.0%
          0.34                                                       0.34                                                        0.34
          0.33                                                       0.33                                                        0.33
ROUGE-1


                                                           ROUGE-1


                                                                                                                       ROUGE-1
          0.32                                                       0.32                                                        0.32
          0.31                                                       0.31                                                        0.31
          0.30                                                       0.30                                                        0.30
          0.29                                                       0.29                                                        0.29

                      103                 104                                    103                  104                                  103               104              105
                     Number of Synthesized Data                                 Number of Synthesized Data                                  Number of Synthesized Data
           0.8                                                        0.8                                                         0.8
           0.7                                                        0.7                                                         0.7
           0.6                                                        0.6                                                         0.6
p*


                                                           p*


                                                                                                                       p*
           0.5                                                        0.5                                                         0.5
           0.4                                                        0.4                                                         0.4
                 Oracle     Llama-3    Self       Random                    Oracle      Llama-3       Self    Random                    Oracle     Llama-3         Self    Random

Figure 5: News summarization with LLMs. (Top Row) The three figures from left to right represents models
trained on 12.5%, 25%, and 50% of the selected data individually. Each figure includes four curves illustrating
different training scenarios: (1) selection with oracle, (2) selection with Llama-3 as a weak supervision, (3)
self-selection, and (4) random selection. Additionally, two horizontal lines are included for comparison: one
representing the generator model and the other representing a model trained with 100% data with original labels.
(Bottom row) Computed values of p∗ for the verifiers for corresponding proportions of selected data. Training
with data selected by a verifier with higher p∗ achieves better performance.
However, they are consistent with the measured p∗ . Intuitively, self-selection tends to favor easy-
to-learn samples, resulting in good performance with fewer data points. Although Llama-3 can
generate better summaries, the synthesized data are produced by Llama-2, which is less correlated
with Llama-3. As discussed in Equation 6, p∗ depends on three correlations and Llama-3 is not
necessarily a better verifier in this context. This comparison highlights the challenges of selecting an
appropriate verifier when a fixed oracle, like those used in code or math tasks, is not available. In
such cases, our proposed p∗ can serve as a valuable proxy before any training is conducted. These
observations resonate with the recent work (Fang et al., 2024) where it was also empirically observed
that more accurate models might not always lead to better data filters.

 7               D ISCUSSION AND L IMITATIONS
In this paper, we consider a novel problem related to synthesized data: how to prevent model
collapse through data selection. We propose to leverage a verifier to improve the synthesized data.
We emphasize it is crucial to focus not only on the quality of the generator but also on having a
high-quality verifier to select the data. We theoretically show that verification is all you need for
synthesized data and identify a proxy function for performance after data selection. Through three
solid experiments, we demonstrate that a decent selector can prevent model collapse and our proxy
function is a reliable measure. Our work is of significant theoretical and practical importance in the
era of large models with increasing use of generated data.
Can a model improve itself? In our paper, we present results showing that a math transformer using
beam search does not improve test accuracy, while Llama-2, through self-selection of its generated
data, can yield a model that performs better than the original generator. In the first experiment, the
model selects a better y (output) for each x (input) (label selection). However, at the distribution
level, the selected y are not better. In the second experiment, the model selects better (x, y) pairs
from a larger pool of news articles (x) than available in the generator’s training set. This introduces
new information through the x and results in a shift in the distribution of x. Due to this distribution
shift, the trained model can outperform the original generator even with self-selection.
One limitation of this study is that we only considered data selection as a means of data curation.
Besides data selection, data curation also includes methods such as data augmentation, data regenera-
tion, and weighting. The exploration of general data curation methods to avoid model collapse is left
for future work.


                                                                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
YF and JK acknowledge support through NSF NRT training grant award 1922658. Part of this work
was done while JK and YF were hosted by the Centre Sciences de Donnees (CSD) at the École
Normale Supérieure (ENS) in 2023/24, and JK and YF would like to thank CSD and ENS for their
hospitality. YF and PY would like to thank Yanzhu Guo, Di He, Zhenyu He for discussions and
suggestions. This work was supported in part through the NYU IT High Performance Computing
resources, services, and staff expertise.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
  Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Alon Albalak, Yanai Elazar, Sang Michael Xie, Shayne Longpre, Nathan Lambert, Xinyi Wang,
  Niklas Muennighoff, Bairu Hou, Liangming Pan, Haewon Jeong, et al. A survey on data selection
  for language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16827, 2024.
Sina Alemohammad, Josue Casco-Rodriguez, Lorenzo Luzi, Ahmed Imtiaz Humayun, Hossein
  Babaei, Daniel LeJeune, Ali Siahkoohi, and Richard G. Baraniuk. Self-consuming generative
  models go mad. arXiv preprint arxiv:2307.01850, 2023.
Sina Alemohammad, Ahmed Imtiaz Humayun, Shruti Agarwal, John Collomosse, and Richard
  Baraniuk. Self-improving diffusion models with synthetic data, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2408.16333.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Towards understanding ensemble, knowledge distillation and self-
  distillation in deep learning. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.
Reyhane Askari-Hemmat, Mohammad Pezeshki, Elvis Dohmatob, Florian Bordes, Pietro Astolfi,
  Melissa Hall, Jakob Verbeek, Michal Drozdzal, and Adriana Romero-Soriano. Improving the
  scaling laws of synthetic data with deliberate practice. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.15588, 2025.
Shekoofeh Azizi, Simon Kornblith, Chitwan Saharia, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J. Fleet.
  Synthetic data from diffusion models improves imagenet classification. Transactions on Machine
  Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna
  Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness
  from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
Quentin Bertrand, Avishek Joey Bose, Alexandre Duplessis, Marco Jiralerspong, and Gauthier Gidel.
  On the stability of iterative retraining of generative models on their own data. arXiv preprint
  arxiv:2310.00429, 2023.
Matyas Bohacek and Hany Farid. Nepotistically trained generative-ai models collapse, 2023.
Martin Briesch, Dominik Sobania, and Franz Rothlauf. Large language models suffer from their own
 output: An analysis of the self-consuming training loop, 2023.
Max F Burg, Florian Wenzel, Dominik Zietlow, Max Horn, Osama Makansi, Francesco Locatello, and
 Chris Russell. Image retrieval outperforms diffusion models on data augmentation. Transactions
 on Machine Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856.
François Charton. Linear algebra with transformers. Transactions on Machine Learning Research,
  2022. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Hp4g7FAXXG.
François Charton. Learning the greatest common divisor: explaining transformer predictions. In
  The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=cmcD05NPKa.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rudrajit Das and Sujay Sanghavi. Understanding self-distillation in the presence of label noise. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7102–7140. PMLR, 2023.
Elvis Dohmatob, Yunzhen Feng, and Julia Kempe. Model collapse demystified: The case of regression.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:46979–47013, 2024a.
Elvis Dohmatob, Yunzhen Feng, Arjun Subramonian, and Julia Kempe. Strong model collapse. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2410.04840, 2024b.
Elvis Dohmatob, Yunzhen Feng, Pu Yang, François Charton, and Julia Kempe. A tale of tails: Model
  collapse as a change of scaling laws. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024c. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=KVvku47shW.
Bin Dong, Jikai Hou, Yiping Lu, and Zhihua Zhang. Distillation ∼ early stopping? harvesting dark
  knowledge utilizing anisotropic information retrieval for overparameterized neural network. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1910.01255, 2019.
Lisa Dunlap, Alyssa Umino, Han Zhang, Jiezhi Yang, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Trevor Darrell.
  Diversify your vision datasets with automatic diffusion-based augmentation. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Ronen Eldan and Yuanzhi Li. Tinystories: How small can language models be and still speak coherent
  english? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07759, 2023.
Alex Fang, Albin Madappally Jose, Amit Jain, Ludwig Schmidt, Alexander T Toshev, and Vaishaal
  Shankar. Data filtering networks. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2024.
Yunzhen Feng, Ariel Kwiatkowski, Kunhao Zheng, Julia Kempe, and Yaqi Duan. Pilaf: Optimal
  human preference sampling for reward modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04270, 2025.
Tommaso Furlanello, Zachary Lipton, Michael Tschannen, Laurent Itti, and Anima Anandkumar.
  Born again neural networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1607–1616.
  PMLR, 2018.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? a case study of simple function classes. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:30583–30598, 2022.
Nate Gillman, Michael Freeman, Daksh Aggarwal, HSU Chia-Hong, Calvin Luo, Yonglong Tian,
  and Chen Sun. Self-correcting self-consuming loops for generative model training. In Forty-first
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Suriya Gunasekar, Yi Zhang, Jyoti Aneja, Caio César Teodoro Mendes, Allie Del Giorno, Sivakanth
  Gopi, Mojan Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, Gustavo de Rosa, Olli Saarikivi, et al. Textbooks are all
  you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11644, 2023.
Yanzhu Guo, Guokan Shang, Michalis Vazirgiannis, and Chloé Clavel. The curious decline of
  linguistic diversity: Training language models on synthetic text, 2023.
Patrick Haluptzok, Matthew Bowers, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Language models can teach them-
  selves to program better. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.
Tahmid Hasan, Abhik Bhattacharjee, Md. Saiful Islam, Kazi Mubasshir, Yuan-Fang Li, Yong-Bin
  Kang, M. Sohel Rahman, and Rifat Shahriyar. XL-sum: Large-scale multilingual abstractive
  summarization for 44 languages. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021, pp. 4693–4703, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-acl.413.
Ryuichiro Hataya, Han Bao, and Hiromi Arai. Will large-scale generative models corrupt future
  datasets? In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
  pp. 20555–20565, October 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ruifei He, Shuyang Sun, Xin Yu, Chuhui Xue, Wenqing Zhang, Philip Torr, Song Bai, and XI-
  AOJUAN QI. IS SYNTHETIC DATA FROM GENERATIVE MODELS READY FOR IMAGE
  RECOGNITION? In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=nUmCcZ5RKF.
Reyhane Askari Hemmat, Mohammad Pezeshki, Florian Bordes, Michal Drozdzal, and Adriana
  Romero-Soriano. Feedback-guided data synthesis for imbalanced classification. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.00158, 2023.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom
  Hennigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia Guy,
  Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and Laurent Sifre.
  Training compute-optimal large language models, 2022.
Sham M Kakade, Karthik Sridharan, and Ambuj Tewari. On the complexity of linear prediction: Risk
  bounds, margin bounds, and regularization. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  21, 2008.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
  Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4015–4026, 2023.
Germain Kolossov, Andrea Montanari, and Pulkit Tandon. Towards a statistical theory of data selec-
  tion under weak supervision. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HhfcNgQn6p.
Benjamin LeBrun, Alessandro Sordoni, and Timothy J O’Donnell. Evaluating distributional distortion
  in neural language modeling. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Kellie Lu, Thomas Mesnard, Colton Bishop, Victor
  Carbune, and Abhinav Rastogi. Rlaif: Scaling reinforcement learning from human feedback with
  ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00267, 2023.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 12888–12900. PMLR, 2022.
Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization
  branches out, pp. 74–81, 2004.
Gonzalo Martı́nez, Lauren Watson, Pedro Reviriego, José Alberto Hernández, Marc Juarez, and
  Rik Sarkar. Combining generative artificial intelligence (ai) and the internet: Heading towards
  evolution or degradation? arXiv preprint arxiv: 2303.01255, 2023a.
Gonzalo Martı́nez, Lauren Watson, Pedro Reviriego, José Alberto Hernández, Marc Juarez, and Rik
  Sarkar. Towards understanding the interplay of generative artificial intelligence and the internet.
  arXiv preprint arxiv: 2306.06130, 2023b.
David McAllester. Simplified pac-bayesian margin bounds. In Learning Theory and Kernel Machines.
  Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2003.
Hossein Mobahi, Mehrdad Farajtabar, and Peter Bartlett. Self-distillation amplifies regularization in
  hilbert space. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3351–3361, 2020.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


OpenAI. Video generation models as world simulators. https://openai.com/index/
 video-generation-models-as-world-simulators/, 2024.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:27730–
  27744, 2022.
Vishakh Padmakumar and He He. Does writing with language models reduce content diversity? In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Baolin Peng, Chunyuan Li, Pengcheng He, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Instruction tuning with
  gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03277, 2023.
Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra. Grokking: Gen-
  eralization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02177,
  2022.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark
  Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang
 (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of
 Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10684–10695, June 2022.
Mohamed El Amine Seddik, Suei-Wen Chen, Soufiane Hayou, Pierre Youssef, and Merouane Debbah.
 How bad is training on synthetic data? a statistical analysis of language model collapse. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2404.05090, 2024.
Amrith Setlur, Saurabh Garg, Xinyang Geng, Naman Garg, Virginia Smith, and Aviral Kumar. Rl on
 incorrect synthetic data scales the efficiency of llm math reasoning by eight-fold. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2406.14532, 2024.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding Machine Learning - From Theory to
  Algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Yiren Zhao, Yarin Gal, Nicolas Papernot, and Ross Ander-
   son. The curse of recursion: Training on generated data makes models forget. arXiv preprint
   arxiv:2305.17493, 2023.
Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Yiren Zhao, Yarin Gal, Nicolas Papernot, and Ross Anderson. Ai
   models collapse when trained on recursively generated data. Nature, 631, 2024.
Ben Sorscher, Robert Geirhos, Shashank Shekhar, Surya Ganguli, and Ari Morcos. Beyond neural
  scaling laws: beating power law scaling via data pruning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:19523–19536, 2022.
Rohan Taori and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Data feedback loops: Model-driven amplification of dataset
  biases. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 33883–33920. PMLR, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Trieu H Trinh, Yuhuai Wu, Quoc V Le, He He, and Thang Luong. Solving olympiad geometry
  without human demonstrations. Nature, 625(7995):476–482, 2024.
Dennis Ulmer, Elman Mansimov, Kaixiang Lin, Justin Sun, Xibin Gao, and Yi Zhang. Bootstrapping
  llm-based task-oriented dialogue agents via self-talk. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05033, 2024.
Soobin Um, Suhyeon Lee, and Jong Chul Ye. Don’t play favorites: Minority guidance for diffusion
  models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=3NmO9lY4Jn.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, pp. 6000–6010, 2017.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions. In
  Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 13484–13508, 2023.
Yuxiang Wei, Zhe Wang, Jiawei Liu, Yifeng Ding, and Lingming Zhang. Magicoder: Source code is
  all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02120, 2023.
Kevin Yang, Dan Klein, Asli Celikyilmaz, Nanyun Peng, and Yuandong Tian. RLCD: Reinforcement
  learning from contrastive distillation for LM alignment. In The Twelfth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  v3XXtxWKi6.
Pu Yang, Yunzhen Feng, Ziyuan Chen, Yuhang Wu, and Zhuoyuan Li. Spend wisely: Maximizing
  post-training gains in iterative synthetic data boostrapping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.18962,
  2025.
Weizhe Yuan, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Kyunghyun Cho, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jing Xu, and Jason
 Weston. Self-rewarding language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10020, 2024.
Biao Zhang, Zhongtao Liu, Colin Cherry, and Orhan Firat. When scaling meets LLM finetuning: The
  effect of data, model and finetuning method. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=5HCnKDeTws.
Jinghui Zhang, Dandan Qiao, Mochen Yang, and Qiang Wei. Regurgitative training: The value of
   real data in training large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.12835, 2024b.
Tianyu Zheng, Ge Zhang, Tianhao Shen, Xueling Liu, Bill Yuchen Lin, Jie Fu, Wenhu Chen, and
  Xiang Yue. Opencodeinterpreter: Integrating code generation with execution and refinement. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2402.14658, 2024.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     M ORE W ORKS ON S YNTHESIZED DATA

A.1    TAXONOMY FOR S YNTHESIZED DATA

Contrary to the phenomenon of model collapse, synthesized data has been shown to improve per-
formance in numerous empirical studies. We now provide a taxonomy outlining when and how
synthesized data is beneficial. Specifically, we identify four key components: prompt engineering
●, knowledge from advanced models ▲, distributional shift and targeted curation ■, and external
verifiers ✦. Most empirical studies can be categorized based on one or more of these components.
We use ●▲■and ✦to denote the components each reference leverages.
Code and Math. Haluptzok et al. (2022) ✦generate synthesized data for codes and use a verifier
to filter and show that the model can ”self-improve” with its own synthesized data. Gunasekar
et al. (2023) ●■filter high-quality data from the web and prompt GPT-3.5 with a specially curated
prompt set covering both quality and diversity. Wei et al. (2023) ●leverage a diverse and large set
of open-source code snippets to curate code instructions as prompts with good coverage and high
quality. Zheng et al. (2024); Trinh et al. (2024) ✦leverage a symbolic deduction engine as a verifier
to test the correctness of each branch for solving Olympic geometry problems.
Alignment. During standard fine-tunings, synthesized data is often generated by a stronger model
like GPT-4 Peng et al. (2023) ▲. Wang et al. (2023) ●✦use a good set of prompts and inputs
with a heuristic verifier to filter out low-quality ones and maintain high diversity. Bai et al. (2022)
●■use the model itself to critique whether its own generation is harmful, given already harmful
prompts with gold standards from humans. For alignment with reinforcement learning, (Ouyang
et al., 2022) ●✦use humans as verifiers to compare synthesized data generated by the current model
with a good set of prompts. Some papers propose reinforcement learning with AI feedback (RLAIF)
(Lee et al., 2023) ●■that leverages another LLM as the verifier to match human verification. The
verifier is a stronger model, instruct-tuned Palm2 L, while the network being trained is the Palm2
XS. However, (Yang et al., 2024) ●later found that using better prompts (self-improve) that direct
harmful or harmless responses can surpass RLAIF. Yuan et al. (2024) ●achieve surprising results
with iterative fine-tuning and generating good prompts with in-context learning. Recently, (Feng
et al., 2025) discuss how to optimally sample synthetic data for alignment.
Knowledge distillation. Most papers in the knowledge distillation area involve using a better model
to distill for general performance or specific tasks, with ●, ▲, and ■involved from case to case. One
example is the tiny story cases (Eldan & Li, 2023) ●▲, where GPT-4 is prompted to generate stories
for four-year-olds that are used to train GPT-Neo with good performance.
Image Domain. (Kirillov et al., 2023) and (Li et al., 2022) ■use a distributional shift from high-
quality to low-quality data to label and curate a vast amount of unlabeled data. Specifically, (Li
et al., 2022) also trains a verifier to filters high-quality data. Um et al. (2024) ▲■specifically curate
minority groups with a diffusion model to enhance performance. He et al. (2023); Dunlap et al.
(2023) ▲■generate synthesized data that aids in classification tasks by tailoring the synthesized
data to match the model’s learning objectives. Azizi et al. (2023); Hemmat et al. (2023) ▲■employ
guided curation (with supervision) to curate data from diffusion models. Burg et al. (2023) find that
while synthesized data from a diffusion model helps improve downstream tasks, such as classification,
using the pre-training data of the diffusion model alone gives even stronger performance.


A.2    K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION WITH S OFT L ABELS

Related to synthesized data, there is a long history of using synthesized labels in image classifica-
tions. In the domains of self-distillation and knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015; Furlanello
et al., 2018), data with soft labels generated from the teacher model can significantly improve the
performance of the student model. These soft labels convey additional insights—referred to as ’dark
knowledge’—that have been theoretically linked to specific advantageous adaptations. These include
implicit biases that mitigate overfitting (Mobahi et al., 2020), mimicry of early stopping (Dong et al.,
2019) for improved optimization under label noise (Das & Sanghavi, 2023), and adjustments to
accommodate specific data structures (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2022). We only consider synthesized data
with fixed labels as in the current practice of LLMs and diffusion models.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3    DATA S ELECTION

Comprehensive surveys on data selection for language models can be found in Albalak et al. (2024),
along with theoretical studies on selection in high-dimensional settings (Sorscher et al., 2022;
Kolossov et al., 2024). Specifically, Kolossov et al. (2024) also explore the use of surrogate models
for producing labels during selection, followed by curation of the original labels. In our study,
selection is applied to synthesized data where original labels are not available, resulting in distinct
phenomena compared to these approaches on original data.


B     P REDICTING THE E IGENVALUES

We leverage the code base provided by Charton (2022) at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/LAWT under the license CC BY-NC 4.0.
Input and Tokenization. Transformers are trained to predict the eigenvalues of 5 × 5 symmetric
real matrices. Model inputs are sequences of 25 real entries, rounded to three significant digits, and
tokenized as triplets of signs( + or -), mantissas (from 0 to 999) and power of ten exponents (from
E-100 to E100). For instance, the 2 × 2 matrix,

                                              2.3     0.6035
                                            0.6035 −3.141

will be encoded as the sequence of 12 tokens: + 23 E-1 + 604 E-3 + 604 E-3 - 314
E-2. Model outputs are vectors of 5 real eigenvalues, rounded to three significant digits, and
tokenized as before, as triplets of sign, mantissa and exponent (the P1000 encoding from Charton
(2022)).
Model and Optimization. We train sequence-to-sequence transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), with
4 layers in the encoder, and one in the decoder, 512 dimensions and 8 attention heads, to minimize a
cross-entropy loss, using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014), with a fixed learning rate of
5 · 10−5 , after an initial linear warm-up phase over the first 10,000 optimization steps. The model is
trained for 400 epochs before overfitting.
Evalution. Model accuracies are measured on a held-out test set of examples not seen at train-
ing. Model predictions are evaluated by decoding the output sequence as a vector of 5 real
numbers (p1 , p2 , p3 , p4 , p5 ), and assessing that a prediction p(p1 , p2 , p3 , p4 , p5 ) of eigenvalues
v(v1 , v2 , v3 , v4 , v5 ) is correct if the relative error in L1 norms is below some tolerance τ , i.e. if
                                       5
                                       X                       5
                                                               X
                                              |vi − pi | < τ         |vi |.
                                        i=1                    i=1

We use tolerances τ of 5, 2, 1 and 0.5%.

B.1    F INETUNING M ODELS WITH S YNTHESIZED DATA

In all previous experiments, the data generated from the generator (using beam or reject sampling)
were used to train a new model. In this section, we consider using data generated from the generator
to finetune models pre-trained on a small sample of ground truth data. We consider four cases:

       • Fine-tuning the generator (Model A).
       • Fine-tuning a model pre-trained to the same accuracy as the generator (62%, Model B).
       • Fine-tuning a model pre-trained to higher accuracy (93%, Model C).
       • Fine-tuning a model pre-trained to low accuracy (4%, Model D).

Table 3 compares accuracy of the four fine-tuning cases to that of a model trained from scratch.
Fine-tuning only achiueves better performance when the pre-teained model achieved higher accuracy
than model A. In all other cases, fine-tuning brings no improvement. Note that fine-tuning model A
on its own generated data achieves the worst result, a clear case of model collapse.


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Model A (66%)     Model B (62%)     Model C (93%)           Model D (4%)   From scratch
      Rejection       61.8              72.9                  82.1                66.3           72.1
      Beam 50         74.1              82.6                  87.3                78.3           84.0
      Beam 35         72.7              81.3                  86.8                76.8           80.4
      Beam 25         71.3              79.8                  84.4                73.3           79.9
      Beam 10         67.5              75.1                  83.5                68.0           73.9
      Beam 5          64.9              70.8                  80.1                65.6           69.1
      Beam 1          61.6              62.1                  75.6                55.8           60.5

    Table 3: Performance of models fine-tuned on 1M examples generated by the generator. τ = 2%


B.2     C OMPUTATIONAL R ESOURCES

We leverage a V100 GPU with 32GB of memory for all experiments involving linear algebra. The
training time ranges from 1 to 5 days, depending on the data size and the number of epochs.

C      G ENERALIZATION OF THE P ROXY
Recall that in our theoretical setting, we define all variables in a two-way classification problem,
with y as the ground truth label and y ′ as the predicted synthesized label. We introduce an indicator
variable s, defined as:
                                                 1 if y = y ′

                                          s=                   .
                                                 0 if y ̸= y ′
We can rewrite all formulas in terms of s:
                                               p := 1 − E[s],
and
                             ϕ = P(q = 1 | s = 1),        ψ = P(q = 1 | s = 0).

When moving beyond the classification setting, s is no longer a binary 0/1 variable. In more general
cases, s represents a measure of similarity or distance between the original target y and the synthesized
target y ′ . Without loss of generality, we assume s is normalized to lie within the range [0, 1]. For
instance, in the news summarization experiment, s corresponds to the ROUGE-1 score between the
ground truth text y and the synthesized text y ′ , and equals 1 if and only if y = y ′ .
With this generalized measure s, we can extend the previous definitions of ϕ and ψ as follows:
                                        Es [qs]             Es [q(1 − s)]
                                   ϕ=           ,   ψ=                    .
                                        1−p                       p
When s takes values in {0, 1}, these definitions are consistent with those in Equation 3.

D      N EWS S UMMARIZATION
We leverage the XLSUM dataset (Hasan et al., 2021) at https://huggingface.co/
datasets/csebuetnlp/xlsum under the license CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0.
Data preprocessing. For each data in both training and test dataset, it consists of a news report and a
summarization, denoted as (news, summarization). We write each data in the following form:

      Article: news. A summary of the article: summarization.

Fine-tuning and generating details. Throughout all phases of evaluation and generation, we employ
greedy decoding. Given that news summarization is a low-entropy task, greedy decoding is chosen to
ensure quality generation. Consistent with common practice, fine-tuning is limited to a single epoch.
Through out the experiments, all the finetuning is with full parameter tuning to better capture the
scaling law as suggested in Zhang et al. (2024a).


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Implementation details. We leverage the official implementation in Huggingface 2 for training,
under the license Apache 2.0. Specifically, for training the generator, we start our training with the
pre-trained Llama-2, and set the learning rate to 5e-5, the learning rate scheduler as ‘cosine’, the
number of epochs to 1, the total batch size to 32, the block size to 1024 and the others to the default
value. For generating the synthesized data, we use greedy strategy to generate a summarization for
each news in the training set. For training based on the selected synthesized data, we also start our
training with the pre-trained Llama-2, and set the learning rate to 2e-5, the learning rate scheduler
as ‘constant’ and the others to the same. For evaluation, we first use greedy strategy to generate
a summarization for each news in the test set, and then calculate the Rouge-1 score between the
generated summarization and the corresponding ground truth, and finally report the average of the
Rouge-1 scores of all test data. When calculating the perplexity, we only calculate the perplexity for
the generated summary. When fine-tuning the Llama-3 model, we use the full XLSUM dataset to
achieve good performance. The resulting model achieves a Rouge-1 score of 34.5.
Computational Resources. All experiments were conducted using a dedicated computational cluster
equipped with 4 NVIDIA A800 GPUs, each with 80 GB of memory. Our training and inference
processes are performed on the cluster.
Estimated Time. Training the whole dataset for an epoch takes about 6 hours. Generating the whole
dataset takes about 1 day. During evaluation, we need to first generate and calculate the rouge score,
which takes around 40 minutes for one checkpoint.
Quantitative Results. We show two additional qualitative examples from the testset of the news
summarization task to compare how the model performs with each selection strategy on the same
news as follow. Notice how the generation without selection collapses: it heavily relies on a clichéd
format that lacks specific information. While this approach might work for simple news by piquing
curiosity, it fails to convey the depth or significance of the current news. The model trained on
generated samples collapses to these formats. The Llama-3 selection does not address this issue,
aligning with our results that Llama-3 selection performs poorly despite using a better model. In
contrast, generations with self-selection and oracle selection produce summaries that are specific,
informative, and directly address the key event, significantly improving the quality of the output.

   Quantitative examples 1 in news summarization

   Article: Currently just the US dollar, the euro, the yen and the pound are in the group. The
   IMF said the yuan “met all existing criteria” and should become part of the basket in October
   2016. IMF chief Christine Lagarde said it was ”an important milestone in the integration of
   the Chinese economy into the global financial system”. She added it was also a recognition
   of the progress that the Chinese authorities have made in the past years in reforming China’s
   monetary and financial systems. The yuan will now make up part of the IMF’s Special
   Drawing Rights (SDR) - an asset created by the IMF which serves almost as a currency. It is
   used for transactions between central banks and the IMF, and is used to decide the currency
   mix that countries like Greece, for example, receive when the IMF provides financial aid.
   The last change made to the basket was in 2000, when the euro replaced the German mark
   and the franc. China is the world’s second largest economy behind the US and asked for
   the yuan to become a reserve currency last year. Analysis: Andrew Walker, BBC World
   Service economics correspondent More than anything this move is a symbol - a powerful
   one - of China’s meteoric rise, from poverty to pillar of the global economy. Until now
   only the currencies of the four leading developed economies were used in the basket that
   determines the value of the SDR. So for China to join this very small club is quite a statement
   of how the world economy has changed. There could also be some real benefits to China.
   If the currency’s elevated status leads to more being held by central banks businesses and
   businesses, it would be helpful for the government’s finances. A state’s monopoly over the
   issue of currency indirectly gives it an extra source of revenue. But the main point is that the
   decision is new way of conveying the increasingly apparent message that China has a central
   role in driving the performance of the world economy. Vaswani: The Chinese yuan is going
   global What’s next? Some analysts have suggested that by 2030 the yuan will become one of

  2
    https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/main/examples/
pytorch/language-modeling/run_clm.py


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   the top three major international currencies, together with the dollar and the euro. Concerns
   about Beijing keeping the yuan artificially low to help exporters is one reason the currency
   has previously failed to meet the criteria for reserve currencies set out by the IMF. However,
   Chinese officials have a made a concerted effort to build support for the yuan’s inclusion, and
   a recent IMF staff report endorsed such a move. Initially, the currency’s inclusion would be
   largely a symbolic gesture, some analysts have said. They have also said the yuan’s continuing
   inclusion in the basket would depend on whether China progresses with its financial reforms.
   Generation of the model trained with oracle selection: China’s yuan has been added to the
   International Monetary Fund’s basket of reserve currencies, the IMF has announced.
   Generation of the model trained with Llama-3 selection: 2015 was a good year for China’s
   currency.
   Generation of the model trained with Self-selection: The International Monetary Fund
   (IMF) has approved the inclusion of the Chinese yuan in its basket of reserve currencies.
   Generation of the model trained without selection: 2015 will be a big year for the Chinese
   yuan.
   Ground truth: The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has announced that China’s currency,
   the yuan, will join the fund’s basket of reserve currencies.

   Quantitative examples 2 in news summarization

   Article: His brother Mahinda Rajapaksa is expected to be installed as prime minister, having
   held the role as caretaker since November. The brothers’ party, Sri Lanka People’s Front, has
   secured a two-thirds ”super majority” of seats needed to carry out its promised constitutional
   changes. The party won 145 of the 225 seats, plus five more seats from its allies. Mahinda
   Rajapaksa earlier tweeted that Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi had called to congratulate
   him. The controversial Rajapaksa family has dominated Sri Lankan politics for two decades.
   Mahinda Rajapaksa was previously president, from 2005 to 2015. The opposition of former
   prime minister Ranil Wickremesinghe has been trounced, having lost all but one of the 106
   seats it held in the outgoing parliament. The main opposition party is now a new group
   established by the son of Ranasinghe Premadasa, a former president who was assassinated in
   1993. Sri Lanka has been one of the few nations to hold an election despite the coronavirus
   pandemic. The vote had already been postponed twice because of the virus. The country has
   had relatively few confirmed infections and deaths of coronavirus - with a total of 2,839 cases
   and 11 deaths. Another victory for controversial brothers By Anbarasan Ethirajan, BBC South
   Asia Analyst Once again it’s a huge victory for the Rajapaksa brothers. Just nine months after
   his impressive win in the presidential election, Gotabaya Rajapaksa has led his Sri Lanka
   People’s Front to a two-thirds majority. He is hugely popular among the Sinhala majority for
   crushing the Tamil Tiger separatist rebels in 2009 when he was defence secretary. Many in
   the country also credit his administration for bringing stability and successfully containing
   the coronavirus outbreak. Gotabaya Rajapaksa is accused of human rights abuses during the
   civil war and also of targeting those who dissented. He always dismissed such accusations -
   but they have not gone away. A surge in Sinhala nationalism in the run-up to the election has
   also worried Sri Lanka’s minority communities. Muslim leaders say their community is still
   reeling from the vilification that followed the devastating Easter Sunday suicide attacks by
   Islamist militants last year, which killed more than 260 people. With their dominant majority,
   the Rajapaksas could attempt to change the constitution, increase the powers of the president
   so reversing the work of the previous government to introduce more checks and balances.
   Activists, already alarmed by the diminishing space for dissent and criticism, fear such an
   eventuality could lead to ever greater authoritarianism.
   Generation of the model trained with oracle selection: 70-year-old Gotabaya Rajapaksa
   has won a landslide victory in Sri Lanka’s parliamentary election.
   Generation of the model trained with Llama-3 selection: 72-year-old Gotabaya Rajapaksa
   has won Sri Lanka’s presidential election, securing a two-thirds majority in parliament.
   Generation of the model trained with Self-selection: 70-year-old Gotabaya Rajapaksa has
   won a landslide victory in Sri Lanka’s parliamentary election.
   Generation of the model trained without selection: 145 seats needed for a two-thirds
   majority 106 seats won by the main opposition party 49 seats won by the ruling party 13 seats



                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      won by the Tamil National Alliance 5 seats won by the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna 1 seat
      won by the United National Party 1 seat won by the Jathika Hela Urumaya 1 seat won by the
      Civic Force
      Ground truth: Sri Lankan President Gotabaya Rajapaksa has declared victory in the country’s
      parliamentary election.


E      A G ENERAL T HEORY OF P RUNING WITH V ERIFICATION

In Section 4 we have presented a special case of our general theory, which we describe here in more
generality and detail. While some of our exposition here overlaps with Section 4, we prefer to leave
it as a complete text that provides a stand-alone overview.

E.1     DATA D ISTRIBUTION

Consider a probability distribution P over Rd × {0, 1} with the following high-dimensional property
Condition E.1. Given N ≤ N (d) i.i.d. samples (x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xN , yN ) from P with N ≤ N (d),
the following hold estimates w.p 1 − o(1) uniformly on all i, j ∈ [N ], in the limit d → ∞
                                         ∥xi ∥2 ≃ 1,

                                          ⊤         a,      if yi = yj ,
                                         xi xj ≃
                                                    b,      if yi ̸= yj
where b < a < 1 are constants. For simplicity of presentation of our results, We will further assume
that b = −a or b = 0.

The above structural condition is inspired by an assumption in Das & Sanghavi (2023).
For simplicity of exposition, we will only consider balanced distributions, meaning that
                           P(y = 1) = P(y = 0) = 1/2, for (x, y) ∼ P.

Gaussian Mixture Example. As a first example, in the case of Gaussian mixtures where the
features have conditional distribution given by
                                          x | y ∼ N (µy , Σ),                                                 (7)
                                                                                                              (8)
where µy = (2y−1)µ, for some µ ∈ Rd and positive-definite matrix Σ with E ∥x∥2 = ∥µ∥2 +tr Σ =
1, we may take
                                         a = ∥µ∥2 ,      b = −a.                                              (9)
Condition E.1 then holds thanks to concentration, with N (d) = eΘ(d) .

E.2     T RAINING DATA , DATA P RUNING , AND D OWNSTREAM M ODEL

Let DN = {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xN , yN )} be a dataset of N i.i.d. pairs from the true distribution P and
     ′
let DN  = {(x1 , y1′ ), . . . , (xN , yN
                                       ′
                                         )} a version of the dataset (also i.i.d.) with labels yi′ instead of yi .
                                                                                                        ′
For example, this could be labels generated by an AI trying to reproduce real-world data. DN              is the
data on which the downstream model is trained.
We will consider a family of models given by
                             P(y = 1 | x, w) = ŷ := σ(x⊤ w) ∈ (0, 1),
parametrized by a vector of weights w ∈ Rd . Here, σ is the sigmoid function defined by
                                                         1
                                           σ(z) :=            .                                             (10)
                                                      1 + e−z

                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For the loss function, we use binary cross-entropy (BCE), defined by
                           ℓ(ŷ, y) = −y log ŷ − (1 − y) log(1 − ŷ).                         (11)
                                                        ′
Let wbN be obtained via logistic regression fitted on DN with ridge regularization parameter λ > 0.
Thus, ŵ is the unique3 minimizer of the following objective function:
                                              N
                                         1 X                       λ
                              L(w) :=          qi ℓ(σ(x⊤      ′        2
                                                       i w), yi ) + ∥w∥ .
                                         N i=1                     2
Here qi is a bit which indicates whether the ith training example has survived pruning. The numbers
q = (q1 , . . . , qN ) is called a pruning strategy. The corresponding downstream classifier is fbN = fwbN ,
where the notation fw refers to the linear classifier induced by a weights vector w ∈ Rd , i.e
                                                    1, if x⊤ w > 0,

                                       fw (x) :=                                                       (12)
                                                    0, otherwise.
The test accuracy of the downstream model fbN is defined by
             acc(fbN ) := P(fbN (x) = fBayes (x)), for a random test point (x, y) ∼ P,
where fBayes (z) := E[y|x = z] is the Bayes-optimal classifier. In particular, note that acc(fBayes ) =
100% by construction.
This quantity will be the main object of our analysis, and we will be interested in how it depends on
the corruption level p and the choice of pruning strategy q, in the infinite-sample limit N → ∞.
For later reference, we also define an empirical version, namely the accuracy of fbN evaluated on the
clean dataset DN , namely
                                         1
                           acc(
                           c fbN ) :=        |{i ∈ M | fbN (xi ) = yi }|,                        (13)
                                        |M |
where M := {i ∈ [N ] | qi = 1} collects the indices of training samples which survive pruning by q.

E.3      A C LASS OF PARAMETRIZED P RUNING S TRATEGIES

Given hyper-parameters ϕ0 , ϕ1 , ψ01 , ψ10 ∈ [0, 1], we consider a broad class of parametrized pruning
strategies with the following property. For any class labels k, ℓ ∈ {0, 1}, the random variables
(zikℓ )i∈[N ] defined by zikℓ = 1[yi = k, yi′ = ℓ, qi = 1] are i.i.d. with Bernoulli distribution
Bern(pkℓ ), where
                   pkℓ = P(qi = 1, yi′ = ℓ, yi = k)
                         = P(qi = 1 | yi′ = ℓ, yi = k)P(yi′ = ℓ | yi = k)P(yi = k)
                                                                                                       (14)
                             ϕk (1 − p)/2, if k = ℓ,
                         =
                             ψkℓ p/2,         else.
and the numbers p, ϕk and ψkℓ are defined by
  p := P(yi′ ̸= yi ), ϕk = P(qi = 1 | yi′ = k, yi = k), ψkℓ = P(qi = 1 | yi′ = ℓ, yi = k). (15)
Consequently, if Nkℓ is the number of training examples that have true label k, fake label ℓ, and
survive pruning, then
                                                        N
                                                        X
                                              Nkℓ :=          zikℓ                                     (16)
                                                        i=1
which is has binomial distribution Bin(N, pkℓ ). As mentioned in the main text, for simplicity of
exposition we considered the following simplifying assumption:
                               ϕ1 = ϕ0 = ϕ, ψ01 = ψ10 = ψ.                                       (17)
Such a pruning strategy will be referred to as a verification-pruning strategy with parameter (ϕ, ψ).
Remark E.2. Note that the parametrization (ϕ, ψ) and (p00 , p11 ) describe the same verification-
pruning strategy via the following bijective transformation.
                          p00 = p11 = (1 − p)ϕ/2, p01 = p10 = pψ/2.                              (18)
   3
       Unicity is due to strong convexity of objective function.


                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.4   E XAMPLES

Let us present some notable examples of verification-pruning strategies.

No Selection. The case (ϕ, ψ) = (1, 1) corresponds to no selection, i.e the entire training dataset is
used.

Oracle Selection. The case (ϕ, ψ) = (1, 0). The selection strategy only keeps indices correspond-
ing to examples in the dataset which have correct label (all corrupted labels discarded).

Supervised (Margin-Based) Selection. Let wprune ∈ Rd , and consider the pruning strategy
defined by
                                  qi = 1[yi′ (x⊤
                                               i wprune ) > 0].
This pruning strategy simplify filters out all examples on which it disagrees on the assigned label.

E.5   P ERFORMANCE B OUNDS FOR M ODELS T RAINED WITH V ERIFICATION S ELECTION


Figure 6: Empirical Confirmation of Theorem E.3. Comparing the breakdown points of different
models. Here, the task is classifying a Gaussian mixture, with infinite training samples from
datasets generated from a model with classification error rate p (x-axis). Notice the sharp phrase-
transitions where the model suddenly switches from perfect accuracy to worse-than-chance, a
phenomenon predicted by Theorem E.3. Left. Performance of verification-pruning strategies with
different values of the hyper-parameters (ϕ, ψ). Recall that the case ψ/ϕ = 1 corresponds to no
pruning, while ψ/ϕ = 0 corresponds to oracle selection. Right. Comparing pup , approximated
with sup{p | acc(fbN ) ≥ 90%} (computed empirically), against the analytic estimate p−⋆ (t) given in
Theorem E.3 (for t = 0.1). Again, the results are in excellent agreement with the predictions of the
theorem.

The following is one of our main results (proved in Appendix F).
Theorem E.3. Suppose Condition E.1 is in order. Fix ϕ, ψ, t ∈ (0, 1) and define p±
                                                                                 ⋆ (t) ∈ (0, 1) by
                                  1−t                            1+t
                p−⋆ (t) :=                     , p+ ⋆ :=                                       (19)
                           1 − t + (1 + t)ψ/ϕ            1 + t + (1 − t)ψ/ϕ
If p < p−
        ⋆ (t), then the limit N → ∞ it holds w.p 1−o(1) that the acc(fN ) = 100% for a downstream
                                                                     b
model fN trained on data from a generator with error rate p pruned with a verification-pruning
        b
strategy with parameters (ϕ, ψ).
On the other hand, if p > p+⋆ , then in the limit N → ∞ it holds w.p 1 − o(1) that the acc(fN ) = 0%
                                                                                           b
for a downstream model fN .
                          b
Thus, there is a sharp phase-transition around the corruption level p⋆ := 1/(1 + ψ/ϕ): as p is
increased past level p⋆ , the downstream model fbN abruptly switches from being perfectly accurate,
to perfectly inaccurate!


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


See Figure 6 for an empirical illustration of the theorem.
The thresholds p±
                ⋆ (t) appearing in the above theorem are proxies for the so-called breakdown points
pup ≥ pdown defined by
                            n                                                  o
                                                  a.s
                  pup = inf p ∈ [0, 1] acc(fbN ) → 0% in the limit N → ∞ ,                     (20)
                             n                                                    o
                                                   a.s
               pdown = sup p ∈ [0, 1] acc(fbN ) → 100% in the limit N → ∞ .                    (21)

Theorem E.3 implies pdown ≥ p−                 +
                              ⋆ (t) and pup ≤ p⋆ (t) for all t ∈ (0, 1). Consequently,
Corollary E.4. Under the hypotheses of Theorem E.3, it holds that pup = pdown .

E.6     S OME C ONSEQUENCES OF T HEOREM E.3

We now present some illustrious applications of Theorem E.3. These examples are empirically
confirmed in Figure 6.

No Selection. Here, we have ψ/ϕ = 1 and so the downstream model achieves 100% accuracy for
all values of corruption parameter p up to the proxy breakdown point predicted by Theorem E.3 is
then p−⋆ = 1/2 − t/2.


Oracle Selection. For this scenario, ψ/ϕ = 0 and so Theorem E.3 predicts that the downstream
model fbN achieves 100% accuracy for all values of corruption parameter p up to the breakdown point
p−
 ⋆ = 1. This is perhaps not so surprising in hindsight. The point is that even for moderately large
values of ψ/ϕ, the proxy breakdown point p− ⋆ given in equation 19 can still be quite close to 1.


Self-supervised (Margin-Based) Selection. Consider Gaussian mixture data with means ±µ, and
consider a margin-based pruning strategy in Equation (5). It is clear that ϕ and ψ only depend on all
the 3 angles between the set of vectors {w∗ , wgen , wprune }, with w∗ = µ.

Supervised Selection. Consider isotropic Gaussian mixture data with means ±µ, and a pruning
strategy as in Eq. (5). The parameters (ϕ, ψ) only depend on the angles θgen , θprune , θ ∈ [0, π] given
by
                           θgen := ∠(wgen , µ), θprune := ∠(wprune , µ),
                                                                                                       (22)
                              θ := ∠(wprune , wgen ).

Conditioned on y = 1 and using E∥x∥2 = ∥µ∥22 + tr Σ = 1 (and ∥µ∥2 < 1), we get x ∼
          1
N (µ, (1−∥µ∥ 2 )d Id ). We can rewrite x as:
                2

                                                         1
                                          x=µ+                    η,                                   (23)
                                                    (1 − ∥µ∥22 )d
where η ∼ N (0, Id ). For simplicity of calculation, let us further assume here that ∥wgen ∥22 =
∥wprune ∥22 = 1.


      ϕ1 = P(x⊤ wprune > 0 | y = 1, y ′ = 1)
             P(x⊤ wprune > 0, y = 1, x⊤ wgen > 0)
         =
                   P(y = 1, x⊤ wgen > 0)
             P(η ⊤ wprune > −∥µ∥2 d(1 − ∥µ∥22 ) cos θprune , η ⊤ wgen > −∥µ∥2 d(1 − ∥µ∥22 ) cos θgen )
         =                                                                                             .
                                 P(η ⊤ wgen > −∥µ∥2 d(1 − ∥µ∥22 ) cos θgen )
In the second step, we use the definition of conditional probability and use equation 23 from line 2 to
line 3. The random variables η ⊤ wgen and η ⊤ wprune are jointly Gaussian with:
                               ⊤
                                η wgen                    1     cos θ
                                            ∼ N 0,                       .
                               η ⊤ wprune               cos θ     1

                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let Φ be the CDF of the standard normal distribution and Φ2 the CDF of the bivariate normal
distribution, where Φ2 (x, y; ρ) is defined as:
                                  Φ2 (x, y; ρ) := P(X ≤ x, Y ≤ y)

                         1 ρ
for (X, Y ) ∼ N 0,              . Denote c1 = −∥µ∥2 d(1 − ∥µ∥22 ) cos θprune and c2 = −∥µ∥2 d(1 −
                         ρ 1
∥µ∥22 ) cos θgen . We have:
                                  1 − Φ(c1 ) − Φ(c2 ) + Φ2 (c1 , c2 ; cos θ)
                           ϕ1 =                                              .
                                                1 − Φ(c2 )

All the distributions are symmetric, and we have ϕ0 = ϕ1 = ϕ. In the same spirit, ψ = ψ10 = ψ01 ,
with
                                  Φ(c1 ) + Φ(c2 ) − Φ2 (c1 , c2 ; cos θ)
                             ψ=                                          .
                                                Φ(c2 )

E.7    S KETCH OF P ROOF OF T HEOREM E.3

The proof is based on the following representation (refer to Proposition F.2) of the accuracy of the
downstream classifier fbN evaluated on the the clean training dataset DN , namely
                         N11 1A<1/2 + N00 1D<1/2 + N10 1B>1/2 + N01 1C>1/2
             acc(
             c fbN ) =                                                            ,             (24)
                                        N11 + N00 + N10 + N01
for some random some random variables A, B, C, D ∈ (0, 1) which depend on the Nkℓ ’s defined in
equation 16.
Remark E.5. We only compute the accuracy acc(  c fbN ) of the downstream model fbN evaluated on the
clean training dataset DN . By classical results in learning theory (McAllester, 2003; Shalev-Shwartz
& Ben-David, 2014; Kakade et al., 2008), we√know that the gap to the population version (test
accuracy) acc(fbN ) shrinks to zero at rate O(1/ N ), and so since the claim in Theorem E.3 is made
only in the limit N → ∞, we are good.
Next, in Proposition F.3 and Proposition F.4, necessary and sufficient conditions are established to
ensure A, D < 1/2 and B, C > 1/2, and therefore acc(      c fbN ) = 100%. These conditions are given
explicitly in terms of the Nkℓ ’s. Finally, in Proposition F.5, concentration of measure is used to control
the Nkℓ ’s, and present the aforementioned conditions in terms of the pkℓ ’s defined in equation 14,
and therefore in terms of p, ϕ, and ψ alone, giving condition equation 19.

F     P ROOF OF T HEOREM E.3
Our analysis is based on non-trivial extensions of arguments by Das and Sanghavi (2023). Viz,
       • We allow for a selection mechanism (aforementioned work does study selection, just self-
         distillation), and
       • We use a careful asymptotic analysis to avoid solving certain complicated fixed-point
         equations defining the weights vector w
                                               bN of the downstream model fbN .

F.1   P RELIMINARY C OMPUTATIONS

For later use, given a pruning strategy q, define the following objects
                                    Ik := {j ∈ [N ] | yj = k},                                        (25)
                                    Iℓ′ := {j ∈ [n] | yj′ = ℓ},                                       (26)
                                   M := {i ∈ [N ] | qi = 1},                                          (27)
                                          X
                                  Nkℓ :=       qi = |Ik ∩ Iℓ′ ∩ M |,                                  (28)
                                           i∈Ik ∩Iℓ′

                                    R := 1 − a > 0.                                                   (29)


                                                       25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thus, Nkℓ is the number of training examples that have true label k, fake label ℓ, and survive pruning.
The following result will be crucial in the sequel.
                                                     P
Proposition F.1. We have the representation w  b = i∈M αi xi , where
                                                 if i ∈ I1 ∩ I1′ ∩ M,
                                       
                                         A,
                                          −B, if i ∈ I1 ∩ I0′ ∩ M,
                                       
                                       
                                αi =                                                              (30)
                                       
                                         C,     if i ∈ I0 ∩ I1′ ∩ M,
                                          −D, if i ∈ I0 ∩ I0′ ∩ M,
                                       

and A, B, C, D ≥ 0 solve the following system of equations
                   γA = σ(−(aN11 A − aN10 B + bN01 C − bN00 D) − RA),
                   γB = σ(aN11 A − aN10 B + bN01 C − bN00 D − RB),
                                                                                                           (31)
                   γC = σ(−(bN11 A − bN10 B + aN01 C − aN00 D) − RC),
                   γD = σ(bN11 A − bN10 B + aN01 C − aN00 D − RD).

Proof. The following result is inspired by Das & Sanghavi (2023) and the proof is similar. Observe
                                       PN
that KKT conditions ∇L(w) = 0 give i=1 qi (ŷi − yi′ )xi + γw = 0, i.e
                        N
                        X                               yi′ − ŷi
                w=             qi αi xi , with αi :=              , ŷi := σ(vi ), vi = x⊤
                                                                                         i w.              (32)
                         i=1
                                                            γ
One then computes
                               N
                               X                                    a(s − qi αi ) + bt,      if i ∈ I1 ,
            vi = x ⊤
                   i w =             qi αi x⊤
                                            i xj = qi αi +
                                                                    a(t − qi αi ) + bs,      if i ∈ I0 ,
                               j=1
                                                                                                           (33)
                       as + bt + Rqi αi ,       if i ∈ I1 ,
               =
                       bs + at + Rqi αi ,       if i ∈ I0 ,
where s ≥ 0 and t ≥ 0 are given by
                                               X                        X
                                        s :=          qj αj ,    t :=          qj αj .                     (34)
                                               j∈I1                     i∈I0

We deduce that for any i ∈ M ,
                                     1 − σ(as + bt + Rqi αi ),                       if i ∈ I1 ∩ I1′ ,
                                   
                                   
                                                                                     if i ∈ I1 ∩ I0′ ,
                                   
                                     −σ(as + bt + Rqi αi ),
                                   
              γαi = yi′ − σ(vi ) =                                                                         (35)
                                   
                                    1 − σ(bs + at + Rqi αi ),                       if i ∈ I0 ∩ I1′ ,
                                                                                     if i ∈ I0 ∩ I0′ .
                                   
                                     −σ(bs + at + Rqi αi ),
Due to monotonicity of σ, we deduce the existence of A, B, C, D ≥ 0 such that
                                       if i ∈ I1 ∩ I1′ ∩ M,
                             
                               A,
                                −B, if i ∈ I1 ∩ I0′ ∩ M,
                             
                             
                       αi =                                                                                (36)
                             
                               C,     if i ∈ I0 ∩ I1′ ∩ M,
                                −D, if i ∈ I0 ∩ I0′ ∩ M.
                             

                                            1 − γA, if i ∈ I1 ∩ I1′ ∩ M,
                                          
                                          
                                                         if i ∈ I1 ∩ I0′ ∩ M,
                                          
                                            γB,
                                          
                       ŷi = yi′ − γαi =                                                                   (37)
                                          
                                           1 − γC, if i ∈ I0 ∩ I1′ ∩ M,
                                                         if i ∈ I0 ∩ I0′ ∩ M.
                                          
                                            γD,
Furthermore, these scalars must verify
                       γA = 1 − σ(as + bt + RA) = σ(−(as + bt) − RA),
                       γB = σ(as + bt − RB),
                                                                                                           (38)
                       γC = 1 − σ(bs + at + RC) = σ(−(bs + at) − RC),
                       γD = σ(bs + at − RD).

                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Finally, observe that,
                                s = N11 A − N10 B,         t = N01 C − N00 D,                  (39)
from which we get
                         as + bt = a(N11 A − N10 B) + b(N01 C − N00 D)
                                 = aN11 A − aN10 B + bN01 C − bN00 D,
                         bs + at = b(N11 A − N10 B) + a(N01 C − N00 D)
                                 = bN11 A − bN10 B + aN01 C − aN00 D.
Plugging this into equation 38 gives equation 31.

F.2      A NALYTIC F ORMULA FOR ACCURACY E VALUATED C LEAN T RAINING DATA

One computes the accuracy acc(
                             c fbN ) of the downstream model evaluated on the clean training dataset
DN as
                           1
            acc(
            c fbN ) =          (|{i ∈ M | yi = 1 ∧ ŷi > 1/2 OR yi = 0 ∧ ŷi < 1/2}|) .
                         |M |
We can rewrite this as follows
      |M | · acc(
             c fbN ) = |{i ∈ M | yi = 1 ∧ ŷi > 1/2 OR yi = 0 ∧ ŷi < 1/2}|
                       = |{i ∈ I1 ∩ M | ŷi > 1/2}| + |{i ∈ I0 ∩ M | ŷi < 1/2}|
                            X                     X
                       =            1ŷi >1/2 +         1ŷi <1/2
                          i∈I1 ∩M               i∈I0 ∩M                                         (40)
                                  ′                             ′
                       = |I1 ∩ I1 ∩ M |1γA<1/2 + |I1 ∩ I0 ∩ M |1γB>1/2
                             + |I0 ∩ I1′ ∩ M |1γC>1/2 + |I0 ∩ I0′ ∩ M |1γD<1/2
                       = N11 1γA<1/2 + N00 1γD<1/2 + N10 1γB>1/2 + N01 AγC>1/2 .
                                                                  P
On the other hand, it is clear that the size of the mask is |M | = k,ℓ Nkℓ . Putting things together
gives the following result which shall be crucial in the sequel.
Proposition F.2. For any ϕ, ψ ∈ [0, 1], there is a solution (A, B, C, D) of the system of equations
equation 31 such that
                          N11 1A<1/2 + N00 1D<1/2 + N10 1B>1/2 + N01 1C>1/2
              acc(
              c fbN ) =                                                           ,             (41)
                                          N11 + N00 + N10 + N01
where A := γA, B = γB, C = γC, and D = γD as usual.
Thus, to attain 100% accuracy, it suffices to have A, D < 1/2 and B, C > 1/2. The proof of
Theorem E.3 will be all about establishing sufficient conditions which ensure these inequalities.

F.3      S UFFICIENT C ONDITIONS FOR P ERFECT ACCURACY

Note that since γ = N λ with λ > 0 fixed and N → ∞, we have γ → ∞ and system of equations
equation 31 simplify to4
               B = σ((aN11 A − aN10 B + bN01 C − bN00 D)/γ),
                  A = σ(−(aN11 A − aN10 B + bN01 C − bN00 D)/γ) = 1 − B,
                                                                                               (42)
                  D = σ((bN11 A − bN10 B + aN01 C − aN00 D)/γ),
                  C = σ(−(bN11 A − bN10 B + aN01 C − aN00 D)/γ) = 1 − D,
where A := γA, B = γB, C = γC, D = γD as usual, and we have used the elementary property
that σ(−z) = 1 − σ(z). Eliminating A and C, the above equations further collapse to
                 B = σ((aN11 (1 − B) − aN10 B + bN01 (1 − D) − bN00 D)/γ),
                    = σ((aN11 + bN01 − a(N11 + N10 )B − b(N01 + N00 )D)/γ),
                                                                                               (43)
                 D = σ((bN11 (1 − B) − bN10 B + aN01 (1 − D) − aN00 D)/γ)
                    = σ((bN11 + aN01 − b(N10 + N10 )B − a(N01 + N00 )D)/γ).
   4
       These simplifications are made possible by the Mean Value Theorem.


                                                      27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Two special cases are tractable.

The Symmetric Case: b = −a. We have D = 1 − B, and thus the equations become
                D = A,      C = B,      D = 1 − B,
                                                                                                     (44)
                B = σ((a(N11 + N00 ) − a(N11 + N10 + N01 + N00 )B)/γ).
If B ≤ 1/2, then we must have B ≥ (N11 + N00 )/(N11 + N10 + N01 + N00 ), which is impossible
if we impose
                                    N10 + N01 < N11 + N00 ,                                          (45)
i.e the number of bad indices which survive is smaller than the number of good indices which survive
pruning. Thus, under the previous condition, we must have C = B > 1/2 and A = D = 1−B < 1/2.
By symmetry of the preceeding argument we know that the condition is also necessary. We deduce
the following result.
Proposition F.3. Suppose b = −a. Then, for any solution (A, B, C, D) of the system of equations
equation 31, the inequalities
                                C = B > 1/2,       D = A < 1/2,                                      (46)
hold if and only iff N10 + N01 < N11 + N00 .

Skewed Case: b = 0. Here, we have
                              B = σ(a(N11 − (N11 + N10 )B)/γ),
                                                                                                     (47)
                              D = σ(a(N01 − (N01 + N00 )D)/γ)
If B ≤ 1/2, then B ≥ N11 /(N11 + N10 ), which is impossible if we impose
                                             N10 < N11 ,                                             (48)
i.e the number of examples with true label 1, which are incorrectly labelled as 0 in the dataset, which
survive pruning is less than the number of examples with true label 1, which are correctly labelled
and survive pruning. We deduce that B > 1/2 under the above condition.
Similarly, if D ≥ 1/2, then D ≤ N01 /(N01 + N00 ), which is impossible if we impose
                                             N01 < N00 ,                                             (49)
i.e the number of with true label 0 but incorrectly labelled as 1 in the dataset, which survive pruning is
less than the number of examples with true label 1, which are correctly labelled and survive pruning.
We obtain the following result.
Proposition F.4. Suppose b = 0. Then, for any solution (A, B, C, D) of equation 31, we have
                                      C, B > 1/2 iff N10 < N11 ,                                     (50)
                                      D, A < 1/2 iff N01 < N00 .                                     (51)

F.4   C ONCENTRATION

We shall now derive conditions which are sufficient to ensure the hypothesis in Propositions F.3 and
F.4, namely Nkℓ < Nkk for all k, ℓ ∈ {0, 1} with k ̸= ℓ. Recall that for any k, ℓ ∈ {0, 1}, the counter
Nkℓ is random with binomial distribution Bin(N, pkℓ ). Now, by basic binomial concentration, we
know that if p, ψ ∈ [0, 1) and ϕ ∈ (0, 1], then for any fixed t ∈ (0, 1), it holds w.p 1 − o(1) that

                                   Nkℓ ≤ (1 + t)N pkℓ , if k ̸= ℓ,
                                                                                                     (52)
                                   Nkℓ ≥ (1 − t)N pkℓ , if k = ℓ.
In particular, w.p 1 − o(1), it holds that
                                         Nkℓ ≤ (1 + t)N pkℓ ,                                        (53)
                                         Nkk ≥ (1 − t)N pkk .                                        (54)
Comparing the above inequalities, we deduce the following result.


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition F.5. If the following condition holds
                         p01 + p10   1−t                    2t
                                   <     = 1 − ϵ with ϵ :=     ,                            (55)
                         p00 + p11   1+t                   1+t
then w.p 1 − o(1) it holds that
                                    N10 + N01 < N11 + N00 .                                 (56)



F.5   P ROOF OF T HEOREM E.3

Follows directly from putting together Propositions F.2, F.3, F.4, and F.5, and then solving the
inequality
                         1−t      p01 + p10       2pψ            pψ
                               ≤            =             =
                         1+t      p00 + p11    2(1 − p)ϕ      (1 − p)ϕ
for p.


                                                29
