Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J UDGE D ECODING : FASTER S PECULATIVE S AMPLING
R EQUIRES G OING B EYOND M ODEL A LIGNMENT
 Gregor Bachmann†,§,∗                     Sotiris Anagnostidis†,§                      Albert Pumarola†

 Markos Georgopoulos†                     Artsiom Sanakoyeu†                           Yuming Du†

 Edgar Schönfeld†                        Ali Thabet†                                  Jonas Kohler†



                                             A BSTRACT
         The performance of large language models (LLMs) is closely linked to their un-
         derlying size, leading to ever-growing networks and hence slower inference. Spec-
         ulative decoding has been proposed as a technique to accelerate autoregressive
         generation, leveraging a fast draft model to propose candidate tokens, which are
         then verified in parallel based on their likelihood under the target model. While
         this approach guarantees to reproduce the target output, it incurs a substantial
         penalty: many high-quality draft tokens are rejected, even when they represent
         objectively valid continuations. Indeed, we show that even powerful draft models
         such as GPT-4o, as well as human text cannot achieve high acceptance rates un-
         der the standard verification scheme. This severely limits the speedup potential of
         current speculative decoding methods, as an early rejection becomes overwhelm-
         ingly likely when solely relying on alignment of draft and target.
         We thus ask the following question: Can we adapt verification to recognize cor-
         rect, but non-aligned replies? To this end, we draw inspiration from the LLM-
         as-a-judge framework, which demonstrated that LLMs are able to rate answers
         in a versatile way. We carefully design a dataset to elicit the same capability
         in the target model by training a compact module on top of the embeddings to
         produce “judgements” of the current continuation. We showcase our strategy on
         the Llama-3.1 family, where our 8b/405B-Judge achieves a speedup of 9×
         over Llama-405B, while maintaining its quality on a large range of benchmarks.
         These benefits remain present even in optimized inference frameworks, where our
         method reaches up to 141 tokens/s for 8B/70B-Judge and 129 tokens/s for
         8B/405B on 2 and 8 H100s respectively.


                                                -8b/    -405b Standard Verification:

                                              To find Alyana's age, we need to subtract 4 from
      User Question:

      Chenny is 10 years old. Alyana
      is 4 years younger than Chenny.           -8b/    -405b Judge Verification:

                                              To find Alyana's age, we need to subtract 4 from
      How old is Anne if she is 2
                                              Chenny's age.
      years older than Alyana?
                                              Chenny's age: 10 years
                                              Alyana's age: 10 - 4 = 6 years

                                              To find Anne's age, we need to add 2 to Alyana's age.
                                              Anne's age: 6 + 2 = 8 years
                                              So, Anne is 8 years old.



Figure 1: Standard speculative decoding versus our judge decoding strategy for Llama-3.1-8B as
draft and Llama-3.1-405B as target. Accepted (rejected) tokens are highlighted in green (red).

    ∗
      Work done during an internship at Meta GenAI. † Meta GenAI. § ETH Zürich.
Correspondence to: gregorb@ethz.ch


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1    I NTRODUCTION
Large language models have transformed the field of natural language processing in recent years,
displaying astounding capabilities across various tasks (Radford et al., 2019; OpenAI et al., 2024).
The performance of these models is closely tied to their underlying size, with bigger models often
achieving significantly better results across benchmarks (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022).
For example, Meta recently released their largest and best model to date with Llama-3.1-405B,
boasting an enormous parameter count of 405 billion (Dubey et al., 2024).
While offering great performance, such big models require a vast amount of resources to be de-
ployed, and inference efficiency starts to pose a critical problem. Due to the autoregressive nature of
decoding coupled with the large parameter count, token generation becomes a memory-bound pro-
cess, especially at small batch sizes (Shazeer, 2019; Ivanov et al., 2021; Pope et al., 2023). To speed
up inference in such a setting, speculative decoding (SD) has been proposed (Stern et al., 2018; Xia
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Leviathan et al., 2023), a technique that leverages the fact that pro-
cessing several tokens in parallel comes at no additional latency cost in the memory-bound regime.
More concretely, a small but fast draft model produces a sequence of M candidate tokens, which are
then verified in parallel by the model of interest, usually referred to as the target model. In standard
SD, the target model accepts a candidate token if it assigns the same or higher probability given the
context, otherwise a biased coin is flipped. If at least one candidate token is accepted, inference time
is reduced as the large model needs to be called only once to produce multiple tokens. As shown
in Chen et al. (2023), such a strategy provably preserves the distribution of the target model, while
achieving significant speedups.
Relying on target probabilities guarantees the same output, but as a consequence, a token is solely
judged based on its alignment with the target model, and not by its inherent contextual quality. As a
consequence, current approaches set the number of candidate tokens to small numbers M ∈ {5, 7},
as an early rejection becomes overwhelmingly likely when drafting more. On the other hand, the
quality of “small” language models (and thus the quality of candidate tokens) has been rapidly im-
proving recently. GPT-4o and the recently introduced GPT-4o-mini show strong performance
across many benchmarks, with OpenAI actively recommending these models over the more expen-
sive GPT-4. Similarly, Llama-3.1-8B has achieved bigger gains in performance over its prior
iterations, compared to the larger Llama-3.1-70B (Dubey et al., 2024), highlighting as well that
small models are catching up. Phi-3-mini is another small model at “only” three billion param-
eters that despite its size manages to match the performance of GPT-3.5 (Abdin et al., 2024).
While draft models are rapidly improving and providing increasingly high-quality answers,
alignment-based verification fails to reflect this progress, still rejecting tokens that are not perfectly
aligned with the target response (see Fig. 1 for an example). Motivated by this insight, we explore
the following question in this paper:
               Can we adapt verification to assess token quality rather than alignment?
We draw inspiration from the LLM-as-a-judge framework, where LLMs are used to judge the qual-
ity of other model responses to user questions (Zheng et al., 2023). These judgements exhibit very
strong correlation with human ratings, making this a cheap and scalable approach for model quality
evaluation. Interestingly, LLM-judges display the ability to rate answers in a versatile way, allowing
them to appreciate correct but potentially unaligned responses. To equip the target model with sim-
ilar capabilities, we design a small dataset consisting of correct and wrong replies to user questions.
We create a diverse set of responses from several models and precisely annotate the location of the
mistaken tokens. We then leverage the powerful target embeddings to train a small module with the
objective of predicting the correctness of a given token, mimicking the LLM-judge mechanism.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
       • We demonstrate through a series of experiments how the decision mechanism in speculative
         decoding rejects many high quality tokens, identifying a key limitation of the technique.
       • We adapt verification using ideas from LLM-as-a-judge, eliciting the same versatile rating
         capability in the target by adding a simple linear layer that can be trained in under 1.5 hours.
       • Using a Llama 8B/70B-Judge, our approach obtains speedups of 9× over standard
         decoding, achieving an unprecedented 129 tokens/s, while maintaining the quality of
         Llama-405B on a range of benchmarks.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     R ELATED W ORKS
Speculative decoding has been used and extended in a range of works, leading to significant
speedups across many model families and datasets. Several ideas for draft models have been ex-
plored in the literature. Early papers rely on specialized draft models (Sun et al., 2021; Xia et al.,
2023) or smaller versions of the target model (Chen et al., 2023; Leviathan et al., 2023), usually
trained using the same data and learning protocol. Another line of work uses shallow networks on
top of the target embeddings as a drafter with the goal to predict multiple tokens into the future
(Stern et al., 2018; Cai et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a;b; Zhang et al., 2024a; Wertheimer et al., 2024;
Ankner et al., 2024; Gloeckle et al., 2024; Bhendawade et al., 2024). Other approaches use a sub-
network of the target model, e.g. Schuster et al. (2022); Zhang et al. (2024b); Elhoushi et al. (2024);
Liu et al. (2024b;a) skip a percentage of the layers to produce candidate tokens. Other architectures
have also been explored: Wang et al. (2024) develop a SD variant for Mamba models (Gu & Dao,
2024), while Christopher et al. (2024) explore diffusion-based language models as drafters. Other
components of the process have been investigated as well; Huang et al. (2024); Liu et al. (2024c)
analyze the number of draft tokens M with the goal of learning to choose it dynamically. Kim et al.
(2023) take a similar approach aiming to measure the uncertainty of the draft model, allowing the
target to take over when needed. Monea et al. (2023); Bachmann & Nagarajan (2024) on the other
hand explore parallel decoding without a draft by conditioning on “look-ahead” tokens or using Ja-
cobi iterations (Santilli et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2024), allowing the target to produce several tokens in
one step.
Many works have aimed to improve the acceptance rates in SD: Zhou et al. (2024) encourage higher
alignment by finetuning with a distillation loss, Li et al. (2024a); Cai et al. (2024); Ankner et al.
(2024); Miao et al. (2024); Chen et al. (2024) construct token trees out of the top-K predictions in
various ways and verify them in parallel using tree-attention, covering thus a larger space of token
combinations. Other methods propose to exchange more information between draft and target: Du
et al. (2024) allow the draft to access the key-value cache of the target, while in S et al. (2024) the
draft is further conditioned on target activations. All these methods improve acceptance rates by
either encouraging better alignment with more information or producing more guesses in parallel.
This is different from our work, which seeks to change the verification scheme itself.

3     V ERIFICATION IN S PECULATIVE D ECODING
3.1   BACKGROUND

Speculative decoding. Denote by LLMtarg and LLMdraft the target and draft model respectively. We
use V = {1, . . . , V } for the vocabulary. Let M ∈ N represent the number of candidate tokens, m∗
the number of accepted tokens and s ∈ V L the context. Let us denote by
                                 (t1 , p1 ), . . . , (tm , pm ) = LLM(m) (s)                            (1)
an autoregressive sampling of m tokens from LLM given context s, where t1 , . . . , tm ∈ V are the
sampled tokens and pi ∈ RV the corresponding softmax probabilities. Further, we denote by
                                 p1 , . . . , pm+1 = LLM(t1 , . . . , tm ; s)                           (2)
running the (parallel) forward pass of LLM on tokens t1 , . . . , tm . Notice that this produces one more
probability vector pm+1 as we now also process token tm .
In SD, the draft model autoregressively produces M candidate tokens given the current context s
using any sampling scheme (but usually greedy),
                                                                     (M )
                                (c1 , q1 ), . . . , (cM , qM ) = LLMdraft (s)                           (3)
where c1 , . . . , cM are the sampled candidate tokens and qi ∈ RV for i = 1, . . . , M are the corre-
sponding probability vectors over the vocabulary. The probability of token ci under the draft model
is thus qi [ci ]. The target model then processes these tokens in parallel, resulting in probability
vectors p1 , . . . , pM +1 = LLMtarg (c1 , . . . , cM ; s). Rejection now works as follows:
                                                                         pi [ci ]
          Accept ci if all previous tokens are accepted and ϵi <                  for ϵi ∼ U ([0, 1])   (4)
                                                                         qi [ci ]

                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Left: Average number of generated tokens as a function of the number of draft tokens M
for Llama-8B/405B with standard and judge verification. Right: Number of accepted tokens on
high-quality human text (top) and for both 8B/405B and 405B/8B (bottom), both standard SD.


In words, a candidate ci is accepted if the probability under the target model is even larger. If
the probability is smaller, a stochastic decision is made according to the discrepancy between the
probabilities. Crucially, one is always guaranteed to produce at least one valid token: p1 is solely
a function of the current context s and can thus be used to sample a token according to the target
distribution. Similarly, if ci is the first rejected token, one can sample a correct token from pi .
Finally, when all candidate tokens are accepted, an extra token can be sampled from pM +1 . The
accepted tokens are then added to the current context s and we repeat the steps until completion.

Number of draft tokens. An immediate question comes to mind when examining speculative
decoding: How many draft tokens should one choose for optimal speedup? On the one hand, if
the draft model produces good tokens, one would ideally want to draft a high number of candidate
tokens M to avoid invoking the expensive target model too many times. On the other hand, if
many candidates end up being rejected, one wants to avoid spending the unnecessary drafting time.
The ideal M thus heavily depends on the acceptance rate, which in turn naturally depends on the
verification scheme. In Fig. 2 we plot the average number of accepted tokens as a function of M for
the model pair Llama-3.1-8B and Llama-3.1-405B evaluated on MT-Bench (Zheng et al.,
2023) and GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) (yellow curve). We observe that the number of accepted
tokens quickly saturates as a function of M and the acceptance rates thus decrease rapidly. As a
result, choosing a large number of draft tokens M solely calls the draft model more in vain, leading
to inefficient inference overall. This is the reason why prior work is limited largely to M ≤ 7.

3.2   L IMITATIONS OF S TANDARD V ERIFICATION

Rejected tokens. What types of tokens get rejected in such a setup? In order to obtain an intu-
ition, we explore the behaviour of SD on several benchmarks including GSM8K, MT-Bench and
HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021). We use Llama-8B as the draft and Llama-405B as the target
model. While there is a significant discrepancy in terms of performance between these two models,
it is worth highlighting that the draft model achieves competitive scores on all these tasks. Higher
acceptance rates would thus not necessarily reduce the quality of the output on many of these ex-
amples. In fact, a large number of draft answers could be accepted as they are, especially those
addressing relatively simple queries.
Notably, even in instances where the draft model produces entirely accurate solutions, the target
model frequently rejects numerous tokens due to the stringent nature of the verification process. This
rejection occurs despite the correctness of the solution, as the target model seeks alignment with its
own response rather than contextual accuracy (Liu et al., 2023). As illustrated in Fig 1, a correct
answer can be rejected after only two tokens, underscoring the potential for relaxed verification


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    -4o/   -405b Standard SD Verification:

           User Question:             Here's a Python function that takes

           Write me a Python
           function that            -4o/   -405b Judge Verification:
           takes a list of
           integers, repeats      Here’s a Python function that takes a
           every even integer     list of integers, repeats every even
           and deletes every      integer, and deletes every odd integer:
           odd integer.
                                  def modify_list(numbers):
                                      result = []
                                      for num in numbers:
                                          # Repeat even numbers
                                          if num % 2 == 0:
                                              result.extend([num, num])
                                          # Odd numbers are skipped
                                      return result


Figure 3: Left: Standard SD and our judge decoding when GPT-4o is drafting and Llama-405B
is verifying. Green denotes accepted and red rejected tokens. Right: Number of accepted tokens for
GPT-4o as draft and Llama-405B as target for standard speculative and our judge verification.



schemes.1 Intuitively, one would expect from a well-calibrated verification scheme to allow for
accepting candidate tokens whenever they are contextually correct. However, as we show in the
following two paragraphs, this not the case for standard logits-based verification.


High-quality draft model. To further demonstrate how valid responses incur high rejection rates,
we perform the following experiment: We take a very powerful LLM as the draft model and evaluate
whether the target model accepts more candidate tokens, which are now guaranteed to be of high
quality. While such a setup does not make sense for SD from an efficiency point of view (a powerful
drafter is of course too slow), it further investigates if acceptance rates improve with the quality of
responses. To that end we use GPT-4o as draft model for the target Llama-405B. We generate
full answers with GPT-4o on MT-Bench, GSM8K and HumanEval and simply check how many
tokens the target accepts under greedy decoding before the first rejection, as there is no way to
properly perform SD with closed-source models. In order to ensure that the target model is able to
“recognize” the high-quality tokens, we use the performant Llama-405B. We display the average
acceptance length and an example prompt in Fig. 3. Counter-intuitively, we find that the target
model does not reward the higher quality of tokens, accepting only roughly two before encountering
the first rejection. To further explore if this observation changes when running the complete process
of SD, we reverse the roles of our standard setup and use Llama-405B as draft for a Llama-8B
target model. Similarly, we find that reversing the roles reduces the number of accepted tokens
slightly (see Fig. 2, right side), even though they are of better quality now. We thus conclude that
acceptance rates do not improve with the quality of the responses.


Human expert drafting. Finally, we evaluate the efficacy of human annotations as can-
didate tokens for Llama-405B by processing Wikipedia articles. Using a subset of the
wikipedia-summary dataset (Scheepers, 2017), which contains high-quality, community-
reviewed abstracts, we assess token acceptance rates under greedy SD verification when prompting
the model to summarize these articles. As illustrated in Fig. 2 (right), a substantial proportion of
tokens face rejection, even within this high-quality context.
In summary, we conclude that SD verification in its current form is highly inefficient, as large por-
tions of correct answers are rejected. Motivated by this insight, the following section presents a
more effective verification scheme that goes beyond model alignment in order to increase efficiency.


   1
       Additional examples of this phenomenon are provided in Appendix C.1 for further examination.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Correct Answer:                                          Correct Answer:
                            France shares its borders                                If the drying process is not
                            with Belgium, Luxembourg,                                affected by the number of
                            Germany, Switzerland,                                    shirts, it would still take
                            Italy, Spain, Andorra,      Input Question:              5 hours to dry 30 shirts,
    Input Question:         and Monaco.                                              just like it took 5 hours to
                                                        If I hang 5 shirts outside   dry 5 shirts.
    What countries border                               and it takes them 5 hours
    France?                 Wrong Answer:               to dry, how long would it
                                                        take to dry 30 shirts?       Wrong Answer:
                            France shares its borders
                            with Belgium, Luxembourg,                                It would take 30 hours to
                            Germany, Switzerland,                                    dry 30 shirts, as each shirt
                            Italy, Spain, Portugal,                                  needs an additional hour to
                            and Poland.                                              dry.


Figure 4: Two examples from our dataset. We highlight the incorrect tokens in the wrong answer in
red.


4      J UDGE D ECODING

As demonstrated by previous experiments, we need a more flexible method of verifying sequences
to increase the number of accepted draft tokens, especially as draft models continue to improve in
quality. Recent work by Zheng et al. (2023) showed that large LLMs can reliably act as judges to
evaluate responses generated by less capable models, correlating highly with human ratings. This
judging approach allows for more versatile evaluation, focusing on correctness and contextual qual-
ity rather than strict alignment. However, using LLM-judges directly is not feasible because (a) they
require lengthy system prompts and often chain-of-thought reasoning, slowing inference, and (b)
they evaluate full answers, whereas SD requires evaluating short, sometime partial continuations.
We thus aim to achieve this judge-like behavior efficiently while retaining the advantages of the orig-
inal verification method, which ensures accurate next-token predictions in case of rejection. Since
this involves computing embeddings for each draft token, we explore whether these embeddings
contain sufficient information to enable rapid, reliable judgments.


4.1      V ERSATILE AND ACCURATE V ERIFICATION WITH T OKEN E MBEDDINGS

Token embeddings signal errors. Contrary to standard SD, which accepts or rejects a given to-
ken based on its softmax probabilities (see Eq. 4), we find that the model’s reaction to processing
the incorrect token itself reveals surprisingly valuable information. Specifically, our experiments
show that last hidden layer embeddings of erroneous tokens effectively ”flag” errors and contradic-
tions, prompting the model to generate subsequent tokens that attempt to correct the mistake. This
phenomenon is strikingly illustrated in Fig. 5, where we condition Llama-405B on wrong replies
(highlighted in red) and observe the model’s immediate efforts to rectify its response (highlighted
in green). For instance, when forced to start with the incorrect statement ”The capital of France is
Berlin”, the model continues with ”... just kidding, it’s actually Paris”. More such examples can
be found in Appendix C.3. This unexpected behavior suggests the feasibility of leveraging the em-
bedding of the current token as a means of verifying its correctness. In fact, we will show in the
following that a simple logistic regression head on top of these embeddings achieves high accuracy
and can be trained in under 1.5 hours. Prior, embeddings have also been used to discover latent
knowledge in LLMs and edit them (Burns et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023a; von Rütte et al., 2024),
further underscoring their richness.


Dataset curation. In order to leverage token embeddings for verification, we carefully craft a
dataset consisting of high-quality user inputs, along with a correct and wrong answer pair. The set
of input prompts are a mixture of newly-created questions and two public datasets that we heavily
filtered (Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023) and ARC (Clark et al., 2018)). Importantly, we only use the
input questions and none of the answers. We leverage several models to produce a diverse set of cor-
rect and wrong answers, including Mistral-Large-2, Llama-8B and Llama-405B, thereby
fostering robustness of the trained judge to recognize correct but differently aligned solutions. All
answers were manually reviewed and corrected by the authors, who also annotated the precise lo-


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


cation of errors in wrong answers2 . In total we collected 500 high-quality question, correct answer,
wrong answer tuples. For training, we label every token from the correct answer as positive, every
token from the wrong answer up until the point of mistake as positive, and finally every mistaken
token as negative. Two examples from our dataset are depicted in Fig. 4. Naturally, the dataset
exhibits a strong imbalance, leading to roughly 20× more positive than negative examples.


Model design and training. Equipped with the dataset, we train a linear head fjudge on top of
the target embeddings, using a weighted cross entropy loss as the objective to counter the imbal-
ance in the dataset. We place larger weight on the negative examples in order to ensure that the
resulting judge does not falsely accept wrong tokens to limit quality degradation and perform early-
stopping to reduce overfitting. We tune all hyperparameters on a small test split. We experiment
with embeddings from several layers and find that deeper layers perform best with only insignificant
differences, while too shallow layers are clearly worse, consistent with similar observations in pre-
vious works (Zou et al., 2023b; Gurnee & Tegmark, 2023; von Rütte et al., 2024). For simplicity,
we thus stick to using the last embedding of the target before the RMS normalization (Zhang &
Sennrich, 2019) and the language modelling (LM) head. While we experimented with more com-
plex architectures, including MLPs and shallow Transformer networks, a simple linear head proved
most effective, demonstrating excellent performance without overfitting. This linear classifier of-
fers significant practical advantages: we train only 16.4k parameters on just 30k tokens in less than
1.5 hours, with all target model parameters remaining frozen. Additional details are provided in
Appendix B.1.


Inference. How is the judge head now combined with the standard elements of SD? In essence, we
use fjudge as an additional evaluator for a given token ci (or rather its embedding ei ∈ RD ) and accept
it if σ (fjudge (ei )) > δ for δ ∈ [0.5, 1], where σ is the sigmoid function. In other words, δ serves
as a threshold for the confidence of acceptance and practitioners can thus choose how much to trust
the judge layer. In practice we observed that there is no need to tune this value to ensure quality and
leave it at the natural value δ = 0.5. Given a sequence of candidate tokens c1 , . . . , cM , we thus get
two accept/reject masks from the target model: zstand ∈ {0, 1}M as in standard SD verification and
zjudge ∈ {0, 1}M from the judge head. We take the logical OR between the two, z = zstand ∨ zjudge ,
since when the judge rejects and standard SD accepts, the corrected token according to the target
will exactly be the same token. We can thus already accept it. We illustrate this mechanism in more
detail in Appendix B.2. Note that δ = 1 reduces to SD.



    User Question:                         User Question:
    What is the capital of France?         What is 402 + 335?
    Tell me something about the
    city.

    Assistant:                             Assistant:
                                                                                      Transformer
    The capital of France is               402 + 335 = 736 + 1 = 737                     Blocks
    Berlin... No just kidding.
    The capital of France is
    actually Paris. [...]


Figure 5: Left: Conditioning Llama-405B on wrong outputs. The part of the assistant response
in red was forced, while parts in green were generated freely. Right: Judge illustration where sL is
the last token from the context s and c1 , . . . , cM are candidate tokens. Orange denotes embeddings,
green denotes the LM-head output and red denotes the produced judgements.



    2
      Using LLMs to that end proved to be too imprecise, which is consistent with recent observations in Tyen
et al. (2024).


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Average acceptance length (m∗ ) and speedup factor over standard decoding in HuggingFace
and gpt-fast for batch size 1. We report generation tokens/s for gpt-fast for 512 input and output
tokens, quantized to 8-bit. All 70B (405B) models run on 2 (8) H100 GPUs, except for ∗ Medusa
(Nvidia, 2024), which runs on significantly faster H200s with NVLink Switch and TensorRT.
                                   m∗     HU G G I N GFA C E   GPT-F A S T   T OKENS / S (512 + 512)
      8B/70B-S T A N D A R D        6.4        1.5×               1.7×                76.7
      8B/70B-J U D G E ( OURS )    18.8         2×                 3×                141.8
      70B-E A G L E -2              4.5        3.3×               1.9×                88.1
      8B/405B-S T A N D A R D       6.3        5.3×              1.78×                58.7
      8B/405B-J U D G E ( OURS )   19.7        9.7×              3.9×                129.3
      405B-M E D U S A             <6          < 6×              1.9×                108∗



5     E VALUATION OF J UDGE D ECODING

First, we revisit the initial experiments outlined in Sec. 3.2 where we use GPT-4o as the draft model,
as well as human generated text as candidate tokens. In both cases, the average number of accepted
tokens is significantly higher for our method across datasets (see Fig 2 and 3). The example prompt
in Fig. 3 (left) shows that the correct response of GPT-4o is fully accepted by judge decoding
while standard SD rejects after two words. This illustrates that our verification scheme offers more
versatile decisions.

5.1    P ERFORMANCE B ENCHMARK

We now evaluate our verification method on standard benchmarks in the SD literature, including
GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021) and MT-Bench (Zheng et al., 2023).
In contrast to standard SD works, we do need to report the achieved accuracy values of our strategy,
as adapting verification comes with the possibility of accepting wrong tokens and thus worse per-
formance. To give a more complete picture, we further include multiple-choice benchmarks ARC
(Clark et al., 2018) and MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021), which are atypical tasks for standard SD as
only a few tokens need to be produced, but further serves as a check that our verification scheme
does not degrade performance. We use the prompting templates from Dubey et al. (2024).

Training-free baseline. To provide more context for our results and to demonstrate that our judg-
ing strategy goes beyond simple heuristics, we also explore a simple training-free method to relax
the acceptance scheme. In particular, we investigate top-K verification, where a candidate token ci
is accepted, if it is among the K highest valued probabilities pi produced by token ci−1 . K ∈ N is
a hyper-parameter of the decoding technique that trades-off quality against speed. Setting K = V
reduces to running just the fast draft model, while K = 1 results in standard SD.

Preserving target performance. We display the accuracy of judge decoding alongside the
vanilla draft and target models, as well as top-K decoding in Fig. 6 for both Llama-405B and
Llama-70B. We observe that judge decoding almost exactly preserves target performance for all
benchmarks, showing hence that up to ∼ 20 tokens can be accepted on average from modern draft
models without loss of quality. The simple heuristic baseline, on the other hand, is hardly able to
improve over the draft model (even for K = 5), highlighting the difficulty of the problem we address
with the learned head.

5.2    S PEED B ENCHMARK

The end-to-end speed-ups achieved by SD methods improve as mainly two factors increase: (1) the
number of accepted tokens and (2) the latency gap between draft and target model. Importantly, the
latter is heavily dependent on whether or not orthogonal inference time optimizations like quantiza-
tion, model parallelism and graph/kernel optimization techniques (like torch.compile and TensorRT)


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Benchmark results. Top: Draft Llama-8B and target Llama-70B. Bottom: Draft
Llama-8B and target Llama-405B. We show top-K decoding, standard SD for M = 10 and our
judge decoding for M = 25 (striped). Notice that our judging method preserves accuracies very
well, while top-K loses most performance.


are applied. Unfortunately, prior works on SD have almost excursively relied on the user-friendly
– but un-optimized – library HuggingFace (Wolf et al., 2020) to implement their methods. Yet,
as rightfully pointed out by (Wertheimer et al., 2024), speed-ups of prior SD methods reported in
HuggingFace tend to shrink significantly when moving to optimized inference frameworks. For ex-
ample, the acceleration of Eagle on Llama-2-7B reduces from 3× to merely 1.5× when using
gpt-fast as reported in Li et al. (2024a). In fact, vanilla Llama-70B without any speculative decod-
ing achieves a higher throughput in gpt-fast than the state-of-the-art SD method Eagle-2 does on
the same model in HuggingFace (∼45 vs ∼33 tokens/s).
To offer a complete picture, we here provide latency benchmarks in both frameworks, HuggingFace
to facilitate comparison, as well as the arguably more relevant and optimized gpt-fast framework
(Pytorch-Team, 2023). If not stated otherwise, we run Llama-70B and Llama-405B on 2 and 8
Nvidia H100 GPUs respectively. Our results are summarized in Table 1.

Llama-3.1-70B. When drafting with Llama-8B for Llama-70B with batch size 1 in simple
frameworks, the latency delta between the two models is relatively small, limiting the speed-ups
of judge decoding. This is particularly evident when compared to SD methods that leverage small
LM heads as draft modules (such as Eagle-2 Li et al. (2024b) and Medusa Cai et al. (2024)).
However, in the more realistic setting of deployment within an optimized inference framework,
several latency bottlenecks (like CPU instruction and memory I/O) are alleviated, resulting in a
more pronounced latency delta between the target and draft models. Consequently, our method
effectively capitalizes on this increased latency disparity and outperforms the current state-of-the-
art by a substantial margin (see right-hand side of Table 1).

Llama-3.1-405B. Replacing the target model with the more powerful Llama-405B model sig-
nificantly increases verification latency. As a result, drafting (and accepting) longer sequences be-
comes more crucial for the overall runtime. In such settings, judge decoding shines because the
average number of accepted tokens is > 3× larger than prior works (left-hand side of Table 1). In
particular, both Medusa and Eagle-23 are limited to drafting ≤ 6 token at the time, by the num-
ber of heads and the draft tree depth respectively. Our 8B/405B-Judge, however, accepts close
to 20 tokens at a time and thereby achieves a 9.7× speed-up in HuggingFace and unprecedented 129
tokens/s in gpt-fast.

5.3      O UT- OF - DISTRIBUTION P ERFORMANCE

Finally, we investigate to what degree our judge-decoding strategy extends to situations for which
it has not been trained. To this end, we filter our dataset by removing all coding examples, train
the verification head for Llama-405B on this reduced set and then evaluate on the coding task
   3
       of which no 405B version exists.


                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


HumanEval. While we do observe a drop in performance from 86.6 to 80.4%, the performance
is still significantly better than the draft model at 71.3%, indicating that the notion of “correctness”
transfers between tasks at least to some degree. Nevertheless, our approach is not a silver bullet and
to maintain target quality it is required to train the judge on data of similar nature.


6   C ONCLUSION

In this work we have investigated the verification mechanism in speculative decoding and identified
how its focus on alignment between draft and target response leads to the rejection of objectively
correct continuations. To fully leverage the improved quality of “small” language models, we thus
proposed an adapted verification scheme that makes use of the capability of LLMs to judge responses
in a versatile way. This allows for efficiently drafting more tokens, leading to significant speedups up
to 9× on a range of benchmarks, achieving unprecedented speeds of 129 tokens/s for Llama-405B.
In the regime of many draft tokens, “small” language models shine as drafters compared to the small
modules employed in approaches like Eagle or Medusa and we believe this trend will only further
accentuate in the future. Our approach however also comes with a drawback; the mathematical
guarantee to maintain target quality is lost by relying on the judge. Through extensive experiments
we show that a well-trained judge does not lose performance on standard benchmarks and we thus
view our approach as a significant first step into this direction. On the other hand, our strategy
in its current version does not present a silver bullet; novel tasks require the careful annotation of
similar data to maintain quality, otherwise performance is lost. The small amount of data required
in our setup is nevertheless a very encouraging sign. Future work can hopefully build upon our
contributions, further improving our judge decoding strategy to enable more speedups.


R EFERENCES
Marah Abdin, Jyoti Aneja, Hany Awadalla, Ahmed Awadallah, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Nguyen
 Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Jianmin Bao, Harkirat Behl, Alon Benhaim, Misha Bilenko,
 Johan Bjorck, Sébastien Bubeck, Martin Cai, Qin Cai, Vishrav Chaudhary, Dong Chen, Dong-
 dong Chen, Weizhu Chen, Yen-Chun Chen, Yi-Ling Chen, Hao Cheng, Parul Chopra, Xiyang
 Dai, Matthew Dixon, Ronen Eldan, Victor Fragoso, Jianfeng Gao, Mei Gao, Min Gao, Amit
 Garg, Allie Del Giorno, Abhishek Goswami, Suriya Gunasekar, Emman Haider, Junheng Hao,
 Russell J. Hewett, Wenxiang Hu, Jamie Huynh, Dan Iter, Sam Ade Jacobs, Mojan Javaheripi, Xin
 Jin, Nikos Karampatziakis, Piero Kauffmann, Mahoud Khademi, Dongwoo Kim, Young Jin Kim,
 Lev Kurilenko, James R. Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Yunsheng Li, Chen Liang, Lars Liden,
 Xihui Lin, Zeqi Lin, Ce Liu, Liyuan Liu, Mengchen Liu, Weishung Liu, Xiaodong Liu, Chong
 Luo, Piyush Madan, Ali Mahmoudzadeh, David Majercak, Matt Mazzola, Caio César Teodoro
 Mendes, Arindam Mitra, Hardik Modi, Anh Nguyen, Brandon Norick, Barun Patra, Daniel Perez-
 Becker, Thomas Portet, Reid Pryzant, Heyang Qin, Marko Radmilac, Liliang Ren, Gustavo
 de Rosa, Corby Rosset, Sambudha Roy, Olatunji Ruwase, Olli Saarikivi, Amin Saied, Adil Salim,
 Michael Santacroce, Shital Shah, Ning Shang, Hiteshi Sharma, Yelong Shen, Swadheen Shukla,
 Xia Song, Masahiro Tanaka, Andrea Tupini, Praneetha Vaddamanu, Chunyu Wang, Guanhua
 Wang, Lijuan Wang, Shuohang Wang, Xin Wang, Yu Wang, Rachel Ward, Wen Wen, Philipp
 Witte, Haiping Wu, Xiaoxia Wu, Michael Wyatt, Bin Xiao, Can Xu, Jiahang Xu, Weijian Xu, Ji-
 long Xue, Sonali Yadav, Fan Yang, Jianwei Yang, Yifan Yang, Ziyi Yang, Donghan Yu, Lu Yuan,
 Chenruidong Zhang, Cyril Zhang, Jianwen Zhang, Li Lyna Zhang, Yi Zhang, Yue Zhang, Yunan
 Zhang, and Xiren Zhou. Phi-3 technical report: A highly capable language model locally on your
 phone, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14219.

Zachary Ankner, Rishab Parthasarathy, Aniruddha Nrusimha, Christopher Rinard, Jonathan Ragan-
  Kelley, and William Brandon. Hydra: Sequentially-dependent draft heads for medusa decoding,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.05109.

Gregor Bachmann and Vaishnavh Nagarajan. The pitfalls of next-token prediction. In Forty-first
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=76zq8Wkl6Z.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nikhil Bhendawade, Irina Belousova, Qichen Fu, Henry Mason, Mohammad Rastegari, and Mahyar
  Najibi. Speculative streaming: Fast llm inference without auxiliary models, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2402.11131.
Collin Burns, Haotian Ye, Dan Klein, and Jacob Steinhardt. Discovering latent knowledge in lan-
  guage models without supervision. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ETKGuby0hcs.
Tianle Cai, Yuhong Li, Zhengyang Geng, Hongwu Peng, Jason D. Lee, Deming Chen, and Tri
  Dao. Medusa: Simple llm inference acceleration framework with multiple decoding heads. arXiv
  preprint arXiv: 2401.10774, 2024.
Charlie Chen, Sebastian Borgeaud, Geoffrey Irving, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Laurent Sifre, and John
  Jumper. Accelerating large language model decoding with speculative sampling, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.01318.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
 tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
 Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec
 Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob Mc-
 Grew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374.
Zhuoming Chen, Avner May, Ruslan Svirschevski, Yuhsun Huang, Max Ryabinin, Zhihao Jia, and
  Beidi Chen. Sequoia: Scalable, robust, and hardware-aware speculative decoding, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.12374.
Jacob K Christopher, Brian R Bartoldson, Bhavya Kailkhura, and Ferdinando Fioretto. Speculative
  diffusion decoding: Accelerating language generation through diffusion, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2408.05636.
Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick,
  and Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning
  challenge. ArXiv, abs/1803.05457, 2018. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:3922816.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems, 2021. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2110.14168.
Cunxiao Du, Jing Jiang, Xu Yuanchen, Jiawei Wu, Sicheng Yu, Yongqi Li, Shenggui Li, Kai Xu,
  Liqiang Nie, Zhaopeng Tu, and Yang You. Glide with a caPE: A low-hassle method to accelerate
  speculative decoding. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=mk8oRhox2l.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony
  Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark,
  Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere,
  Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris
  Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny
  Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino,
  Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael
  Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Ander-
  son, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan
  Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Ma-
  hadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy
  Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak,
  Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Al-
  wala, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini,
  Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der
  Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo,
  Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Man-
  nat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova,
  Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal,
  Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne, Onur
  Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhar-
  gava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong,
  Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic,
  Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sum-
  baly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa,
  Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang,
  Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende,
  Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney
  Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom,
  Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta,
  Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vladan Petro-
  vic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang,
  Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur,
  Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre
  Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aaron Grattafiori, Abha
  Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay
  Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda
  Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew
  Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Franco, Aparajita
  Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh
  Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De
  Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Bran-
  don Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina
  Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai,
  Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li,
  Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana
  Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil,
  Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Ar-
  caute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco
  Caggioni, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella
  Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Govind Thattai, Grant Herman, Grigory
  Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang,
  Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Gold-
  man, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman,
  James Geboski, James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer
  Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe
  Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie
  Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Karthik Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun
  Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun Huang, Kunal
  Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva,
  Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian
  Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson,
  Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Ke-
  neally, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel
  Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mo-
  hammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navy-
  ata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong,


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Ning Zhang, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli,
  Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux,
  Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao,
  Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Raymond Li,
  Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Rohan Maheswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott,
  Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Sa-
  tadru Pan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lind-
  say, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang
  Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen
  Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Sungmin Cho,
  Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser,
  Tamara Best, Thilo Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Tim-
  othy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan,
  Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vı́tor Albiero, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu
  Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Con-
  stable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xide Xia, Xilun Wu,
  Xinbo Gao, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi,
  Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef
  Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, and Zhiwei Zhao. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.
Mostafa Elhoushi, Akshat Shrivastava, Diana Liskovich, Basil Hosmer, Bram Wasti, Liangzhen Lai,
 Anas Mahmoud, Bilge Acun, Saurabh Agarwal, Ahmed Roman, Ahmed Aly, Beidi Chen, and
 Carole-Jean Wu. LayerSkip: Enabling early exit inference and self-speculative decoding. In Lun-
 Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting
 of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 12622–12642,
 Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.681.
Yichao Fu, Peter Bailis, Ion Stoica, and Hao Zhang. Break the sequential dependency of LLM in-
  ference using lookahead decoding. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=eDjvSFOkXw.
Fabian Gloeckle, Badr Youbi Idrissi, Baptiste Roziere, David Lopez-Paz, and Gabriel Synnaeve.
  Better & faster large language models via multi-token prediction. In Forty-first International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  pEWAcejiU2.
Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.00752.
Wes Gurnee and Max Tegmark. Language models represent space and time. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2310.02207, 2023.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Ja-
  cob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  d7KBjmI3GmQ.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom Hen-
  nigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia Guy,
  Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and Laurent Sifre.
  Training compute-optimal large language models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2203.15556.
Kaixuan Huang, Xudong Guo, and Mengdi Wang. Specdec++: Boosting speculative decoding via
  adaptive candidate lengths, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19715.
Andrei Ivanov, Nikoli Dryden, Tal Ben-Nun, Shigang Li, and Torsten Hoefler. Data movement is
  all you need: A case study on optimizing transformers. Proceedings of Machine Learning and
  Systems, 3:711–732, 2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.08361.
Sehoon Kim, Karttikeya Mangalam, Suhong Moon, Jitendra Malik, Michael W. Mahoney, Amir
  Gholami, and Kurt Keutzer. Speculative decoding with big little decoder. In Thirty-seventh
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=EfMyf9MC3t.
Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. Fast inference from transformers via speculative
  decoding. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’23.
  JMLR.org, 2023.
Yuhui Li, Fangyun Wei, Chao Zhang, and Hongyang Zhang. Eagle: Speculative sampling requires
  rethinking feature uncertainty. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024a.
Yuhui Li, Fangyun Wei, Chao Zhang, and Hongyang Zhang. Eagle-2: Faster inference of language
  models with dynamic draft trees, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.16858.
Fangcheng Liu, Yehui Tang, Zhenhua Liu, Yunsheng Ni, Kai Han, and Yunhe Wang. Kangaroo:
  Lossless self-speculative decoding via double early exiting, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2404.18911.
Jiahao Liu, Qifan Wang, Jingang Wang, and Xunliang Cai. Speculative decoding via early-exiting
   for faster LLM inference with Thompson sampling control mechanism. In Lun-Wei Ku, An-
   dre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
   guistics ACL 2024, pp. 3027–3043, Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting, August 2024b.
   Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
   findings-acl.179.
Tianyu Liu, Yun Li, Qitan Lv, Kai Liu, Jianchen Zhu, and Winston Hu. Parallel speculative decoding
  with adaptive draft length, 2024c. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.11850.
Xiaoxuan Liu, Lanxiang Hu, Peter Bailis, Ion Stoica, Zhijie Deng, Alvin Cheung, and Hao Zhang.
  Online speculative decoding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07177, 2023.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
   Bkg6RiCqY7.
Xupeng Miao, Gabriele Oliaro, Zhihao Zhang, Xinhao Cheng, Zeyu Wang, Zhengxin Zhang, Rae
  Ying Yee Wong, Alan Zhu, Lijie Yang, Xiaoxiang Shi, Chunan Shi, Zhuoming Chen, Daiyaan
  Arfeen, Reyna Abhyankar, and Zhihao Jia. Specinfer: Accelerating large language model serv-
  ing with tree-based speculative inference and verification. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM
  International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operat-
  ing Systems, Volume 3, ASPLOS ’24, pp. 932–949, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association
  for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400703867. doi: 10.1145/3620666.3651335. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/3620666.3651335.
Giovanni Monea, Armand Joulin, and Edouard Grave. Pass: Parallel speculative sampling, 2023.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.13581.
Nvidia. Llama 3.1 performance with medusa. https://shorturl.at/IkXRC, 2024. Ac-
  cessed: 2024-10-01.
OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Floren-
  cia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red
  Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Moham-
  mad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher
  Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brock-
  man, Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann,
  Brittany Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis,
  Derek Chen, Sully Chen, Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux,
  Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch, Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling, Sheila
  Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix,
  Simón Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gib-
  son, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan Gordon, Morgan
  Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu, Yufei Guo, Chris Hal-
  lacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke, Chris Hesse, Alan
  Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli Hu, Xin Hu,
  Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang, Roger Jiang, Haozhun
  Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Łukasz Kaiser, Ali Ka-
  mali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook
  Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Jamie Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel
  Kokotajlo, Łukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich, Aris Konstantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen
  Krueger, Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel
  Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Mateusz Litwin, Theresa Lopez,
  Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Makanju, Kim Malfacini, Sam Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv
  Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer McKinney,
  Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan, Jake McNeil, David Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick,
  Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel
  Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David Mély, Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Ra-
  jeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo Noh, Long Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe,
  Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Joel
  Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng, Adam Perelman, Filipe
  de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Michael, Pokorny,
  Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr H. Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea Power, Boris Power, Elizabeth Proehl,
  Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron Raymond, Francis Real, Kendra
  Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder, Mario Saltarelli, Ted Sanders,
  Shibani Santurkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John Schulman, Daniel Sel-
  sam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker, Pranav Shyam, Szymon Sidor,
  Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin Sokolowsky,
  Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang,
  Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine B. Thompson, Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng, Pre-
  ston Tuggle, Nick Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cerón Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun Vi-
  jayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan
  Ward, Jason Wei, CJ Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng, Matt
  Wiethoff, Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lauren Workman,
  Sherwin Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming Yuan, Wo-
  jciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers, Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao Zheng,
  Juntang Zhuang, William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024.

Reiner Pope, Sholto Douglas, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Jacob Devlin, James Bradbury, Jonathan
  Heek, Kefan Xiao, Shivani Agrawal, and Jeff Dean. Efficiently scaling transformer inference.
  Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 5:606–624, 2023.

Pytorch-Team. gpt-fast. https://github.com/pytorch-labs/gpt-fast, 2023.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.

Aishwarya P S, Pranav Ajit Nair, Yashas Samaga B L, Toby James Boyd, Sanjiv Kumar, Prateek
  Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli. Tandem transformers for inference efficient LLMs. In Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and
  Felix Berkenkamp (eds.), Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 42906–42917. PMLR, 21–27 Jul
  2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/s24a.html.

Andrea Santilli, Silvio Severino, Emilian Postolache, Valentino Maiorca, Michele Mancusi, Ric-
  cardo Marin, and Emanuele Rodola. Accelerating transformer inference for translation via par-
  allel decoding. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Papers), pp. 12336–12355, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.689. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  acl-long.689.
Thijs Scheepers. Improving the compositionality of word embeddings. Master’s thesis, Universiteit
  van Amsterdam, Science Park 904, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 11 2017.
Tal Schuster, Adam Fisch, Jai Gupta, Mostafa Dehghani, Dara Bahri, Vinh Q. Tran, Yi Tay, and
  Donald Metzler. Confident adaptive language modeling. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle
  Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=uLYc4L3C81A.
Noam Shazeer. Fast transformer decoding: One write-head is all you need, 2019. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1911.02150.
Mitchell Stern, Noam M. Shazeer, and Jakob Uszkoreit. Blockwise parallel decoding for deep
 autoregressive models. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018. URL https://api.
 semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:53208380.
Xin Sun, Tao Ge, Furu Wei, and Houfeng Wang. Instantaneous grammatical error correction with
  shallow aggressive decoding. In Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
  11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 5937–5947, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2021.acl-long.462. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.462.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
Gladys Tyen, Hassan Mansoor, Victor Cărbune, Peter Chen, and Tony Mak. Llms cannot find
  reasoning errors, but can correct them given the error location, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2311.08516.
Dimitri von Rütte, Sotiris Anagnostidis, Gregor Bachmann, and Thomas Hofmann. A language
  model’s guide through latent space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14433, 2024.
Junxiong Wang, Daniele Paliotta, Avner May, Alexander M. Rush, and Tri Dao. The mamba in the
  llama: Distilling and accelerating hybrid models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2408.15237.
Davis Wertheimer, Joshua Rosenkranz, Thomas Parnell, Sahil Suneja, Pavithra Ranganathan, Raghu
  Ganti, and Mudhakar Srivatsa. Accelerating production llms with combined token/embedding
  speculators, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.19124.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gug-
  ger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art
  natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 38–45, Online, October 2020. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
  2020.emnlp-demos.6.
Heming Xia, Tao Ge, Peiyi Wang, Si-Qing Chen, Furu Wei, and Zhifang Sui. Speculative decoding:
  Exploiting speculative execution for accelerating seq2seq generation. In Houda Bouamor, Juan
  Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
  2023, pp. 3909–3925, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.257. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  findings-emnlp.257.
Aonan Zhang, Chong Wang, Yi Wang, Xuanyu Zhang, and Yunfei Cheng. Recurrent drafter for fast
  speculative decoding in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09919, 2024a.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Biao Zhang and Rico Sennrich. Root mean square layer normalization, 2019. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/1910.07467.
Jun Zhang, Jue Wang, Huan Li, Lidan Shou, Ke Chen, Gang Chen, and Sharad Mehrotra. Draft&
  verify: Lossless large language model acceleration via self-speculative decoding. In Lun-
  Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meet-
  ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 11263–
  11282, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024b. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.607.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=uccHPGDlao.
Yongchao Zhou, Kaifeng Lyu, Ankit Singh Rawat, Aditya Krishna Menon, Afshin Rostamizadeh,
  Sanjiv Kumar, Jean-François Kagy, and Rishabh Agarwal. Distillspec: Improving speculative
  decoding via knowledge distillation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rsY6J3ZaTF.
Andy Zou, Long Phan, Sarah Chen, James Campbell, Phillip Guo, Richard Ren, Alexander
  Pan, Xuwang Yin, Mantas Mazeika, Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, Shashwat Goel, Nathaniel
  Li, Michael J. Byun, Zifan Wang, Alex Troy Mallen, Steven Basart, Sanmi Koyejo, Dawn
  Song, Matt Fredrikson, Zico Kolter, and Dan Hendrycks. Representation engineering: A top-
  down approach to ai transparency. ArXiv, abs/2310.01405, 2023a. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263605618.
Andy Zou, Long Phan, Sarah Chen, James Campbell, Phillip Guo, Richard Ren, Alexander Pan,
  Xuwang Yin, Mantas Mazeika, Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, et al. Representation engineering: A
  top-down approach to ai transparency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01405, 2023b.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     L IMITATIONS
Here we list limitations of our approach to the best of our knowledge:

       • An obvious limitation is the loss of the mathematical guarantee to match target quality.
         While we perform extensive experiments and show that quality is maintained, there is no
         certainty for novel tasks.
       • The draft model needs to be of high-quality, otherwise our approach naturally does not
         prove beneficial and too many tokens end up being rejected. Self-speculation and small
         drafters in the spirit of Medusa or Eagle are thus not ideal since their generations quickly
         deteriorate when drafting too far into the future.
       • Similarly, the target model needs to be of sufficient size to be able to provide accurate judge-
         ments. Speedups for smaller models such as Llama-8B are hence tougher to achieve.
       • As highlighted in the main text, new tasks do require careful annotation of data to maintain
         quality. The required amount on the other hand turns out to be small in our case.
       • If the draft model has safety issues, the target model could potentially accept safety-critical
         tokens through the judge, even if the target would otherwise never produce such outputs.
         We have not observed such issues in our experiments but have also not thoroughly investi-
         gated this problem as it is beyond the scope of our work.

B     A RCHITECTURAL AND E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
B.1    L INEAR HEAD

We train our linear heads using the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) with learning
rate η = 0.0001, weight decay 0.1 and batch size 128. Note that for Llama-405B, our linear head
has dimension 16, 384 while for Llama-70B it has 8, 192. Our linear head can be viewed as an
additional entry in the vocabulary V, reducing its inference overhead thus to practically zero.

B.2    J UDGE MASKING

We describe the the combination of standard and judge mask in more detail in Fig. 7. In the following

      Judge
                Harry    Potter     is      a    series     of    fantasy     thrillers     written
      mask

    Standard
                Harry    Potter     is      a    series     of    fantasy     thrillers     written
      mask


      Final
                Harry    Potter     is      a    series     of    fantasy     thrillers     written
      mask


Figure 7: Illustration of mask creation in judge decoding. The decision mask resulting from the
judge is combined with the standard mask from SD. Once both methods disagree, subsequent tokens
get rejected automatically as usual, even if they were individually accepted.

we will describe in more detail why it is natural to combine the masks of judge decoding and standard
speculative decoding. We illustrate this in Fig. 8. There are (rare) scenarios where a candidate token
is rejected by judge decoding (such as ”that” in the example) and the ”corrected” token according to
the target model happens to be the same token (”that” in blue). This situation could repeat; the very
next token could again be rejected by JD and accepted by the target (token ”guy” in the example).
Standard SD on the other hand would accept all those tokens as the draft exactly matches the target
suggestion. We eventually end up accepting the exact same tokens (in case of rejection we have to
trust the target), so it makes sense to combine the masks and use the SD mask to not end up repeating
the steps (in the example we combine steps 1., 2., 3. into one step on the right). In our experiments
we do not observe this situation too often, but it can occasionally occur as the judge was tuned to
rather reject than accept when in doubt to avoid false positives.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Current                                            Corrected
                                 Accepted          Rejected
                context                                             token



                                  that


 1.     Short       everything    that       guy      has     touched   JD Mask           Short   everything   that      guy    has   touched   JD Mask



                                             guy                                          Short   everything   that      guy    has   touched   SD Mask


 2.     Short       everything    that       guy      has     touched   JD Mask


                                                                                                                                                Combined
                                                                                          Short   everything   that      guy    has   touched
                                                                                                                                                  Mask
                                                      has


 3.     Short       everything    that       guy      has     touched   JD Mask


Figure 8: Illustration how combining the masks of judge decoding (JD) and standard speculative
decoding (SD) results in the same reply but in less steps in the (rare) case that JD rejects a token that
is actually the target token.


B.3     H ARDWARE

We run all of our experiments on a single node of H100-SXM5 GPUs. For Llama-405B we use
8 GPUs and 8-bit quantization to ensure that the model fits on a single node. For Llama-70B, we
use again 8-bit quantization but only 2 GPUs.


C     M ORE PROMPTS

C.1     R EJECTED REPLIES FOR L L A M A -8B

Here we provide more example prompts where Llama-8B provides completely correct answers but
gets rejected early on by the target Llama-405B. We display the decision of our judge decoding
strategy right below. To also highlight that judge decoding can catch errors and does not just blindly
accept responses, we also show prompts where Llama-8B provides a wrong response.

                                         -8b/405b Standard Verification:                                               -8b/405b Standard Verification:
                                     To find out how far each vehicle                                                 To find out how much each roommate
  User Question:                                                                       User Question:
                                                                                                                      will pay per year, we need to
  A bus travels 60                                                                     Jenna has 4                    calculate the monthly share
  miles per hour for                     -8b/405b Judge Verification:                  roommates. Each
  5 hours. A car                                                                       month the
  travels 30 miles                   To find out how far each vehicle                  electricity bill
  per hour for 8                     traveled, we need to multiply their               is $100. How much               -8b/405b Judge Verification:
  hours. How much                    speed by the time they traveled.                  will each roommate             To find out how much each roommate
  farther did the                                                                      pay per year for               will pay per year, we need to
  bus go than the                    The bus traveled 60 miles per hour                electricity, if                calculate the monthly share and then
  car, in miles?                     for 5 hours, so it traveled 60 * 5 =              they divide the                multiply it by 12.
                                     300 miles.                                        share equally?
                                                                                                                      The monthly electricity bill is $100.
                                     The car traveled 30 miles per hour                                               Since there are 4 roommates, we
                                     for 8 hours, so it traveled 30 * 8 =                                             divide the bill by 4
                                     240 miles.

                                     To find out how much farther the bus
                                     went than the car, we need to
                                     subtract the distance the car
                                     traveled from the distance the bus
                                     traveled.


Figure 9: More example prompts for SD for Llama-8B and Llama-405B. Left: Correct response
getting rejected early under standard decoding, while judge decoding accepts a long continuation
(but admittedly over-cautiously rejects later on). Right: Wrong response that gets rejected too early
by standard decoding and correctly rejected later on by judge decoding (there are 5 roommates in
total).



                                                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          -8b/405b Standard Verification:                                      -8b/405b Standard Verification:

 User Question:          **Island of Aloha                             User Question:
                                                                                              Since David has three sisters
 Compose an engaging                                                   David has three
                          -8b/405b Judge Verification:                 sisters. Each of
 travel blog post
 about a recent trip     **Island of Aloha: Unveiling the              them has one
 to Hawaii,              Hidden Gems of Hawaii**                       brother. How many
                                                                       brothers does           -8b/405b Judge Verification:
 highlighting
 cultural experiences    As I stepped off the plane in                 David have?            Since David has three sisters, and
 and must-see            Honolulu, the warm tropical air                                      each of them has one brother, that
 attractions.            enveloped me, and the sweet scent of                                 brother is David himself. \n\nSo,
                         plumeria filled my senses. I was                                     David has 1 brother.
                         finally in Hawaii, the ultimate
                         paradise on earth. My recent trip to
                         the Aloha State was a journey of
                         discovery, immersing myself in the
                         rich culture, breathtaking landscapes,
                         and unforgettable experiences that
                         make Hawaii a true gem.

                         **Cultural Experiences**

                         Hawaii is a melting pot [...]


Figure 10: More example prompts for speculative decoding for Llama-8B and Llama-405B.
Left: Correct response getting rejected early under standard decoding, while judge decoding accepts
a long continuation (but admittedly over-cautiously rejects later on). Right: Wrong response that
gets rejected too early by standard decoding and correctly rejected later on by judge decoding (there
are 5 roommates in total).


C.2     J UDGING OF W IKIPEDA ARTICLES

Here we provide more details and examples for verifying Wikipedia articles. Given a Wikipedia
article name such as “aluminium”, “Moore’s Law” or “Pet Shop Boys”, we prompt the model for
information by asking “What can you tell me about <insert topic>?”. We then
again compare greedy matching for standard speculative decoding with our judging strategy when
using the summary part of the Wikipedia article as a reply. We display some example prompts along
with the corresponding verifications in Fig. 11.

                         Wiki/   405b Standard Verification:                                  Wiki/   405b Standard Verification:
  User Question:                                                       User Question:
                         Zinc is a chemical element with symbol                               Donnie Darko is a 2001 American
                                                                       What can you tell me
  What can you tell me                                                 about "Donnie
  about "zinc"?                                                        Darko"?
                         Wiki/   405b Judge Verification:                                     Wiki/   405b Judge Verification:

                                                                                              Donnie Darko is a 2001 American science
                         Zinc is a chemical element with symbol                               fiction film written and directed by
                         and atomic number 30. It is the first                                Richard Kelly. It stars Jake Gyllenhaal,
                                                                                              Jena Malone, Drew Barrymore, James


Figure 11: Two example prompts from the subset of wikipedia-summaries, along with the
correspond verifications.


C.3     F ORCING WRONG REPLIES FOR L L A M A -405B

Here we provide some more evidence of the “correcting” behaviour of Llama-405B when condi-
tioned on wrong tokens. If the model cannot fix the response anymore, then it will often point out
that the completion it just gave is actually wrong, see e.g. examples in Fig. 13. This again strongly
suggests that correctness should thus be detectable in the embeddings of such tokens.


                                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    User Question:                                         User Question:
    Write me a Python function that doubles                What is heavier: A kilogram of
    every element in a given list.                         feathers or a kilogram of stones?

    Assistant:                                             Assistant:

    def double_elements(l):                                A kilogram of stones is heavier
       """Doubles every element in a list"""               because... just kidding. They are
       for i in range(len(l)):                             actually the same weight.
          l[i] = 3 * l[i] - l[i]
       return l



Figure 12: Left: Llama-405B corrects the mistake by subtracting l[i] to double instead of
triple. Right: Similar correction behaviour by pointing out that response so far is wrong.


   User Question:                                 User Question:
   Write me a Python function that doubles        Write me a Python function that sets every odd
   every element in a given list.                 entry in a list to zero and appends the result to
                                                  the original unmodified list.

   Assistant:                                     Assistant:

   def double_elements(l):                        def odd_to_zero(l):
      """Doubles every element in a list"""           """Set every odd entry in a list to zero and
      for i in range(len(l)):                     append it to the original unmodified list"""
         l[i] = 2 * l[j]                              copy = l
      return l                                        for i in range(len(copy)):
                                                          if copy[i] % 2 == 1:
   However, the above function has a bug.                      copy[i] = 0
   Here is the corrected version [...]                return l + copy

                                                  However, the above function will modify the
                                                  original list when it is referenced by another
                                                  variable. Here is the corrected version [...]


Figure 13: Left: Llama-405B correctly points out that there is a bug as the index variable “j”” is
not defined. Right: The model can also catch more subtle mistakes. Here the original list also gets
modified as no copy was made, leading to wrong outputs.


                                                21
