Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C IPHER P RUNE : E FFICIENT AND S CALABLE P RIVATE
T RANSFORMER I NFERENCE

                               Yancheng Zhang1 , Jiaqi Xue1 , Mengxin Zheng1
                             Mimi Xie2 , Mingzhe Zhang3 , Lei Jiang4 , Qian Lou1*
                   1
                       University of Central Florida 2 University of Texas at San Antonio
                               3
                                 Ant Research 4 Indiana University Bloomington


                                                A BSTRACT
            Private Transformer inference using cryptographic protocols offers promising so-
            lutions for privacy-preserving machine learning; however, it still faces significant
            runtime overhead (efficiency issues) and challenges in handling long-token inputs
            (scalability issues). We observe that the Transformer’s operational complexity
            scales quadratically with the number of input tokens, making it essential to re-
            duce the input token length. Notably, each token varies in importance, and many
            inputs contain redundant tokens. Additionally, prior private inference methods
            that rely on high-degree polynomial approximations for non-linear activations are
            computationally expensive. Therefore, reducing the polynomial degree for less
            important tokens can significantly accelerate private inference. Building on these
            observations, we propose CipherPrune, an efficient and scalable private inference
            framework that includes a secure encrypted token pruning protocol, a polynomial
            reduction protocol, and corresponding Transformer network optimizations. At the
            protocol level, encrypted token pruning adaptively removes unimportant tokens
            from encrypted inputs in a progressive, layer-wise manner. Additionally, encrypted
            polynomial reduction assigns lower-degree polynomials to less important tokens
            after pruning, enhancing efficiency without decryption. At the network level, we
            introduce protocol-aware network optimization via a gradient-based search to max-
            imize pruning thresholds and polynomial reduction conditions while maintaining
            the desired accuracy. Our experiments demonstrate that CipherPrune reduces the
            execution overhead of private Transformer inference by approximately 6.1× for
            128-token inputs and 10.6× for 512-token inputs, compared to previous meth-
            ods, with only a marginal drop in accuracy. The code is publicly available at
            https://github.com/UCF-Lou-Lab-PET/cipher-prune-inference.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have become the predominant approach for tackling a wide
range of machine learning tasks, spanning Natural Language Processing (NLP) (Xue et al., 2024) and
Computer Vision (CV) (Zheng et al., 2022) domains. Notably, Transformer-as-a-Service (TaaS) (Rad-
ford et al., 2018) has emerged as an effective means for average users to harness the capabilities of
sophisticated and accurate Transformers deployed on cloud servers. Privacy has become a major
concern, driving a growing demand for privacy-preserving TaaS solutions (Zheng et al., 2023; Hao
et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2023; Santriaji et al., 2025; Lou et al., 2021).
Homomorphic Encryption (HE) (Gentry, 2009) is a promising secure computing technology that
protects data privacy by enabling computations on encrypted data without decryption. However,
applying HE continuously for deep computation tasks often results in prohibitively high latency (Lou
et al., 2019; Lou & Jiang, 2019; Zheng et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023a; Jiang et al., 2022). To address
this, hybrid HE/Multi-party Computation (MPC)-based techniques (Chen et al., 2022; Zheng et al.,
2023; Hao et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023b; Lu et al., 2025; Pang et al., 2024; Xu
et al., 2024b) have been widely adopted for private Transformer inference, as illustrated in Figure 1
    ∗
        Corresponding Author. Email: qian.lou@ucf.edu.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Output                                  Input: The movie was      Different inputs
                                                                                                                                   #Tokens: 52
           …                                           a great mix of action     Input 𝒙𝟏                                    Layer N
                                                       and comedy.
                                                                                            Input 𝒙𝟐
                                                       Output: 99.3% positive                          …                           #Tokens: 60
   Non-Linear (MPC)                                                                                        Input 𝒙𝒌            …
                                                                    Remove
                                                                    redundancy                                               Layer 2
       Linear (HE)
                                                       Pruned input: The           80%                                             #Tokens: 90
      𝑿                 𝑾
                                                       movie was a great mix                 30% …                           Layer 1
                                                       of action and comedy.                                60%
                                                                                 Redundancy Ratio                                  #Tokens: 128
                                                       Output: 99.2% positive
  Client        Server                                                                                                       Input 𝒙𝒌
(a) Private Transformer     (b) Issues of Efficiency                                  (d) Input-specific
                                                       (c) Input redundancy                                           (e) Progressive Pruning
        Inference                & Scalability                                          Redundancy

Figure 1: (a) An illustration of HE/MPC-based private inference. (b) The high-latency and scalable
challenge of private Transformer models over lengthy inputs. (c) An example of redundant input in
sentiment analysis tasks. (d) Demonstration of varying levels of redundancy across different inputs.
(e) An example showcasing progressive redundancy pruning.
(a). This hybrid approach achieves state-of-the-art performance by using HE for linear operations
and MPC for non-linear operations.
Unfortunately, prior private Transformer inferences (Lu et al., 2025; Pang et al., 2024; Zheng et al.,
2023) still suffer from significant latency and poor scalability over long-token inputs. As Figure 1 (b)
shows, the prior private inference process for a GPT2 Transformer (Pang et al., 2024) with 128 input
tokens extends to ∼ 10 minutes. It necessitates the exchange of over 60 gigabytes of data between
the server and the client. Furthermore, as the token length increases, the runtime overhead grows
super-linearly, indicating poor scalability. This is primarily because the operational complexity of
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2022) scales quadratically with the number of input
tokens. Reducing the number of input tokens without compromising accuracy is essential.
We observe that most inputs contain redundant words/tokens, with varying levels of redundancy
across different inputs. As illustrated in Figure 1 (c), in a sentiment analysis task, an input that retains
only the tokens movie and great while removing almost all others still maintains inference confidence
and accuracy. We refer to such tokens that can be removed without significantly impacting accuracy
as redundancy. Meanwhile, the different inputs have various levels of redundancy (Wang et al.,
2021; Kim et al., 2022; Yudha et al., 2024). Figure 1 (d) illustrates that some inputs exhibit greater
redundancy, while others have less, with this variation being particularly evident across different
tasks. Classification tasks typically have more redundancy compared to sequence-to-sequence
tasks (Fu et al., 2024). To effectively prune more tokens from longer inputs and potentially reduce
the Transformer’s quadratic complexity to linear, pruning should be done progressively—that is,
tokens should be pruned layer by layer over multiple stages, as illustrated in Figure 1 (e), rather than
performing a one-time pruning at the first layer (Wang et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2024a).
Another key observation is that previous private Transformer inference methods, whether relying on
precise non-linear activations (Hao et al., 2022; Yudha et al., 2024) or using large-degree polynomial
approximations (Lu et al., 2025; Pang et al., 2024) for these activations, continue to suffer from
significant execution overhead for non-linear operations. Therefore, replacing non-linear activations
or high-degree polynomials with lower-degree polynomials can be beneficial. As shown in Figure 2 ,
a degree-d polynomial activation for tokens (Figure 2 (a)) can be reduced to a degree-di polynomial
(Figure 2 (b)), where di ≤ d.
Adopting existing plaintext-level pruning techniques (PlainPrune) (Wang et al., 2021; Kim et al.,
2022) to accelerate private Transformer inferences presents a formidable challenge. The primary
reason is that the tokens are encrypted, and we need to calculate token importance scores layer by
layer for specific encrypted inputs. This requires redesigning a new encrypted token pruning protocol.
Meanwhile, the polynomial reduction in the encrypted domain poses a similar challenge, and we need
to design an encrypted polynomial reduction protocol for efficient private activation. Also, at the
network level, we need to learn the pruning and polynomial reduction thresholds while maximizing
efficiency, ensuring privacy, and maintaining the desired level of accuracy.
To address these challenges, we introduce CipherPrune, a scalable and efficient frame-
work for private inference that incorporates a secure encrypted token pruning protocol, a
polynomial reduction protocol, and tailored Transformer network optimizations. At the
protocol level, CipherPrune adaptively prunes unimportant tokens from encrypted inputs
in a progressive, layer-by-layer manner. It also applies encrypted polynomial reduction

                                                                2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


by assigning lower-degree polynomials to less important                Activate       Degree-𝒅
                                                               Token 𝒊
tokens post-pruning, thereby improving efficiency without                         Polynomial 𝑷(; 𝒅)
requiring decryption. At the network level, we implement          (a) No Polynomial Reduction
protocol-aware optimization using a gradient-based search,
aiming to maximize pruning thresholds and polynomial                   Activate       Degree-𝒅𝒊
                                                               Token 𝒊          Polynomial 𝑷(; 𝒅𝒊 ≤ 𝒅)
reduction conditions while preserving the required accu-
racy. Our experiments show that CipherPrune reduces the             (b) Polynomial Reduction
execution overhead of private Transformer inference by
                                                               Figure 2: Polynomial Reduction.
about 6.1× for 128-token inputs and 10.6 × for 512-token
inputs compared to prior method (Pang et al., 2024), with only a marginal drop in accuracy.


2    P RELIMINARIES

Token Pruning in Transformers. To reduce the computational overhead of plaintext Transformers,
a range of strategies including efficient architecture design, knowledge distillation, quantization,
and both model and token pruning have been developed. Among these, token pruning (Goyal et al.,
2020; Kim & Cho, 2020; Wang et al., 2021) stands out for its ability to dynamically reduce token
complexity, enhancing efficiency for scalable input lengths. Online token pruning progressively
eliminates nonessential input tokens during inference, with recent techniques like learning-based
token pruning assigning tunable thresholds to each Transformer layer. These thresholds are fine-tuned
during training to maximize the removal of tokens from the sequence.
                                                      √
Given the attention map Att = Sof tM ax(QK T / d) ∈ Rn×n , QK T computes√the dot product
between the query and key vectors, resulting in an n × n matrix. Dividing by d scales down
the values to avoid excessively large dot products, especially when the dimensionality d is large.
The importance score S ∈ Rn of n tokens xi ∈ RD in the input sequence can be computed as:
             PH−1 Pn−1
S[i] = H1 n1 h=0                h                                                             h
                       j=0 Att [j, i] (1) where H is the number of attention heads and Att is the
attention map in the h-th head. Importance score S is essentially computed by accumulating attention
scores vertically, which indicates the importance of a token across all heads in one Transformer layer.
Cryptographic Primitives. Our protocol uses multiple cryptographic primitives including Additive
Secret Sharing (ASS), Homomorphic Encryption (HE), and Oblivious Transfer (OT). We reuse partial
existing protocols detailed in Appendix B.
• ASS. We employ a 2-out-of-2 ASS scheme (Cramer et al., 2015) operating over the ring Zℓ , where
  ℓ is the bitwidth of the input x. ASS partitions x into two distinct random shares ⟨x⟩0 , ⟨x⟩1 , where
  x = ⟨x⟩0 + ⟨x⟩1 mod Zℓ . The parties, P0 and P1 , respectively hold ⟨x⟩0 , ⟨x⟩1 . Importantly, it is
  guaranteed that neither P0 nor P1 can discern the actual value of x (Cramer et al., 2015). ASS
  lends itself to linear operations, i.e., addition and constant multiplication, without communications.
• HE. We leverage the BFV scheme (Brakerski, 2012; Fan & Vercauteren, 2012; Deng et al., 2024),
  a leveled HE scheme, to facilitate linear operations on ciphertexts. The HE scheme has 4 functions:
  KeyGen, Enc, Dec, and Eval. KeyGen generates a public key pk and a secret key sk. Enc
  encrypts a message m with the public key pk to yield a ciphertext c. Dec, with the secret key sk
  and ciphertext c as inputs, decrypts the ciphertext to recover the message m. Finally, Eval, when
  given the public key pk, two ciphertexts c1 and c2 encrypting messages m1 and m2 , along with a
  linear function F, produces a new ciphertext c′ encrypting the result of F(m1 , m2 ).
• OT. We use OT for non-linear operations (Rathee et al., 2020; 2021; Xue et al., 2023) in a network
  model. Specifically, we employ 1-out-of-2 correlated OT (Asharov et al., 2013) (2-COTℓ ) and
  1-out-of-k (Kolesnikov & Kumaresan, 2013) (k-OTℓ ). In 2-COTℓ , the protocol takes as inputs the
  sender’s correlation x ∈ Zℓ and receiver’s bit choice i ∈ {0, 1}. It then produces a random element
  r ∈ Zℓ for the sender and r + i · x for the receiver. In k-OTℓ , the sender possesses k messages
  m0 , ...mk−1 and the receiver holds an index i ∈ [k]. The protocol ensures the receiver learns xi as
  the output without learning any information about xj , where j ∈ [k] and j ̸= i, while the sender
  learns nothing about the receiver’s choice i.
Prior Private Transformer Inference. In response to the success of Transformers and the need to
safeguard data privacy, various private Transformer Inferences (Chen et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2023;
Hao et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2025; Hou et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2024; Pang et al., 2024)
are proposed. To efficiently run private Transformer inferences, multiple cryptographic primitives are


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


used in a popular hybrid HE/MPC method IRON (Hao et al., 2022), i.e., in a Transformer, HE and SS
are used for linear layers, and SS and OT are adopted for nonlinear layers. IRON and BumbleBee (Lu
et al., 2025) focus on optimizing linear general matrix multiplications; SecFormer (Luo et al., 2024)
improves non-linear operations, such as the exponential function, through polynomial approximation.
BOLT (Pang et al., 2024) introduces the baby-step giant-step (BSGS) algorithm to reduce the number
of HE rotations, proposes a word elimination (W.E.) technique, and uses polynomial approximation
for non-linear operations, ultimately achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance. It’s worth
noting that the W.E. technique in BOLT is not input-specific, as it uniformly prunes half the tokens
regardless of the input or task. This approach may fail to remove all redundancy when it exceeds
half of the tokens and can harm accuracy when redundancy is less than half. Additionally, since W.E.
performs one-time pruning at the first layer rather than progressive, layer-by-layer pruning, it is less
effective at reducing tokens for longer inputs. Moreover, BOLT’s W.E. protocol is computationally
expensive due to its reliance on sorting, whereas our method achieves lower asymptotic complexity
and faster concrete runtime. Specifically, the state-of-the-art BOLT still faces efficiency and scalability
challenges with long-token inputs. For example, one private inference with a GPT2-Base model can
take ∼ 10 minutes for 128-token inputs and ∼ 1 hour for 512-token inputs, requiring data exchanges
of more than 60GB and 200GB, respectively. Besides the hybrid HE/MPC methods, a line of works
has explored performing private Transformer inference with only HE (Zimerman et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2024). We leave a more detailed review of related works in Appendix G.
Threat Model and Security Guarantee. CipherPrune operates in a common private inference
scenario where server P0 owns a proprietary Transformer-based model M with private weights
w, and client P1 possesses private input data x. We assume the server and client are semi-honest,
i.e., the server and client follow the designed protocols but are curious and attempt to learn extra
information (e.g., x or w). This setting is practical, as the server is incentivized to follow protocols
and provide high-quality services for monetary gain, while the client is motivated to adhere to the
protocol to receive those services. Consequently, this semi-honest setting is commonly adopted in
existing works (Rathee et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2022; Hao et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2025; Pang et al.,
2024). In this semi-honest setting, our protocols prevent the server from learning the client’s data
and the inference result; meanwhile, these protocols also block the client from accessing the model’s
parameters. In our protocols, we assume that both the server and client are aware of the number of
pruned tokens. We argue that this information does not compromise the client’s data or inference
results, nor does it enable the client to access the model’s weight parameters. Attacks that deviate
from the semi-honest setting are beyond the scope of this work.

3     C IPHER P RUNE F RAMEWORK
3.1   M OTIVATION

Although plaintext pruning methods (Goyal et al., 2020; Kim & Cho, 2020; Wang et al., 2021)
enable efficient and scalable inference for standard plaintext-domain Transformers, integrating these
techniques into private Transformers remains challenging. Additionally, encrypted polynomial
reduction and its joint optimization with token pruning remain largely unexplored.
Challenge 1: Lacking protocols for input-specific, progressive encrypted token pruning and
encrypted polynomial reduction. The efficiency and scalability of plaintext pruning methods (Goyal
et al., 2020; Kim & Cho, 2020; Wang et al., 2021) rely on two important features: (1) Input-specific
pruning: This involves assigning an adaptive pruning ratio based on the dynamic importance of
each input, as different inputs exhibit varying levels of redundancy. A fixed pruning ratio applied
universally can result in suboptimal pruning or excessive pruning, leading to catastrophic accuracy
loss. (2) Progressive pruning: This approach prunes tokens layer by layer, rather than performing a
one-time early-layer pruning. Early pruning may fail to correctly identify redundant tokens, resulting
in suboptimal or incorrect pruning. As mentioned earlier, prior W.E. in BOLT (Pang et al., 2024)
is not input-specific or progressive. Furthermore, there is an absence of an encrypted protocol for
polynomial production aimed at reducing the overhead of non-linear approximations.
Challenge 2: Lacking network optimization to support joint token pruning and polynomial
reduction. In plaintext-domain token pruning (Goyal et al., 2020; Kim & Cho, 2020; Wang et al.,
2021), there is no strong motivation to use polynomials to approximate non-linear activations, as
these operations are straightforward and inexpensive to compute. However, in the ciphertext domain,


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


large-degree polynomials are employed to approximate non-linear functions for both efficiency and
accuracy. We observed that polynomials of varying degrees can be assigned to different tokens in the
encrypted domain based on their importance scores, which can also be optimized alongside token
pruning. For instance, joint optimization of polynomial reduction and token pruning is essential, and
network optimization involves searching for the optimal pruning and reduction thresholds.
                                                                      Pruned
CipherPrune Overview. In this paper, Embedded
                                            tokens      Sec. 3.2       tokens         Sec. 3.3
                                                   𝑡!
we introduce CipherPrune for an efficient               Encrypted        𝑡!            Encrypted    𝑑𝑒𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑒2
                                                                               Linear
and scalable private Transformer inference.        𝑡"      Token
                                                                                (HE)
                                                                                       Polynomial
                                                         Pruning         𝑡#            Reduction    𝑑𝑒𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑒6
Figure 3 shows the overview of Cipher-
                                                   𝑡# Sec. 3.4 Pruning support                     Activation
Prune. We first propose encrypted token                                                            for 𝒕𝟏 and 𝒕𝟑
pruning for both linear and non-linear ac-         𝑡$   Network Optimization for Encrypted Pruning (MPC)
tivations in Section 3.2. Then, we develop
an encrypted polynomial reduction for effi-           Figure 3: Overview of CipherPrune.
cient non-linear operations in Section 3.3. We also introduce a network optimization for the joint
optimization of token pruning and polynomial reduction in Section 3.4.
Figure 4 shows the workflow of a private Transformer inference implementation with our CipherPrune.
During the private inference, ❶ the client’s input is encrypted and multiplied with the embedding
matrix in the server by the ΠM atM ul protocol. Then the result will be added to the positional
encoding. ❷ The server performs the private attention computations, including linear projection via
ΠM atM ul and non-linear attention map via ΠSof tM ax , respectively. After obtaining the tokens and
attention maps, ❸ our proposed encrypted token pruning method is performed to calculate token
importance scores and compare these scores with the pruning threshold θ and reduction threshold β to
decide which tokens will be pruned or reduced in a privacy-preserving manner. The pruned tokens are
discarded such that the following layers will have fewer operations. Low-degree polynomials are used
to compute the GELU and SoftMax functions on reduced tokens. ❹ Layernorm and Feedforward
operations will be executed via the prior protocols, ΠLayerN orm , ΠM atM ul and ΠGeLU . We detail
our proposed encrypted token pruning method in the subsequent subsections.

   Server                   Pos Encoding                            𝑉
                                                                                                                                                      Linear
Transformers                                        Linear
                                                                    𝐾
                                                                          MatMul             Softmax             MatMul          LayerNorm                          LayerNorm       Output
                                   +


                                                                                                                                                      GELU
                                                                    𝑄                𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛             𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠             𝑃𝑟𝑢𝑛𝑒𝑑
                              Embedding
                                                2 Attention                          𝑀𝑎𝑝                                      𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠                  Linear    4 Feed Forward
    Private                                        0.5         𝑥!                         > 0.4
                                                                                                               Keep
                                                                                                                          𝑥! (SoftMax)
   Inference                  1 Input                                                                      Reduce
                                                   0.3         𝑥"                        0.2 ~ 0.4                        𝑥" (Ploy.)                 Prune and Reduce        MatMul

                                                   0.1         𝑥#                         < 0.2            Prune          𝑥# (Pruned)                 Softmax    LayerNorm       GELU
Input Output                                    𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝑆 (")    𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠 𝑥$           𝑇ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑠: 𝜃 ("), 𝛽 (")

   Client                                                       3 Dynamic Token Pruning and Polynomial Reduction                                          Cryptographic Protocols


                   Figure 4: The workflow of a private Transformer inference with CipherPrune.
3.2       E NCRYPTED T OKEN P RUNING

Pruning protocol Πprune . In private inference, confidentially pruning tokens presents a challenge,
as the server and client must share attention maps and inputs without accessing their actual values.
As depicted in Figure 5, during inference, attention maps are protected using ASS, with each party
only able to view their respective shares.

                      Column mean                                                                                     Send to
                                                                                                                      the other party
  Attention
                                                                           𝑺>𝜽?
       map
                                                                        Secure Compare                                            Add        0   1    1
     shares                        𝟑 score shares ⟨𝑺⟩                                                   𝟑 mask shares 𝑴 𝟎                                       Prune
      ⟨𝑨𝒕𝒕⟩                                                     Compare with threshold                                                   𝟑 real mask 𝑴
                                                                                                                                                                        𝟐 token shares ⟨𝒚⟩
                                                                                                        𝟑 mask shares 𝑴 𝟏
                                                     Arithmetic           Boolean                                Receive from            𝟑 token shares ⟨𝒙⟩
  Data protected Data protected   Unprotected        value                value
     by ASS         by OT            data                                           Communication                the other party


  Figure 5: Illustration of mask generation and token pruning in Πprune with a non-sharing mask.
                                                                                                                                                                                             h
Specifically, the proposed secure token pruning protocol takes the secret-shared attention maps ⟨Att⟩
and tokens ⟨x⟩ as inputs, and outputs the pruned tokens ⟨y⟩ in a secret-sharing format. The secret
shares are held by server P0 and client P1 , respectively. First, P0 and P1 compute the importance
score on their local secret shares, respectively. As depicted in Equation 1, the computation of


                                                                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the importance score involves only addition and constant multiplication, which can be performed
efficiently via ASS. After P0 and P1 acquire their respective shares of the importance score ⟨S⟩,
they initiate a comparison protocol ΠCM P . This protocol contrasts the importance score against the
threshold θ learned offline, enabling them to determine the shares of the resultant mask ⟨M ⟩, where
M is 1 if S > θ, otherwise 0.
Possessing the shares ⟨M ⟩ without access to their real values prevents the direct pruning of tokens
⟨x⟩. A feasible solution involves reconstructing the non-shared mask, allowing both parties to
independently prune their shares of the input sequence of n tokens ⟨x⟩. This process then enables
them to obtain the shares of the pruned output sequence of m tokens ⟨y⟩. Appendix A, Figure 13
includes a more detailed and formal definition of Πprune .
The overhead for our secure token pruning protocol is minimal. The importance score can be
computed directly on shares, taking only 0.1 ms per attention module. This is efficient even for large
models like BERT-Large, which has 24 heads per layer. Additionally, our protocol only requires n
invocations of the comparison protocol ΠCM P , each consistently completed within 5 ms, independent
of the number of heads or embedding dimension. Thus, the total time complexity of our pruning
protocol Πprune is linear, O(n), based on the input token sequence length n.
                                                                                                                                 Keep first 𝒏! = 𝟐 token shares

                                    1 Bind Mask                                      2 Derive 𝒏′       3 Secure Swap                                      4 Truncate Tokens
    𝟑 mask shares ⟨𝑴⟩                   and Tokens                                                                                                             and MSB
                                                           Masked token shares                                              Swapped token shares ⟨%
                                                                                                                                                  𝒙⟩                                 𝟐 token shares ⟨𝒚⟩
                                                        𝑴 [𝒊] ≪ 𝟒 Shift 𝟒 bits        Boolean Mask Share
                                         𝑴 𝒊 =𝟏                                                                                           MSB 𝑥 𝑖    == 0?
    𝟑 token shares ⟨𝒙⟩              1
                                                                                                                  Add       𝒏! = 𝟐
                                                                                                                                                                  23    𝒙
                                                                                                                                                                        2 𝒊 = 𝟏𝟎𝟏𝟏𝟏
                                                                                                                                                                                            Sub
                                                                  Add                                                                                                                               7
                                  𝟏-bit Boolean share                        23             𝚷𝐁𝟐𝐀           𝒏! 𝟏             Real token                            𝟓-bit Arithmetic share
       Arithmetic       Boolean                                                                                         𝟐
       value            value                                                                                               number                                                          𝒚 𝒊 = 𝟎𝟏𝟏𝟏
                                    7    𝒙 𝒊 = 𝟎𝟏𝟏𝟏                𝒙 𝒊 = 𝟏𝟎𝟏𝟏𝟏                                                                                                 𝟏≪𝟒
                                                                                                                                         𝑥𝑖          𝑥 𝑖+1         𝟏                            𝟒-bit
                                                                       𝟓-bit
  Data protected Data protected
                                  𝟒-bit Arithmetic share
                                                                  Arithmetic share
                                                                                     sum              𝒏! 𝟎 Token number share              OT-based               Constant 𝟏               Arithmetic share
     by ASS         by OT                  Bind Mask and Tokens                        Derive Pruning Token Number 𝒏′                     Secure Swap                Truncate tokens and MSB

                                     Figure 6: Example of token pruning with a protected mask.

Pruning Mask Protocol Πmask . To further safeguard the privacy of the binary pruning mask M ,
specifically to protect the locations of pruned tokens, we design an additional Pruning Mask Protocol,
Πmask . The goal is to ensure that both parties, P0 and P1 , can obtain the pruned token sequence
without knowing which specific tokens were pruned. One key observation is that the number of
tokens after pruning, n′ , can be safely disclosed, as it is essential for subsequent processing and is not
typically associated with significant security risks like adversarial attacks (Cui et al., 2021). Knowing
n′ is crucial because token pruning involves relocating the less-important m = n − n′ tokens to
the end of the token sequence while maintaining the order of the remaining n′ tokens. After this
rearrangement, one can simply discard the m ASS tokens at the end of the token list.
Figure 6 shows the secure mask protocol Πmask that is used to ensure the mask privacy in Πprune .
The protocol takes secret-shared token sequence ⟨x⟩ and mask ⟨M ⟩ as inputs, and generates the
pruned tokens ⟨y⟩. ❶ Bind Mask and Tokens. To swap tokens, their corresponding links with the
mask will be disrupted. To preserve these links, there are two methods: one is to swap the masks
and tokens respectively and simultaneously; the other is to bind the mask and tokens together so that
they can be swapped as a unit. We adopt the second method, as binding the mask and tokens together
proves more efficient than managing separate swaps for the mask and tokens. The bounded tokens
⟨x̄⟩ can be obtained via left-shifting ⟨M ⟩ by f bits and adding to ⟨x⟩, where f is the bit width of a
token in x. Figure 6 illustrates using f = 4 as an example; however, in practice, f can be flexibly
adjusted. ❷ Derive Pruning Token Number n′ . We found that n′ can be obtained by securely
counting the number of 1s in M , which does not reveal the locations of 1s in M . Specifically, to
determine n′ , both P0 and P1 first convert their boolean mask shares ⟨M ⟩ into a fixed-point format
using ΠB2A . Each party then locally computes the sum of the arithmetic mask using ASS, yielding
⟨n′ ⟩. Finally, P0 and P1 obtain n′ by summing their respective shares, ⟨n′ ⟩0 and ⟨n′ ⟩1 .
                                                                     (
                                                                      b · x̄[i] + (1 − b) · x̄[i + 1],
                                            Swap(x̄[i], x̄[i + 1]) =                                                                                                                                    (2)
                                                                      b · x̄[i + 1] + (1 − b) · x̄[i].

❸ Secure Swap. This step aims to enable P0 and P1 to iteratively move m tokens to the end of
the token sequence via OT-based oblivious swap defined in Equation 2.In each iteration, P0 and P1
perform an oblivious swap through the token sequence. To privately swap two tokens x̄[i] and x̄[i + 1],
they first extract the MSB b from the bounded token x̄[i] and perform four OT-based multiplications.


                                                                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


❹ Truncate Tokens and MSB. P0 and P1 can truncate the swapped token sequence ⟨x̃⟩ and remove
the MSB respectively to obtain the pruned token sequence. Figure 14 in the Appendix A details more
about the mask protection protocol.
Analysis. The complexity of the proposed Πmask mainly depends on the number of oblivious swaps.
To prune m tokens out of n input tokens, O(mn) swaps are needed. Since token pruning is performed
progressively, only a small number of tokens are pruned at each layer, which makes Πmask efficient
during runtime. Specifically, for a BERT-Base model with 128 input tokens, the pruning protocol
only takes ∼ 0.9s on average in each layer.


   Figure 7: Comparison of token pruning-only method and pruning with polynomial reduction.
3.3    E NCRYPTED P OLYNOMIAL R EDUCTION

After pruning, retained tokens still require expensive operations, particularly for costly non-linear
functions. These non-linear functions are computed via expensive high-degree polynomials (Lu
et al., 2025; Pang et al., 2024). We notice that we can reduce the high-degree polynomials to
their low-degree counterparts for the less important tokens. As demonstrated in Figure 7 (a),
the cost of reduced polynomial can be 0.1× that of the high-degree polynomial. This moti-
vates us to accelerate the non-linear operations with low-degree polynomials while maintaining
the desired accuracy. Similar to employing a threshold θ to prune tokens with importance scores
below θ, we use another reduction threshold β (β > θ) to identify tokens for reduction. As
shown in Figure 7 (b)(c), combining token pruning with polynomial reduction further reduces
execution time compared to the pruning-only method. Importantly, we can optimize both θ
and β together during offline fine-tuning to enhance ef-                                                                 Reduce

ficiency. During the online inference phase, polynomial                             𝟐 remained ⟨𝒙⟩
                                                                𝟐 score shares ⟨𝑺⟩                   𝟐 token shares ⟨𝒚⟩
reduction occurs after token pruning (the pruning ratio                            token shares
                                                                                                                        Communicate
greater than zero). This simplifies the reduction process:            𝑺> 𝜷?                                             and disclose        0   1


the tokens have already been pruned, and the locations           Secure Compare     𝟐 reduction ⟨𝑴 ⟩
                                                                                   mask shares
                                                                                                      𝟐 real reduction
                                                                                                      masks 𝑴           𝜷
                                                                                                                                                    𝜷
of these tokens are rotated and concealed. Consequently,
there’s no need to safeguard the token mask for reduc-                  Data protected Data protected Disclosed   Arithmetic    Reduced     Boolean
                                                                           by ASS         by OT         data        value      Arithmetic    value
tion. Instead, we can simply modify the pruning protocol                                                                         value

ΠP rune to establish the reduction protocol. As illustrated
in Figure 8, the pruned tokens are determined by executing Figure 8: Secure polynomial reduction.
protocols Πprune and Πmask in tandem. A secure com-
parison with the reduction threshold β then produces the reduction mask ⟨Mβ ⟩. The location of this
mask corresponds to pruned tokens, not the original tokens, so revealing it does not compromise the
location privacy of reduced tokens, provided that the privacy of pruned locations is maintained. Once
the reduction mask Mβ is known to each party, it can be used to guide the decision on whether to
apply the high-degree polynomials or low-degree ones for the non-linear functions, where 1 indicates
using the high-degree ones and 0 signifies low-degree ones. The choice of these approximation
polynomials can be flexible. We utilize prior non-linear function approximation methods as detailed
in references such as (Kim et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2025; Pang et al., 2024). The specific configurations
used are outlined in the Appendix C.


3.4    N ETWORK O PTIMIZATION FOR E NCRYPTED P RUNING AND P OLYNOMIAL R EDUCTION

To support online token pruning and non-linear approximation, an offline fine-tuning method is needed
to optimize pruning and approximation thresholds, θ and β, to minimize inference overhead and
achieve user-defined accuracy above a. This process is challenging because (1) previous studies have
not incorporated the efficiency and accuracy of encrypted token pruning and non-linear approximation
into the fine-tuning phase, and (2) the thresholds for different Transformer layers vary and are


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Crypto-aware Thresholds Learning
Input: pre-trained Transformer M, training data D, initial thresholds θ, β
1. Set model M with L layers, weights w, input tokens x, accuracy requirement a, and hyperparameters T, λ, α.
2. Search for optimal thresholds θ, β and weights w on data D.
                                                  (l)             (l)    (l)        (l)            (l)     (l)
    (a) For l ∈ [L], set soft masks for token xi , Mθ (xi ) = σ( S (xTi )−θ ) and Mβ (xi ) = σ( S (xTi )−β ).
    (b) For l ∈ [L], integrate the crypto-friendly polynomial activation functions. In the l-th layer, compute
                                             (l)                            (l)
    GELU function as: GELU(xi ) = Mβ (xi ) · GELU(xi ) + (1 − Mβ (xi )) · ApproxGELU(xi ). Except
                                                                              (l−1)
    for the first layer, compute SoftMax function as: SoftMax(xi ) = Mβ             (xi ) · SoftMax(xi ) + (1 −
       (l−1)
    Mβ       (xi )) · ApproxSoftMax(xi ). For the input feature xin , compute the output feature xout in the l-th
                          (l)
    layer as: xout = Mθ (xin ) · xout
   (c) Update w, θ and β jointly to minimize the loss L, where L = Ltask + λ(Lprune + αLapprox. ).
3. Finetune w on data D with learned thresholds θ and β.
                                                        (l)
                    ( θ, β. Binarize the mask Mθ in every layer as:
   (a) Fix the threshold
          (l)         1 if S (l) (xi ) > θ(l) ,        (l)
       Mθ (xi ) =                               , and Mβ is binarized in the same way.
                      0 otherwise.
   (b) Update w to minimize the loss Ltask . Derive the optimal fine-tuned transformer M∗ .
4. Output θ, βand w if accuracy ≥ a; otherwise back to step 2.
challenging to pinpoint. To address these challenges, we introduce a crypto-aware fine-tuning method,
outlined in Algorithm 1. This method uses a gradient search approach and proposes to incorporate
crypto-aware pruning and approximation into the training phase. Additionally, the loss functions are
designed to optimize both efficiency and accuracy.
After initialization, we make the masks differentiable during fine-tuning to allow for trainable
thresholds, as shown in step 2.(a) of Algorithm 1. Here, T represents the temperature, and σ is
the Sigmoid function. This soft mask, a differentiable approximation of the binary mask, enables
gradient-based updates to θ and β. In step 2.(b) of the same algorithm, we introduce polynomial
activation functions during the fine-tuning phase. ApproxSoftMax and ApproxGELU are low-degree
polynomial approximations of the SoftMax and GELU functions. The ApproxSoftMax
                                                                            n
                                                                                          replaces the
exponential function ex in original SoftMax with a Taylor series (1 + 2xn )2 . And the ApproxGELU
leverages simple polynomials such as p3 (x) = −0.51 − 0.42x2 + −0.12x2 − 0.01x3 to approximate
GELU. We defer the detailed polynomial in Equations 5 and 8 in the Appendix C. If a token xi ’s
importance score exceeds the threshold β, it activates mainly through the original SoftMax or GELU
functions; otherwise, through their polynomial approximations.
                                      L−1                               L−1
                                   1 X  (l)                1 X  (l)
                        Lprune =       Mθ (x) , Lapprox. =     Mβ (x)                                            (3)
                                   L         1             L          1
                                      l=0                                l=0
The overall objective function is designed to minimize the loss function L = Ltask + λ(Lprune +
αLapprox. ) where L denotes the number of layers. Ltask optimizes accuracy for downstream tasks,
while Lprune and Lapprox. , defined by Mθ ’s and Mβ ’s l1 -norms respectively, target efficiency as detailed
in Equation 3. The hyperparameters λ and α dictate the extent of pruning and approximation, with
higher values leading to increased pruning or approximation. This structure introduces additional
gradients, pushing θ and β towards minimizing Lprune and Lapprox. . Once the optimized θ and β are
determined, we fix them and proceed to fine-tune the model weights to meet the accuracy requirement
a as specified in Step 3. For each Transformer layer, we binarize the masks Mθ and Mβ to select
tokens for pruning or approximation. Subsequently, we update the model weights to minimize the
downstream task loss Ltask .


4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Models and Datasets. We evaluated CipherPrune on the GPT2-Base and three BERT variants (Devlin
et al., 2018): BERT-Medium, BERT-Base, and BERT-Large. These models are commonly used in
private Transformer frameworks. Similar to prior work (Pang et al., 2024), we fine-tune the BERT
models on four downstream NLP tasks in GLUE benchmarks (Wang et al., 2018): the Multi-Genre
Natural Language Inference Corpus (MNLI), the Stanford Question Answering Dataset (QNLI), the
Stanford Sentiment Treebank (SST-2), and the Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus (MRPC).


                                                              8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


System Setup and Implementation. We encode floating-point parameters in Transformers into
fixed-point numbers and set the scale according to prior works(Hao et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2025; Pang
et al., 2024). CipherPrune uses the EzPC (EzP, 2023) framework and the SEAL (SEA, 2023) library.
EzPC compiles TensorFlow-based deep neural networks into secure computation protocols running
on cryptographic backends. We simulate LAN with 3Gbps bandwidth and 0.8ms ping, and WAN with
200Mbps bandwidth and 40ms ping, following (Pang et al., 2024). All experiments are conducted on
an AMD Ryzen Threadripper PRO 3955WX (2.2GHz, 125GB RAM) and fine-tuning of the BERT
model with threshold learning is done on NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs with CUDA 11.0.3.

4.2   R ESULTS

Table 1: End-to-end comparison of CipherPrune with prior works on BERT models. Time is in
seconds. Comm. stands for communication in GB and Acc. for accuracy in percentage.
                                          BERT Medium                     BERT Base                             BERT Large
                  Method
                                        Time Comm.    Acc.    Time Comm.    Acc.    Time Comm.    Acc.
         IRON (Hao et al., 2022)        442.4 124.5 87.7±0.2 1087.8 281.0 90.4±0.1 2873.5 744.8 92.7±0.1
      BOLT w/o W.E. (Pang et al., 2024) 197.1 27.9 87.4±0.3 484.5    59.6 90.3±0.1 1279.8 142.6 92.6±0.2
         BOLT (Pang et al., 2024)        99.5  14.3 87.2±0.3 245.4   25.7 89.9±0.3 624.3   67.9 92.4±0.2
               CipherPrune               43.6   6.7 87.4±0.2 79.1     9.7 90.1±0.2 157.6  18.4 92.5±0.1


End-to-end performance. In Table 1, we evaluate CipherPrune on three BERT models, comparing it
with previous private Trasnformer frameworks: IRON (Hao et al., 2022) and BOLT (Pang et al., 2024).
CipherPrune achieves up to ∼ 18.2× speedup over IRON on the BERT-Large model and ∼ 8.1×
speedup over vanilla BOLT without W.E.. When compared with BOLT with the word elimination
technique, CipherPrune is still ∼ 3.9× faster without compromising accuracy. Communication costs
are also reduced by 2.3 ∼ 40.4× compared to prior works. Compared with BOLT, CipherPrune can
remove more redundant tokens during inference thorough the adaptive and progressive pruning strat-
egy. Moreover, CipherPrune also leverages low-degree polynomials to further reduce the computation
and communication overhead. CipherPrune can easily extend to other frameworks. Comparison with
more related works like BumbleBee (Lu et al., 2025), MPCFormer (Li et al., 2022) and PUMA (Dong
et al., 2023) can be found in Appendix D.

                                                                                                      60
Table 2: Accuracy and time comparisons of different methods.                                          50        GPT2-Baseline
                                                                                                                GPT2-BOLT
                                                                                      Runtime (min)


CipherPrune† stands for CipherPrune with token pruning only.                                          40        GPT2-CipherPrune
                                                                                                      30
                           Accuracy Metric on Tasks (%)
         Method                                                 Time(Sec)                             20
                       MNLI      QNLI     SST2     MPRC
                                                                                                      10
      BOLT w/o W.E.    84.75     90.32    91.74    90.53          484.5
                                                                                                       0
         BOLT          84.71     89.94    92.74    89.95          245.4                                    32     64   128   256   512
       CipherPrune†    84.74      90.17   92.75     90.45         115.3
                                                                                                            Number of Input Tokens
       CipherPrune     84.68      90.11   92.66     90.18          79.1
                                                                                              Figure 9: Runtime on GPT2.

Token pruning and polynomial reduction. Table 2 demonstrates the the effects of the main design
blocks in CipherPrune: adaptive token pruning and polynomial reduction. Our baseline is the vanilla
BOLT framework without W.E.. BOLT’s W.E. removes 50% of the input tokens and effectively cuts
the overhead of cryptographic protocols by half. With fine-tuning, the W.E. incurs only marginal
accuracy loss. Yet, the adaptive and progressive token pruning in CipherPrune† can further improve
the utility-accuracy trade-off. Instead of setting the pruning ratio as 50% manually, CipherPrune†
adaptively decides the pruning ratio based on both the input length and content. This contributes to
up to 0.5% better accuracy. On the other hand, the progressive pruning in CipherPrune† allows to
remove more redundant information, contributing to 2.1× runtime speed up over BOLT with W.E..
By incorporating polynomial reduction, CipherPrune can achieve up to 6.1× speed up over BOLT.
While the accuracy drops slightly from CipherPrune† , it is still comparable or even higher than BOLT.
Scalability with the input length. In Figure 9, we compare the runtime of CipherPrune and BOLT
with varying input token numbers on GPT2. The baseline is BOLT without W.E.. The quadratic
complexity of Transformer inference makes it challenging for BOLT to scale to long inputs. Although
W.E. can reduce the overhead of private inference by half, BOLT with W.E. still scales quadratically


                                                            9
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 with the number of input tokens. In contrast, CipherPrune demonstrates increasingly significant
 runtime savings as the input length grows. With 32 input tokens, CipherPrune achieves a ∼ 1.9×
 speedup. When the input length reaches 512 tokens, CipherPrune is ∼ 10.6× faster than the baseline.
 The details about private inference on GPT2 models can be found in Appendix D.
                             BOLT w/o W.E.    BOLT     CipherPrune        CipherPrune                                                   BOLT Sort               Swap
                                                                                                                                        CipherPrune
               300 LAN (3Gbps, 0.8ms)                                                 10            Acc
                                                                                                               95                 101


                                                                          Time(min)
   Time(Sec)



               200                                                                                             90


                                                                                                                Acc.(%)


                                                                                                                                                         x2.8
                                                                                                                      Time(Sec)
                                                                                       5                                          100


                                                                                                                                                      x6.2
                                                                                                                                            x11.2
               100                                                                                             85


                                                                                                                                          x20.3
                 0                                                                     0                       80             10 1
                        Linear SoftMax       GELU LayerNorm Prune                          total


                                                                                                                                                                    x1.4
                                                                                                                                                                  x2.2
                     WAN (200Mbps, 40ms)                                              60                       95             10 2
            1000                                                                                    Acc                                    1           4           8
                                                                                                                                            Layer Number


                                                                          Time(min)
Time(Sec)


                                                                                      40                       90


                                                                                                                Acc.(%)
               500                                                                    20                       85
                                                                                                                          Figure 11: Runtime com-
                 0                                                                     0                       80
                        Linear SoftMax GELU LayerNorm Prune          total                                                parison of different prun-
                       Figure 10: Runtime breakdown on BERT-Base model.                                                   ing protocols.


 Runtime breakdown. In Figure 10, we break down the runtime for each protocol in the BERT-Base
 model with 128 input tokens. In the LAN setting, the communication is efficient and the main
 bottleneck is the HE-based linear operation. In contrast, the massive communication of the non-linear
 operations becomes the bottleneck in the WAN setting. Since pruned tokens are excluded from the
 computation in all subsequent layers, CipherPrune can effectively reduce the overhead of both linear
 and non-linear operations. This contributes to CipherPrune’s efficiency in both LAN setting and
 WAN setting. As shown in Figure 10, the proposed pruning protocols in CipherPrune are lightweight,
 accounting for only 1.6% of the total runtime. This is because Πprune leverages ASS to offload
 substantial computation to the local side, such as accumulating the importance score. Additionally,
 Πmask utilizes the number of tokens in each layer to avoid sorting the whole token sequence.
 Analysis on different pruning protocols. As shown in Figure 11, we compare the efficiency of
 different pruning protocols. BOLT’s W.E. uses Bitonic sort to sort the whole token sequence, which
 needs O(n log2 n) oblivious swaps. In CipherPrune, the client
 and server only need O(mn) oblivious swaps to relocate and            91 = 0.1                = 0.025   = 0.01
                                                                                  = 0.05
                                                                                                 Accuracy(%)


 prune the less important tokens. Since only a small number            90
                                                                       89        = 0.075
 of tokens are removed in each layer, CipherPrune has a linear
 complexity to n in general. By binding the mask with tokens           88       = 0.1
 on the MSB, CipherPrune can handle the token sequence and             87 0     90 180 270 360 450
                                                                                      Latency(Sec)
 pruning mask in one go and achieves 2.2 ∼ 20.3× speed up.                  = 0.05
                                                                     91.0
                                                                                            Accuracy(%)


 Study on the pruning parameters. In Figure 12, we show the          90.5                        = 0.05 = 0.01
 accuracy-latency trade-off for the BERT-Base model under dif-                        = 0.1
                                                                     90.0        = 0.15
 ferent parameter settings. Larger λ and α result in more tokens     89.5      = 0.2
 being pruned or reduced. With λ less than 0.05, an appropri-        89.050
 ate ratio of tokens is pruned, maintaining a stable accuracy of                  80        110 140 170
                                                                                      Latency(Sec)
 around 90%. Smaller α leads to more tokens being computed
                                                                 Figure 12: Ablation study on hyper-
 with high-degree polynomials, which increases accuracy but
                                                                 parameters λ and α.
 also latency. Notably, accuracy with a large α is higher than
 with a large λ. This is because many tokens are reduced but not discarded, preserving necessary
 information for accurate inference.


 5              C ONCLUSION

 The proposed CipherPrune addresses the critical efficiency and scalability challenges of private
 Transformer inference by introducing a novel approach that combines encrypted token pruning
 and polynomial reduction protocols. By progressively pruning redundant tokens and reducing the
 polynomial degree for less important tokens, CipherPrune significantly reduces runtime overhead
 while maintaining accuracy. Our experiments confirm its effectiveness, achieving a substantial
 reduction in execution time compared to previous methods.


                                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Ezpc. https://github.com/mpc-msri/EzPC, 2023.
Seal. https://github.com/microsoft/SEAL, 2023.
Gilad Asharov, Yehuda Lindell, Thomas Schneider, and Michael Zohner. More efficient oblivious
  transfer and extensions for faster secure computation. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC
  conference on Computer & communications security, pp. 535–548, 2013.
Dan Bogdanov, Sven Laur, and Riivo Talviste. A practical analysis of oblivious sorting algorithms for
  secure multi-party computation. In Nordic Conference on Secure IT Systems, pp. 59–74. Springer,
  2014.
Zvika Brakerski. Fully homomorphic encryption without modulus switching from classical gapsvp.
  In CRYPTO, volume 7417, pp. 868–886. Springer, 2012.
Tianyu Chen, Hangbo Bao, Shaohan Huang, Li Dong, Binxing Jiao, Daxin Jiang, Haoyi Zhou, Jianxin
  Li, and Furu Wei. The-x: Privacy-preserving transformer inference with homomorphic encryption.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00216, 2022.
Ronald Cramer, Ivan Bjerre Damgård, et al. Secure multiparty computation. Cambridge University
  Press, 2015.
Jinming Cui, Chaochao Chen, Lingjuan Lyu, Carl Yang, and Wang Li. Exploiting data sparsity
   in secure cross-platform social recommendation. Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems, 34:10524–10534, 2021.
Xianglong Deng, Shengyu Fan, Zhicheng Hu, Zhuoyu Tian, Zihao Yang, Jiangrui Yu, Dingyuan Cao,
  Dan Meng, Rui Hou, Meng Li, Qian Lou, and Mingzhe Zhang. Trinity: A general purpose fhe
  accelerator. Accepted by MICRO’24, 2024.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Ye Dong, Wen-jie Lu, Yancheng Zheng, Haoqi Wu, Derun Zhao, Jin Tan, Zhicong Huang, Cheng
  Hong, Tao Wei, and Wenguang Chen. Puma: Secure inference of llama-7b in five minutes. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.12533, 2023.
Junfeng Fan and Frederik Vercauteren. Somewhat practical fully homomorphic encryption. IACR
  Cryptol. ePrint Arch., pp. 144, 2012.
Qichen Fu, Minsik Cho, Thomas Merth, Sachin Mehta, Mohammad Rastegari, and Mahyar Na-
  jibi. Lazyllm: Dynamic token pruning for efficient long context llm inference. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.14057, 2024.
Craig Gentry. A fully homomorphic encryption scheme. Stanford university, 2009.
Saurabh Goyal, Anamitra Roy Choudhury, Saurabh Raje, Venkatesan Chakaravarthy, Yogish Sab-
  harwal, and Ashish Verma. Power-bert: Accelerating bert inference via progressive word-vector
  elimination. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3690–3699. PMLR, 2020.
Meng Hao, Hongwei Li, Hanxiao Chen, Pengzhi Xing, Guowen Xu, and Tianwei Zhang. Iron: Private
 inference on transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:15718–15731,
 2022.
Xiaoyang Hou, Jian Liu, Jingyu Li, Yuhan Li, Wen-jie Lu, Cheng Hong, and Kui Ren. Ciphergpt:
  Secure two-party gpt inference. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2023.
Zhicong Huang, Wen-jie Lu, Cheng Hong, and Jiansheng Ding. Cheetah: Lean and fast secure {two-
  party} deep neural network inference. In 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22),
  pp. 809–826, 2022.
Lei Jiang, Qian Lou, and Nrushad Joshi. Matcha: A fast and energy-efficient accelerator for fully
  homomorphic encryption over the torus. In The Design Automation Conference (DAC 2022), 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Gyuwan Kim and Kyunghyun Cho. Length-adaptive transformer: Train once with length drop, use
  anytime with search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07003, 2020.
Sehoon Kim, Amir Gholami, Zhewei Yao, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. I-bert: Integer-
  only bert quantization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 5506–5518. PMLR,
  2021.
Sehoon Kim, Sheng Shen, David Thorsley, Amir Gholami, Woosuk Kwon, Joseph Hassoun, and Kurt
  Keutzer. Learned token pruning for transformers. In ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
  Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 784–794, 2022.
Vladimir Kolesnikov and Ranjit Kumaresan. Improved ot extension for transferring short secrets. In
  Advances in Cryptology–CRYPTO 2013: 33rd Annual Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA,
  USA, August 18-22, 2013. Proceedings, Part II, pp. 54–70. Springer, 2013.
Dacheng Li, Rulin Shao, Hongyi Wang, Han Guo, Eric P Xing, and Hao Zhang. Mpcformer: fast,
  performant and private transformer inference with mpc. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01452, 2022.
Yuhong Li, Yingbing Huang, Bowen Yang, Bharat Venkitesh, Acyr Locatelli, Hanchen Ye, Tianle Cai,
  Patrick Lewis, and Deming Chen. Snapkv: Llm knows what you are looking for before generation.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:22947–22970, 2024.
Qian Lou and Lei Jiang. She: A fast and accurate deep neural network for encrypted data. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 2019, pp. 10035–10043, 2019.
Qian Lou, Bo Feng, Geoffrey C Fox, and Lei Jiang. Glyph: Fast and accurately training deep neural
  networks on encrypted data. NeurIPS 2020 (Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems),
  2019.
Qian Lou, Yilin Shen, Hongxi Jin, and Lei Jiang. Safenet: A secure, accurate and fast neural network
  inference. 2021.
Wen-jie Lu, Zhicong Huang, Zhen Gu, Jingyu Li, Jian Liu, Cheng Hong, Kui Ren, Tao Wei, and
 Wenguang Chen. BumbleBee: Secure Two-party Inference Framework for Large Transformers.
 In 32nd Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, NDSS 2025. The Internet
 Society, 2025.
Jinglong Luo, Yehong Zhang, Zhuo Zhang, Jiaqi Zhang, Xin Mu, Hui Wang, Yue Yu, and Zenglin
   Xu. Secformer: Towards fast and accurate privacy-preserving inference for large language models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00793, 2024.
Qi Pang, Jinhao Zhu, Helen Möllering, Wenting Zheng, and Thomas Schneider. Bolt: Privacy-
  preserving, accurate and efficient inference for transformers. In 2024 IEEE Symposium on Security
  and Privacy (SP), pp. 4753–4771. IEEE, 2024.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language
  understanding by generative pre-training. 2018.
Deevashwer Rathee, Mayank Rathee, Nishant Kumar, Nishanth Chandran, Divya Gupta, Aseem
  Rastogi, and Rahul Sharma. Cryptflow2: Practical 2-party secure inference. In Proceedings of the
  2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 325–342, 2020.
Deevashwer Rathee, Mayank Rathee, Rahul Kranti Kiran Goli, Divya Gupta, Rahul Sharma, Nishanth
  Chandran, and Aseem Rastogi. Sirnn: A math library for secure rnn inference. In 2021 IEEE
  Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 1003–1020. IEEE, 2021.
Muhammad Husni Santriaji, Jiaqi Xue, Yancheng Zhang, Qian Lou, and Yan Solihin. Dataseal:
 Ensuring the verifiability of private computation on encrypted data. In 2025 IEEE Symposium on
 Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 78–78. IEEE Computer Society, 2025.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R Bowman. Glue:
  A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1804.07461, 2018.
Hanrui Wang, Zhekai Zhang, and Song Han. Spatten: Efficient sparse attention architecture with
  cascade token and head pruning. In IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer
 Architecture, pp. 97–110. IEEE, 2021.
Bingxin Xu, Yuzhang Shang, Yunhao Ge, Qian Lou, and Yan Yan. freepruner: A training-free
  approach for large multimodal model acceleration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15446, 2024a.
Tianshi Xu, Lemeng Wu, Runsheng Wang, and Meng Li. Privcirnet: Efficient private inference via
  block circulant transformation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14569, 2024b.
Jiaqi Xue, Yancheng Zhang, Yanshan Wang, Xueqiang Wang, Hao Zheng, and Qian Lou. Cryptotrain:
   Fast secure training on encrypted dataset. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM Workshop on Large AI
   Systems and Models with Privacy and Safety Analysis, pp. 97–104, 2023.
Jiaqi Xue, Mengxin Zheng, Ting Hua, Yilin Shen, Yepeng Liu, Ladislau Bölöni, and Qian Lou.
   Trojllm: A black-box trojan prompt attack on large language models. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Ardhi Wiratama Baskara Yudha, Jiaqi Xue, Qian Lou, Huiyang Zhou, and Yan Solihin. Boostcom:
  Towards efficient universal fully homomorphic encryption by boosting the word-wise comparisons.
  In (PACT’24) The International Conference on Parallel Architectures and Compilation Techniques
  (PACT), 2024.
Wenxuan Zeng, Meng Li, Wenjie Xiong, Tong Tong, Wen-jie Lu, Jin Tan, Runsheng Wang, and
 Ru Huang. Mpcvit: Searching for accurate and efficient mpc-friendly vision transformer with
 heterogeneous attention. In IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5052–
 5063, 2023.
Jiawen Zhang, Xinpeng Yang, Lipeng He, Kejia Chen, Wen-jie Lu, Yinghao Wang, Xiaoyang
   Hou, Jian Liu, Kui Ren, and Xiaohu Yang. Secure transformer inference made non-interactive.
   Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2024.
Yancheng Zhang, Xun Chen, and Qian Lou. Hebridge: Connecting arithmetic and logic operations in
  fv-style he schemes. In Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on Encrypted Computing and Applied
  Homomorphic Cryptography, pp. 23–35, 2023a.
Yuke Zhang, Dake Chen, Souvik Kundu, Chenghao Li, and Peter A Beerel. Sal-vit: Towards
  latency efficient private inference on vit using selective attention search with a learnable softmax
  approximation. In IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5116–5125,
  2023b.
Mengxin Zheng, Qian Lou, and Lei Jiang. Trojvit: Trojan insertion in vision transformers. CVPR
 2023, 2022.
Mengxin Zheng, Qian Lou, and Lei Jiang. Primer: Fast private transformer inference on encrypted
 data. DAC 2023, 2023.
Mengxin Zheng, Cheng Chu, Qian Lou, Nathan Youngblood, Mo Li, Sajjad Moazeni, and Lei Jiang.
 Ofhe: An electro-optical accelerator for discretized tfhe. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM/IEEE
 International Symposium on Low Power Electronics and Design, pp. 1–6, 2024.
Itamar Zimerman, Moran Baruch, Nir Drucker, Gilad Ezov, Omri Soceanu, and Lior Wolf. Converting
   transformers to polynomial form for secure inference over homomorphic encryption. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2311.08610, 2023.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

A     S ECURE T OKEN P RUNING P ROTOCOLS
We detail the encrypted token pruning protocols Πprune in Figure 13 and Πmask in Figure 14 in this
section.

    Parties: Server P0 , Client P1 .
                                     h     h
    Input: P0 and P1 holds {⟨Att⟩0 , ⟨Att⟩1 }H−1
                                              h=0 ∈ Z2ℓ
                                                        n×n
                                                             and ⟨x⟩0 , ⟨x⟩1 ∈ Zn×D
                                                                                2ℓ
                                                                                    respectively,
    where H is the number of heads, n is the number of input tokens and D is the embedding
    dimension of tokens. Additionally, P1 holds a threshold θ ∈ Z2ℓ .
                                            ′
    Output: P0 and P1 get ⟨y⟩0 , ⟨y⟩1 ∈ Zn2ℓ ×D , respectively, where y = Prune(x) and n′ is the
    number of remaining tokens.

    Protocol:
                                                                   h
    1: For h ∈ [H], P0 and P1 compute locally with input ⟨Att⟩ , and learn the importance score
                       h                  h        Pn−1       h
       in each head ⟨s⟩ ∈ Zn2ℓ , where ⟨s⟩ [j] = n1 i=0 ⟨Att⟩ [i, j].
                                                   i
    2: P0 and P1 compute locally with input {⟨s⟩ ∈ Zn2ℓ }H−1
                                                         i=0 , and learn the final importance score
               n                                 1
                                                   PH−1        h
       ⟨S⟩ ∈ Z2ℓ for each token, where ⟨S⟩ [i] = H h=0 ⟨s⟩ [i].
    3: For i ∈ [n], P0 and P1 invoke ΠCM P with inputs ⟨S⟩ and θ, and learn ⟨M ⟩ ∈ Zn2ℓ , such
       that⟨M ⟩ [i] = ΠCM P (⟨S⟩ [i] − θ), where:

                  1 if S[i] > θ,
       M [i] =
                  0 otherwise.
    4: P0 and P1 invoke Πmask with inputs ⟨x⟩ and pruning mask ⟨M ⟩, and set outputs as ⟨y⟩.

                          Figure 13: Secure Token Pruning Protocol Πprune .


    Parties: Server P0 , Client P1 .
    Input: P0 and P1 hold ⟨x⟩0 , ⟨x⟩1 ∈ Zn×D
                                           2ℓ
                                               and ⟨M ⟩0 , ⟨M ⟩1 ∈ Zn2ℓ , respectively, where n is
    the number of input tokens and D is the embedding dimension of tokens.
                                             ′
    Output: P0 and P1 get ⟨y⟩0 , ⟨y⟩1 ∈ Zn2ℓ ×D , respectively, where y = Prune(x) and n′ is the
    number of remaining tokens.

    Protocol:
    1: For i ∈ [n], P0 and P1 set ⟨M ⟩ to the MSB of ⟨x⟩ and learn the masked tokens ⟨x̄⟩ ∈ Z2n×D
                                                                                               ℓ  ,
       where ⟨x̄[i]⟩ = ⟨x[i]⟩ + (⟨M [i]⟩ << f ) and f is the fixed-point precision.
    2: P0 and P1 compute the sum of {ΠB2A (⟨M ⟩ [i])}n−1      i=0 , and learn the number of remaining
       tokens n′ and the number of tokens to be pruned m, where m = n − n′ .
    3: For k ∈ [m], for i ∈ [n − k − 1], P0 and P1 invoke Πmsb to learn the highest bit of ⟨x̄[i]⟩,
       where b = MSB(x̄[i]). With the highest bit of x̄[i], P0 and P1 perform a oblivious swap

                                      x̃[i] = b · x̄[i] + (1 − b) · x̄[i + 1]
       between x̄[i] and x̄[i + 1]:
                                      x̃[i + 1] = b · x̄[i + 1] + (1 − b) · x̄[i]
       P0 and P1 learn the swapped token sequence ⟨x̃⟩.
    4: P0 and P1 truncate ⟨x̃⟩ locally by keeping the first n′ tokens, clear current MSB (all remaining
       token has 1 on the MSB), and set outputs as ⟨y⟩.

                               Figure 14: Secure Mask Protocol Πmask .

Complexity of Πmask . The complexity of the proposed Πmask mainly depends on the number of
oblivious swaps. To prune m tokens out of n input tokens, O(mn) swaps are needed. Since token
pruning is performed progressively, only a small number of tokens are pruned at each layer, which


                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


makes Πmask efficient during runtime. Specifically, for a BERT base model with 128 input tokens,
the pruning protocol only takes ∼ 0.9s on average in each layer. An alternative approach is to invoke
an oblivious sort algorithm (Bogdanov et al., 2014; Pang et al., 2024) on ⟨x̄⟩. However, this approach
is less efficient because it blindly sort the whole token sequence without considering m. That is, even
if only 1 token needs to be pruned, O(nlog 2 n) ∼ O(n2 ) oblivious swaps are needed, where as the
proposed Πmask only need O(n) swaps. More generally, for an ℓ-layer Transformer with a total of m
tokens pruned, the overall time complexity using the sort strategy would be O(ℓn2 ) while using the
swap strategy remains an overall complexity of O(mn). Specifically, using the sort strategy to prune
tokens in one BERT Base model layer can take up to 3.8 ∼ 4.5 s depending on the sorting algorithm
used. In contrast, using the swap strategy only needs 0.5 s. Moreover, alternative to our MSB strategy,
one can also swap the encrypted mask along with the encrypted token sequence. However, we find
that this doubles the number of swaps needed, and thus is less efficient the our MSB strategy, as is
shown in Figure 11.

B    E XISTING P ROTOCOLS
Existing Protocols Used in Our Private Inference. In our private inference framework, we reuse
several existing cryptographic protocols for basic computations. ΠM atM ul (Pang et al., 2024)
processes two ASS matrices and outputs their product in SS form. For non-linear computations,
protocols ΠSof tM ax , ΠGELU , and ΠLayerN orm (Lu et al., 2025; Pang et al., 2024) take a secret
shared tensor and return the result of non-linear functions in ASS. Basic protocols from (Rathee et al.,
2020; 2021) are also utilized. ΠCM P (EzP, 2023), for example, inputs ASS values and outputs a
secret shared comparison result, while ΠB2A (EzP, 2023) converts secret shared Boolean values into
their corresponding arithmetic values.

C    P OLYNOMIAL R EDUCTION FOR N ON - LINEAR F UNCTIONS
The SoftMax and GELU functions can be approximated with polynomials. High-degree polynomi-
als (Lu et al., 2025; Pang et al., 2024) can achieve the same accuracy as the LUT-based methods Hao
et al. (2022). While these polynomial approximations are more efficient than look-up tables, they can
still incur considerable overheads. Reducing the high-degree polynomials to the low-degree ones
for the less important tokens can imporve efficiency without compromising accuracy. The SoftMax
function is applied to each row of an attention map. If a token is to be reduced, the corresponding row
will be computed using the low-degree polynomial approximations. Otherwise, the corresponding
row will be computed accurately via a high-degree one. That is if Mβ′ [i] = 1, P0 and P1 uses
high-degree polynomials to compute the SoftMax function on token x[i]:
                                                             exi
                                     SoftMaxi (x) = P                xj
                                                                                                    (4)
                                                           j∈[d] e

where x is a input vector of length d and the exponential function is computed via a polynomial
approximation. For the SoftMax protocol, we adopt a similar strategy as (Kim et al., 2021; Hao et al.,
2022), where we evaluate on the normalized inputs SoftMax(x − maxi∈[d] xi ). Different from (Hao
et al., 2022), we did not used the binary tree to find max value in the given vector. Instead, we
traverse through the vector to find the max value. This is because each attention map is computed
independently and the binary tree cannot be re-used. If Mβ [i] = 0, P0 and P1 will approximate
the SoftMax function with low-degree polynomial approximations. We detail how SoftMax can be
approximated as follows:
                                                          ApproxExp(xi )
                          ApproxSoftMaxi (x) = P                                                    (5)
                                                         j∈[d] ApproxExp(xj )

                                                  0                if x ≤ T
                           ApproxExp(x) =                     n                                     (6)
                                                  (1 + 2xn )2      if x ∈ [T, 0]
where the 2n -degree Taylor series is used to approximate the exponential function and T is the
clipping boundary. The value n and T determines the accuracy of above approximation. With n = 6
and T = −13, the approximation can achieve an average error within 2−10 (Lu et al., 2025). For
low-degree polynomial approximation, n = 3 is used in the Taylor series.


                                                    15
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Similarly, P0 or P1 can decide whether or not to approximate the GELU function for each token. If
  Mβ [i] = 1, P0 and P1 use high-degree polynomials (Lu et al., 2025) to compute the GELU function
  on token x[i] with high-degree polynomial:

                                                                 if x ≤ −5
                                            
                                             0
                                             3
                                            
                                              P (x),             if − 5 < x ≤ −1.97
                            ApproxGELU(x) =     6                                                    (7)
                                            
                                             P   (x),           if − 1.97 < x ≤ 3
                                            
                                              x,                 if x > 3
  where P 3 (x) and P 6 (x) are degree-3 and degree-6 polynomials respectively. The detailed coefficient
  for the polynomial is:
                  P 3 (x) = −0.50540312 − 0.42226581x − 0.11807613x2 − 0.01103413x3
  , and
              P 6 (x) = 0.00852632 + 0.5x + 0.36032927x2 − 0.03768820x4 + 0.00180675x6

  For BOLT baseline, we use another high-degree polynomial to compute the GELU function.
                                               
                                               0        if x < −2.7
                                ApproxGELU(x) = P 4 (x), if |x| ≤ 2.7                                (8)
                                               
                                                 x,      if x > 2.7
 We use the same coefficients for P 4 (x) as BOLT (Pang et al., 2024).

                                      IRON           BumbleBee                CipherPrune
        104
                                                             102
                                                     Comm.(GB)
Time(Sec)


        103
                                                             101
        102
                                                             100
        101     Medium         Base          Large                   Medium       Base      Large
                      BERT Architecture                                   BERT Architecture
            Figure 15: Comparison with prior works on the BERT model. The input has 128 tokens.

  If Mβ′ [i] = 0, P0 and P1 will use low-degree polynomial approximation to compute the GELU
  function instead. Encrypted polynomial reduction leverages low-degree polynomials to compute
  non-linear functions for less important tokens. For the GELU function, the following degree-2
  polynomial Kim et al. (2021) is used:
                                        
                                        0                    if x < −1.7626
                     ApproxGELU(x) = 0.5x + 0.28367x2 , if x ≤ |1.7626|
                                        
                                           x,                 if x > 1.7626

  D         C OMPARISON WITH M ORE R ELATED W ORKS .
  Other 2PC frameworks. The primary focus of CipherPrune is to accelerate the private Transformer
  inference in the 2PC setting. As shown in Figure 15, CipherPrune can be easily extended to other
  2PC private inference frameworks like BumbleBee (Lu et al., 2025). We compare CipherPrune
  with BumbleBee and IRON on BERT models. We test the performance in the same LAN setting
  as BumbleBee with 1 Gbps bandwidth and 0.5 ms of ping time. CipherPrune achieves more than
  ∼ 60× speed up over BOLT and 4.3× speed up over BumbleBee.
  Extension to 3PC frameworks. Additionally, we highlight that CipherPrune can be also ex-
  tended to the 3PC frameworks like MPCFormer (Li et al., 2022) and PUMA (Dong et al.,


                                                     16
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            MPCFormer                         PUMA                CipherPrune
        300                                                                   50
        250


                                                                  Comm.(GB)
Time(Sec)                                                                     40
        200                                                                   30
        150
        100                                                                   20
         50                                                                   10
          0      Medium              Base            Large                     0       Medium           Base            Large
                        BERT Architecture                                                     BERT Architecture
  Figure 16: Comparison with MPCFormer and PUMA on the BERT models. The input has 128
  tokens.

                                            MPCFormer                         PUMA                CipherPrune
        600                                                                  103
        500


                                                                  Comm.(GB)
Time(Sec)


        400                                                                  102
        300
        200                                                                  101
        100
          0        Base             Medium          Large                    100        Base           Medium           Large
                        GPT2 Architecture                                                     GPT2 Architecture
  Figure 17: Comparison with MPCFormer and PUMA on the GPT2 models. The input has 128 tokens.
  The polynomial reduction is not used.
  2023). This is because CipherPrune is built upon basic primitives like comparison and Boolean-
  to-Arithmetic conversion. We compare CipherPrune with MPCFormer and PUMA on both
  the BERT and GPT2 models. CipherPrune has a 6.6 ∼ 9.4× speed up over MPCFormer
  and 2.8 ∼ 4.6× speed up over PUMA on          Input tokens
                                                                                    𝑡!
  the BERT-Large and GPT2-Large models.          𝑡!                   Generated                         Generated
  For a fair comparison with prior works (Li                            token
                                                                                    𝑡"                     token
  et al., 2022; Dong et al., 2023), we report    𝑡"                                                               …
                                                             GPT2        𝑡′!        …         GPT2          𝑡′"
  the runtime and communication cost mea-        …                                  𝑡#
                                                                        Append
  sured from the prefilling phase. As shown      𝑡#
                                                                                    𝑡′!
  in Figure 18, we perform private inference              Prefilling                      Decoding step #1
  on GPT2 models to generate one token.             Our evaluation time
  Similar to PUMA, we do not consider the
                                                                            Overall generation time
  whole autoregressive decoding process. We
                                              Figure 18: Illustration of evaluation on GPT2 models.
  note that the Key-Value (KV) cache and its
  compression (Li et al., 2024) can further improve the efficiency of the decoding phase for GPT2
  models. We leave private KV cache compression for future work.

  E         C OMMUNICATION R EDUCTION IN S OFT M AX AND GELU.

  Table 3: Communication cost (in MB) of the SoftMax and GELU protocol in each Transformer layer.
              Layer Index       0      1      2      3        4          5         6      7        8      9     10      11
                 Softmax      642.19 642.19 642.19 642.19   642.19 642.19 642.19        642.19   642.19 642.19 642.19 642.19
             Pruned Softmax   642.19 129.58 127.89 119.73    97.04 71.52 43.92           21.50   10.67 6.16     4.65   4.03
                  GELU        698.84 698.84 698.84 698.84   698.84 698.84 698.84        698.84   698.84 698.84 698.84 698.84
              Pruned GELU     325.10 317.18 313.43 275.94   236.95 191.96 135.02         88.34   46.68 16.50    5.58   5.58


  In Figure 19, we illustrate why CipherPrune can reduce the communication overhead of both SoftMax
  and GELU. Suppose there are n tokens in layeri . Then, the SoftMax protocol in the attention module
  has a complexity of O(n2 ). CipherPrune’s token pruning protocol is invoked to select n′ tokens
  out of all n tokens, where m = n − n′ is the number of tokens that are removed. The overhead


                                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     𝑛 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠                                                                  𝑛& 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠                                                                                  𝑛′′ 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠


                     ×𝐻


                                                                                                                                  ×𝐻
                                         Prune & Reduce


                                                                                                                                                   Prune & Reduce
                                                                                                        Add & Norm


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Add & Norm
                                                              Add & Norm


                                                                                                                                                                        Add & Norm
                         Attention


                                                                                                                                   Attention
                                                                                               Linear


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Linear
                                                                               Linear


                                                                                                                                                                                         Linear
                                                                                        GELU


                                                                                                                                                                                                   GELU
                                                                    𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟#                                                                                                     𝐿𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟#$%

Figure 19: Toy example of two successive Transformer layers. In layeri , the SoftMax and Prune
protocol have n input tokens. The number of input tokens is reduced to n′ for the Linear layers,
LayerNorm and GELU in layeri and SoftMax in layeri+1 .
of the GELU function in layeri , i.e., the current layer, has only O(n′ ) complexity (which should
be O(n) without token pruning). The complexity of the SoftMax function in layeri+1 , i.e., the
following layer, is reduced to O(n′2 ) (which should be O(n2 ) without token pruning). The SoftMax
protocol has quadratic complexity with respect to the token number and the GELU protocol has linear
complexity. Therefore, CipherPrune can reduce the overhead of both the GELU protocol and the
SoftMax protocols by reducing the number of tokens. In Table 3, we provide detailed layer-wise
communication cost of the GELU and the SoftMax protocol. Compared to the unpruned baseline,
CipherPrune can effectively reduce the overhead of the GELU and the SoftMax protocols layer by
layer.


F     A NALYSIS ON L AYER - WISE REDUNDANCY.


               15.0                                                                                                                                                                                                         80
                                                                                                                                                                                     Pruning protocol runtime
                                                                                                                                                                                     Number of pruned tokens


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #Pruned tokens
    Runtime(Sec)


                   2.0                                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                   1.5
                   1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                   0.5
                    0                0                    1                2            3        4                   5        6                7                    8                9            10      11                0
                                                                                                         Layer index
Figure 20: The number of pruned tokens and pruning protocol runtime in different layers in the BERT
Base model. The results are averaged across 128 QNLI samples.


In Figure 20, we present the number of pruned tokens and the runtime of the pruning protocol for
each layer in the BERT Base model. The number of pruned tokens per layer was averaged across 128
QNLI samples, while the pruning protocol runtime was measured over 10 independent runs. The
mean token count for the QNLI samples is 48.5. During inference with BERT Base, input sequences
with fewer tokens are padded to 128 tokens using padding tokens. Consistent with prior token pruning
methods in plaintext (Goyal et al., 2020), a significant number of padding tokens are removed at layer
0. At layer 0, the number of pruned tokens is primarily influenced by the number of padding tokens
rather than token-level redundancy.
In CipherPrune, tokens are removed progressively, and once removed, they are excluded from
computations in subsequent layers. Consequently, token pruning in earlier layers affects computations
in later layers, whereas token pruning in later layers does not impact earlier layers. As a result,
even if layers 4 and 7 remove the same number of tokens, layer 7 processes fewer tokens overall,
as illustrated in Figure 20. Specifically, 8 tokens are removed in both layer 4 and layer 7, but the
runtime of the pruning protocol in layer 4 is ∼ 2.4× longer than that in layer 7.


                                                                                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    R ELATED W ORKS
In response to the success of Transformers and the need to safeguard data privacy, various private
Transformer Inferences (Chen et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2023; Hao et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022;
Lu et al., 2025; Luo et al., 2024; Pang et al., 2024) are proposed. To efficiently run private Trans-
former inferences, multiple cryptographic primitives are used in a popular hybrid HE/MPC method
IRON (Hao et al., 2022), i.e., in a Transformer, HE and SS are used for linear layers, and SS and OT
are adopted for nonlinear layers. IRON and BumbleBee (Lu et al., 2025) focus on optimizing linear
general matrix multiplications; SecFormer Luo et al. (2024) improves the non-linear operations like
the exponential function with polynomial approximation; BOLT (Pang et al., 2024) introduces the
baby-step giant-step (BSGS) algorithm to reduce the number of HE rotations, proposes a word elimi-
nation (W.E.) technique, and uses polynomial approximation for non-linear operations, ultimately
achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance.
Other than above hybrid HE/MPC methods, there are also works exploring privacy-preserving
Transformer inference using only HE (Zimerman et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024). The first HE-
based private Transformer inference work (Zimerman et al., 2023) replaces SoftMax function with
a scaled-ReLU function. Since the scaled-ReLU function can be approximated with low-degree
polynomials more easily, it can be computed more efficiently using only HE operations. A range-loss
term is needed during training to reduce the polynomial degree while maintaining high accuracy.
A training-free HE-based private Transformer inference was proposed (Zhang et al., 2024), where
non-linear operations are approximated by high-degree polynomials. The HE-based methods need
frequent bootstrapping, especially when using high-degree polynomials, thus often incurring higher
overhead than the hybrid HE/MPC methods in practice.


                                                19
