Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             A DVANCING A RTISTIC T YPOGRAPHY
THROUGH AI-D RIVEN , U SER -C ENTRIC , AND M ULTI -
LINGUAL W ORDA RT S YNTHESIS

 Jun-Yan He1 , Zhi-Qi Cheng,2,3∗, Chenyang Li1 , Jingdong Sun2 , Qi He2 ,
 Wangmeng Xiang1 , Hanyuan Chen1 , Jin-Peng Lan1 , Xianhui Lin1 , Kang Zhu1 ,
 Bin Luo1 , Yifeng Geng1 , Xuansong Xie1 , Alexander G. Hauptmann2
 1
   Alibaba Group, Institute for Intelligent Computing (Tongyi Lab)
 2
   Carnegie Mellon University, Language Technologies Institute (LTI)
 3
   University of Washington, Tacoma School of Engineering & Technology (SET)
 Project: https://modelscope.cn/studios/WordArt/WordArt


                                                   A BSTRACT

              MetaDesigner introduces a transformative framework for artistic typography syn-
              thesis, powered by Large Language Models (LLMs) and grounded in a user-centric
              design paradigm. Its foundation is a multi-agent system comprising the Pipeline,
              Glyph, and Texture agents, which collectively orchestrate the creation of customiz-
              able WordArt, ranging from semantic enhancements to intricate textural elements.
              A central feedback mechanism leverages insights from both multimodal models and
              user evaluations, enabling iterative refinement of design parameters. Through this
              iterative process, MetaDesigner dynamically adjusts hyperparameters to align with
              user-defined stylistic and thematic preferences, consistently delivering WordArt
              that excels in visual quality and contextual resonance. Empirical evaluations under-
              score the system’s versatility and effectiveness across diverse WordArt applications,
              yielding outputs that are both aesthetically compelling and context-sensitive.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Typography, as a nexus of linguistic expression and visual design, occupies a pivotal role across
diverse fields such as advertising Cheng et al. (2016; 2017a;b); Sun et al. (2018), education Vungthong
et al. (2017), and tourism Amar et al. (2017). By functioning as both a communication medium
and a form of artistic expression, typography demands a nuanced understanding of aesthetics and
design principles. The challenge for non-professionals lies in navigating the multifaceted considera-
tions—ranging from visual composition to emotional resonance—necessary to produce designs that
are simultaneously informative and striking.
In recent years, generative models have accelerated advancements in typographic design by enabling
rapid adaptation to varied aesthetic preferences. Nevertheless, integrating these models to satisfy
elaborate typesetting requirements remains non-trivial. Two significant obstacles are noteworthy:
(1) The subjective nature of artistic typography, which varies widely based on personal and cultural
contexts and complicates the development of models capable of broad appeal; and (2) The lack of
comprehensive, annotated datasets of artistic typography, which restricts the capacity of generative
models to accurately reflect the vast stylistic diversity demanded by real-world applications. While
text-to-image synthesis models—such as denoising diffusion probabilistic models Ho et al. (2020);
Ramesh et al. (2021); Song et al. (2021)—have made notable progress, they often struggle to address
these intricacies in typography.
To tackle these challenges, we present MetaDesigner, a multi-agent system purpose-built to generate
artistic typography guided by user preferences. As depicted in Figure 1, MetaDesigner comprises four
specialized intelligent agents: the Pipeline Designer, Glyph Designer, Texture Designer, and Q&A
     ∗
         Corresponding author. Part of this work was completed while serving as a Project Scientist at CMU.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 Pipeline Designer                   Glyph Designer               Texture Designer
             Q: What‘s the proper design for    : The glyph is generated        : The Texture is rendered
             “Merry Chrismas”?

 [Glyph]: Christmas tree, snow, bells, pine
 needles, chimney, smiley snowman…

 [Texture]: gift, red gift wrapping paper,
 pine needles, …

Figure 1: Overview of MetaDesigner, illustrating the interactions among the Pipeline, Glyph, and Texture
agents, collectively shaping WordArt to align with user preferences.

Evaluation Agent, each contributing to personalized WordArt creation within an integrated, user-
focused workflow (see Sec. 3). The Pipeline Designer acts as the system’s orchestrator, converting
user prompts into well-defined tasks for the other agents (see Sec. 3.1). The Glyph Designer handles
diverse glyph styles—ranging from conventional lettering to semantic glyph adaptations—tailored to
the thematic context of each design (see Sec. 3.2). Building on these glyphs, the Texture Designer
applies various visual styles through LoRA model matching (see Sec. 3.3) based on a hierarchical
tree structure. Finally, the Q&A Evaluation Agent refines the generated WordArt by integrating user
feedback into an iterative, question-and-answer refinement loop (see Sec. 3.4).
The contributions of MetaDesigner are threefold:

    • Multi-agent system with evaluation and optimization. MetaDesigner combines distinct de-
      sign modules with an evaluative feedback process to discover and realize customized artistic
      typography styles. Through rigorous hyperparameter tuning, the platform consistently produces
      outputs that align with individual aesthetic preferences. Its accessibility is further evidenced by
      over 1,007,293 visits on ModelScope1 .
    • Advanced glyph design through a hierarchical model tree. The Glyph Designer leverages
      both comprehensive font libraries and semantic translation methods to support extensive glyph
      transformations. Equipped with a hierarchical tree of 68 LoRA models, MetaDesigner ensures
      rich stylistic diversity, significantly broadening the creative possibilities in typographic design.
    • Comprehensive dataset fostering continued research. To further support the study of artistic
      typography, we introduce a carefully curated dataset containing over 5,000 multilingual images
      (English, Chinese, Japanese, and Korean) spanning an array of artistic styles and cultural elements.
      This resource provides researchers and practitioners with a robust foundation for benchmarking
      new techniques and advancing the state of the art in artistic text generation.

2        R ELATED W ORK
Text-to-Image Synthesis. Recent advancements in denoising diffusion probabilistic models Ho et al.
(2020); Song et al. (2021); Dhariwal & Nichol (2021); Nichol & Dhariwal (2021); Saharia et al.
(2022); Ramesh et al. (2022); Rombach et al. (2022); Chang et al. (2023) have significantly enhanced
the fidelity and flexibility of text-to-image synthesis. These models have given rise to interactive
editing approaches Meng et al. (2022); Gal et al. (2023); Brooks et al. (2022) and multi-condition
controllable pipelines Zhang & Agrawala (2023); Mou et al. (2023); Huang et al. (2023). Recent
work such as ELITE Wei et al. (2023), UMM-Diffusion Ma et al. (2023b), and InstantBooth Shi et al.
(2023) leverages CLIP-based image encoders to bridge visual information with textual embeddings,
expanding the expressive range of generative models.
Visual Text Generation. Producing legible text within images poses substantial challenges Rom-
bach et al. (2022), especially when dealing with complex or multilingual scripts. Approaches like
GlyphDraw Ma et al. (2023a) and GlyphControl Yang et al. (2023) address character alignment and
rendering, while TextDiffuser Chen et al. (2023b) introduces character-level segmentation to enhance
text clarity. Large-scale language models further refine text generation Saharia et al. (2022); Balaji
et al. (2022); Lab (2023), yet traditional text encoders often struggle with non-Latin alphabets Liu
et al. (2023). To address such issues, GlyphDraw fine-tunes text encoders and integrates CLIP-based
glyph embeddings Ma et al. (2023a), whereas DiffUTE uses pre-trained image encoders to extract
glyphs for editing tasks Chen et al. (2023a).
     1
         Project: https://modelscope.cn/studios/WordArt/WordArt


                                                             2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


WordArt Synthesis. The synthesis of WordArt Tanveer et al. (2023); Iluz et al. (2023); Berio et al.
(2022); Tendulkar et al.; Zhang et al. (2017) aims to integrate semantic richness with artistic yet
readable text representations. Early work Tendulkar et al. experimented with replacing letters by
semantically related icons. More recent models harness large-scale generative techniques to push
typographic boundaries. For example, Word-As-Image Iluz et al. (2023) proposes artistic typography
for Latin scripts, while DS-Fusion Tanveer et al. (2023) explores the generation of intricately styled
texts, including hieroglyphs.
Positioning of MetaDesigner. Unlike prior methods, MetaDesigner adopts a multi-agent framework
featuring Pipeline, Glyph, Texture, and Q&A Evaluation agents within an interactive feedback
loop. This architecture iteratively refines semantic, glyph, and texture elements based on user input,
covering a broader range of aesthetic demands and typographic nuances than existing approaches.


                   Pipeline Designer                                             Glyph Designer                                                   Texture Designer

                     Pipeline Designer                                           Glyph Designer                                                 Texture Designer
                Style/ Purpose/Emotion …                                    Normal/Semantic/Traditional                                        Real/3D/Chinese/Painting



                                                                  Instruction: Generate WordArt for giving Text                  Instruction: Render the glyph with prompt:
     Instruction: Generate WordArt for giving                     “World Peace”, with leaves, dove, branches,                    “peace doves, branch leaves, ocean…in realistic
     Text “World Peace” [Instruction Form User]                   ocean… [Instruction Form pipeline designer]                    style…” [Instruction Form pipeline designer]
    Program:
    [1]:[PROMPT0, PROMPT1]=PROMPTEXTENSION(                                                   Tag: ‘Chinese Style’
                                                                           Tag “Normal”
         prompt= World Peace’)                                                                                                                    LoRAs                 3D   Real Painting
    [2]:GLYPH0=GLYPHDESIGNER(                                                        Normal      Semantic       Traditional                       - Multi LoRAs
                                                                                                                                                  - Adjustable weight
                                                                                                                                                  - Dynamic loading
         text='World Peace ',prompt=PROMPT0)
    [3]:WORDART=TEXTUREDESIGNER(                                                                                                                      Base Models            ControlNet
         glyph=GLYPH0,prompt=PROMPT1)                                Chain-of-
                                                                                                                                        Tree-of-Thought Model Selection
                                                                     Thought                     Tag: ‘Funny’
    🔥 P_pip:[ <Prompt : ”what objects represents                  🔥 P_gly : [<Font: “Semantic”>, <promt: “branch,                  🔥 P_tex: [<prompt: ”leaves,
       “World Peace” user prefer cartoon style ..”>, … ]             leaves..”>… ]                                                    branches, sun …”>, …

                                                                           Parameter Optimization
                                              QA Eval : User & Multimodal Model Feedback Evaluation
             Q: Is the <prompt> extension <text <World Peace> with
                                                                                                            Q: Are the 【objects】 in the WordArt match
             branch and leaves, doves, sunshine… in realistic style>
             satisfy your intent ? ”                                             User                       the original prompt : “text <World Peace>
                                                                                                            with doves branch and leaves, sun… ”                                  LLaVA
           [Preference]: ” cartoon is preferred ”
           Score: 3                                                                                         [Object1]: branch | – <desc: branch and leaves…>
                                                                                                            [Object2]: leaves | – <desc: green leaves …>
            Please Measure the [ < Consistency >, <Quality>,                                                [Object3]: sun |-– <desc: sun around...> …
             <Glyph>, …] score for the generated
            image ,                                                              User                       Final Reason: The image contains : branch, leaves, and
                                                                                                            sun; ocean is absent
                                                                                                            Consistency Score: 7
          < Consistency> : 7; <Quality> : 7; <Glyph > : 8; <>..
                                                                                                            Q: Is the image text-to-image consistency is correct? Is              LLaVA
            Q: All the following object in the image and describe                                           the quality of the WordArt…”
            correctly ?
                                                                                                            [Consistency]     : 7 ； [Quality] : 8.0
                                                                                                            Final Score: 7
                                      …


                                                                                                                                        …


           Reward: {User-preference: ”cartoon is preferred ”; In-Consistency Objs: [“Peace Dove”…. ], Quality : 7 …}

                : Language Model                       : Prompt Engineering                          : Image Synthesis                🔥 : Tunable Hyper Parameter


Figure 2: MetaDesigner Architectural Overview. The framework integrates three primary intelligent
agents—Pipeline Designer, Glyph Designer, and Texture Designer—to produce personalized WordArt. A Q&A
Evaluation agent runs in parallel to iteratively refine the design. This diagram highlights how textual inputs are
transformed into visually compelling, user-driven artistic typography through an interactive, iterative process.



3     M ETA D ESIGNER F RAMEWORK

Overview. MetaDesigner is an interactive multi-agent system for synthesizing user-tailored WordArt.
Four specialized agents—Pipeline Designer, Glyph Designer, Texture Designer, and Q&A Evaluation
Agent—collaborate to generate and refine typographic art according to evolving user preferences.
Mathematical Formulation. Let Iˆ be the synthesized WordArt, defined by an operator Ψ:

                                                                       Iˆ = Ψ suser , ϕ, P, M ,

                                                                                                                                                                                             (1)


                                                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where suser is the user prompt (specifying style, theme, or other attributes), ϕ = {ϕpip , ϕgly , ϕtex , ϕqa }
encompasses the functionalities of the four agents, M denotes a model library (used primarily by the
Texture Designer), and P = {P pip , P gly , P tex , P qa } represents hyperparameters tunable via feedback.
Iterative Process. To adapt and improve results across iterations, MetaDesigner leverages previously
generated images. Let Iprev be the output of a past iteration. The synthesis process then becomes:

                   Iˆ = Ψ suser , ϕ, P, M

                                                                                                 (2)
                      = ϕpip suser · ϕtex ϕgly (sgly ), stex , M · ϕqa Iprev , P qa ,


where ϕpip produces an extended prompt S from suser . This extended prompt divides into {sgly , stex },
guiding the Glyph and Texture agents.
Feedback and Adaptation. The Q&A Evaluation Agent reviews both the previously generated
image Iprev and hyperparameters P qa , then incorporates user and automated feedback to refine system
parameters. Through this loop, MetaDesigner incrementally aligns outputs with user preferences,
producing visually coherent and context-aware WordArt. As shown in Figure 2, the sections below
detail the functionalities of each agent, illustrating their collaborative roles in the synthesis pipeline.
3.1   P IPELINE D ESIGNER AGENT

The Pipeline Designer is responsible for translating user instructions into a structured workflow,
ensuring seamless coordination among the remaining agents. By combining visual programming
techniques with a Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting strategy, this component simplifies the design
process into manageable steps while incorporating iterative feedback to refine the final output.

Visual Programming. As depicted in Figure 2, GPT-4’s in-context learning capabilities are em-
ployed to generate visual programs directly from natural language instructions. These programs,
assembled without explicit fine-tuning, consist of sequential “blocks” or “modules,” each defined by:

• A module name, identifying the function or operation.
• A set of input arguments with specified names and values.
• An output variable name that receives the module’s result.

This modular structure enforces clarity in the synthesis pipeline, allowing straightforward validation
and debugging of intermediate steps.

Prompt Extension. To tailor output to user preferences, the Pipeline Designer employs CoT
reasoning within GPT-4. Beginning with a user prompt suser , the system generates an enriched prompt
S that includes specialized instructions for the Glyph Designer and Texture Designer:
                                      S = ϕpip (suser ) = { sgly , stex }.                                (3)
        pip
Here, ϕ represents the Pipeline Designer function. By posing clarifying questions related to style,
application context, and design constraints, GPT-4 refines the initial prompt into two well-defined
components: sgly (for glyph design) and stex (for texture design).

Feedback Integration. A key advantage of the Pipeline Designer lies in its ability to incorporate
user feedback in an iterative loop. Formally, feedback is modeled via a function F that aggregates
various signals G (e.g., user evaluations, automated metrics), along with an update directive supdate :
                                           pip
                                          Pnew = F G | supdate ,

                                                                                                          (4)
         pip
where Pnew   denotes the updated set of hyperparameters for the pipeline. The Pipeline Designer also
returns the enriched prompt S needed by downstream agents:
                                   pip
                               S, Pnew = ϕpip suser , P pip , F(G | supdate ) .

                                                                                                          (5)

This guarantees that subsequent design iterations progressively align more closely with user intent.
Through active integration of user preferences and continuous prompt refinement, the Pipeline
Designer ensures that each step of the workflow converges toward the most suitable artistic outcome.

                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2        G LYPH D ESIGNER AGENT

The Glyph Designer is central to MetaDesigner’s pipeline, capable of producing three distinct glyph
types—Normal, Traditional, and Semantic—to accommodate a wide spectrum of stylistic needs.
While Normal and Traditional glyphs are suited for formal contexts (e.g., weddings, galas), Semantic
glyph transformations cater to more imaginative or humorous applications. GPT-4 automatically
determines the most appropriate glyph type based on the user prompt.

Normal & Traditional Glyph Generation. In formal scenarios, the system renders conventional
or culturally traditional glyphs with the FreeType font library:
                                                  Gn , Gt = ϕn (sgly ),          ϕt (sgly )                                                  (6)
where ϕn and ϕt are specialized rendering functions, and sgly denotes the glyph-specific prompt. This
setup ensures a clean, dignified aesthetic for occasions demanding a formal tone.

Semantic Glyph Transformation. For creative and humorous contexts, the Glyph Designer
supports semantic glyph transformations through ϕs . These transformations reshape vector-based
glyphs to approximate target objects or thematic concepts, leveraging differentiable rasterization and
a depth-to-image Stable Diffusion model:
                                                       Gs = ϕs (ssem , M),                                                                   (7)
            sem
where s is a semantic prompt capturing the desired concept, and M references the model library.
During this process, vector parameters in an SVG representation are iteratively optimized so that the
resulting glyph visually integrates the target idea without compromising legibility.

Optimization Mechanism. To achieve smooth, context-aware deformations, the system begins by
creating a glyph image Isem from trainable parameters θ using DiffVG. The character segment x is
then cropped and augmented into batches Xaug . Coupled with a semantic concept S, these batches
are fed into a vision-language model to calculate the training loss—particularly the SDS loss in the
latent space code z. This iterative procedure refines θ, producing a final glyph design that balances
aesthetic appeal with textual clarity.

Glyph Style Selection. Finally, the glyph style is determined by context-derived cues, enabling
both aesthetic and functional considerations. Formally:
                                              
                                                     gly
                                              ϕn (s ),
                                                                                    if formal context,
                                    gly gly         gly
                             G = ϕ s , P , M = ϕt (s ),                              if traditional context,                                 (8)
                                              ϕ (ssem , M),
                                              
                                                                                     if creative context.
                                                s


Where G is the final glyph, and P gly represents glyph-specific hyperparameters. By choosing the
appropriate rendering technique and iteratively refining vector shapes, the Glyph Designer produces
glyphs that are visually appealing while fulfilling functional needs.

                  General             Realistic                  SCI-FI                       Art                      Cartoon

                  Anything         Realistic object             Future SCI               European style                Pixel style
                                         …


                                                                 cyberpunk                    Painting
                    …


                                                                                                                         Simple
                                                                                                             …
   Style


                                    Realistic Scene
                                                                   …


                                                                                              Van Gogh                     sketch
                                                             fractal geometry
                                                                                                    …


                                                                                                                           …


                                                              fractal geometry            Chinese Style          Oil painting for children

                                                                                        Landscape Painting          Freehand painting
                                                                   …


                                                                                                …


                                                                                                                           …


   Figure 3: A hierarchical model tree with multiple sub-categories for fine-grained ToT model selection.

3.3        T EXTURE D ESIGNER AGENT

The Texture Designer enriches glyphs by integrating controllable image synthesis with a Tree-
of-Thought (ToT) strategy, ensuring both creative diversity and alignment with user preferences.
Formally, it can be represented as follows:


                                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Itex = ψ tex Igly , stex , F, M

                                                                                                     (9)
                              = TexR Igly , stex , C, ToTSel stex , F, M ,

where Itex is the final textured output, TexR denotes the controllable synthesis mechanism, ToTSel
encapsulates the ToT-based model selection function, Igly is the input glyph image, stex is the texture
prompt, C represents control conditions (e.g., edge maps, depth), F guides the ToT process, and M
is the model library. The remainder of this subsection provides a high-level overview; additional
details can be found in the supplementary materials.

Controllable Synthesis. Building on ControlNet, the Texture Designer manipulates stylization
parameters such as edges, depth, or scribbles to realize varied and adaptive texture styles:

                                    Itex = TexR Igly , stex , C, W ,

                                                                                                    (10)

where W denotes the selected model weights. By tweaking these parameters, the system can fine-tune
visual details, catering to a range of aesthetic or thematic requirements.

Tree-of-Thought Selection. To ensure artistic originality and coherence with user preferences,
the Texture Designer adopts a Tree-of-Thought approach (see Figure 3). First, the prompt           stex
                                                                                             tex
is decomposed into conceptual pathways {z1 , z2 , . . . , zn } under the guidance of F s . Each
pathway’s suitability is then evaluated by a heuristic V (zi ), leading to a search for the model Mbest
that maximizes the aggregate score:
                                                         n
                                                         X
                                   Mbest = arg max             V zi | M .                           (11)
                                            M∈Mlib
                                                         i=1

This approach identifies the model that best matches each conceptual path, thereby enhancing the
creative alignment between the chosen style and the user’s vision.

Model Library Integration. Within MetaDesigner, a curated library of 68 LoRA models (see
Figure 11) spans categories like “General,” “Realistic,” “SCI-FI,” “Art,” “Design,” and “Cartoon.” To
maximize flexibility, these models can be fused through weighted combinations:
                                                     X
                                         Wfusion =           αi Wi ,                                (12)
                                                         i

where αi denotes the blending coefficient for each LoRA model Wi . By adapting the Tree-of-Thought
output to this model library, the Texture Designer deftly transforms plain glyph images into textural
“masterpieces,” balancing user-defined constraints with artistic flair.

3.4   Q&A E VALUATION AGENT

MetaDesigner incorporates a feedback mechanism designed to fine-tune hyperparameters based on
four core criteria: text-to-image consistency, image quality, glyph feedback, and user preference.
The system employs the LLaVA model to quantitatively assess consistency and overall image quality,
while user studies contribute qualitative feedback via a Q&A format.

Feedback Metrics. For each newly synthesized image, GPT-4 generates evaluation prompts that
encapsulate the project’s goals (e.g., artistic style, thematic adherence). LLaVA analyzes these
prompts against the generated images and outputs a metric set:
                                              cos    qua
                                      Gm = { gm   , gm   , Lm },
        cos                                     qua
where gm    denotes text-to-image consistency, gm   represents image quality, and Lm is a loss-like term
used in optimizing system parameters. GPT-4 then summarizes these findings, producing coherent
feedback and suggesting rationales for potential hyperparameter updates.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


User Feedback. In parallel, MetaDesigner gathers optional user responses through GPT-4-initiated
Q&A sessions, capturing preferences (gupref ) and perceptions of glyph style (gugly ). Formally:
                                                                  Gu = { gucos , guqua , gugly , gupref , Lu }.
Although not mandatory, these user evaluations provide crucial insight into subjective factors like
aesthetic appeal or contextual appropriateness. MetaDesigner integrates all feedback via

                                      G = Merge Gm , Gu ,
giving precedence to user input if any conflicts arise.

Optimization Strategy. Drawing on both model-based and user-derived inputs, MetaDesigner
frames the overall optimization objective as L = Lm + Lu . Specifically,
                                                                          Lm = argmax H seval , Iˆ ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                               (13)
                                                                                        {P gly ,P tex }


where seval is the evaluative prompt and H the LLaVA-based heuristic measuring how well the
generated image Iˆ satisfies the evaluation criteria. Accordingly, the system adjusts glyph design
parameters P gly and texture design parameters P tex to maximize this composite objective.

Iterative Hyperparameter Tuning. As illustrated in Algorithm 1 and Figure 4, the system dy-
namically refines its entire hyperparameter
                                               set P = {P pip , P gly , P tex , P qa } by applying the feedback
                         update
function P̂ = F G | s             . Generally, user preferences and glyph-specific cues influence P gly
and pipeline adjustments, while text-to-image alignment and quality assessments inform P tex . This
closed-loop process ensures continual convergence toward outcomes that balance objective visual
performance with the subjective nuances of user-defined style.
    User Prompt: “Generate “World Peace” WordArt ”                      Prompt Engineering               Origin Parameter:
    Extension Prompt: “Generate “World Peace”                                                            +FontType: ”Arial”                                                        Parameter Update
                                                               Update Prompt: “Generate “World
    WordArt, with leave branch and peace dove… ”                                                                                                                         Origin Parameter:
                                                               Peace” WordArt, with an cartoon           Feedback:
                                                                                                                                                                         +FontType: ”Semantic”
    Feedback:                                                  style, with leave branch and peace        + Glyph Style: “not interesting for the children ”
                                                                                                                                                                         +Stylization：0.7
    + User-preference ：”Cartoon style is prefer!”              dove..”                                   + Glyph Readable: True
                                      User-preference Parameter Updated                                                                        Glyph Quality Parameter Updated

    Origin Prompt: "Generate image with leave                       Emphasis Symbol & Duplication        Origin Prompt: “Generate image with leave
                                                                                                                                                                                 Quality Keyword
    branch and peace dove”                                                                               branch and peace dove”
                                                                Update Prompt: "Generate image                                                                        Update Prompt: “Generate image
    Feedback:                                                   with leave branch and (peace dove)       Feedback:                                                    with leave branch and, 4k lighting...”
    + In Consistency Object: [“Peace Dove”…. ]                  (peace dove) ”                           + Quality score：5
                                Text-to-Image Consistency Parameter Updated                                                                     Quality Parameter Updated



Figure 4: Feedback Loop for Hyperparameter Tuning: An overview of how user preferences, glyph quality,
text-to-image consistency, and image quality assessments iteratively guide hyperparameter updates.

4      E XPERIMENTS
To evaluate the effectiveness of MetaDesigner, we curated 150 prompts spanning five
themes—cartoon, design, reality, sci-fi, and traditional culture—encompassing a wide range of
artistic styles and cultural motifs. From these, we selected 20 prompts (in English, Chinese, Japanese,
and Korean) for user studies to investigate the framework’s multilingual performance.

4.1       C OMPARISON WITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS

We compared MetaDesigner against several contemporary state-of-the-art (SOTA) models, including
Stable Diffusion XL (SD-XL) Podell et al. (2023), TextDiffuser Frans et al. (2022), TextDiffuser-
2 Chen et al. (2023c), Anytext Tuo et al. (2023), and DALL-E 3. The models were chosen to represent
a spectrum of approaches in text-to-image synthesis. Representative results are illustrated in Figure 5
and evaluated on the following criteria:
WordArt Synthesis Success. Figure 5 shows that SD-XL often fails to accurately depict text, per-
forming inconsistently even in English. Both versions of TextDiffuser produce acceptable English
WordArt but encounter difficulties with Chinese, Korean, and Japanese. Anytext improves perfor-
mance on English yet struggles with Korean and Japanese, and DALL-E 3 is similarly restricted
to English. By contrast, MetaDesigner adeptly handles all tested languages, demonstrating robust,
high-quality WordArt generation. (See supplementary materials for additional examples.)


                                                                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                       “世界和平”                 “세계 평화” & “せかいへいわ”
                          “World Peace“          “World Peace” in Chinese   “World Peace” in Korean and Japanese



          SD XL


         TextDiffuser


        TextDiffuser-2


         Anytext


         DALLE 3


           Ours


Figure 5: WordArt Synthesis Comparison: Columns 1 and 2 illustrate “World Peace” in English, columns 3
and 4 present the Chinese rendition, and columns 5 and 6 show the Korean and Japanese versions, respectively.
The leftmost column corresponds to the baseline prompt (“Create a stylish word ‘World Peace’ representing its
meaning”), while subsequent columns include additional keywords such as “Sun, Peace Dove, leaves, cloud.”


Quality and Diversity. Owing to its reliance on the Stable Diffusion 1.5 backbone and limited training
data, the TextDiffuser family tends to yield visually similar results across prompts. While Anytext
exhibits greater stylistic variety, it occasionally sacrifices image fidelity. DALL-E 3 achieves higher-
quality outputs but tends to default to a cinematic or 3D aesthetic. As shown in Figure 5, MetaDesigner
excels in both quality and stylistic breadth, consistently producing diverse outputs—ranging from
realistic to cartoon or 3D—while preserving overall visual quality.
Creativity and Semantic Alignment. Although SD-XL produces visually appealing text, it often
strays from the prompt’s meaning. The TextDiffuser series includes thematic elements (e.g., leaves
and a peace dove for “World Peace”) but lacks cultural or linguistic adaptability. Anytext sometimes
introduces unrelated logos that miss the prompt’s essence, and DALL-E 3, while visually refined, can
be thematically ambiguous. In contrast, MetaDesigner consistently generates creative, semantically
coherent WordArt (e.g., adding a dove and foliage for “World Peace”), demonstrating a clear grasp of
both context and theme (see Figure 5 and Figure 9).
Quantitative Analysis. Because OCR methods often struggle with stylized text, we conducted a user
study to evaluate MetaDesigner alongside competing approaches on two dimensions: Text Accuracy
and Aesthetics & Creativity. Eleven participants provided feedback, ensuring varied perspectives.
As seen in Table 1, MetaDesigner clearly outperforms other methods in both criteria, striking a
strong balance between textual fidelity and visual appeal. We further assessed each method using
SSIM (Structural Similarity) and LPIPS (Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity). Table 2 shows
MetaDesigner consistently achieving superior results on both metrics, underscoring its capacity to
produce readable, visually coherent WordArt.
Letter-Level Comparison. We further evaluated MetaDesigner at a more granular level by comparing
its single-letter WordArt outputs against Google search results, Stable Diffusion Rombach et al.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Table 1: User Study Results. Higher scores are better; * denotes MetaDesigner without feedback.
           Dimension          SDXL           SDXL-Aug           TextDiff         TextDiff-2   Anytext    DALLE 3    Ours*       Ours
           Text Accuracy          3.6            3.6              44.1             42.7        82.3        33.2     88.2         96.8
           Aesthetics             0.5            5.9               0.9              0.5         0.9        10.9      5.0         75.4
           Creativity             0.9            1.8               0.5              0.9         0.9         7.3     10.5         77.2


Table 2: Quantitative Comparison. We measure SSIM and LPIPS on ground-truths from Promeai (P) and
design websites (D). Bold and underlined are best and second-best. * denotes MetaDesigner w/o feedback.
      GT     Metric        Text         SDXL     SDXL-Aug.               TDiff      TDiff-2    Anytext    DALLE 3    Ours*          Ours
                           Eng.         0.1254         0.1381        0.1860          0.1641    0.1324      0.0834    0.1730        0.2397
             SSIM↑         CJK          0.1853         0.2092        0.1747          0.2037    0.1021      0.1401    0.2269        0.2643
                           All          0.1553         0.1736        0.1803          0.1839    0.1172      0.1117    0.2000        0.2520
      P
                           Eng.         0.7491         0.7684        0.7652          0.7441    0.7453      0.7653    0.6960        0.6910
             LPIPS↓        CJK          0.7712         0.7307        0.7970          0.7687    0.7601      0.7693    0.6937        0.6846
                           All          0.7602         0.7496        0.7811          0.7564    0.7527      0.7673    0.6949        0.6878
                           Eng.         0.1802         0.2439        0.2342          0.2036    0.1669      0.1413    0.1913        0.3119
             SSIM↑         CJK          0.1951         0.2093        0.1846          0.1987    0.1073      0.1542    0.2184        0.2539
                           All          0.1877         0.2266        0.2094          0.2012    0.1371      0.1478    0.2048        0.2829
      D
                           Eng.         0.7993         0.8157        0.8312          0.8366    0.8495      0.7650    0.8169        0.7950
             LPIPS↓        CJK          0.8023         0.7964        0.8249          0.8429    0.8437      0.7872    0.7912        0.7880
                           All          0.8008         0.8060        0.8280          0.8397    0.8466      0.7761    0.8040        0.7915


(2022), DALL-E 3, and DS-Fusion Tanveer et al. (2023). As shown in Figure 8, Stable Diffusion
struggles with coherent letter shapes, while DS-Fusion produces cleaner forms but offers limited style
variation. DALL-E 3 demonstrates high textural quality yet does not always capture thematic nuances.
In contrast, MetaDesigner consistently merges artistic creativity with precise detailing, achieving
visually appealing, thematically aligned letters. More examples are in the supplementary material.

4.2    E FFECT OF T REE - OF -T HOUGHT

To verify the effectiveness of the Tree-of-
Thought (ToT) scheme, we conducted a quan-
titative analysis comparing the ControlNet and
the ToT-LoRA+ControlNet approaches. GPT-4,
a state-of-the-art language model, was used to
measure the "Relevance," "Quality," and "Style"
of the synthesized WordArt. The results, illus-                                  Figure 6: The evaluation of the synthesis WordArt.
                                                                             From left to right are the “Relevance", “Quality", and
trated in Figure 6, show significant improve-
                                                                             “Style" scores generated by the ChatGPT-4 in the sub-
ments achieved by the ToT-LoRA in all metrics,                               categories. (The performance of ToT+Gemini and
highlighting its ability to generate WordArt that                            ToT+GPT4 are very close)
is highly relevant to the given prompts, visually
appealing, and stylistically diverse.
                                                                             ControlNet                                    ToT+LoRA+ControlNet
A case study, presented in Figure 7, demon-
                                                     "ethnic customs, New
strates that the ToT-LoRA scheme significantly       Year, dumplings,
outperforms ControlNet in WordArt style and          steamed bread, kitchen,
                                                     mother, little boy "
text-to-image consistency. Specifically, ToT-
LoRA+ControlNet excels in rendering com-
plex textures and maintaining coherence with         "Renaissance style,
                                                     Castle"
the given prompts, such as "ethnic customs,
New Year, dumplings, steamed bread, kitchen,
mother, little boy" and "Renaissance style, Cas-                Figure 7: WordArt Texture rendering.
tle." The results show clearer thematic representation and enhanced visual appeal, further validating
the effectiveness of our approach. More examples are in the supplementary material.
4.3    E FFECT OF O PTIMIZATION

To illustrate the impact of the optimization process, we conducted a detailed case study, presented in
Figure 10. The LLaVA system is employed to identify objects mentioned in the prompt but absent in
the generated WordArt. This information is then used to update the generation process, incorporating
the omitted elements. Techniques such as symbol enhancement, word sequencing adjustments, and


                                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Dragon                                   PLANT                                       Dragon                                 PLANT

      Stable
                                                                                                DS-Fusion
     Diffusion



     DALL-E3                                                                                        Ours


Figure 8: Single-Letter WordArt Comparison: We compare Google, Stable Diffusion, DALL-E 3, DS-
Fusion, and MetaDesigner. The prompts here are “Dragon” (left) and “Plant” (right). Partial results from
DS-Fusion Tanveer et al. (2023) are reproduced for reference.


Figure 9: Examples showcasing multi-language support (Chinese, English, Japanese, Korean, Arabic numerals,
etc.) and varied word counts, with applications ranging from e-commerce to personalized social media.

keyword repetition are employed to augment the WordArt generation process, ensuring that the final
output accurately reflects the input prompt. As shown in Figure 10, the optimization process proceeds
through several steps to achieve better alignment with the prompts. In Step 1, the initial generation
may miss key elements such as "little girl" in the prompt "old man, cake, candles, little girl." In Step
2, iterative refinement introduces missing elements, enhancing text-to-image consistency. Similarly,
for the prompt "kitchen, girl, steamed bread, a plate of fruit," the optimization process adds missing
objects and refines their depiction over multiple steps. This optimization process plays a crucial role
in enhancing the semantic consistency and visual quality of the generated WordArt.
     [Step-1] : old man, cake,        [Step-2] :old man, cake,              [Step-3] : old man, < little girl>,   [Step-1] : Kitchen, girl, steamed [Step-2] : Kitchen, girl, steamed
     Candles, little girl             Candles, little girl, little girl     cake, Candles little girl             bread, A plate of fruit           bread, A plate of fruit, girl


                     Figure 10: The examples are the optimization of the text-to-image consistency.

5    C ONCLUSION
We introduced MetaDesigner, an LLM-driven, multi-agent framework that streamlines user-centric
artistic typography synthesis. Its three core agents—Pipeline, Glyph, and Texture—collaboratively
translate user preferences into visually compelling, context-aware WordArt. By integrating generative
AI with typographic rendering, MetaDesigner enables both professionals and hobbyists to efficiently
produce high-quality, customizable, and aesthetically diverse designs. Future work includes expand-
ing the WordArt Dataset, extending language coverage, refining the multi-agent system, and exploring
broader applications in design, branding, digital media, and visual communication.


                                                                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Jennifer Amar, Olivier Droulers, and Patrick Legohérel. Typography in destination advertising: An exploratory
   study and research perspectives. Tourism Management, 63:77–86, 2017. ISSN 0261-5177. doi: https://doi.org/
  10.1016/j.tourman.2017.06.002. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
   pii/S0261517717301243.
Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Karsten Kreis, Miika Aittala, Timo
  Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, Tero Karras, and Ming-Yu Liu. ediff-i: Text-to-image diffusion models
  with an ensemble of expert denoisers. arXiv preprint, abs/2211.01324, 2022.
Daniel Berio, Frederic Fol Leymarie, Paul Asente, and Jose Echevarria. Strokestyles: Stroke-based segmentation
  and stylization of fonts. ACM Trans. Graph., 41(3):28:1–28:21, 2022.
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A. Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image editing
  instructions. arXiv preprint, abs/2211.09800, 2022.
Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Jarred Barber, Aaron Maschinot, José Lezama, Lu Jiang, Ming-Hsuan Yang, Kevin
  Murphy, William T. Freeman, Michael Rubinstein, Yuanzhen Li, and Dilip Krishnan. Muse: Text-to-image
  generation via masked generative transformers. arXiv preprint, abs/2301.00704, 2023.
Haoxing Chen, Zhuoer Xu, Zhangxuan Gu, Jun Lan, Xing Zheng, Yaohui Li, Changhua Meng, Huijia Zhu, and
  Weiqiang Wang. Diffute: Universal text editing diffusion model. arXiv preprint, abs/2305.10825, 2023a.
Jingye Chen, Yupan Huang, Tengchao Lv, Lei Cui, Qifeng Chen, and Furu Wei. Textdiffuser: Diffusion models
   as text painters. arXiv preprint, abs/2305.10855, 2023b.
Jingye Chen, Yupan Huang, Tengchao Lv, Lei Cui, Qifeng Chen, and Furu Wei. Textdiffuser-2: Unleashing the
   power of language models for text rendering. CoRR, abs/2311.16465, 2023c.
Zhi-Qi Cheng, Yang Liu, Xiao Wu, and Xian-Sheng Hua. Video ecommerce: Towards online video advertising.
  In Proceedings of the 24th ACM international conference on Multimedia, pp. 1365–1374, 2016.
Zhi-Qi Cheng, Xiao Wu, Yang Liu, and Xian-Sheng Hua. Video ecommerce++: Toward large scale online video
  advertising. IEEE transactions on multimedia, 19(6):1170–1183, 2017a.
Zhi-Qi Cheng, Xiao Wu, Yang Liu, and Xian-Sheng Hua. Video2shop: Exact matching clothes in videos to
  online shopping images. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 4048–4056, 2017b.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Quinn Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. In NeurIPS, pp.
   8780–8794, 2021.
Kevin Frans, Lisa B. Soros, and Olaf Witkowski. Clipdraw: Exploring text-to-drawing synthesis through
  language-image encoders. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit Haim Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
  An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual inversion. In ICLR, 2023.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Hugo Larochelle,
  Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), NeurIPS, 2020.
Lianghua Huang, Di Chen, Yu Liu, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Jingren Zhou. Composer: Creative and
  controllable image synthesis with composable conditions. arXiv preprint, abs/2302.09778, 2023.
Shir Iluz, Yael Vinker, Amir Hertz, Daniel Berio, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Ariel Shamir. Word-as-image for
  semantic typography. SIGGRAPH, 2023.
DeepFloyd Lab. Deepfloyd if. https://github.com/deep-floyd/IF, 2023.
Rosanne Liu, Dan Garrette, Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Adam Roberts, Sharan Narang, Irina Blok, RJ Mical,
  Mohammad Norouzi, and Noah Constant. Character-aware models improve visual text rendering. In ACL, pp.
  16270–16297, 2023.
Jian Ma, Mingjun Zhao, Chen Chen, Ruichen Wang, Di Niu, Haonan Lu, and Xiaodong Lin. Glyphdraw:
   Learning to draw chinese characters in image synthesis models coherently. arXiv preprint, abs/2303.17870,
   2023a.
Yiyang Ma, Huan Yang, Wenjing Wang, Jianlong Fu, and Jiaying Liu. Unified multi-modal latent diffusion for
  joint subject and text conditional image generation. arXiv preprint, abs/2303.09319, 2023b.


                                                     11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon. Sdedit:
  Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. In ICLR, 2022.

Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, and Xiaohu Qie. T2i-adapter:
  Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint,
  abs/2302.08453, 2023.

Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Marina
  Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), ICML, volume 139, pp. 8162–8171, 2021.

Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe Penna, and
  Robin Rombach. SDXL: improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image synthesis. CoRR,
  abs/2307.01952, 2023.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In ICML, volume 139, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-conditional
  image generation with CLIP latents. arXiv preprint, abs/2204.06125, 2022.

Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-resolution image
  synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, pp. 10684–10695, June 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L. Denton, Seyed Kamyar Seyed
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, David J. Fleet, and
  Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. In
  NeurIPS, 2022.

Jing Shi, Wei Xiong, Zhe Lin, and Hyun Joon Jung. Instantbooth: Personalized text-to-image generation without
   test-time finetuning. arXiv preprint, abs/2304.03411, 2023.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P. Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole.
  Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In ICLR, 2021.

Guang-Lu Sun, Zhi-Qi Cheng, Xiao Wu, and Qiang Peng. Personalized clothing recommendation combining
  user social circle and fashion style consistency. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 77:17731–17754, 2018.
Maham Tanveer, Yizhi Wang, Ali Mahdavi-Amiri, and Hao Zhang. Ds-fusion: Artistic typography via discrimi-
  nated and stylized diffusion. arXiv preprint, abs/2303.09604, 2023.

Purva Tendulkar, Kalpesh Krishna, Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, and Devi Parikh. Trick or treat : Thematic
  reinforcement for artistic typography. In Kazjon Grace, Michael Cook, Dan Ventura, and Mary Lou Maher
  (eds.), Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Computational Creativity, ICCC, pp. 188–195.

Yuxiang Tuo, Wangmeng Xiang, Jun-Yan He, Yifeng Geng, and Xuansong Xie. Anytext: Multilingual visual
  text generation and editing. CoRR, abs/2311.03054, 2023.

Sompatu Vungthong, Emilia Djonov, and Jane Torr. Images as a resource for supporting vocabulary learning: A
  multimodal analysis of thai efl tablet apps for primary school children. TESOL Quarterly, 51(1):32–58, 2017.
Yuxiang Wei, Yabo Zhang, Zhilong Ji, Jinfeng Bai, Lei Zhang, and Wangmeng Zuo. ELITE: encoding visual
  concepts into textual embeddings for customized text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint, abs/2302.13848,
  2023.

Yukang Yang, Dongnan Gui, Yuhui Yuan, Haisong Ding, Han Hu, and Kai Chen. Glyphcontrol: Glyph
  conditional control for visual text generation. arXiv preprint, abs/2305.18259, 2023.

Junsong Zhang, Yu Wang, Weiyi Xiao, and Zhenshan Luo. Synthesizing ornamental typefaces. Comput. Graph.
  Forum, 36(1):64–75, 2017.
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv
  preprint, abs/2302.05543, 2023.


                                                     12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A      A PPENDIX : A DDITIONAL D ETAILS
This appendix provides further information that could not be included in the main paper. The sections
are organized as follows:

1. ToT Model Selection (appendix B)
     (a) ToT Model Selection Prompt (appendix B.1)
     (b) ToT Model Selection Case Study (appendix B.2)
2. Image Evaluation (appendix C)
     (a) ToT-LoRA Evaluation Prompt (appendix C.1)
     (b) LLaVA Evaluation Prompt (appendix C.2)
3. Dataset Details (appendix D)
4. Additional Comparisons with SOTA Methods (fig. 17)
5. Mixing vs. Separating the Glyph and Texture Designers (fig. 18)
6. Effect of GPT-4/GPT-4V on ToT Selection (appendix E)

B      M ORE D ETAILS OF T OT M ODEL S ELECTION
B.1     T OT M ODEL S ELECTION T EMPLATE

You possess knowledge of various cultural backgrounds and artistic styles. For each prompt, identify
and analyze its vocabulary, theme, content, implied culture, and potential reader perception. From
this analysis, choose the most appropriate element from the given input list. Document the reasoning
steps, then determine a final consensus or best-guess match. The final output must adhere to the
following template:
TEMPLATE:

          Selected: [the selected word]
          Input list: {search_list}
          Input prompt: {input}

B.2     T OT M ODEL S ELECTION C ASE

Input Prompt: A girl, a boy, in a church

• Thoughts-1st (Keywords: “General”, “Traditional Art”, “Design”, “Cartoon”, “SCI-FI”,
  “Realistic”)
    – Vocabulary: The prompt uses common words (girl, boy, church) that do not point to a specific
      art style or culture.
    – Theme: Featuring a girl and a boy in a church, suggesting a spiritual or religious setting often
      associated with traditional art.
    – Content: Minimal details; however, the church context is frequently linked to traditional or
      classical depictions.
    – Implicit Culture: Likely Western or Christian influence, common in traditional art.
    – Reader Perception: A straightforward scene that leans toward traditional aesthetics in many
      cultural contexts.
    – Summarization: “Traditional Art” best fits this simple yet possibly religious scene.
    – Selected: Traditional Art
• Thoughts-2nd (Keywords: “European Style”, “Chinese Style”)
    – Vocabulary: The prompt mentions a girl, a boy, and a church, but does not specify a distinct
      culture or art form.
    – Theme: Two individuals in a religious setting, with no direct mention of cultural influence.
    – Content: Minimal context, though a church often implies a Western or European setting.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  General
                               General          :           Anything                 ReVAnimated                      EveryOne

                    Art

                            European style
                                         Painting          : Oil Painting                Van Gogh                Monet          RealisticOilPainting

                                         Engrave           : Black gold relief           PlasterStyle

                              Chinese Style
                                    Wash painting          : ShuiMo                        Mural          Chinesepainting         CuteInkPainting

                                   Chinese Comics          : XIAORENSHU             Chinese_illustrations                InkComicStrip
                                  Chinese paper cuttings   : Paper cutting         BliLaminatedPaperCut
                  Design
                                  Logo              :          LOGO                       LinearIcon               FinanceIcon

                                 Poster             :        Old school             MinimalistPoster                TextCover

                                 Cover              :      Cartoon cover           RedEnvelope cover
                              Indoor design         :          Indoor                InteriorDesign
                                IP design           :         IP_Cute                     IP_Animal
      Style


                  Cartoon
                               Pixel style      :               Pixel                     PixelArt                SimplePixel

                              Simple style      :          Simple drawing           SimpleFashion
                      Oil painting for children :           Hand drawn               FarkFairyTale

                             Line style         :              LineArt                   ComicLine

                           Colorful style       :          ExplodeEffect          DreamyWatercolor           ClassicalDazzle
                              3D style          :            3D Cartoon                   BlindBox                  Cute3D

                   SCI-FI

                              Cyberpunk             :      Cyberspace             CyberGirl               CyberCat               CyberCity

                            Transportation          :        FutureCar              Interstellar Ship

                            Futuristic Cities       :      Advanced Cities           Wasteland            Underwater City           FantacyWorld

                            Science Object          :       Mecha                Alien                  Robots               Bionic Robot

                  Realistic

                            Realistic Scene         :        School                  Park                  Street             RealisticUrbanMix

                            Realistic Object        :      ChilloutMix            majicmixRealistic         KryptonRealistic             MoonFilm


Figure 11: The complete hierarchical model tree, featuring multi-level subcategories for in-depth ToT model
selection and enhanced stylistic diversity.


  – Implicit Culture: Likely European, given the mention of a church.
  – Reader Perception: Many viewers may perceive a Western influence, though this remains
    subjective.
  – Summarization: “European Style” appears most compatible with the church setting.
  – Selected: European style
• Thoughts-3rd (Keywords: “Painting”, “Engrave”)
  – Vocabulary: Plain language referencing a girl, boy, and church, making the setting easily
    visualized.
  – Theme: Suggests a peaceful or spiritual scenario with no explicit action, often depicted in
    paintings.
  – Content: Minimalistic, focusing on two characters within a church.
  – Implicit Culture: The mention of a church indicates a likely Christian or Western environment.
  – Reader Perception: Evokes serenity or spirituality; could be rendered effectively as a painting.
  – Summarization: “Painting” suits the subtle details of the scene better than “Engrave.”
  – Selected: Painting


                                                                            14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Hyperparameter Tuning
 1: Input: Prompt suser , initial hyperparameters P, max iteration threshold τ , score threshold θ, model library
    M, MetaDesigner Ψ;
 2: Output: WordArt image I;        ˆ
 3: while i < τ and L < θ do
 4:    Iˆ = Ψ(suser , ϕ, P, M);                                                                        ▷ Eq. (1)
 5:    Gm = H(seval , I) ˆ
 6:    Gu = {gucos , guqua , gutex , gupref , Lu }                                              ▷ User Feedback
 7:    G = Merge(Gm , Gu )
 8:    P = F(G | supdate )
 9:    L = Lm + Lu ; i = i + 1
10: end while
            ˆ P = {P pip , P gly , P tex };
11: return I,


Prompt: man, vase;         Text Content: Word;          Base model : AnythingV5[Prt-RE];        LoRA Model : Chinese_bronzes_LORA, Sketch_Style_LORA


        (0.0, 1.0)                 (0.2, 0.8)                  (0.4, 0.6)                 (0.6, 0.4)                      (0.8, 0.2)          (1.0, 0.0)


             (0.1, 0.9)                         (0.3, 0.7)                   (0.5, 0.5)                      (0.7, 0.3)                 (0.9, 0.1)
0.0   Chinese_bronzes LoRA                                                                                                                                  1.0
1.0                                                                                                                                    Sketch_Style LoRA    0.0

Prompt: girl, vase;       Text Content: Word;         Base model : AnythingV5[Prt-RE];                 LoRA Model : Comic LoRA, Croissant Style LoRA


         (0.0, 1.0)                (0.2, 0.8)                   (0.4, 0.6)                (0.6, 0.4)                      (0.8, 0.2)           (1.0, 0.0)


             (0.1, 0.9)                         (0.3, 0.7)                   (0.5, 0.5)                      (0.7, 0.3)                 (0.9, 0.1)
0.0 Comic LoRA                                                                                                                                              1.0
1.0                                                                                                                                    Croissant Style LoRA 0.0


Figure 12: Effect of merging LoRAs with different weights. The top example fuses Chinese Bronzes
and Sketch Style LoRAs; the bottom fuses Comic and Croissant Style LoRAs.


• Thoughts-4th (Keywords: “Oil Painting”, “Van Gogh”, “Monet”, “RealisticOilPainting”)

  – Vocabulary: Straightforward scene without explicit ties to any single artist or style.
  – Theme: A possibly everyday or spiritual moment suitable for an oil painting approach.
  – Content: Two figures in a church—a scene often depicted in a realist or classical oil painting
    tradition.
  – Implicit Culture: Western context, aligning well with artists like Van Gogh or Monet, although
    the prompt is not artist-specific.
  – Reader Perception: Could be viewed as an ordinary, contemplative moment in a church,
    commonly illustrated in oil paintings.
  – Summarization: “Oil Painting” is broad enough to encompass the scene without restricting it to
    a specific artist or ultra-realistic style.
  – Selected: Oil Painting



                                                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            ControlNet   ToT+LoRA+ControlNet                                 ControlNet   ToT+LoRA+ControlNet

"ethnic customs, New                                                "Sculpt a
Year, dumplings,                                                    representation of Han
steamed bread, kitchen,                                             Dynasty bronze
mother, little boy "                                                artifacts"

                                                                    ”Chinese traditional
                                                                    style, a lovely little
"Renaissance style,                                                 girl,bamboo
Castle"                                                             pole,persimmon
                                                                    tree,Basket,Persimmon"

"no humans,leaf,simple
background,flower,tradi                                             "An abstract wave
tional media,white                                                  shape enclosing an
background,branch,pla                                               anchor, a compass, and
nt,still life,red flower"                                           a nautical cap"



Figure 13: Comparison of WordArt texture rendering on the glyph “World Peace” (ControlNet vs.
ToT-GPT4-LoRA+ControlNet).


Gemini


Claude


Qwen


Figure 14: A radar-chart comparison of WordArt rendering on the glyph “World Peace” (ControlNet
vs. ToT-GPT4-LoRA+ControlNet).

C       M ORE D ETAILS OF I MAGE E VALUATION

C.1       T OT-L O RA E VALUATION P ROMPT

You are now a scoring judge for a generative model. I will show you images and prompts produced
by the model. Please assess how well each image’s content aligns with the corresponding prompt
and rate its overall image quality on a scale of 1–10. Provide three numerical scores: (1) Prompt


                                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Relevance, (2) Image Quality, and (3) Style–Prompt Match. Return only these numbers without any
further explanations.

 C.2      LL AVA E VALUATION P ROMPT

Given an input sentence, break it down into real-world, visually identifiable “Targets.” Use the
template below to list these targets:

            Targets:{target, target, ...}
            <Input sentence>: {input}

 Subsequently, for each listed target, query LLaVA to check whether it appears in the image by asking:
“Is {target} present in the photo? Please answer Yes or No.”

 D       M ORE D ETAILS OF W ORDA RT DATASET
To thoroughly evaluate the MetaDesigner framework, we assembled 150 prompts spanning five
themes—cartoon, design, reality, sci-fi, and traditional culture. These themes encompass a broad
array of artistic styles and thematic elements, challenging MetaDesigner to produce aesthetically and
contextually diverse WordArt.
Linguistic Diversity and Selection Criteria. From this larger set, we selected 20 prompts for a
user study, specifically chosen to represent English, Chinese, Japanese, and Korean. This subset was
curated to ensure linguistic variety, thematic breadth, and real-world applicability (e.g., e-commerce,
education, and digital content creation).
Statistics and Analysis. Each of the five themes contains 30 prompts, ensuring balanced coverage of
different styles and subject matter. We considered cultural relevance, popularity in digital art, and
commercial or educational applicability when selecting these prompts. Figure 9 highlights diverse
use cases such as cartoon text, Chinese surnames, and solar terms, illustrating the dataset’s capacity
to accommodate varied artistic and linguistic expressions.
Applicability and Use Cases. The dataset demonstrates utility for numerous domains. In e-commerce,
for instance, customized WordArt can enhance user engagement; in educational contexts, multilingual
text designs can enrich language learning and cultural instruction. By testing MetaDesigner in these
settings, we validate both its ability to generate contextually and culturally relevant WordArt and the
dataset’s suitability for studying the intersection of AI, language, and art.
WordArt Dataset Analysis. Figure 15 illustrates numerical data from our “Image Plaza,” where over
two million images have been generated. These images feature a range of aspect ratios, word counts,
and thematic content, and are retrievable in our WordArt space2 .
Figure 16 depicts user-preference analytics, revealing that over one million images have been
produced by users. The majority favor a 16:9 aspect ratio, typically using up to five characters of text.
Moreover, alpha-channel images are especially popular.

Table 3: VLM evaluation in two dimensions: Aesthetics and Creativity, scored from 0–10 (higher is
better). Ours* indicates a version without agents.

              Evaluation   SDXL   SDXL-Aug   TDiff   TDiff-2   Anytext   DALLE 3   Ours*   Ours
              Aesthetics    7.9      8.1      6.1     6.4        7.0       8.5      8.3     8.7
              Creativity    7.5      7.7      5.8     6.0        6.1       7.6      7.7     7.9


     2
         https://modelscope.cn/studios/WordArt/WordArt


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Number of Images                                                                                                   Aspect Ratio
                                                                                                                                      (k)
                                                                                                                       2500
                                                              14%                                                                           2,032.49
                                                                                                                       2000

                                                                                                                       1500
                                         Total: 2,226,285
                                                                                                                       1000

                                              86%                                                                       500
                                                                                                                                                                178.29
                                                                                                                                                                                 15.51
                                                                                                                                  0
                                    Glyph+Texture                   Texture                                                                  16:9               9:16             1:1

                                Number of Characters                                                                                                   Text Topic
            (k)                                                                                                             (k)
    10000                                                                                                            1000
                           1366.198                                                                                               136.35     103.69     94.93
    1000                             293.954413.998                                                                   100
              136.352
     100                                                                                                                                                         7.69
                                                              10.285                                                   10                                                 5.29    4.12
      10                                                               5.345                                                                                                               2.03

                                                                                                                        1
        1
                                                                                 0.095
      0.1                                                                                    0.031 0.027

     0.01
                      1         2         3          4          5         6         7           8       9


Figure 15: Numerical analyses of our WordArt dataset. The horizontal axis denotes the number of
images (in thousands), while the vertical axis represents category labels.


                                    Number of Images                                                                                                      Aspect Ratio
                                                                                                                                      (k)
                                                                                                                        1400
                                                                                                                                            1,169.53
                                                                                                                        1200
                                                                                                                        1000
                                                                                                                            800
                                    50% Total: 1,480,776 47%
                                                                                                                            600
                                                                                                                            400
                                                                                                                                                                 201.58
                                                         3%                                                                 200                                                   109.67

                                                                                                                                  0
                          Glyph+Texture                   Glyph               Texture                                                         16:9                9:16              1:1

                                Number of Characters                                                                                            Alpha Channel Image
       (k)                                                                                                                    (k)
    1000                                                                                                              1000                       717.99
             609.76



                                                    207.74
                                                                                                                       100
                          133.07 131.39 124.19                                                                                                                                   44.79

     100                                                      64.16                                     69.66

                                                                       38.36
                                                                               31.68
                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                27.96
                                                                                        22.99



      10                                                                                                                     1
                  0         1        2        3       4         5       6       7        8          9   >=10                                        Yes                           No


Figure 16: User preference analytics. The horizontal axis shows the number of images (in thousands),
and the vertical axis displays specific categories. “0” in the “Number of Characters” panel indicates
use of a mask image rather than textual input.


                                                                                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    “Desert“       “Sky“         “百炼成钢”               “春分”                “立秋”                “珠宝”
                                              “Iron” in Chinese “Spring” in Chinese “Autumn” in Chinese “Jewelry” in Chinese



     SDXL


    SDXL
 Augmented


  TextDiffuser


 TextDiffuser-2


   Anytext


   DALLE 3


    Ours
 (w/o agents)


     Ours


                        Figure 17: Additional examples comparing different methods.

                  “World Peace”    “Fruits”      “世界和平”                      “세계평화”                 “せかいへいわ”                       “水果”
                                               “World Peace” in Chinese   “World Peace” in Korean   “World Peace” in Japanese   “Fruits” in Chinese


      Mix
Glyph & Texture


   Separate
Glyph & Texture


      Figure 18: Visual comparison of merging vs. separating the Glyph and Texture Designers.

                                                             19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         LLaVA response                                             GPT-4V response
                                                                                         Consistency : "score": 8; "reason": "The image
                                Consistency : “score”: 9; “reason”: “The image           effectively incorporates several elements from
                             contains all the required elements, such as flowers,        the prompt, including flowers and leaves, and
                             young leaves, sunlight, warmth, curves, petal patterns,     showcases a sense of warmth and vitality.
                             grass texture, ripples, warm tones, and vitality. The       However, it lacks direct representation of
                             elements are properly positioned and contribute to          sunlight and a textural representation of grass."
                             the overall composition.”                                      Style : "score": 9; "reason": "The overall
                                Style : “score”: 9; “reason”: “The image has a warm      aesthetic aligns well with the prompt. It features
                             and vibrant color tone, which matches the requested         warm tones and curves in the arrangement of
                             artistic style. The sunlight and warmth elements add        flora, creating an inviting atmosphere. The
                             to the overall atmosphere, creating a sense of vitality     minimalist background enhances the focus on
                             and life. The use of curves and petal patterns adds         the floral elements, contributing to the intended
                             visual interest and contributes to the artistic             style."
                             innovation.”                                                   Quality: "score": 9; "reason": "The image
                                Quality : “score”: 9;“reason”: “The image is clear       exhibits high clarity with a well-considered
                             and well-composed, with good lighting effects that          composition. The lighting effectively highlights
                             enhance the overall visual appeal. The technical            the textures and colors of the flowers, adding to
                             excellence is evident in the details of the flowers,        the technical excellence of the photograph."
                             leaves, and grass texture, which are all well-executed.”       Creativity: "score": 8; "reason": "The
                                Creativity : "score": 8; "reason": "The image            arrangement of flowers to form characters is a
                             showcases a high level of artistic innovation through       unique artistic interpretation, showing ingenuity
                             the use of various elements, such as the sunlight,          in using natural elements to convey a message.
                             warmth, and grass texture. The combination of these         The innovation in presentation is commendable,
                             elements creates a unique and visually appealing            though it remains within established creative
                             composition that stands out from more conventional          boundaries."
                             floral images."


                                Consistency: score": 9; "reason": "The image                Consistency": "score": 9; "reason": "The
                             contains all the required elements, such as flowers,        image features a variety of flowers and young leaves
                             young leaves, sunlight, warmth, curves, petal patterns,     arranged in a way that is visually coherent and
                             grass texture, ripples, warm tones, and vitality. The       interpretable. All elements from the prompt, such as
                             elements are well-positioned and contribute to the          flowers, leaves, and natural textures, are present
                             overall composition of the image."                          and well-integrated, creating a harmonious
                                                                                         composition."
                               Style: "score": 9; "reason": "The image matches
                             the requested artistic style, color tone, and                  Style : "score": 8; "reason": "The color tone is
                             atmosphere. The warm tones, sunlight, and warmth            warm, with yellows and greens dominating, which
                             create a sense of vitality and life, while the curves and   matches the request for warm tones. The overall
                             petal patterns add an artistic touch. The grass texture     atmosphere feels vibrant and lively, aligning well
                             and ripples contribute to the overall visual interest of    with the concept of warmth and vitality, although
                             the image."                                                 the artistic style may not fully resonate with a
                                                                                         traditional floral representation."
                               Quality: "score": 9; "reason": "The image is of
                             high quality, with clear details and a well-composed           Quality: "score": 9; "reason": "The image is clear,
                             composition. The lighting effects are well-executed,        with sharp details that highlight the textures of the
                             and the technical aspects of the image are excellent."},    flowers and leaves. The lighting is soft and enhances
                                                                                         the overall warmth of the composition, contributing
                                Creativity": "score": 8; "reason": "The image is
                                                                                         to a visually appealing and technically excellent
                             quite creative, with a unique combination of elements
                                                                                         photo."
                             that create a visually interesting and engaging
                             composition. The use of warm tones, sunlight, and              Creativity: "score": 9; "reason": "The
                             warmth adds a sense of vitality and life to the image,      arrangement of the floral elements in a creative and
                             while the curves and petal patterns contribute to its       artistic way demonstrates a high level of innovation.
                             artistic appeal."                                           The use of petals and leaves to form an artistic
                                                                                         representation shows uniqueness and a strong
                                                                                         creative vision, setting it apart from typical floral
                                                                                         imagery."


            Figure 19: Differences between LLaVA- and GPT-4V-based evaluations.


                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     User I want a peace of WordArt with text “西湖龙井”
                                                                                                Glyph Designer
   Prompt :

               Pipeline Designer

    Glyph Prompt: teapot, tea, ripple, willow,
    water drop.
                                                                                              Texture Designer
    Texture Prompt :spring , green tea, mist,
    ripples, young leaves teapot, tea, ripple,
    willow, water drop

   ToT LoRA Selection
    Vocabulary: The prompt indicates a possible combination of realistic textures for portraying elements like the blooming green tea,
    the slate road, the mist, ripples, young leaves, teapot, tea, willow, and water drop. There is also hints of some abstract co ncepts that
    could be explored through artistic technique such as the texture effects on the slate road or the ripples of the water.
    Theme: In terms of theme, the prompt portrays a calm, peaceful atmosphere typically associated with traditional tea ceremony
    scenes. This suggests a leaning towards symbolism related to tranquility, tradition, and nature.
    Content: The colors that can be inferred from the prompt suggest a fresh, outdoorsy, and calm mood. The green and misty attributes
    lean towards a specific color palette that can be found within nature-oriented artwork.
    Implicit Culture: The elements mentioned in the prompt are associated with Asian or Eastern cultures, especially due to the
    emphasis on tea ceremony symbolism.
    Reader Perception: Given that the scene being painted invites a thorough exploration of different textures like the softness of the
    tea leaves, the hardness strength of the slate road, the delicate nature of the mist, etc., it clearly emphasizes the use of realistic
    rendering techniques.
    Summarization: Considering all the above analysis, the prominent elements from the prompt appear to be 'traditional culture' and
    'realistic'. The theme of the scene, the implied cultural context, and the necessity for realistic texture rendering contribu te to these
    choices.

    Selected : realistic
    Vocabulary: The prompt contains vocabulary indicative of a re alistic scene. Words like 'spring', 'gree n tea' , 'slate roa d',
    'mist', 'ripples', 'young lea ves', and 'water drop' contributes to setting a particular atmosphere that portrays a concrete
    moment in time , m uch a kin to a rea listic sc ene.
    Theme: The them e here is a serene springtime m ome nt expe rienced while having tea. Green tea, willows, and young leaves
    sym bolize fresh beginnings, calm and tranquility presented in a realistic scene .
     Content: The c olor palette inferred f rom the prompt portrays a natural, ref reshing, soothing m ood; spring gree ns, slate
    grays, mist w hite or soft blues, a nd the warmth of tea . The Mood is peaceful and c alm, ofte n associated with rea listic
    scene s.
     Implicit Culture : The c ultural context is dra wn from te a-drinking cultures, where spring green te a reflec ts East Asian
    cultural tra ditions like Chinese or Japanese, which pre fer doing it in natural sc eneries, aligning it more towards a realisti c
    scene .
    Reader Perception: The a rtistic technique s implied through the obje cts e.g., blooming tea , road with mist, young leaves,
    water drops, a re more nature-centered, toge ther cre ating a cohe rent, relatable, and rea listic sc ene.
    Summarization: In summa tion, the described scenario in the input prompt appears to be painting a picture of a partic ular
    moment in nature - note the spring blooms, the m ist, the sla te road, the tea, hinting towards a re alisticscene ra ther tha n
    foc using on a single re alisticobjec t.

    Selected : realisticscene

   Evaluation
    Consistency : "score": 8, "reason": "The image contains a teapot, tea, ripple, willow, water drop,
    and young leaves, which are all elements of the prompt. The arrangement of these elements is
    visually appealing and well-organized."

    Style : "score": 9, "reason": "The image has a green tea theme, which is consistent with the
    prompt. The color tone is predominantly green, and the atmosphere is calm and serene, which
    aligns with the requested artistic style.”

    Quality: "score": 9, "reason": "The image is of high quality, with clear details and a well-
    composed arrangement of the elements. The lighting effects are subtle and effective, enhancing the
    overall visual appeal of the image."

    Creativity : "score": 8, "reason": "The image is creative in its presentation of the elements, with
    the teapot and tea leaves arranged in a visually interesting manner. The use of ripples, willow, and
    water drop adds a touch of artistic flair to the composition."


                             Figure 20: Overview of the full MetaDesigner pipeline.


                                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Figure 21: User interface of the MetaDesigner system.

      Formal                  Traditional              Elegant                  Classic


                    Figure 22: Impact of font type on glyph transformations.


                 Figure 23: Further examples generated by the Glyph Designer.

                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Table 4: Comparison of ToT-Selection using different models.

     Evaluation Theme                       GPT-4                                         GPT-4V
                                                                        traditional culture -> oil painting (x1)
                                     design -> poster (x3)                       general -> general (x2)
        World Peace
                            traditional culture -> oil painting (x2)         realistic -> realisticscene (x1)
                                                                          traditional culture -> papercut (x1)
                                                                                sci-fi -> future world (x1)
                                   sci-fi -> future world (x2)          traditional culture -> oil painting (x1)
      Colorful World        traditional culture -> oil painting (x1)      traditional culture -> papercut (x1)
                            traditional culture -> inkpainting (x2)          realistic -> realisticscene (x1)
                                                                                    sci-fi -> cyber (x1)
                            traditional culture -> oil painting (x3)              design -> poster (x2)
    Artistic Style Fusion     traditional culture -> engrave (x1)       traditional culture -> inkpainting (x1)
                                     design -> poster (x1)             traditional culture -> chinesecomic (x1)
    Future Technology                  sci-fi -> cyber (x5)                         sci-fi -> cyber (x5)
                                   cartoon -> 3dcartoon (x4)                    cartoon -> 3dcartoon (x4)
      Children’s Fun
                                     design -> poster (x1)                     cartoon -> forchildren (x1)


E      E FFECT OF GPT-4/GPT-4V ON T OT-S ELECTION
We evaluated the GPT-4 and GPT-4V models on 25 test prompts, divided into five thematic categories.
Table 4 shows the ToT-Selection results. Compared to the more constrained Future Technology theme,
World Peace and Colorful World allow broader interpretations. On these open-ended themes, GPT-4V
produces more varied outcomes, indicating a nuanced grasp of user intent. However, for the more
focused Future Technology theme, GPT-4V tends to be more consistent than GPT-4. Details of the
test prompts within each theme are outlined below:

• World Peace Theme
  – "watercolor dove, olive branch, rainbow blend, peace symbol"
  – "multicultural children, circle dance, traditional patterns, vibrant clothing"
  – "hands joining together, global unity, soft pastels, harmony symbols"
  – "peace garden, blooming flowers, meditation space, tranquil atmosphere"
  – "world flags blending, peaceful doves flying, sunrise hope, gentle clouds"
• Colorful World Theme
  – "earth view, kaleidoscope, abstract continents, space art"
  – "butterfly swarm, gradient sky, cultural patterns, colorful wings"
  – "rainbow coral reef, tropical fish, underwater prism, vibrant marine life"
  – "northern lights aurora, starry night, color spectrum, celestial dance"
  – "spring festival lanterns, color explosion, festive celebration, dynamic lights"
• Artistic Style Fusion Theme
  – "art nouveau, digital wireframe, modern fusion, geometric patterns"
  – "ukiyo-e waves, pixel art, japanese digital, style blend"
  – "renaissance painting, neon aesthetics, classical meets cyberpunk"
  – "baroque architecture, minimalist overlay, historical modern mix"
  – "tribal patterns, glitch art fusion, ancient digital blend"
• Future Technology Theme
  – "cybernetic cityscape, holographic interface, neon circuits, quantum particles"
  – "robotic augmentation, bioluminescent tech, neural networks visualization"
  – "quantum computing visualization, data crystals, energy flows"
  – "cyborg nature fusion, techno-organic growth, synthetic biology"
  – "artificial intelligence mindscape, digital consciousness, virtual reality portals"
• Children’s Fun Theme
  – "playful teddy bears, rainbow playground, bubble floating, magical toybox"


                                                         23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  – "cartoon dinosaurs, candy colored clouds, children’s storybook, whimsical adventure"
  – "magical treehouse, flying paper planes, fairy lights, childhood dreams"
  – "circus animals parade, balloon animals, cotton candy skies, cheerful carousel"
  – "fantasy schoolyard, animated crayons, floating books, imagination sparkles"


                                               24
