Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


NN SIGHT AND NDIF: D EMOCRATIZING ACCESS TO
O PEN -W EIGHT F OUNDATION M ODEL I NTERNALS
    Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman∗, Alexander R. Loftus∗, Eric Todd, Jannik Brinkmann1,2 , Koyena Pal,
    Dmitrii Troitskii, Michael Ripa, Adam Belfki, Can Rager3 , Caden Juang, Aaron Mueller,
    Samuel Marks, Arnab Sen Sharma, Francesca Lucchetti, Nikhil Prakash,
    Carla Brodley, Arjun Guha, Jonathan Bell, Byron C. Wallace, David Bau
 1
     Northeastern University, 2 TU Clausthal, 3 University of Hamburg



                                                 A BSTRACT

             We introduce NNsight and NDIF, technologies that work in tandem to enable
             scientific study of very large neural networks. NNsight is an open-source system
             that extends PyTorch to introduce deferred remote execution. The National Deep
             Inference Fabric (NDIF) is a scalable inference service that executes NNsight
             requests, allowing users to share GPU resources and pretrained models. These
             technologies are enabled by the intervention graph, an architecture developed to
             decouple experimental design from model runtime. Together, this framework pro-
             vides transparent and efficient access to the internals of deep neural networks such
             as very large language models (LLMs) without imposing the cost or complexity of
             hosting customized models individually. We conduct a quantitative survey of the
             machine learning literature that reveals a growing gap in the study of the internals
             of large-scale AI. We demonstrate the design and use of our framework to address
             this gap by enabling a range of research methods on huge models. Finally, we
             conduct benchmarks to compare performance with previous approaches. Code,
             documentation, and tutorials are available at https://nnsight.net/.


1        I NTRODUCTION

Research on large-scale AI currently faces two practical challenges: lack of transparent model access,
and lack of adequate computational resources. Model access is limited by the secrecy of state-of-
the-art commercial model parameters (OpenAI et al., 2023; Anthropic, 2024; Gemini Team et al.,
2024), and computational resources are limited by funding and engineering barriers. Commercial
application programming interfaces (APIs) help amortize costs by offering frontier models “as a
service”. However, these APIs lack the transparency necessary to enable scientists to study model
internals, e.g., by providing access to intermediate activations or gradients used during neural network
inference and training.
Surveys of AI research needs have documented this situation (Shevlane, 2022; Casper et al., 2024).
Bucknall & Trager (2023) highlight the need for structured model access APIs that offer greater
transparency than existing commercial inference APIs. The current paper aims to meet this need by
defining an expressive and efficient technical standard that addresses the key problems for providing
a practical and useful structured model access API to support research on large models.
Our work makes three contributions:
The intervention graph architecture (Figure 1b), an approach for organizing experiments on
very large models that reduces engineering burden, enhances reproducibility, and enables low-cost
communication with remote models. We compare the intervention graph architecture to classical
approaches for running similar experiments, and show how it achieves these goals.
NNsight (Figure 1a), an open-source implementation of the intervention graph architecture that
extends PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) to create an expressive programming idiom that supports
transparent model interventions on large-scale AI without requiring users to store or manage model
parameters locally. NNsight builds intervention graphs using the same deferred computation graph
     ∗
         Equal contribution. Correspondence to: {j.fiotto-kaufman, loftus.al}@northeastern.edu


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    NNsight                                      Intervention Graph                NDIF
    from nnsight import LanguageModel


                                                                                                                     embed
    model_id = “meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B”

                                                                                                                       ...
    lm = LanguageModel(model_id)

                      get(mlp_layer.input)

    mlp = lm.model.layers[16].mlp.down_proj
           slice([..., -1, neurons])


                                                                                          mlp_block 16
    neurons = [394, 5490, 8929]
                                                                            ...
    prompt = “The truth is the”

                              set(10)

    with lm.trace(prompt, remote=True):
                                                                 down_proj
          mlp.input[:, -1, neurons] = 10



          out = lm.output.save()

                      get(out_layer.output)
                                                                                                                       ...
    last = out[“logits”][:, -1].argmax()
                      save()
    prediction = lm.tokenizer.decode(last)

    print(prediction)

                                                                                                                     lm_head
    >>> “ lie”


                       (a)                                      (b)                                           (c)

Figure 1: An example of the implementation of an NNsight intervention graph: (a) A user writes
research code from which (b) an intervention graph is constructed. (c) The intervention operations are
interleaved with the original model’s computation and then executed. Values marked with .save()
are made available to the user upon completion.


idiom that deep learning frameworks adopt to enable automatic differentiation (Bottou & Le Cun,
1988; Bottou & Gallinari, 1990; Abadi et al., 2016; Al-Rfou et al., 2016; Bradbury et al., 2018).
NDIF (Figure 1c), an open-source cloud inference service that supports this idiom by providing
behind-the-scenes user sharing of model instances to reduce the costs of large-scale AI research.
Crucially, by executing intervention graphs from multiple users with safe co-tenancy, NDIF supports
the expressiveness of NNsight while avoiding costly startup times and communication costs incurred
by traditional high-performance computing (HPC). We measure the performance of NDIF against
the traditional approach, and we also compare it with Petals (Borzunov et al., 2023), a peer-to-peer
approach to reducing barriers to distributed computing with large AI models.

2       S URVEYING MODEL AVAILABILITY AND RESEARCH USAGE
Compared to commercial APIs, models with openly downloadable parameters enable much more
invasive experimentation and are a valuable resource for interpretability researchers (Scao et al.,
2022; Biderman et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023). To understand current research
activity studying the internals of these open-weight models, we examine a set of 184 papers sourced
from a recent survey of interpretability research (Ferrando et al., 2024) — see Appendix A for data
curation details.
In Figure 2, we visualize the research usage of the largest open-weight models studied in these papers
over time. While there has been a rapid investment in training larger and more capable models, we
find that there is a disparity between the most capable systems1 and those being studied in detail.
There is a small group of papers that study language models with ≥70% MMLU performance (see (a)
in Figure 2), suggesting that this gap can partially be explained as a previous lack of sufficiently
capable models. However, even after the release of more-capable open-weight models, 60.6% of the
surveyed research papers since February 2023 are still doing research on smaller, less performant
models (< 40% MMLU). This suggests that the gap is not just due to a lack of capable models, but
may also be due to engineering and infrastructural barriers.
Studying models with up to 70 billion parameters is possible for labs with access to high-end compute
such as NVIDIA A100 or H100 80GB GPUs, but doing research beyond this scale represents a leap
in technical complexity and resource requirements. For example, inference on a 530 billion parameter
LLM uses 1TB of GPU memory, requiring many devices distributed across multiple nodes just to
load model parameters in 16-bit precision (Aminabadi et al., 2022; Dettmers et al., 2023). Even
if a scientist has access to such resources, they must integrate their experiment code with model
sharding, parallelization, quantization, and other deployment specifics. Thus, despite evidence that
    1
        Defined in terms of MMLU performance (Hendrycks et al., 2021, see Appendix A for details.)


                                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         100
                                                                                                                                       OpenAI o1
                                                                                                            GPT-4o   Gemini Ultra
                                                                                                    GPT-4                        Llama 3.1 (405B)

                         80                                                                                     Qwen 1.5 (72B)
MMLU Average Score (%)


                                                                                                                                          (b)
                                                                                 Chinchilla         Llama (65B) (a)


                         60



                                                       GPT-3
                          40
                                     GPT-2 XL (1.5B)
                               RoBERTa (125M)


                          20
                           2019               2020                2021             2022              2023             2024
                                                                             Publish Date
                                          Open-Weight Skyline            MMLU of Studied Models          Average MMLU of Studied Models
                                          Closed-Weight Skyline          MMLU of Studied Models (Interpolated)     Random Baseline


Figure 2: Most interpretability research is done on models that lag far behind the capabilities available in
either closed- or open-models. Each blue point represents the MMLU performance of the largest open-weight
model studied by a surveyed paper, where the size of the point represents the model’s parameter size. Models
without a recorded MMLU score were interpolated with nearest neighbors. There is a significant gap between
the performance of models studied (blue line) and the capabilities of leading open-weight models (shown in
orange). This gap is extended even further when considering the performance of leading closed-weight models
(black line). (a) A small group of papers study language models with ≥70% MMLU performance, which can
account for at least some of the gap. However, many researchers are still studying smaller, less performant
models that hover around baseline performance (shown in gray). (b) Studying smaller, but still capable models
such as Qwen 72B or Yi-34B may be part of the solution to closing this research gap, but these models still
underperform the leading open-weight model, Llama 3.1 405B.


many fascinating capabilities appear only in the largest models (Brown et al., 2020; Rae et al., 2021;
Wei et al., 2022; Patel & Pavlick, 2022; Schaeffer et al., 2023), studying them can seem unattainable.
One solution is to study similarly capable, smaller models; this approach is used in two recent works
that study Yi-34B (Young et al., 2024) and Qwen 2 72B (Yang et al., 2024) (see (b) in Figure 2) —
these are models that use distillation techniques to compress larger model capabilities into smaller
model sizes. However, these models still underperform the most capable open-weight models, such
as Llama 3.1 405B (Dubey et al., 2024). In the following sections we describe how NNsight and
NDIF are designed to address this research gap by providing a flexible system for studying very large
open models, presenting a reusable and modular service suitable for fully-transparent large-scale
deployment distributed across many devices and nodes.


3                          A F RAMEWORK FOR E XPERIMENTS ON L ARGE -S CALE AI

Research on the internals of pretrained neural networks follows one common pattern: Experimental
code is inserted between computational steps of the network, interleaved with code previously written
to run the network. Depending on the experiment, researchers’ code may inspect internal representa-
tions (Bau et al., 2017), perform interventions (Vig et al., 2020), collect gradients (Sundararajan et al.,
2017; Selvaraju et al., 2017; Ancona et al., 2019; Bastings et al., 2022; Kramár et al., 2024), modify
parameters (Meng et al., 2022), or use and train the parameters of supplementary models (Lester
et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2023; Huben et al., 2024; Templeton et al., 2024; Marks et al., 2024).
Traditionally, researchers have organized their code by creating bespoke versions of neural network
modifications and hooks for each experiment using callback systems (Li et al., 2024; Wang et al.,
2022; Geva et al., 2023, and see Figure 3a), or by designing custom neural network systems with


                                                                                 3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


built-in access points (Nanda & Bloom, 2022; Wu et al., 2024b). While tying experiments with
network implementations is primarily a matter of code organization for small models, it burdens
researchers with the responsibility and cost of model deployment and storage, increasing engineering
challenges as parameter sizes increase. This pattern also makes it difficult for external research groups
to reproduce large distributed neural network experiments without duplicating the environment.
We introduce a new framework that implements the following pattern: Separate experimental and
engineering code, store the experiment, and then execute it on shared computational infrastructure.
We achieve this separation by expressing an experiment as an intervention graph that can be saved,
transmitted, optimized, and interleaved with model execution.
This framework implements three core requirements necessary for scalable, reproducible research
that are not currently met by classical approaches:

   • Separation: The framework must decouple experimental and engineering code, so that the
     increasingly complex challenge of running the underlying model can be tackled separately from
     experimental design.
   • Expressiveness: The framework must allow the user to express all the experiments that they
     would have been able to express if they were using PyTorch on local hardware.
   • Co-Tenancy: Experiments must be able to be safely, efficiently, and concurrently combined
     with model execution at runtime, to allow the service to amortize costs across many users.

Each of these requirements is addressed by one of the aspects of our framework: First, the intervention
graph allows us to decouple research and engineering code. Next, the NNsight API is designed to
be fully expressive, because users define interventions using Python and PyTorch code. Finally, the
NDIF inference server enables co-tenancy, by setting up a central system to which experiments can
be safely transmitted, optimized, and run concurrently.

3.1    R EPRESENTING EXPERIMENTS AS GRAPHS

Our core innovation is a portable, serializable representation of an experiment, called the intervention
graph, which dynamically captures modifications to the model’s computation graph. This graph can
be stored in JSON format, version-controlled, optimized, and sent to or retrieved from remote systems
for execution. In this section, we formalize the notion of an intervention graph.

Computation Graph. Our formalism adopts Al-Rfou et al. (2016, Theano)’s definition of a
computation graph2 . The computation graph is a weakly connected, bipartite, directed, acyclic graph
defined as C = (V, A, E), where V and A are variable nodes and apply nodes, respectively. E is a
set of directed edges connecting the variable nodes and the apply nodes. The definition and properties
of V , A, and E are as follows:

   • V = {v1 , ⋯, vm } is the set of variable nodes representing objects. They are one-to-many, and
     are connected to apply nodes.
   • A = {a1 , ⋯, an } is the set of apply nodes representing operations on variable nodes. They are
     many-to-one, and are connected to variable nodes.
   • E = {e1 , ⋯, ep } is the set of directed edges. An edge e in E either connects a variable node v to
     an apply node a, or vice versa. Thus, E ⊆ (V × A) ∪ (A × V ) — making C a bipartite graph as
     there are no connections between nodes of the same type.

In our context, a node that is “one-to-many” has a single input edge, but multiple output edges, as
seen with variable nodes. Likewise, a node that is “many-to-one” has multiple input edges but only a
single output edge, as with apply nodes. In NNsight, apply nodes correspond to PyTorch Modules.
The graph C is weakly connected since converting all directed edges to undirected edges results in a
connected graph. It is bipartite because edges only exist between variable and apply nodes.
   2
    Al-Rfou et al. (2016) allow apply nodes to have many outgoing edges, whereas in ours, apply nodes can
only have one outgoing edge. Appendix E argues that the two definitions are equivalent for our use case.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1    from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForCausalLM   1    from nnsight import LanguageModel
2    model_id = "meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B"                      2    model_id = "meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B"
3    tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_id)            3    lm = LanguageModel(model_id)
4    lm = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(model_id)

5    mlp = lm.model.layers[16].mlp.down_proj                        4    mlp = lm.model.layers[16].mlp.down_proj
6    neurons = [394, 5490, 8929]                                    5    neurons = [394, 5490, 8929]
7    prompt = "The truth is the"                                    6    prompt = "The truth is the"


8    def pre_hook_fn(module, input):
9        input[0][:,-1,neurons] = 10

10   hook = mlp.register_forward_pre_hook(pre_hook_fn)              7    with lm.trace(prompt, remote=True):
11   inputs = tokenizer(prompt, return_tensors="pt")                8        mlp.input[:, -1, neurons] = 10
12   out = lm(**inputs)                                             9        out = lm.output.save()
13   hook.remove()

14   last = out["logits"][:, -1].argmax()                           10   last = out["logits"][:, -1].argmax()
15   prediction = tokenizer.decode(last)                            11   prediction = lm.tokenizer.decode(last)
16   print(prediction)                                              12   print(prediction)
                                 (a)                                                           (b)

Figure 3: Experiment code expressed using (a) standard PyTorch hooks and (b) the NNsight API.
Both code snippets define the same intervention – activating three neurons which cause the model to
invert the meaning of its output (e.g., producing “lie” rather than “truth”). The PyTorch intervention
code captured in six lines of code (a, lines 8-13), can be easily expressed using NNsight with three
lines of code (b, lines 7-9). Standard PyTorch requires creating custom hooks for each access point,
whereas with NNsight, all module inputs and outputs can be accessed within a single trace context.


Intervention Graph. Interventions are modifications to the computation graph C that introduce
additional nodes and edges. We define an intervention component C ′ = (V ′ , A′ , E ′ ), where C ′
is a computation graph representing a single user-specified edit. We define an intervention as
I = {C ′ , G, S}, where sets G and S, referred to as getters and setters, determine how C ′ connects to
C. Integrating an intervention component into C is called interleaving, and consists of two parts:

     • The getters (G) connect variable nodes in C to apply nodes in C ′ , i.e., G ⊆ V × A′ .
     • The setters (S) connect variable nodes in C ′ back to apply nodes in C, i.e., S ⊆ V ′ × A.

The intervention graph of NNsight is the union of all individual intervention components, I =
⋃1≤i≤k Ci′ . The final augmented computation graph is constructed by interleaving each intervention
component with the original graph, and represents a complete user experiment. Appendix B.1 dis-
cusses implementation details of how intervention graphs are constructed, and Figure 10 (Appendix E)
shows an example of an abstract intervention graph.
For the intervention graph to be valid, for every getter edge (vi , a′j ) ∈ G and setter edge (vk′ , al ) ∈ S,
there must be no directed path from al to vi or from vk′ to a′j . This rule ensures that the augmented
computation graph is acyclic.

3.2     FAMILIAR AND EXPRESSIVE INTERVENTIONS

To define and execute intervention graphs in code, the NNsight API uses PyTorch notation inside of a
Python context window. We enable the tracing of user-defined experiments inside the context window
by overriding basic Python operations as well as wrapping every PyTorch module and submodule to
expose their inputs, outputs, and gradients. We call this the tracing context.
In Figure 3, we compare two code snippets that define the same intervention — one using standard
PyTorch hooks (Figure 3a) and the other using NNsight’s API (Figure 3b). In both snippets, a
language model (Llama-3.1-8B; Dubey et al., 2024) is loaded from HuggingFace (Wolf et al., 2020)
and an intervention is specified – activating three neurons which cause the model to invert its output
(e.g., producing “lie” instead of “truth”). While using standard PyTorch hooks requires creating
custom hooks for each access point (Figure 3a, lines 8-13), NNsight’s trace context window provides
access to the intermediate inputs and outputs of all PyTorch modules (Figure 3b, lines 7-9). See
Appendix C for additional NNsight code examples.


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Local
            NDIF                                                                                                         Legend
 Workstation        Frontend                             Backend
                                                                                                                                     Dockerized
      NNsight
                                                                                                                       Service
       Code                API             API Keys        Head                                Worker
                        HTTP Server                         WSC Request           Controller    Model Shard-0                        Process or
        Serialize           /request                                                                             NNsight             Object
                                        Object Storage                                            Deserialize
                             /status
                           /response     Responses           Model              Deserialize                     Llama 405B           Ray
    Intervention
                                                                                                                    Deployment
       Graph                 /result
                                           Results                               NNsight
                                                                                                                                     NNsight
                           WebSocket                           WebSocket                          WebSocket     Torch NCCL
          Operation
                                                                                Llama 70B           Client         Head
                            Server                               Client
                                        Observability                                                                                Data Flow

   WebSocket          Message Broker     Aggregator                                                             Worker               Creation
                                                           Worker                              Shard-1
     Client                                                                                                     Shard-N
                                                                                                WSC      NCCL
                                         Dashboard           WSC Model          WSC Model                        WSC      NCCL

                                                               Llama 8B            GPT-J         Llama 405B       Llama 405B


Figure 4: An overview of the NNsight and NDIF remote system. Researchers write experiment code
using the NNsight API which is converted to an Intervention Graph. The graph is serialized to a
custom JSON format and sent as a request to the NDIF frontend server. The NDIF backend can host
multiple model instances, each on a dedicated set of GPU nodes. For very large models, such as
Llama 3.1 405B (Dubey et al., 2024), model weights are distributed across many shards using tensor
parallelism. The router transfers the request to the head node (shard 0) of the requested model, via the
Ray GCS Service (Moritz et al., 2018; Ray Team, 2022). Shard 0 sends the request to all other shards
of the model where it is then deserialized and executed. Each shard receives the full intervention
graph, but only manages a slice of the model parameters. The Torch NCCL Head manages distributed
model execution across allocated shards. After the intervention graph has been executed, results are
gathered at shard 0 and sent to the object store in the NDIF frontend. The shard 0 WebSocket client
informs the WebSocket client on the local workstation about the completion of the intervention. As
soon as the local WebSocket client notes the intervention is complete it pulls the final results from the
Object Store and inserts the result back into the local intervention graph. The research code can pull
results from the intervention graph that are requested via .save().



The experiment’s corresponding intervention graph is defined upon exiting the context window,
and execution does not occur until the context is complete. The graph can then either be executed
locally, or it can be serialized and sent to a remote system for execution. Tensors within the deferred
execution block are not directly available to the main code, but every deferred tensor provides a
.save() method to make its data available to the main program. Although the tracing context defers
execution, it is still possible to debug many issues locally by using the PyTorch FakeTensor system,
which precomputes and checks tensor shapes and datatypes while building the computation graph.
Because PyTorch code is used inside the tracing context, any experiment that can be written using
standard PyTorch hooks can also be expressed using NNsight and will feel familiar to PyTorch users.
NNsight wraps all 217 fundamental PyTorch tensor operations, supports built-in modules and custom
neural network architectures, and includes infrastructure for loading models distributed by popular
platforms such as HuggingFace. Users can express a wide range of interventions beyond simple
probing and manipulation, including custom attention mechanisms, dynamic computation graph
alterations, weight updates, and training loops (see Code Example 5), as well as computing gradients
on backwards passes and gradient flow modifications.
By separating experiment code from the underlying neural network implementation, NNsight allows
remote execution of experiments by simply adding a remote=True flag (Figure 3b, line 7), which
sends the experiment to NDIF for execution.


3.3        C O -T ENANCY AND REMOTE INFRASTRUCTURE

The NDIF service, in contrast to the NNsight system, is a multi-user runtime infrastructure designed
to amortize costs and remove engineering burden from scientists by concurrently sharing inference.
NDIF accepts intervention graphs created by NNsight, and executes them on large, preloaded models.
In Figure 4, we provide an overview of the different components of the system, their responsibilities,
and how they interact with one another.


                                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Shared
                      Remote     Local                 Decentralized Swarm
     Experiment                                    Experiment
                          Inference Service                              Experiment
                                                                                       Hidden
   Shard
                                                                Remote     Local       States
     Experiment   Graph                            Experiment                                              Shard
                                                                         Experiment
                  Graph                                                                            Shard

                  Graph                                         Remote     Local
     Experiment           Queue      Experiments   Experiment                                                 Shard
                                                                         Experiment



                  NDIF                                HPC                             PETALS


Figure 5: Schematic of research community use of NDIF vs. HPC and Petals. Green nodes show
custom experiments. NDIF (left) allows many researchers to share a common inference service that
runs customized experiments with shared memory. In HPC (center), researchers are responsible
for weight-loading and handling model memory overhead on their own separate instances. In peer-
to-peer swarm approaches like Petals (right), while GPU resources are shared, hidden states must
be transferred between nodes during inference and returned to the user for custom interventions,
resulting in costly data transfers.



Unlike traditional distributed computing approaches for supporting research experiments in AI, the
NDIF infrastructure is designed to minimize the communication overhead involved in remote model
execution. Figure 5 compares the infrastructure to traditional approaches.
In high-performance computing services (HPC), shared computational resources are allocated to
researchers at the level of machines or virtual machines. That means that when researchers conduct
experiments on customized AI models, all of the engineering code, weight-loading, and model storage
must be handled by the researcher on instances that are exclusively allocated to them.
One approach that has been proposed for sharing costly computational resources while retaining
researcher control is to distribute work using a peer-to-peer distributed service. This is the approach
supported by Petals (Borzunov et al., 2023), which provides a swarm of inference servers that
preload and provide inference computation services for layers of large neural networks. The Petals
architecture can support custom experiment work by enabling researchers to host their own customized
intervention code for particular layers on their own nodes (e.g., on their own workstation) while
relying on the swarm for other inference steps. However, this architecture incurs costly data transfers
multiple times during a forward pass for experiments that intervene on the inference process.
NDIF is designed to execute intervention graphs within the high-performance cluster itself. Models
and engineering code are preloaded onto the cluster, and large model-internal data transfers are
avoided since custom experiment code does not need to be run on the researchers’ own hardware.
Critically, unlike traditional HPC and peer-to-peer approaches, NDIF is designed to allow multiple re-
searchers to conduct customized experiments while sharing the underlying preloaded model instances
on shared computing hardware.
Safe co-tenancy. NDIF assumes responsibility for ensuring the safe and fair use of its shared
model resources via multiple protocols. Interference between user experiments is prevented by the
intervention graph’s interleaving mechanism, which enables users to simulate interventions without
permanently modifying the model’s original computation graph. Model parameters cannot be directly
accessed; instead, users interact with a copy of the parameters. Finally, users can only access models
hosted on NDIF if they have been authorized by the model providers. This restriction is naturally
enforced, as submitting a request to NDIF through the NNsight API requires downloading the model’s
meta version from Hugging Face, where access is managed directly by the model providers.
Compute efficiency. NDIF hosts a selection of preloaded models. For each model, a single shared
instance is open to minimize performance difficulties associated with weight-loading and model
startup. Researchers can access these models and conduct experiments on them through intervention
requests conducted with the NNsight API. The infrastructure implements horizontal scaling and
dynamic resource allocation to support multiple user requests and ensure the model deployments
are operational and healthy at any given time. The NDIF server facilitates dynamic, bi-directional
communication with the client side, enabling users to retrieve and save requested results, and allowing
users to minimize additional overhead when running experiments remotely compared to locally. This
approach reduces costs for individual researchers, as they no longer need to set up and maintain their


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


own separate high-performance computing environments. Figure 6 compares NDIF performance to
using HPC and Petals.
The code for creating NDIF infrastructure is freely available on GitHub at https://github.com/
ndif-team/ndif, allowing users to create their own NDIF infrastructure for specialized use cases.

4      P ERFORMANCE AND E VALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the performance of NNsight when used remotely, both using exclusive
allocations in the traditional high-performance computing setting, and using the shared NDIF infer-
ence service. We also compare to the Petals (Borzunov et al., 2023) distributed inference system,
which can also reduce the costs of customized inference on huge models. Our evaluation focuses
on the time required to load the model weights into memory, as well as the runtime of activation
patching, a standard model intervention technique (Vig et al., 2020). For this purpose, we use a single
batch of 32 examples from the Indirect Object Identification (IOI) dataset (Wang et al., 2022). We
evaluate performance in three different settings: First, we measure the runtime when the models and
interventions are executed entirely on a high-performance computing node (HPC). Then, we execute
the models and interventions on the NDIF infrastructure, and contrast it against HPC execution
times. Finally, we compare NDIF with Petals (Borzunov et al., 2023), and evaluate their relative
performance on standard inference tasks as well as on intervention tasks.
High-Performance Computing. We first evaluate NNsight in HPC scenarios by comparing it
against other popular libraries designed for intervening on the internal states of PyTorch models,
namely TransformerLens (Nanda & Bloom, 2022), pyvene (Wu et al., 2024b), and baukit (Bau,
2022). Our comparison spans models ranging from 1.5 to 8.5 billion parameters. We consider
GPT2-XL (Radford et al., 2019), Gemma-7B (Team et al., 2024), and Llama-3.1 8B (AI@Meta,
2024). The experiments were conducted on a single HPC node with four NVIDIA H100 PCIe 82GB
GPUs with CUDA version 12.3 and an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6342 CPU with 24 cores.
The results are presented in Table 1. We find that the other libraries achieve comparable weight-
loading and activation patching times3 to NNsight run without NDIF, for all three models. Therefore
we argue that when using exclusive HPC allocations, the choice of library should primarily be guided
by factors such as usability, feature set, and compatibility with existing workflows.

Table 1: Runtime comparison of baukit, pyvene, and TransformerLens with NNsight for loading
PyTorch models into memory and intervening on their internal states. NNsight achieves comparable
performance with other frameworks in both evaluation settings across all three models.
                                       Setup Time                                   Activation Patching
    Framework          GPT2-XL         Gemma-7B        Llama-3.1-8B      GPT2-XL         Gemma-7B       Llama-3.1-8B
    baukit            3.146 ± 0.006    6.112 ± 0.074   4.529 ± 0.049    0.073 ± 0.001   0.220 ± 0.006   0.352 ± 0.006
    pyvene            3.143 ± 0.011    6.263 ± 0.487   5.736 ± 0.717    0.074 ± 0.001   0.222 ± 0.001   0.348 ± 0.006
    TransformerLens   8.991 ± 0.024   21.560 ± 0.385   20.625 ± 0.365   0.205 ± 0.027   0.208 ± 0.002   0.332 ± 0.002
    NNsight           3.532 ± 0.172   6.351 ± 0.062    5.991 ± 0.192    0.073 ± 0.002   0.227 ± 0.009   0.335 ± 0.010


Remote Execution. We measure the same evaluation settings for HPC versus remotely on an NDIF
server. We compare the two setups using the OPT suite of language models (Zhang et al., 2022),
ranging from 125 million to 66 billion parameters. For the experiments, we use the same infrastructure
as in the comparison against other libraries. The results of this analysis are presented in Figure
6a & 6b. As model size increases, the time required to load the model into memory grows nearly
linearly on HPC. In contrast, the time for loading is negligible when using NDIF, since models
are preloaded by the service. We also observe that the remote execution on NDIF introduces a
roughly constant overhead from communication between the local device and NDIF during activation
patching, regardless of model size (see Table 2 in Appendix D). In our setting, remote execution
provides runtime improvements for models with 3 billion parameters and more, indicating that remote
execution via NDIF becomes increasingly beneficial as parameter size grows.
    3
      There is one exception, as loading the model weights into memory takes about three times as long with
TransformerLens as with other libraries. This is likely a result of the preprocessing steps to convert weights
into a standardized format across different models.


                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            HPC                                    4        HPC                                         Petals


                                                Request Time (s)


                                                                                                Request Time (s)
 Setup Time (s)
                  20        NDIF                                            NDIF                                        NDIF
                                                                                                                   2

                                                                   2
                  10
                                                                                                                   1

                   0
                      350m 2.7b 13b 66b                               350m 2.7b 13b 66b                            Petals-Style Activation
                   Number of Parameters (log)                      Number of Parameters (log)                       Inference    Patching
                                                                         Number of Parameters (log-scale)
(a) HPC vs. NDIF. We compare the (b) HPC vs. NDIF. We also com- (c) Petals vs. NDIF. We com-
time required to set up the model pare the runtime of activation patch- pare NDIF against Petals, an open-
when NNsight is executed on an ing when NNsight is executed on an source remote inference framework.
HPC node and an NDIF server. For HPC node, versus using a NNsight We find that the libraries demon-
HPC execution, the model must be locally to remotely access an NDIF strate comparable performance for
loaded, so the setup time scales server. We observe that the remote standard remote inference, but
nearly linearly with model size. execution introduces a roughly con- that NDIF significantly outperforms
In contrast, remote execution with stant overhead from communication Petals for remote interventions.
NDIF bypasses loading weights.     between the local device and NDIF.

Figure 6: Performance evaluation of NNsight and NDIF. In all experiments, the sample size is
n = 128. Plot marker widths are comparable to the 95% confidence intervals.


Distributed inference. We also compare NDIF against Petals, an open-source service for distributed
model inference (Borzunov et al., 2023). Petals enables inference on large language models across
shared resources by transmitting intermediate hidden states. To ensure a fair comparison, we deployed
private instances of both Petals and NDIF on a server with a single NVIDIA RTX A6000 49 GB
GPUs with CUDA version 12.5 and an AMD Ryzen 9 5900X CPU with 12 cores. The communication
between these instances took place via a network with a bandwidth of about 60 MB/s. As Petals was
primarily designed for standard remote inference, we first compare the two services in this context.
With Petals, the client transmits token embeddings to the server and receives final hidden states,
which can then be mapped to token probabilities. In contrast, NDIF sends the input data and the
intervention graph to the server. While NDIF could simply return the next token prediction, we
opted to return the final hidden states to the client for a fair comparison. The results are presented in
Figure 6c. In this scenario, both frameworks demonstrate comparable performance.
Petals also support certain types of inference-time interventions on model internals. Therefore, we
also compare NDIF and Petals in executing activation patching. Petals allows returning intermediate
hidden states, which can be used for interventions on the model’s residual stream. However, as Petals
does not support server-side interventions, modifications to the internal state must be performed locally
on the client device. This process involves receiving hidden states at a specific layer, performing
local modifications, and then sending the modified hidden states back to the server. In contrast, NDIF
supports server-side interventions and metric computations. This allows us to avoid transmitting
hidden states between client and server by computing patching metrics (e.g., logit difference) on the
server and returning only those. The results are presented in Figure 6c. In this scenario, we find that
NDIF significantly outperforms Petals.

5                 R ELATED W ORK
Research model hosting frameworks. The most similar previous works are Garçon (Elhage et al.,
2021) and Petals (Borzunov et al., 2023). Garçon is a proprietary internal research system at Anthropic
that supports remote inspection and customization of large models hosted on a remote cluster. Unlike
the computation-graph approach of NNsight, Garçon operates by allowing researchers to hook models
via arbitrary-code execution. As a result, co-tenancy is unsafe, so unlike the NDIF server that shares
model instances between many users, Garçon requires each user to allocate their own model instance,
which is computationally expensive. The Petals system has similar goals, but instead of distributing
experiment code, it distributes foundation-model computation across user-contributed nodes in a
BitTorrent-style swarm. Petals achieves co-tenancy by leaving researcher-defined computations on


                                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the user’s own system. Unlike Petals, NNsight can avoid costly model-internal data transfers by
executing computation graphs on NDIF servers.
Several other solutions for sharing hosted model resources have been developed, including VLLM
(Kwon et al., 2023), Huggingface TGI (Dehaene et al., 2024) and Nvidia TensorRT-LLM (Nvidia,
2024). These are systems for LLM inference acceleration that support large-scale multiuser model
sharing. However, unlike NDIF, these systems only provide black-box API access to models, and do
not permit model inspection or modification, which limits their utility for interpretability research.
Also related to our work are systems such as S-LoRA (Sheng et al., 2024), dLoRA (Wu et al., 2024a),
and Punica (Chen et al., 2024), which excel at efficient serving of many pretrained LoRA adapters
in parallel, and systems such as FusionAI and FusionLLM (Tang et al., 2023; 2024) which support
decentralized training. While these LoRA-focused systems enable one form of model modification,
NNsight and NDIF provide finer-grained control that allows for a wider range of model interventions.
Frameworks for model internals. Numerous efforts have been made to create robust tools for
exploring and manipulating model internals. These tools are all designed to support local experiments,
executed on compute resources controlled by the researcher conducting them. TransformerLens
(Nanda & Bloom, 2022) is designed to facilitate the exploration of GPT-style decoder-only language
models. It allows users to apply custom functions to outputs of specific model modules. Unlike
NNsight, which operates on arbitrary PyTorch networks, TransformerLens is limited to transformer-
based language models. Pyvene (Wu et al., 2024b) supports configurable intervention schemes on
PyTorch modules, decorating a PyTorch module with hooks that allow activations to be collected
and overwritten. Pyvene operates at a higher level of abstraction, and can be configured as a
layer over NNsight. Baukit (Bau, 2022) provides a range of utilities that simplify tracing and
editing activations for local models. However, unlike NNsight’s intervention graph, it lacks an
intermediate representation that would allow for interaction with larger, remotely-hosted models.
Penzai (Johnson, 2024) is an open-source functional library which provides a modular system that
allows for introspection, visualization, and manipulation of neural network computation graphs;
Penzai works within the JAX framework, in contrast to NNsight which works with PyTorch models.

6   D ISCUSSION
The growing scale of highly-capable AI systems has presented our field with an access challenge:
The most capable systems are increasingly costly to deploy, and that has meant that many of the most
interesting and important research targets have become difficult for scientists to study in depth. In
this paper we have proposed an architecture for reducing barriers to research by defining a technical
approach for separating experiment definition from network deployment. Together, the intervention
graph architecture, the NNsight API, and the NDIF service enable researchers to perform complex
experiments and explore neural network internals at a scale previously limited by computational,
engineering, and financial constraints.
While our approach addresses technical issues for conducting research on very large open-weight
models, a key limitation is that it does not provide access to closed-parameter, proprietary models
like GPT-4 or Claude. However, proprietary vendors often have special requirements. For instance,
they may wish to maintain secrecy and security of model parameters for business or safety reasons.
Our system is designed with these concerns in mind, and it is technically feasible for companies to
support under these requirements. We encourage commercial providers to consider adopting our
approach as part of their products to enable transparency and facilitate future scientific progress at
the frontiers of AI.
NDIF and NNsight define a way of doing research that acknowledges the important role of community
resources. Scientists in other fields have opened up new research vistas by pooling investments in
shared research instruments, databases, and facilities. By enabling the AI research community to
similarly pool its resources for large-scale inference, we can open a pathway for conducting research
on AI at scales that would be unattainable for individual research groups.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   E THICS S TATEMENT
Our work is intended to democratize access to large neural networks by providing tools that make
it easier for researchers to audit, understand, and interpret large AI models. We caution that such
transparency may also enable abuse of large models, for example exploiting model vulnerabilities.
Therefore, we strongly urge the responsible and ethical use, deployment, and monitoring of our tools,
while emphasizing the importance of continued research to improve model interpretation.

8   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
To promote transparency and ensure the reproducibility of our results, the complete NNsight and
NDIF frameworks, along with comprehensive documentation and all relevant experiment code, are
available at https://github.com/ndif-team/nnsight and https://github.com/ndif-team/
ndif, respectively. We hope this will allow researchers and practitioners to build upon our work.

9   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Deep Inference Fabric (NDIF) and NNsight are supported by the U.S. National Science
Foundation Award IIS-2408455. We are also grateful for the support of Open Philanthropy (ET, KP,
SM, AS, NP, DB), Manifund Regrants (CR), and the Zuckerman Postdoctoral Fellowship (AM).
We thank Brett Bode, William Gropp, Greg Bauer, and Volodymyr Kindratenko at NCSA for their
help working with DeltaAI, which provides the primary computing infrastructure for NDIF, and we
thank Thea Shaheen for invaluable assistance with infrastructure for the project at Northeastern. We
thank the New England Research Cloud (NERC) for hosting the web frontend for NDIF. We also
thank Callum McDougall for developing the NNsight tutorial in the ARENA 3.0 materials. We thank
Clément Dumas and Gonçalo Paulo for valuable feedback as early research adopters, Zhengxuan Wu
for implementing pyvene on NNsight, and Zhongbo Zhu for valuable advice on serving infrastructure.
We also acknowledge the many early testers for the Llama 3.1 405B pilot program. Finally, we are
grateful for the ongoing feedback and engagement of our community of users on Discord.

R EFERENCES
Martı́n Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin,
 Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, et al. TensorFlow: a system for Large-Scale
 machine learning. In 12th USENIX symposium on operating systems design and implementation
 (OSDI 16), pp. 265–283, 2016.
AI@Meta. Llama 3 model card, 2024. URL https://github.com/meta-llama/llama3/blob/
  main/MODEL CARD.md.
Rami Al-Rfou, Guillaume Alain, Amjad Almahairi, Christof Angermüller, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Nico-
  las Ballas, Frédéric Bastien, Justin Bayer, Anatoly Belikov, Alexander Belopolsky, Yoshua Bengio,
  Arnaud Bergeron, James Bergstra, Valentin Bisson, Josh Bleecher Snyder, Nicolas Bouchard,
  Nicolas Boulanger-Lewandowski, Xavier Bouthillier, Alexandre de Brébisson, Olivier Breuleux,
  Pierre Luc Carrier, Kyunghyun Cho, Jan Chorowski, Paul Francis Christiano, Tim Cooijmans,
  Marc-Alexandre Côté, Myriam Côté, Aaron C. Courville, Yann Dauphin, Olivier Delalleau, Julien
  Demouth, Guillaume Desjardins, Sander Dieleman, Laurent Dinh, Mélanie Ducoffe, Vincent Du-
  moulin, Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, D. Erhan, Ziye Fan, Orhan Firat, Mathieu Germain, Xavier Glorot,
  Ian J. Goodfellow, M. Graham, Çaglar Gülçehre, Philippe Hamel, Iban Harlouchet, Jean-Philippe
  Heng, Balázs Hidasi, Sina Honari, Arjun Jain, Sébastien Jean, Kai Jia, Mikhail Korobov, Vivek
  Kulkarni, Alex Lamb, Pascal Lamblin, Eric Larsen, César Laurent, Sea Sun Lee, Simon Lefrançois,
  Simon Lemieux, Nicholas Léonard, Zhouhan Lin, Jesse A. Livezey, Cory Lorenz, Jeremiah Lowin,
  Qianli Ma, Pierre-Antoine Manzagol, Olivier Mastropietro, Robert T. McGibbon, Roland Memise-
  vic, Bart van Merrienboer, Vincent Michalski, Mehdi Mirza, Alberto Orlandi, Christopher Joseph
  Pal, Razvan Pascanu, Mohammad Pezeshki, Colin Raffel, Daniel Renshaw, Matthew Rocklin,
  Adriana Romero, Markus Roth, Peter Sadowski, John Salvatier, François Savard, Jan Schlüter, John
  Schulman, Gabriel Schwartz, Iulian Serban, Dmitriy Serdyuk, Samira Shabanian, Étienne Simon,
  Sigurd Spieckermann, S. Ramana Subramanyam, Jakub Sygnowski, Jérémie Tanguay, Gijs van


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Tulder, Joseph P. Turian, Sebastian Urban, Pascal Vincent, Francesco Visin, Harm de Vries, David
  Warde-Farley, Dustin J. Webb, Matthew Willson, Kelvin Xu, Lijun Xue, Li Yao, Saizheng Zhang,
  and Ying Zhang. Theano: A python framework for fast computation of mathematical expressions.
  ArXiv, abs/1605.02688, 2016. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:8993325.
Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Samyam Rajbhandari, Minjia Zhang, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Cheng Li,
  Du Li, Elton Zheng, Jeff Rasley, Shaden Smith, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Deepspeed-
  inference: Enabling efficient inference of transformer models at unprecedented scale. SC22:
  International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, pp.
  1–15, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:250243681.
Marco Ancona, Enea Ceolini, Cengiz Öztireli, and Markus Gross. Gradient-based attribution methods.
 Explainable AI: Interpreting, explaining and visualizing deep learning, pp. 169–191, 2019.
Anthropic. The claude 3 model family: Opus, sonnet, haiku, 2024.               URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:268232499.
Jasmijn Bastings, Sebastian Ebert, Polina Zablotskaia, Anders Sandholm, and Katja Filippova. “will
  you find these shortcuts?” a protocol for evaluating the faithfulness of input salience methods for
  text classification. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 976–991, Abu
  Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.64. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.64.
David Bau. Baukit, 2022. URL https://github.com/davidbau/baukit.
David Bau, Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Network dissection:
  Quantifying interpretability of deep visual representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 6541–6549, July 2017.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien,
  Eric Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, Usvsn Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff,
  Aviya Skowron, Lintang Sutawika, and Oskar Van Der Wal. Pythia: A suite for analyzing large
  language models across training and scaling. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun
  Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 2397–2430. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v202/biderman23a.html.
Alexander Borzunov, Dmitry Baranchuk, Tim Dettmers, Maksim Riabinin, Younes Belkada, Artem
  Chumachenko, Pavel Samygin, and Colin Raffel. Petals: Collaborative inference and fine-tuning
  of large models. In Danushka Bollegala, Ruihong Huang, and Alan Ritter (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 3: System
  Demonstrations), pp. 558–568, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-demo.54. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  acl-demo.54.
Léon Bottou and Patrick Gallinari. A framework for the cooperation of learning algorithms. Advances
   in neural information processing systems, 3, 1990.
Léon Bottou and Yann Le Cun. Sn: A simulator for connectionist models. In Proceedings of
   NeuroNimes 88, pp. 371–382, Nimes, France, 1988. URL http://leon.bottou.org/papers/
   bottou-lecun-88.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and
  Qiao Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL
  http://github.com/google/jax.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Benjamin S Bucknall and Robert F Trager. Structured access for third-party research on frontier
  ai models: Investigating researcher’s model access requirements, 2023. URL https://cdn.
  governance.ai/Structured Access for Third-Party Research.pdf.

Stephen Casper, Carson Ezell, Charlotte Siegmann, Noam Kolt, Taylor Lynn Curtis, Benjamin
  Bucknall, Andreas Haupt, Kevin Wei, Jérémy Scheurer, Marius Hobbhahn, et al. Black-box access
  is insufficient for rigorous ai audits. In The 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
  and Transparency, pp. 2254–2272, 2024.

Lequn Chen, Zihao Ye, Yongji Wu, Danyang Zhuo, Luis Ceze, and Arvind Krish-
  namurthy.   Punica: Multi-tenant lora serving.   In P. Gibbons, G. Pekhimenko,
  and C. De Sa (eds.), Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, volume 6, pp.
  1–13, 2024.   URL https://proceedings.mlsys.org/paper files/paper/2024/file/
  054de805fcceb78a201f5e9d53c85908-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Olivier Dehaene, Nicolas Patry, David Richard Holtz, Daniël de Kok, and contribu-
  tors. HuggingFace text generation interface. URL https://github.com/huggingface/
  text-generation-inference, 2024.

Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. QLoRA: Efficient finetuning
  of quantized LLMs. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=OUIFPHEgJU.

Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
 Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston
  Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron,
  Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris
  McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton
  Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, David
  Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes,
  Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip
  Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Graeme
  Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Korevaar, Hu Xu,
  Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov,
 Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah,
 Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu
  Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph
  Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Kartikeya Upasani,
  Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz
  Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der Maaten, Lawrence
  Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas
  Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri,
  Marcin Kardas, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis,
  Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov,
  Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne, Onur Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan
  Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan,
  Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy,
  Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit
  Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou,
  Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia
  Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan,
  Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla,
  Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek
  Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao,
  Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent
  Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu,
 Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia,
 Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen
  Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aaron Grattafiori, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya
  Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex
  Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei
  Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew
  Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Franco, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley
  Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin
  Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu,
  Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt
  Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao
  Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Damon
  Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide
  Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le,
  Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily
  Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix
  Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Kanayet, Frank
  Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern,
  Govind Thattai, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid
  Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen
  Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-
  Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James Geboski, James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste
  Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul,
  Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie,
  Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Karthik
  Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly
  Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun Huang, Kunal Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen,
  Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu,
  Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Maria
  Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev,
  Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle
  Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang,
  Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam,
  Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navyata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier,
  Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong, Ning Zhang, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia
  Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro
  Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani,
  Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy,
  Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Raymond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Rohan
  Maheswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara
  Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh
  Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha,
  Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe,
  Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan
  Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury,
  Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe
  Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi,
  Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vı́tor Albiero, Vlad Ionescu,
  Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang,
  Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang,
  Xide Xia, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang,
  Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yuzi He, Zach Rait,
  Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, and Zhiwei Zhao. The llama 3 herd
  of models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.


Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Amanda
  Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac
  Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse,
  Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris Olah. Garcon.
  URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/garcon/index.html, 2021.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Epoch AI.    Data on notable ai models, 2024.               URL https://epochai.org/data/
  notable-ai-models. Last Accessed: 2024-09-30.

Javier Ferrando, Gabriele Sarti, Arianna Bisazza, and Marta R Costa-jussà. A primer on the inner
  workings of transformer-based language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.00208, 2024.

Gemini Team, Machel Reid, Nikolay Savinov, Denis Teplyashin, Dmitry Lepikhin, Timothy P. Lilli-
  crap, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Radu Soricut, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, Julian Schrittwieser,
  Ioannis Antonoglou, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Andrew M. Dai, Katie Millican, Ethan
  Dyer, Mia Glaese, Thibault Sottiaux, Benjamin Lee, Fabio Viola, Malcolm Reynolds, Yuanzhong
  Xu, James Molloy, Jilin Chen, Michael Isard, Paul Barham, Tom Hennigan, Ross McIlroy, Melvin
  Johnson, Johan Schalkwyk, Eli Collins, Eliza Rutherford, Erica Moreira, Kareem W. Ayoub,
  Megha Goel, Clemens Meyer, Gregory Thornton, Zhen Yang, Henryk Michalewski, Zaheer Ab-
  bas, Nathan Schucher, Ankesh Anand, Richard Ives, James Keeling, Karel Lenc, Salem Haykal,
  Siamak Shakeri, Pranav Shyam, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Roman Ring, Stephen Spencer, Eren
  Sezener, Luke Vilnis, Oscar Chang, Nobuyuki Morioka, George Tucker, Ce Zheng, Oliver Wood-
  man, Nithya Attaluri, Tomás Kociský, Evgenii Eltyshev, Xi Chen, Timothy Chung, Vittorio Selo,
  Siddhartha Brahma, Petko Georgiev, Ambrose Slone, Zhenkai Zhu, James Lottes, Siyuan Qiao,
  Ben Caine, Sebastian Riedel, Alex Tomala, Martin Chadwick, J Christopher Love, Peter Choy,
  Sid Mittal, Neil Houlsby, Yunhao Tang, Matthew Lamm, Libin Bai, Qiao Zhang, Luheng He,
  Yong Cheng, Peter Humphreys, Yujia Li, Sergey Brin, Albin Cassirer, Ying-Qi Miao, Lukás
  Zilka, Taylor Tobin, Kelvin Xu, Lev Proleev, Daniel Sohn, Alberto Magni, Lisa Anne Hendricks,
  Isabel Gao, Santiago Ontan’on, Oskar Bunyan, Nathan Byrd, Abhanshu Sharma, Biao Zhang,
  Mario Pinto, Rishika Sinha, Harsh Mehta, Dawei Jia, Sergi Caelles, Albert Webson, Alex Morris,
  Becca Roelofs, Yifan Ding, Robin Strudel, Xuehan Xiong, Marvin Ritter, Mostafa Dehghani,
  Rahma Chaabouni, Abhijit Karmarkar, Guangda Lai, Fabian Mentzer, Bibo Xu, YaGuang Li,
  Yujing Zhang, Tom Le Paine, Alex Goldin, Behnam Neyshabur, Kate Baumli, Anselm Levskaya,
  Michael Laskin, Wenhao Jia, Jack W. Rae, Kefan Xiao, Antoine He, Skye Giordano, Laksh-
  man Yagati, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Paul Natsev, Sanjay Ganapathy, Fangyu Liu, Danilo Martins,
  Nanxin Chen, Yunhan Xu, Megan Barnes, Rhys May, Arpi Vezer, Junhyuk Oh, Ken Franko,
  Sophie Bridgers, Ruizhe Zhao, Boxi Wu, Basil Mustafa, Sean Sechrist, Emilio Parisotto, Thanu-
  malayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Chris Larkin, Chenjie Gu, Christina Sorokin, Maxim Krikun,
  Alexey Guseynov, Jessica Landon, Romina Datta, Alexander Pritzel, Phoebe Thacker, Fan Yang,
  Kevin Hui, A.E. Hauth, Chih-Kuan Yeh, David Barker, Justin Mao-Jones, Sophia Austin, Hannah
  Sheahan, Parker Schuh, James Svensson, Rohan Jain, Vinay Venkatesh Ramasesh, Anton Briukhov,
  Da-Woon Chung, Tamara von Glehn, Christina Butterfield, Priya Jhakra, Matt Wiethoff, Justin
  Frye, Jordan Grimstad, Beer Changpinyo, Charline Le Lan, Anna Bortsova, Yonghui Wu, Paul
  Voigtlaender, Tara N. Sainath, Charlotte Smith, Will Hawkins, Kris Cao, James Besley, Srivatsan
  Srinivasan, Mark Omernick, Colin Gaffney, Gabriela de Castro Surita, Ryan Burnell, Bogdan
  Damoc, Junwhan Ahn, Andrew Brock, Mantas Pajarskas, Anastasia Petrushkina, Seb Noury,
  Lorenzo Blanco, Kevin Swersky, Arun Ahuja, Thi Avrahami, Vedant Misra, Raoul de Liedekerke,
  Mariko Iinuma, Alex Polozov, Sarah York, George van den Driessche, Paul Michel, Justin Chiu,
  Rory Blevins, Zach Gleicher, Adrià Recasens, Alban Rrustemi, Elena Gribovskaya, Aurko Roy,
  Wiktor Gworek, S’ebastien M. R. Arnold, Lisa Lee, James Lee-Thorp, Marcello Maggioni, Demis
  Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Jeffrey Dean, and Oriol Vinyals. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multi-
  modal understanding across millions of tokens of context. ArXiv, abs/2403.05530, 2024. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:268297180.

Mor Geva, Jasmijn Bastings, Katja Filippova, and Amir Globerson. Dissecting recall of factual
 associations in auto-regressive language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
 Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 12216–12235, 2023.

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.

J. Edward Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, and Weizhu
   Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ArXiv, abs/2106.09685, 2021. URL
   https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:235458009.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Robert Huben, Hoagy Cunningham, Logan Riggs Smith, Aidan Ewart, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse
  autoencoders find highly interpretable features in language models. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  F76bwRSLeK.
Huggingface. Huggingface open llm leaderboard archive, 2024. URL https://huggingface.co/
  spaces/open-llm-leaderboard-old/open llm leaderboard. Last Accessed: 2024-09-30.
Albert Qiaochu Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh
  Chaplot, Diego de Las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile
  Saulnier, L’elio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril,
  Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b. ArXiv, abs/2310.06825,
  2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263830494.
Daniel D. Johnson. Penzai + Treescope: A toolkit for interpreting, visualizing, and editing models as
  data. ICML 2024 Workshop on Mechanistic Interpretability, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=KVSgEXrMDH.
János Kramár, Tom Lieberum, Rohin Shah, and Neel Nanda. Atp*: An efficient and scalable method
   for localizing llm behaviour to components. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.00745, 2024.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E.
 Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
 serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating
 Systems Principles, 2023.
Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient
  prompt tuning. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-
  tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
  guage Processing, pp. 3045–3059, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November
  2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.243. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.243.
Kenneth Li, Oam Patel, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg. Inference-time
  intervention: Eliciting truthful answers from a language model. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Samuel Marks, Can Rager, Eric J. Michaud, Yonatan Belinkov, David Bau, and Aaron Mueller.
  Sparse feature circuits: Discovering and editing interpretable causal graphs in language models,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.19647.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in gpt. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=-h6WAS6eE4.
Philipp Moritz, Robert Nishihara, Stephanie Wang, Alexey Tumanov, Richard Liaw, Eric Liang,
  Melih Elibol, Zongheng Yang, William Paul, Michael I. Jordan, and Ion Stoica. Ray: A distributed
  framework for emerging ai applications, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.05889.
Neel Nanda and Joseph Bloom. Transformerlens. https://github.com/TransformerLensOrg/
  TransformerLens, 2022.
Nvidia. TensorRT-LLM. URL https://github.com/NVIDIA/TensorRT-LLM, 2024.
OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni
  Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red Avila, Igor
  Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Mo Bavarian, Jeff
  Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher Berner, Lenny Bog-
  donoff, Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brockman, Tim Brooks, Miles
  Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann, Brittany Carey, Chelsea
  Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis, Derek Chen, Sully Chen,
  Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Benjamin Chess, Chester Cho, Casey Chu, Hyung Won
  Chung, Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux, Thomas Degry, Noah


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Deutsch, Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling, Sheila Dunning, Adrien
  Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix, Sim’on Posada Fishman,
  Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gibson, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni,
  Gabriel Goh, Raphael Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan Gordon, Morgan Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan
  Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu, Yufei Guo, Chris Hallacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris,
  Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke, Chris Hesse, Alan Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter
  Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli Hu, Xin Hu, Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain,
  Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang, Roger Jiang, Haozhun Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie
  Jonn, Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Lukasz Kaiser, Ali Kamali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish
  Keskar, Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Hendrik
  Kirchner, Jamie Ryan Kiros, Matthew Knight, Daniel Kokotajlo, Lukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew
  Kondrich, Aris Konstantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen Krueger, Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai
  Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin,
  Stephanie Lin, Mateusz Litwin, Theresa Lopez, Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Adeola Makanju,
  Kim Malfacini, Sam Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie Mayer,
  Andrew Mayne, Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer McKinney, Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan,
  Jake McNeil, David Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick, Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko,
  Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel P. Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati,
  Oleg Murk, David M’ely, Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Rajeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan,
  Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo Noh, Ouyang Long, Cullen O’Keefe, Jakub W. Pachocki, Alex Paino,
  Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Joel Parish, Emy Parparita, Alexandre
  Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng, Adam Perelman, Filipe de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael
  Petrov, Henrique Pondé de Oliveira Pinto, Michael Pokorny, Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr H. Pong,
  Tolly Powell, Alethea Power, Boris Power, Elizabeth Proehl, Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack
  Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron Raymond, Francis Real, Kendra Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rot-
  sted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder, Mario D. Saltarelli, Ted Sanders, Shibani Santurkar, Girish
  Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John Schulman, Daniel Selsam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki
  Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker, Pranav Shyam, Szymon Sidor, Eric Sigler, Maddie
  Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin D. Sokolowsky, Yang Song, Natalie
  Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang, Nikolas A. Tezak,
  Madeleine Thompson, Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng, Preston Tuggle, Nick
  Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cer’on Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun Vijayvergiya, Chelsea
  Voss, Carroll L. Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan Ward, Jason
  Wei, CJ Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng, Matt Wiethoff,
  Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lauren Workman, Sherwin Wu,
  Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba,
  Rowan Zellers, Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao Zheng, Juntang Zhuang,
  William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257532815.

PaperswithCode.     Multi-task language understanding on mmlu, 2024. URL https:
  //paperswithcode.com/sota/multi-task-language-understanding-on-mmlu. Last Ac-
  cessed: 2024-09-30.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.

Roma Patel and Ellie Pavlick. Mapping language models to grounded conceptual spaces. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=gJcEM8sxHK.

Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Blog, 2019.

Jack W. Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song,
  John Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, Eliza Rutherford, Tom Hen-
  nigan, Jacob Menick, Albin Cassirer, Richard Powell, George van den Driessche, Lisa Anne
  Hendricks, Maribeth Rauh, Po-Sen Huang, Amelia Glaese, Johannes Welbl, Sumanth Dathathri,


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Saffron Huang, Jonathan Uesato, John F. J. Mellor, Irina Higgins, Antonia Creswell, Nathan
  McAleese, Amy Wu, Erich Elsen, Siddhant M. Jayakumar, Elena Buchatskaya, David Bud-
  den, Esme Sutherland, Karen Simonyan, Michela Paganini, L. Sifre, Lena Martens, Xiang Lor-
  raine Li, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Aida Nematzadeh, Elena Gribovskaya, Domenic Donato, Angeliki
  Lazaridou, Arthur Mensch, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Maria Tsimpoukelli, N. K. Grigorev, Doug
  Fritz, Thibault Sottiaux, Mantas Pajarskas, Tobias Pohlen, Zhitao Gong, Daniel Toyama, Cy-
  prien de Masson d’Autume, Yujia Li, Tayfun Terzi, Vladimir Mikulik, Igor Babuschkin, Aidan
  Clark, Diego de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Chris Jones, James Bradbury, Matthew G. Johnson,
  Blake A. Hechtman, Laura Weidinger, Iason Gabriel, William S. Isaac, Edward Lockhart, Si-
  mon Osindero, Laura Rimell, Chris Dyer, Oriol Vinyals, Kareem W. Ayoub, Jeff Stanway, L. L.
  Bennett, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Geoffrey Irving. Scaling language mod-
  els: Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. ArXiv, abs/2112.11446, 2021. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:245353475.
Ray Team. Ray, 2022. URL https://github.com/ray-project/ray.
Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ili’c, Daniel Hesslow, Roman
  Castagn’e, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, François Yvon, Matthias Gallé, Jonathan Tow, Alexander M.
  Rush, Stella Biderman, Albert Webson, Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Thomas Wang, Benoı̂t
  Sagot, Niklas Muennighoff, Albert Villanova del Moral, Olatunji Ruwase, Rachel Bawden, Stas
  Bekman, Angelina McMillan-Major, Iz Beltagy, Huu Nguyen, Lucile Saulnier, Samson Tan, Pe-
  dro Ortiz Suarez, Victor Sanh, Hugo Laurenccon, Yacine Jernite, Julien Launay, Margaret Mitchell,
  Colin Raffel, Aaron Gokaslan, Adi Simhi, Aitor Soroa Etxabe, Alham Fikri Aji, Amit Alfassy,
  Anna Rogers, Ariel Kreisberg Nitzav, Canwen Xu, Chenghao Mou, Chris C. Emezue, Christo-
  pher Klamm, Colin Leong, Daniel Alexander van Strien, David Ifeoluwa Adelani, Dragomir R.
  Radev, Eduardo Gonz’alez Ponferrada, Efrat Levkovizh, Ethan Kim, Eyal Natan, Francesco De
  Toni, Gérard Dupont, Germán Kruszewski, Giada Pistilli, Hady ElSahar, Hamza Benyamina,
  Hieu Trung Tran, Ian Yu, Idris Abdulmumin, Isaac Johnson, Itziar Gonzalez-Dios, Javier de la
  Rosa, Jenny Chim, Jesse Dodge, Jian Zhu, Jonathan Chang, Jorg Frohberg, Josephine Tobing,
  Joydeep Bhattacharjee, Khalid Almubarak, Kimbo Chen, Kyle Lo, Leandro von Werra, Leon
  Weber, Long Phan, Loubna Ben Allal, Ludovic Tanguy, Manan Dey, Manuel Romero Muñoz,
  Maraim Masoud, Marı́a Grandury, Mario vSavsko, Max Huang, Maximin Coavoux, Mayank
  Singh, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Minh Chien Vu, Mohammad A. Jauhar, Mustafa Ghaleb, Nishant
  Subramani, Nora Kassner, Nurulaqilla Khamis, Olivier Nguyen, Omar Espejel, Ona de Gibert,
  Paulo Villegas, Peter Henderson, Pierre Colombo, Priscilla Amuok, Quentin Lhoest, Rheza Harli-
  man, Rishi Bommasani, Roberto L’opez, Rui Ribeiro, Salomey Osei, Sampo Pyysalo, Sebastian
  Nagel, Shamik Bose, Shamsuddeen Hassan Muhammad, Shanya Sharma, S. Longpre, Somaieh
  Nikpoor, S. Silberberg, Suhas Pai, Sydney Zink, Tiago Timponi Torrent, Timo Schick, Tristan
  Thrush, Valentin Danchev, Vassilina Nikoulina, Veronika Laippala, Violette Lepercq, Vrinda
  Prabhu, Zaid Alyafeai, Zeerak Talat, Arun Raja, Benjamin Heinzerling, Chenglei Si, Elizabeth
  Salesky, Sabrina J. Mielke, Wilson Y. Lee, Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Antoine Chaf-
  fin, Arnaud Stiegler, Debajyoti Datta, Eliza Szczechla, Gunjan Chhablani, Han Wang, Harshit
  Pandey, Hendrik Strobelt, Jason Alan Fries, Jos Rozen, Leo Gao, Lintang Sutawika, M Saiful Bari,
  Maged S. Al-Shaibani, Matteo Manica, Nihal V. Nayak, Ryan Teehan, Samuel Albanie, Sheng
  Shen, Srulik Ben-David, Stephen H. Bach, Taewoon Kim, Tali Bers, Thibault Févry, Trishala
  Neeraj, Urmish Thakker, Vikas Raunak, Xiang Tang, Zheng-Xin Yong, Zhiqing Sun, Shaked
  Brody, Y Uri, Hadar Tojarieh, Adam Roberts, Hyung Won Chung, Jaesung Tae, Jason Phang,
  Ofir Press, Conglong Li, Deepak Narayanan, Hatim Bourfoune, Jared Casper, Jeff Rasley, Max
  Ryabinin, Mayank Mishra, Minjia Zhang, Mohammad Shoeybi, Myriam Peyrounette, Nicolas
  Patry, Nouamane Tazi, Omar Sanseviero, Patrick von Platen, Pierre Cornette, Pierre Franccois
  Lavall’ee, Rémi Lacroix, Samyam Rajbhandari, Sanchit Gandhi, Shaden Smith, Stéphane Requena,
  Suraj Patil, Tim Dettmers, Ahmed Baruwa, Amanpreet Singh, Anastasia Cheveleva, Anne-Laure
  Ligozat, Arjun Subramonian, Aur’elie N’ev’eol, Charles Lovering, Daniel H Garrette, Deepak R.
  Tunuguntla, Ehud Reiter, Ekaterina Taktasheva, Ekaterina Voloshina, Eli Bogdanov, Genta Indra
  Winata, Hailey Schoelkopf, Jan-Christoph Kalo, Jekaterina Novikova, Jessica Zosa Forde, Xiangru
  Tang, Jungo Kasai, Ken Kawamura, Liam Hazan, Marine Carpuat, Miruna Clinciu, Najoung Kim,
  Newton Cheng, Oleg Serikov, Omer Antverg, Oskar van der Wal, Rui Zhang, Ruochen Zhang,
  Sebastian Gehrmann, Shachar Mirkin, S. Osher Pais, Tatiana Shavrina, Thomas Scialom, Tian Yun,
  Tomasz Limisiewicz, Verena Rieser, Vitaly Protasov, Vladislav Mikhailov, Yada Pruksachatkun,
  Yonatan Belinkov, Zachary Bamberger, Zdenvek Kasner, Zdeněk Kasner, Amanda Pestana, Amir


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Feizpour, Ammar Khan, Amy Faranak, Ananda Santa Rosa Santos, Anthony Hevia, Antigona
  Unldreaj, Arash Aghagol, Arezoo Abdollahi, Aycha Tammour, Azadeh HajiHosseini, Bahareh
  Behroozi, Benjamin Ayoade Ajibade, Bharat Kumar Saxena, Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis, Danish
  Contractor, David M. Lansky, Davis David, Douwe Kiela, Duong Anh Nguyen, Edward Tan, Emi
  Baylor, Ezinwanne Ozoani, Fatim Tahirah Mirza, Frankline Ononiwu, Habib Rezanejad, H.A.
  Jones, Indrani Bhattacharya, Irene Solaiman, Irina Sedenko, Isar Nejadgholi, Jan Passmore, Joshua
  Seltzer, Julio Bonis Sanz, Karen Fort, Lı́via Dutra, Mairon Samagaio, Maraim Elbadri, Margot
  Mieskes, Marissa Gerchick, Martha Akinlolu, Michael McKenna, Mike Qiu, Muhammed Ghauri,
  Mykola Burynok, Nafis Abrar, Nazneen Rajani, Nour Elkott, Nourhan Fahmy, Olanrewaju Samuel,
  Ran An, R. P. Kromann, Ryan Hao, Samira Alizadeh, Sarmad Shubber, Silas L. Wang, Sourav
  Roy, Sylvain Viguier, Thanh-Cong Le, Tobi Oyebade, Trieu Nguyen Hai Le, Yoyo Yang, Zach
  Nguyen, Abhinav Ramesh Kashyap, Alfredo Palasciano, Alison Callahan, Anima Shukla, Antonio
  Miranda-Escalada, Ayush Kumar Singh, Benjamin Beilharz, Bo Wang, Caio Matheus Fonseca
  de Brito, Chenxi Zhou, Chirag Jain, Chuxin Xu, Clémentine Fourrier, Daniel Le’on Perin’an,
  Daniel Molano, Dian Yu, Enrique Manjavacas, Fabio Barth, Florian Fuhrimann, Gabriel Altay,
  Giyaseddin Bayrak, Gully Burns, Helena U. Vrabec, Iman I.B. Bello, Isha Dash, Ji Soo Kang, John
  Giorgi, Jonas Golde, Jose David Posada, Karthi Sivaraman, Lokesh Bulchandani, Lu Liu, Luisa
  Shinzato, Madeleine Hahn de Bykhovetz, Maiko Takeuchi, Marc Pàmies, Marı́a Andrea Castillo,
  Marianna Nezhurina, Mario Sanger, Matthias Samwald, Michael Cullan, Michael Weinberg,
  M Wolf, Mina Mihaljcic, Minna Liu, Moritz Freidank, Myungsun Kang, Natasha Seelam, Nathan
  Dahlberg, Nicholas Michio Broad, Nikolaus Muellner, Pascale Fung, Patricia Haller, R. Chan-
  drasekhar, Renata Eisenberg, Robert Martin, Rodrigo Canalli, Rosaline Su, Ruisi Su, Samuel
  Cahyawijaya, Samuele Garda, Shlok S Deshmukh, Shubhanshu Mishra, Sid Kiblawi, Simon Ott,
  Sinee Sang-aroonsiri, Srishti Kumar, Stefan Schweter, Sushil Pratap Bharati, Tanmay Laud, Théo
  Gigant, Tomoya Kainuma, Wojciech Kusa, Yanis Labrak, Yashasvi Bajaj, Y. Venkatraman, Yifan
  Xu, Ying Xu, Yu Xu, Zhee Xao Tan, Zhongli Xie, Zifan Ye, Mathilde Bras, Younes Belkada,
  and Thomas Wolf. Bloom: A 176b-parameter open-access multilingual language model. ArXiv,
  abs/2211.05100, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:253420279.

Rylan Schaeffer, Brando Miranda, and Sanmi Koyejo. Are emergent abilities of large language
  models a mirage? In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ITw9edRDlD.

Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 618–626,
  2017.

Ying Sheng, Shiyi Cao, Dacheng Li, Coleman Hooper, Nicholas Lee, Shuo Yang, Christo-
  pher Chou, Banghua Zhu, Lianmin Zheng, Kurt Keutzer, Joseph Gonzalez, and Ion Sto-
  ica. Slora: Scalable serving of thousands of lora adapters. In P. Gibbons, G. Pekhi-
  menko, and C. De Sa (eds.), Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, volume 6, pp.
  296–311, 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlsys.org/paper files/paper/2024/file/
  906419cd502575b617cc489a1a696a67-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Toby Shevlane. Structured access: an emerging paradigm for safe ai deployment, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.05159.

Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In Doina
 Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
 Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3319–3328. PMLR,
 06–11 Aug 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/sundararajan17a.html.

Zhenheng Tang, Yuxin Wang, Xin He, Longteng Zhang, Xinglin Pan, Qiang Wang, Rongfei Zeng,
  Kaiyong Zhao, Shaohuai Shi, Bingsheng He, et al. Fusionai: Decentralized training and deploying
  llms with massive consumer-level gpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.01172, 2023.

Zhenheng Tang, Xueze Kang, Yiming Yin, Xinglin Pan, Yuxin Wang, Xin He, Qiang Wang, Rongfei
  Zeng, Kaiyong Zhao, Shaohuai Shi, et al. Fusionllm: A decentralized llm training system on
  geo-distributed gpus with adaptive compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12707, 2024.


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Gemma Team, Thomas Mesnard, Cassidy Hardin, Robert Dadashi, Surya Bhupatiraju, Shreya Pathak,
  Laurent Sifre, Morgane Rivière, Mihir Sanjay Kale, Juliette Love, Pouya Tafti, Léonard Hussenot,
  Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Adam Roberts, Aditya Barua, Alex Botev, Alex
  Castro-Ros, Ambrose Slone, Amélie Héliou, Andrea Tacchetti, Anna Bulanova, Antonia Paterson,
  Beth Tsai, Bobak Shahriari, Charline Le Lan, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Clément Crepy,
  Daniel Cer, Daphne Ippolito, David Reid, Elena Buchatskaya, Eric Ni, Eric Noland, Geng Yan,
  George Tucker, George-Christian Muraru, Grigory Rozhdestvenskiy, Henryk Michalewski, Ian
  Tenney, Ivan Grishchenko, Jacob Austin, James Keeling, Jane Labanowski, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau,
  Jeff Stanway, Jenny Brennan, Jeremy Chen, Johan Ferret, Justin Chiu, Justin Mao-Jones, Katherine
  Lee, Kathy Yu, Katie Millican, Lars Lowe Sjoesund, Lisa Lee, Lucas Dixon, Machel Reid, Maciej
  Mikuła, Mateo Wirth, Michael Sharman, Nikolai Chinaev, Nithum Thain, Olivier Bachem, Oscar
  Chang, Oscar Wahltinez, Paige Bailey, Paul Michel, Petko Yotov, Rahma Chaabouni, Ramona
  Comanescu, Reena Jana, Rohan Anil, Ross McIlroy, Ruibo Liu, Ryan Mullins, Samuel L Smith,
  Sebastian Borgeaud, Sertan Girgin, Sholto Douglas, Shree Pandya, Siamak Shakeri, Soham De,
  Ted Klimenko, Tom Hennigan, Vlad Feinberg, Wojciech Stokowiec, Yu hui Chen, Zafarali Ahmed,
  Zhitao Gong, Tris Warkentin, Ludovic Peran, Minh Giang, Clément Farabet, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff
  Dean, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Demis Hassabis, Zoubin Ghahramani, Douglas Eck, Joelle Barral,
  Fernando Pereira, Eli Collins, Armand Joulin, Noah Fiedel, Evan Senter, Alek Andreev, and
  Kathleen Kenealy. Gemma: Open models based on gemini research and technology, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.08295.
Adly Templeton, Tom Conerly, Jonathan Marcus, Jack Lindsey, Trenton Bricken, Brian Chen, Adam
  Pearce, Craig Citro, Emmanuel Ameisen, Andy Jones, Hoagy Cunningham, Nicholas L Turner,
  Callum McDougall, Monte MacDiarmid, C. Daniel Freeman, Theodore R. Sumers, Edward Rees,
  Joshua Batson, Adam Jermyn, Shan Carter, Chris Olah, and Tom Henighan. Scaling monoseman-
  ticity: Extracting interpretable features from claude 3 sonnet. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2024.
  URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2024/scaling-monosemanticity/index.html.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin R. Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei,
  Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Daniel M. Bikel, Lukas
  Blecher, Cristian Cantón Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes,
 Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony S.
  Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa,
  Isabel M. Kloumann, A. V. Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril,
 Jenya Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar
  Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan
  Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, R. Subramanian, Xia Tan, Binh Tang, Ross
 Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zhengxu Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang,
 Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey
  Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. ArXiv,
  abs/2307.09288, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259950998.
Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Yaron Singer,
  and Stuart Shieber. Investigating gender bias in language models using causal mediation
  analysis. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 12388–12401. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2020/file/
  92650b2e92217715fe312e6fa7b90d82-Paper.pdf.
Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Inter-
  pretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in gpt-2 small, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.00593.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani
  Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto,
  Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large lan-
  guage models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022. ISSN 2835-8856. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=yzkSU5zdwD. Survey Certification.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama
  Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language
  processing. In Qun Liu and David Schlangen (eds.), Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 38–45, Online,
  October 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-demos.6.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-demos.6.
Bingyang Wu, Ruidong Zhu, Zili Zhang, Peng Sun, Xuanzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. {dLoRA}: Dynami-
  cally orchestrating requests and adapters for {LoRA}{LLM} serving. In 18th USENIX Symposium
  on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24), pp. 911–927, 2024a.
Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Thomas Icard, Christopher Potts, and Noah Goodman. Interpretability
  at scale: Identifying causal mechanisms in alpaca. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko,
  M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp.
  78205–78226. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper
  files/paper/2023/file/f6a8b109d4d4fd64c75e94aaf85d9697-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Aryaman Arora, Jing Huang, Zheng Wang, Noah Goodman, Christo-
  pher Manning, and Christopher Potts. pyvene: A library for understanding and improving
  PyTorch models via interventions. In Kai-Wei Chang, Annie Lee, and Nazneen Rajani (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 3: System Demonstrations), pp.
  158–165, Mexico City, Mexico, June 2024b. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-demo.16.
An Yang, Baosong Yang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Zhou, Chengpeng Li,
  Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, et al. Qwen2 technical report. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.10671, 2024.
Alex Young, Bei Chen, Chao Li, Chengen Huang, Ge Zhang, Guanwei Zhang, Heng Li, Jiangcheng
  Zhu, Jianqun Chen, Jing Chang, et al. Yi: Open foundation models by 01. ai. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.04652, 2024.
Fred Zhang and Neel Nanda. Towards best practices of activation patching in language models:
  Metrics and methods. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Hf17y6u9BC.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher
  Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt
  Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
  Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.
  01068.


                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A       R ESEARCH S URVEY D ETAILS
In this section, we provide details on the data collection process for the results reported in Section 2,
and report additional findings related to model parameter size.
Data Curation. We curated a list of 184 total papers that study the internals of open-weight
transformer models, taken from the citations of a recent survey of interpretability research (Ferrando
et al., 2024). Starting from the initial list of 411 citations, we excluded any paper that met one or
more of the following criteria:

     • Paper is a survey paper, tutorial, library report, model card, or performs no model experiments.
     • Paper only performs experiments on closed-weight models, custom models, or non-transformer
       architectures.
     • Paper was published before 2019.

We identified the largest model (by parameter count) studied in each paper and gathered data related
to its MMLU performance (Hendrycks et al., 2021) from the HuggingFace OpenLLM Leaderboard
Archive (Huggingface, 2024). We used the Papers with Code MMLU Leaderboard (PaperswithCode,
2024) to supplement MMLU performance data when models did not have a score on the Huggingface
leaderboard. When a model had a score from both sources, we averaged its benchmark results together.
A few models did not have reported MMLU results from either source (primarily BERT-style models).
For these models, we interpolated MMLU results using nearest neighbor approximation based on
parameter size. Papers with Code provides an MMLU performance reference for closed-weight
models.

                            1012



                            1011
     Model Parameter Size


                                                                                                 10.3x
                            1010
                                                                       67.7x      4.8x



                            109
                                                        10.8x
                                   2.7x   2.7x
                            108



                                   2019   2020          2021           2022        2023          2024

                                             Models Used in Research           Models Released

Figure 7: Evolution of the size gap between open-weight models used in research and publicly released models
from 2019 to 2024. Blue boxes represent the distribution of model sizes used in research papers, while pink
boxes show publicly released models. The dashed gold line connects median model sizes for each group, with
the ratio between medians displayed. Outliers are shown as individual points. The growing disparity (from
2.7x in 2019-2020 to 10.3x in 2024) suggests that interpretability research is increasingly lagging behind the
capabilities of state-of-the-art models available to the public.

Comparing Model Parameter Size. In Figure 7, we show there is a growing disparity between the
size of models that interpretability researchers are studying and the size of models that are publicly
released each year, a similar trend to the one discussed in §2 regarding MMLU. Reference data
on parameter sizes of publicly available models is taken from Epoch AI (2024), restricting our
analysis to language models released after 2019 that have openly downloadable parameters. To ensure
reproducibility and transparency, all source code and data used for the analyses described in this
section are available in the supplementary materials accompanying this paper.


                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     S YSTEM D ESIGN
In this section, we provide additional details describing the implementation and design of NNsight
and NDIF.

B.1   NN SIGHT D ESIGN

Wrapped PyTorch modules To support the tracing context, the NNsight library wraps PyTorch
modules in an NNsight object instance. This wrapper is responsible for providing access to its sub-
modules’ intermediate deferred inputs and outputs. Upon initialization, the NNsight object creates
an Envoy object for each sub-module, forming a tree-like structure mirroring that of the original
PyTorch module tree. Each Envoy is responsible for managing and recording operations on future
inputs and outputs for its underlying module. It achieves this by exposing attributes like .input
and .output which, when accessed, trace a deferred operation to intervene at the corresponding
module’s input or output during model execution. This attribute access returns a Proxy object of
that deferred operation, representing a future intermediate value. Any operation performed on the
resulting Proxy object creates a new deferred operation, and therefore a new Proxy. As all future
Proxys originate from operations performed on these root .input and .output attributes, it makes
them the entry-point into the tracing context functionality.
 1 from nnsight import NNsight
 2 model = NNsight ( model )
 3 input = tensor ([.46 , 1.56 , -0.3 , .98 , -0.5])
 4 with model . trace ( input ):
 5     model . submodule . output [:2] = 0
 6     hidden_state = model . submodule . output . save ()
Code Example 1: Basic usage of the NNsight tracing context and the NNsight data type. model
in this example has a single submodule named “submodule” and accepts a Tensor of length five. On
line two, the PyTorch model is wrapped with NNsight. On line four, the tracing context is created
and entered by calling with model.trace(...) given some input. On line five, the Envoy for
“submodule” is used to access a Proxy for its deferred intermediate output via the .output attribute.
Also on line five, the returned Proxy is intervened on, creating two new Proxys and Nodes through
the overloaded slicing and setting methods. Finally on line six, the same intermediate value is placed
in the “hidden state” variable, and saved for use after model execution.

When exiting the tracing context, the NNsight object interleaves the traced operations to the model’s
computation graph and executes the model. This process is performed by adding PyTorch hooks to
all modules whose Envoy’s .input or .output attributes were accessed within the tracing context.
These hooks are the interface between the intervention graph, formed from the deferred operations
gathered while inside of the tracing context, and the model’s original computation graph. After
interleaving, NNsight removes these hooks.

The Intervention Graph The Intervention Graph encapsulates the logic that should be interleaved
with model’s original computation graph. The Graph is composed of individual Node objects, each
representing a single operation to be executed during evaluation of the graph. Nodes have arbitrary
positional and keyword arguments. These arguments may contain other Nodes which are considered
dependencies of the source Node. Conversely, the source Node is a listener of its dependency. When
a Node’s remaining listeners reaches zero, it is considered redundant and has its value is cleared and
its memory freed immediately.
Portions of the Intervention Graph are divided into sub-graphs depending on which module they
rely on. These sub-graphs are then executed sequentially when their corresponding module’s hook
is called during model execution. In other words, the root intervention Nodes created via Envoys
(.input or .output) act as GOTO statements that transfer execution of the Intervention Graph,
beginning from that Node up until they hit another root intervention Node. Modules may be executed
more than once during interleaving, and therefore these sub-graphs may also be executed multiple
times, just as you would a for loop.
For every Node, there is a corresponding Proxy that manages tracing operations on the underlying
Node. Proxys achieve this by overriding builtin Python and PyTorch magic methods. These overrides


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: The components involved in creating nodes within the Intervention Graph. Module calls
like lm.output are processed through Envoy, resulting in the creation of relevant ProtocolNodes like
InterventionProtocolNode(). Everything else goes through Proxy layers to create other relevant
nodes in the graph. All nodes are encapsulated within InterventionProxy(), which users see upon
printing nodes. NNsight can scan the modules in the PyTorch model instance to gather related data
shapes with a scan flag, creating FakeTensors that are included in the respective intervention graph
nodes and returned to the user.


intercept calls to methods and functions that now create and add a new Node to the Intervention
Graph, returning the Node’s corresponding Proxy. Chaining this process results in a completed
Intervention Graph.

Protocols When composed into an Intervention Graph, Nodes are quite powerful on their own.
However, a full-featured framework requires operations that can exert more control on the intervention
process than the scope an individual Node can provide.
A Protocol is a special NNsight operation that enables these more powerful controls. A Protocol
must define two methods: One that adds a Node of its type to the Intervention Graph, and another
that executes that Node during interleaving. Rather than NNsight executing a Node’s target with its
arguments, Protocols allow the Node to be passed the Protocol for execution. With full access
to the Node, the Protocol can processes its arguments, implement complex logic, and access the
Intervention Graph itself. This access provides the Protocol a global view of the intervention
process, which it can leverage by interacting with the attachments attribute on the Intervention
Graph. Attachments are a dictionary on the Intervention Graph where Protocols can manage a
global state throughout interleaving.
Two types of Protocols are highlighted below:
LockProtocol: When a Node has no more listeners, its value is cleared to free memory. Therefore
this NO-OP operation never updates the remaining listeners of its dependencies, preventing a Node’s
value from being deleted. Proxys implement a .save() method which creates a LockProtocol with
the source Node as its only dependency, resulting in the Node’s value being available outside the
tracing context.
GradProtocol: Many use cases require intervening on the backwards pass of a model rather than
exclusively the forward pass. Accessing a Proxy’s.grad attribute creates a GradProtocol Node.
When executed, GradProtocol adds a backwards hook to the underlying Tensor value. This hook
injects the gradients into the GradProtocol Node during the backwards pass, allowing it to behave
like any other Node.

Model Abstractions The NNsight class defines abstract convenience methods that subclasses can
implement to extend common neural network architectures to the NNsight API. These methods
include logic to load the model, which is called twice when initializing and executing an NNsight-
based model from scratch. The first call happens upon initialization to create and populate the Envoy
tree with a ‘meta’ version of the model. In a ‘meta’ model, the parameters of the network are not yet
loaded: they exist as placeholders containing shape and datatype information. The second call occurs
when loading and dispatching the true model parameters.
NNsight comes with a few of these subclasses pre-implemented. The most common subclass
is the LanguageModel, for text-to-text sequence generation architectures. The LanguageModel
integrates with Huggingface to load model configurations, tokenizers, and parameters from their
online repository when provided with a repo id. Implementing the input processing methods uses


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the model’s tokenizer to accept common forms of inputs and batch them together. When loading the
‘meta’ version of the model, the LanguageModel uses AutoModelForCausalLM.from config from
Huggingface transformers to download only the models configuration. Only upon dispatching
does LanguageModel fetch the model parameters if they aren’t already cached.

Scanning and Validation       NNsight offers two key debugging features integrated with the Tracer
context.
The first is Scanning. When toggled, scanning performs an initial execution pass on the model in
FakeTensorMode. During this pass, Hooks registered on each module update the input and output of
their corresponding Envoys on the NNsight model with generated FakeTensors. This process makes
valuable information available during tracing such as output shapes, dtypes, and device allocations.
When Scanning is enabled, Validation can be used to test interventions on FakeTensors as they
are being added on the intervention graph. This acts as a sanity check to identify errors related to
defined interventions before engaging in the model’s forward pass run.

Remote Execution and Session It is common for users to run multiple forward passes on a model
as part of a larger experiment, such as in a LoRA training loop. NNsight offers an API that allows
the creation of a Session context, where inner defined Tracer contexts are executed sequentially
only after the Session context is exited. By encapsulating multiple Tracers in a Session, values
obtained in earlier passes can be seamlessly referenced by later stages in the experiment without the
need for manual saving.
When a Session is executed remotely, all forward passes defined within are sent as part of a single
request to be executed. This can reduce wait times between Tracer calls by 1) minimizing the
number of server requests and 2) eliminating the need to download and re-upload values referenced
across Tracer contexts for subsequent calls that require them.

B.2   NDIF D ESIGN

NDIF enables distributed execution of intervention graphs across multiple GPUs. The system
architecture consists of three main components: a request handling layer, a model service layer, and a
distributed execution engine. The current implementation builds on top of Ray (Moritz et al., 2018;
Ray Team, 2022) as a distributed scheduler.

Request Processing and Graph Distribution When a user creates an intervention with NNsight,
the system serializes the intervention graph into a custom JSON format and sends it to NDIF’s
HTTP server front-end. The request handler places the graph in Ray’s object store and queues it for
processing by the Request Service deployment. This service routes the request to the appropriate
Model Service deployment based on the requested model.
For distributed models split across multiple GPUs, NDIF maintains separate Ray deployments for
each model shard. The head shard (shard 0) receives the request first and distributes it to other shard
deployments. All shards wait to receive the complete intervention graph before beginning execution.

Distributed Model Management NDIF loads large models using a sharding process. First, it
creates a “meta model” containing only shape information without loading weights. It then attaches
hooks to PyTorch’s load state dict functionality that convert modules into their parallel versions
during loading. This allows NDIF to load model checkpoints shard-by-shard while maintaining a set
memory limit for unsharded tensors at any given time.

Executing Distributed Interventions During execution, NDIF handles interactions between the dis-
tributed model and the intervention graph. When encountering distributed tensors (DTensors), NDIF
records tensor placement information, converts DTensors to full tensors using torch.distributed
gather operations, injects the full tensors into the intervention graph, and then re-shards tensors after
graph execution using saved placement information.
This approach allows the intervention graph to operate on complete tensors while maintaining memory
efficiency. Only the head shard handles communication with the user, including websocket updates
and returning saved values.


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Co-tenancy and Resource Management NDIF supports sequential co-tenancy, allowing multiple
users to access the same model instance without reloading parameters. Future implementations will
enable parallel co-tenancy through batch grouping as follows: During tracing, intervention nodes
record batch groups that specify tensor slices. During execution, the system extracts appropriate
slices while preserving gradient propagation, enabling multiple users to share execution within a
single forward pass.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C      C ODE C OMPARISON
In Section 3.2, we discussed how NNsight can express any experiment that can be expressed with
PyTorch, but that is also simplifies the design of custom experiments on large model internals
compared to using standard PyTorch hooks. Here we provide an additional pair of code examples
that implement a common interpretability technique called “activation patching” (Zhang & Nanda,
2024). Code Example 2 implements this experiment using PyTorch hooks, while Code Example 3
uses the NNsight API. Both code snippets implement the same intervention, causing the model to
change its prediction for the base prompt from “Paris” to “Rome”.
1    from transformers import AutoTokenizer , AutoModelForCausalLM
2    model_id = " meta - llama / Meta - Llama -3.1 -8 B "
3    tokenizer = AutoTokenizer . from_pretrained ( model_id , padding_side = ' left ')
4    tokenizer . pad_token = tokenizer . eos_token
5    lm = AutoModelForCausalLM . from_pretrained ( model_id )

7 edit_prompt = " The Colosseum is located in the city of "
8 base_prompt = " The Louvre is located in the city of "
9 batch = [ edit_prompt , base_prompt ]

11 edit_tok = 5
12 base_tok = 6

14 def hook_fn ( module , input , output ) :
15     output [0][1 , base_tok ,:] = output [0][0 , edit_tok ,:]

17   layer = lm . model . layers [5]
18   hook = layer . register_forward_hook ( hook_fn )
19   inputs = tokenizer ([ edit_prompt , base_prompt ] , return_tensors = " pt " , padding = True )
20   output = lm (** inputs )
21   hook . remove ()

23 last = output [ " logits " ][ -1 , -1]. argmax ()
24 prediction = tokenizer . decode ( last )
25 print ( prediction )

Code Example 2: An intervention implemented with standard PyTorch hooks. Lines 1-4 load a
language model from huggingface, and lines 7-9 define two prompts. In lines 11-12, we note the
token indices for the last token of the subjects in each prompt. Lines 14-15 define a PyTorch hook
that replaces the hidden state in the base prompt with the hidden state from the edit prompt using the
respective last-subject-token indices. The experiment is carried out in lines 17-21, and we collect and
print the output of the model in lines 23-25.

1 from nnsight import LanguageModel
2 model_id = " meta - llama / Meta - Llama -3.1 -8 B "
3 lm = LanguageModel ( model_id )

5 edit_prompt = " The Colosseum is located in the city of "
6 base_prompt = " The Louvre is located in the city of "
7 batch = [ edit_prompt , base_prompt ]

 9 edit_tok = 5
10 base_tok = 6

12 layer = lm . model . layers [5]
13 with lm . trace ( batch ) as tracer :
14     layer . output [0][1 , base_tok ,:] = layer . output [0][0 , edit_tok ,:]
15     output = lm . output . save ()

17 last = output [ " logits " ][ -1 , -1]. argmax ()
18 prediction = lm . tokenizer . decode ( last )
19 print ( prediction )

Code Example 3: An intervention implemented with the NNsight API. This code defines the same
intervention as in Code Example 2. Lines 1-3 load a language model from huggingface, and lines 5-7
define two prompts. In lines 9-10, we note the token indices for the last token of the subjects in each
prompt. The experiment is carried out in lines 12-15, where we replace the hidden state in the base
prompt with the hidden state from the edit prompt, using the respective last-subject-token indices.
We collect and print the output of the model in lines 17-19.

Code Example 4 shows an NNsight implementation for attribution patching (Kramár et al., 2024), a
method that involves both causal interventions and computation of gradients within the model.


                                                         27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1 def get_batch_states_and_grads ( model , submodules , submod_names , batch , batch_target_ids ) :
2     hidden_states_cache = {}
3     grads_cache = {}

 5      with model . trace ( batch , remote = True ) as tracer :
 6          for submodule in submodules :
 7              if ' neurons ' in submod_names [ submodule ]:
 8                    x = submodule .input
 9              else :
10                    x = submodule . output [0]
11              hidden_states_cache [ submodule ] = x . save ()
12              grads_cache [ submodule ] = x . grad . save ()
13          neg_log_likelihood = metric_nll ( model , batch_target_ids ) . save ()
14          neg_log_likelihood . sum () . backward ()

16      hidden_states = { k : v . value [: , token_idx ] for k , v in hidden_states_cache . items () }
17      grads = { k : v . value [: , token_idx ] for k , v in grads_cache . items () }
18      return hidden_states , grads , neg_log_likelihood
     Code Example 4: An NNsight implementation for attribution patching (Kramár et al., 2024)

In Code Example 5, we show an example of how to implement and train a LoRA (Hu et al., 2021)
adapter using a session context with remote execution via NDIF. Code Examples 6 and 7 demonstrate
interventions on the gradients of model computations. And in Code Example 8, we show an what
training a linear probe remotely via NDIF might look like to predict output of layer 1 using the output
of layer 0.
1 import torch

3 from nnsight . envoy import Envoy
4 from torch . utils . data import DataLoader

6 # We will define a LORA class .
7 # The LORA class call method operations are simply traced like you would normally do in a .
         trace .
 8 class LORA ( nn . Module ) :
 9     def __init__ ( self , module : Envoy , dim : int , r : int ) -> None :
10         """ Init .

12          Args :
13               module ( Envoy ) : Which model Module we are adding the LORA to .
14               dim ( int ) : Dimension of the layer we are adding to ( This could potentially be
         auto populated if the user scanned first so we know the shape )
15               r ( int ) : Inner dimension of the LORA
16          """
17          super ( LORA , self ) . __init__ ()
18          self . r = r
19          self . module = module
20          self . WA = torch . nn . Parameter ( torch . randn ( dim , self . r ) , requires_grad = True ) . save ()
21          self . WB = torch . nn . Parameter ( torch . zeros ( self .r , dim ) , requires_grad = True ) . save ()

23      # The Call method defines how to actually apply the LORA .
24      def __call__ ( self , alpha : float = 1.0) :
25          """ Call .

27          Args :
28               alpha ( float , optional ) : How much to apply the LORA . Can be altered after
         training for inference . Defaults to 1.0.
29          """

31           # We apply WA to the first positional arg ( the hidden states )
32           A_x = torch . matmul ( self . module . input [0][0] , self . WA )
33           BA_x = torch . matmul ( A_x , self . WB )

35           # LORA is additive
36           h = BA_x + self . module . output

38           # Replace the output with our new one * alpha
39           # Could also have been self . module . output [:] = h * alpha , for in - place
40           self . module . output = h * alpha

42      def parameters ( self ) :
43          # Some way to get all the parameters .
44          return [ self . WA , self . WB ]

46 # get the model
47 llama = LanguageModel ( " meta - llama / Meta - Llama -3.1 -70 B " )

49 # We need the token id of the correct answer .


                                                          28
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 50   answer = " Paris "
 51   answer_token = llama . tokenizer . encode ( answer ) [1]
 52   # Inner LORA dimension
 53   lora_dim = 4

 55 # Module to train LORA on
 56 module = llama . model . layers [ -1]. mlp


 60 # The LORA object itself isn 't transmitted to the server . Only the forward / call method .
 61 # The parameters are created remotely and never sent only retrieved
 62 with llama . session ( remote = True ) as session :

 64       # Create dataset of 100 pairs of a blank prompt and the " Paris " id
 65       dataset = [[ " _ " , answer_token ]] * 100

 67       # Create a dataloader from it .
 68       dataloader = DataLoader ( dataset , batch_size =10)

 70       # Create our LORA on the last mlp
 71       lora = LORA ( module , dim , lora_dim )

 73       # Create an optimizer . Use the parameters from LORA
 74       optimizer = torch . optim . AdamW ( lora . parameters () , lr =3)

 76       # Iterate over dataloader using . iter .
 77       with session . iter ( dataloader , return_context = True ) as ( batch , iterator ) :

 79            prompt = batch [0]
 80            correct_token = batch [1]

 82            # Run . trace with prompt
 83            with llama . trace ( prompt ) as tracer :

 85                 # Apply LORA to intervention graph just by calling it with . trace
 86                 lora ()

 88                 # Get logits
 89                 logits = llama . lm_head . output

 91                 # Do cross entropy on last predicted token and correct_token
 92                 loss = torch . nn . functional . cross_entropy ( logits [: , -1] , batch [1])
 93                 # Call backward
 94                 loss . backward ()

 96           # Call methods on optimizer . Graphs that arent from . trace ( so in this case session
           and iterator both have their own graph ) are executed sequentially .
 97           # The Graph of Iterator here will be :
 98           # 1.) Index batch at 0 for prompt
 99           # 2.) Index batch at 1 for correct_token
100           # 3.) Execute the . trace using the prompt
101           # 4.) Call . step () on optimizer
102           optimizer . step ()
103           # 5.) Call . zero_grad () in optimizer
104           optimizer . zero_grad ()
105           # 6.) Print out the lora WA weights to show they are indeed changing
106           iterator . log ( lora . WA )

 Code Example 5: Using NNsight to train a LORA with remote execution, the Session context,
 and iterative interventions. NNsight supports creating parameters and optimizers remotely. Using
‘model.trace‘ as a forward pass, a dataset can be iterated over to optimize the remote parameters. The
 normal workflow of calculating a loss, executing a backwards pass, and taking optimizations steps
 is expressed just as if this were code executing on the user’s local workstation. After executing the
 training loop, the optimized parameters are sent back to the user’s workstation to be used locally, or
 to be sent back to the remote server for future applications of parameters.

 1    import nnsight
 2    from nnsight import NNsight
 3    from collections import OrderedDict
 4    import torch

 6 input_size = 5
 7 hidden_dims = 10
 8 output_size = 2

 10 net = torch . nn . Sequential (
 11     OrderedDict (



                                                           29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


12          [
13              ( " layer1 " , torch . nn . Linear ( input_size , hidden_dims ) ) ,
14              ( " layer2 " , torch . nn . Linear ( hidden_dims , output_size ) ) ,
15          ]
16      )
17 ). requires_grad_ ( False )
18 tiny_model = NNsight ( net )
19 input = torch . rand ((1 , input_size ) )

21 with tiny_model . trace ( input ) :

23       # We need to explicitly have the tensor require grad
24       # as the model we defined earlier turned off requiring grad .
25       tiny_model . layer1 . output . requires_grad = True

27       # We call . grad on a tensor Proxy to communicate we want to store its gradient .
28       # We need to call . save () since . grad is its own Proxy .
29       layer1_output_grad = tiny_model . layer1 . output . grad . save ()
30       layer2_output_grad = tiny_model . layer2 . output . grad . save ()

32       # Need a loss to propagate through the later modules in order to have a grad .
33       loss = tiny_model . output . sum ()
34       loss . backward ()

36 print ( " Layer 1 output gradient : " , layer1_output_grad )
37 print ( " Layer 2 output gradient : " , layer2_output_grad )

      Code Example 6: Applying backpropagation and accessing gradients with respect to a loss.

1    import nnsight
2    from nnsight import NNsight
3    from collections import OrderedDict
4    import torch

6 input_size = 5
7 hidden_dims = 10
8 output_size = 2

10   net = torch . nn . Sequential (
11        OrderedDict (
12            [
13                 ( " layer1 " , torch . nn . Linear ( input_size , hidden_dims ) ) ,
14                 ( " layer2 " , torch . nn . Linear ( hidden_dims , output_size ) ) ,
15            ]
16        )
17   ). requires_grad_ ( False )
18   tiny_model = NNsight ( net )
19   input = torch . rand ((1 , input_size ) )

21 with tiny_model . trace ( input ) :

23       # We need to explicitly have the tensor require grad
24       # as the model we defined earlier turned off requiring grad .
25       tiny_model . layer1 . output . requires_grad = True

27        tiny_model . layer1 . output . grad [:] = 0
28        tiny_model . layer2 . output . grad = tiny_model . layer2 . output . grad * 2

30        layer1_output_grad = tiny_model . layer1 . output . grad . save ()
31        layer2_output_grad = tiny_model . layer2 . output . grad . save ()

33       # Need a loss to propagate through the later modules in order to have a grad .
34       loss = tiny_model . output . sum ()
35       loss . backward ()

37 print ( " Layer 1 output gradient : " , layer1_output_grad )
38 print ( " Layer 2 output gradient : " , layer2_output_grad )

     Code Example 7: Zeroing out the grad of one layer, and doubling the grad of a second layer.

1 import torch
2 from torch . utils . data import DataLoader
3 from nnsight import LanguageModel , list , log

5 model = LanguageModel ( " meta - llama / Meta - llama -3.1 -405 B " )

7 with model . session ( remote = True ) as session :
8     features = 4096
9     probe = torch . nn . Linear ( features , features ) . save ()



                                                           30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


10     dataset = DataLoader (
11         [ " some " , " text " , " to " , " train " , " on " ] , batch_size =2 , shuffle = True
12     )
13     optimizer = torch . optim . Adam ( probe . parameters () , lr =0.003)

15     for epoch in list ( range (50) ) :
16         for batch in dataset :
17             with model . trace ( batch ) as tracer :
18                 input = model . model . layers [0]. output [0]
19                 probe = probe . to ( input . device )
20                 prediction = probe ( input )
21                 output = model . model . layers [1]. output [0]
22                 loss = torch . nn . functional . mse_loss ( prediction , output )
23                 loss . backward ()

25               optimizer . step ()
26               optimizer . zero_grad ()

28          log ( loss )
29          log ( probe . weight )
     Code Example 8: Sample code showing the remote training of a linear probe using NDIF.


                                                          31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     P ERFORMANCE
In this section, we report additional results evaluating the performance of NNsight and NDIF in
various settings. These include setup and runtime across different model sizes of OPT (Zhang et al.,
2022), comparing the setup and runtime of HPC and NDIF for Llama-3.1 models (Dubey et al., 2024),
and the response time for NDIF requests as a function of the number of users.

D.1   HPC VS . NDIF

    Table 2: Setup-time and runtime comparison of HPC and NDIF across OPT parameter sizes

                   OPT           Parameters      Setup Time         Runtime
                                 125m           0.635 ± 0.035     0.021 ± 0.001
                                 350m           0.847 ± 0.058     0.041 ± 0.001
                                 1.3b           1.242 ± 0.016     0.072 ± 0.004
                   HPC           2.7b           1.866 ± 0.003     0.123 ± 0.011
                                 6.7b           3.474 ± 0.023     0.257 ± 0.008
                                 13b            5.971 ± 0.021     0.429 ± 0.018
                                 30b           11.338 ± 0.073     0.913 ± 0.016
                                 66b           23.697 ± 0.079     1.889 ± 0.040
                                 125m           0.149 ± 0.008     0.541 ± 0.123
                                 350m           0.304 ± 0.015     0.588 ± 0.178
                                 1.3b           0.409 ± 0.213     0.627 ± 0.099
                   NDIF          2.7b           0.358 ± 0.054     0.494 ± 0.085
                                 6.7b           0.317 ± 0.011     0.550 ± 0.080
                                 13b            0.370 ± 0.026     0.773 ± 0.136
                                 30b            0.343 ± 0.013     1.295 ± 0.104
                                 66b            0.423 ± 0.095     2.739 ± 0.154


Table 3: Runtime comparison of NNsight using execution on an HPC and remote execution via NDIF.


                                                 Activation Patching
                     Framework
                                          Llama-3.1-8B     Llama-3.1-70B
                     NNsight (HPC)        0.333 ± 0.013     1.992 ± 0.056
                     NNsight (NDIF)       0.998 ± 0.134     2.369 ± 0.117


                     Table 4: Time in seconds to load the model into memory.


                                                     Loading Weights
                     Framework
                                          Llama-3.1-8B     Llama-3.1-70B
                     NNsight (HPC)        5.991 ± 0.192     43.617 ± 1.118
                     NNsight (NDIF)       0.518 ± 0.005     0.695 ± 0.056



D.2   L OAD -T ESTING NDIF FOR C ONCURRENT U SERS

In this section, we assess the performance and scalability of NDIF with an increasing number of
concurrent users (and thereby requests). We use Llama-3.1-8B (Dubey et al., 2024) as the model
being served on NDIF for this evaluation, which was hosted on a 48 GB RTX 6000 Ada GPU.
To simulate a single user, we construct a NNsight request with a prompt containing up to 24 tokens
that accesses and saves the output of a layer of Llama-3.1-8B selected uniformly at random. Code


                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Example 9 shows how we generate sample prompts and requests for a single user, saving the response
time of the request sent to and returned by NDIF.
 1 def layer_selector ( self ) -> None :
 2     """ Simulate selecting activations of an intermediate layer . """
 3     start_time = time . time ()
 4     try :
 5           layer : int = random . randint (0 , self . n_layers - 1)
 6           query : str = ' hello ' * random . randint (1 , 24)
 7           with self . model . trace ( query , remote = True ) :
 8                output = self . model . model . layers [ layer ]. output . save ()
 9     finally :
10           elapsed_time = time . time () - start_time
11           # Append to a list visible locally to this process
12           self . user . environment . request_times . append ( elapsed_time )

      Code Example 9: Code to generate NDIF requests and measure the response time for many users.

Then, for N ∈ {1, ..., 100}, we simulate N concurrent users submitting requests to the NDIF server,
all running as separate processes, and record the response time for each user’s request.
The results can be seen in Figure 9, where we plot the response time of the NDIF system as a function
of the number of concurrent users. We find that as the number of users increases, the increase in the
median response time (shown in black) is approximately linear. Furthermore, as more concurrent
users access the system, variance in response time increases.
This experiment was done using an implementation of the system that creates a queue for each
subsequent user, and runs multiple forward passes (one for each user). There are future plans to allow
true parallel execution of user requests in the same batch.


                          50
Response Time (seconds)


                          40


                          30


                          20


                          10


                          0
                               0   5   10   15   20   25   30    35   40   45    50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95 100
                                                                Number of Concurrent Users
Figure 9: Speed and robustness of NDIF response time to changes in concurrent user request count.
Tests simulated N = 1 to 100 concurrent users on Llama-3.1-8B requesting outputs from uniformly
random intermediate layers over a 30-second window. The gray area shows 25% and 75% quantiles.
Points show the minimum and maximum times for each user count. Line plot shows median response
time.


                                                                            33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    E QUIVALENCE OF T HEANO ’ S M ANY- TO -M ANY AND NN SIGHT ’ S
     M ANY- TO -O NE A PPLY N ODES
We demonstrate that Al-Rfou et al. (2016)’s many-to-many computation graph structure—where an
apply node can output multiple variable nodes—is computationally equivalent to a graph in which
each apply node outputs only a single variable node. This equivalence holds by considering the
many-to-many structure as a special case of a many-to-one structure, where the single output is a
tuple (or concatenation) of variable nodes.
Let a(in) denote an apply node in the many-to-many setting, and let v1 , . . . , vm represent the m
variable node outputs of a(in) . Suppose these variable nodes serve as inputs to n downstream apply
nodes a(out)         (out)
        1 , . . . , an     in the computation graph.
We now construct a new graph that adheres to the many-to-one structure, where each apply node has
exactly one output. Let b(in) , v , and b(out)        (out)
                                         1 , . . . , bn     denote corresponding nodes in the transformed
graph, defined as follows:

      1. The apply node b(in) outputs a single variable node v, which is defined as the concatenation
         (or tuple) of the original outputs: v = (v1 , . . . , vm ).
      2. Each downstream apply node b(out)   i      takes as input v and any other variables that were inputs
         to ai in the original graph. The node b(out)
              (out)
                                                             i   performs the same computation as a(out)      i   , but
         accesses the necessary components of v corresponding to its original inputs. Specifically, if
         a(out)
           i    originally took inputs vi1 , . . . , vik , then a(out)
                                                                 i     extracts vi1 , . . . , vik from v and processes
         them accordingly.

This process generalizes inductively to any depth of the computation graph. In the event that one of
the output variable nodes vi needs to be used elsewhere in the computation graph (e.g., as input to a
node that does not directly accept v), the transformation can be handled by introducing an additional
apply node, b(extract) . This node takes v as input and outputs vi , ensuring that the structure of the
original computation graph is maintained.
Figure 10 shows an example of how getters and setters interact with an intervention graphs variable
and apply nodes on an abstract computation graph.

                                                 (a)
                                                                                    Computation Graph
                                                                                    Intervention Graph

                                                                                    Variable Node
                      v1
                                                                                    Apply Node

                                                               a'1            (a) Getter (v1, a'1)
                                                                              (b) Setter (v'2, a3)
                      a3                        v'2


                     …               (b)
Figure 10: Augmenting the computation graph C (pink graph on the left) with an intervention graph
(green, right). (a) A getter edge brings the output of a variable node v1 from the computation graph to
an apply node a′1 in the intervention graph. (b) A setter edge sends the output of v2′ in the intervention
graph back to a3 in the computation graph.


                                                         34
