Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K ITTEN   : A K NOWLEDGE -I NTENSIVE E VALUATION
OF I MAGE G ENERATION ON V ISUAL E NTITIES

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review


       Real Photo             Stable Diffusion            Adobe Firefly              DALL-E 3


                                        Great Pyramid of Giza


                                     Statue of Equality Ramanuja

Figure 1: Can text-to-image models generate precise visual details of real-world entities? State-
of-the-art image generation models are effective at rendering well-known entities (i.e., Great Pyra-
mid of Giza), but often struggle with less-known entities and end up with hallucinated depictions.

                                            A BSTRACT
         Recent advancements in text-to-image generation have significantly enhanced the
         quality of synthesized images. Despite this progress, evaluations predominantly
         focus on aesthetic appeal or alignment with text prompts. Consequently, there is
         limited understanding of whether these models can accurately represent a wide
         variety of realistic visual entities — a task requiring real-world knowledge. To
         address this gap, we propose a benchmark focused on evaluating Knowledge-
         I n T ensive image genera T ion on real-world EN tities (i.e., K ITTEN ). Using K IT-
         TEN , we conduct a systematic study on the fidelity of entities in text-to-image
         generation models, focusing on their ability to generate a wide range of real-world
         visual entities, such as landmark buildings, aircraft, plants, and animals. We evalu-
         ate the latest text-to-image models and retrieval-augmented customization models
         using both automatic metrics and carefully-designed human evaluations, with an
         emphasis on the fidelity of entities in the generated images. Our findings reveal
         that even the most advanced text-to-image models often fail to generate entities
         with accurate visual details. Although retrieval-augmented models can enhance
         the fidelity of entity by incorporating reference images during testing, they often
         over-rely on these references and struggle to produce novel configurations of the
         entity as requested in creative text prompts.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent advancements in generative AI have revolutionized multimedia content creation. Large
Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in assisting with knowledge-


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


intensive tasks such as question-answering and summarization. Cutting-edge image generation mod-
els, such as Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022; Imagen 3 Team, 2024; Hu et al., 2024), DALL-E (Ramesh
et al., 2021; 2022) and Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), can produce photorealistic and cre-
ative images from textual descriptions. However, as these generative models become more capable
and popular, it is crucial to assess their reliability. Recent research has focused on the factuality
of LLMs, revealing that even the most advanced models can generate errors or inaccurate content,
potentially undermining trust and causing societal harm (Muhlgay et al., 2023; Feng et al., 2023).
Despite the growing attention to factuality issues in large language models, significantly less focus
has been placed on the factual accuracy of image generation models. Existing benchmarks for text-
to-image generation predominantly assess alignment with general textual descriptions (Lin et al.,
2015), compliance with image-editing instructions (Ku et al., 2024), or adherence to specified spatial
relationships (Gokhale et al., 2022). These benchmarks fall short in evaluating how well models can
generate images that accurately reproduce the precise visual details of real-world entities, objects,
and scenes grounded in trustworthy knowledge sources (see examples in Figure 1).
Recently, HEIM (Lee et al., 2024) introduces an evaluation suite that examines various aspects
of image generation models, including their ability to generate entities such as historical figures
or well-known subjects. However, the real-world distribution of visual entities is far richer than the
entities evaluated by HEIM, and a more breadth assessment is demanded. In addition, the evaluation
of HEIM primarily measures the alignment between the generated images and the text prompts
associated with the names of entities, which often can not capture the fine-grained visual details
essential for assessing the reproduction of visual-world knowledge. Since many nuances of real-
world entities cannot be conveyed through text alone, directly evaluating the fidelity of entities in
the generated images is crucial.
To fill this critical gap in evaluating whether the image generation models can reproduce visual
world knowledge, we introduce K ITTEN, a benchmark dataset and evaluation suite specifically de-
signed to assess how well these models can generate visually accurate representations of real-world
entities grounded in trust-worthy knowledge sources. Unlike prior benchmarks that primarily fo-
cus on aesthetics, general text alignment, or commonsense reasoning, K ITTEN leverages prompts
derived from visual entities documented in Wikipedia (Hu et al., 2023a), a widely recognized and
trustworthy knowledge base, and evaluates real-world entities over 8 visual domains (i.e., aircraft,
vehicle, cuisine, flower, insect, landmark, plant, and sport in Figure 2). This ensures that the gen-
erated images are evaluated based on comparison with reliable and verifiable visual information
crowdsourced by the large internet population. Moreover, we have developed a comprehensive set
of human evaluation criteria that emphasize the precise and accurate visual depiction of these en-
tities, capturing subtle yet critical details essential for visual correctness. By directly assessing the
fidelity of entities in the generated images against established knowledge, K ITTEN aims to promote
the evaluation of world knowledge for image generation models.
Using K ITTEN, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation of various text-to-image models, includ-
ing both standard models and customization models fine-tuned or employing in-context learning
with retrieved reference images (Chen et al., 2022). Our assessment focuses on the fidelity of en-
tities in the generated images, particularly in depicting real-world entities across eight visual do-
mains. The results reveal that even the most advanced text-to-image models (Imagen 3 Team, 2024;
Black Forest Labs, 2024) frequently fail to produce correct representations, often generating images
with inaccuracies or missing critical details essential for correctness in visual knowledge. While
retrieval-augmented models show promise in enhancing precise visual details by incorporating ref-
erence images during testing, they tend to over-rely on these references. This dependency hampers
their ability to create novel configurations of entities as requested in creative text prompts. These
findings highlight a significant challenge in current image generation models: balancing the fidelity
of entity with creative flexibility. Our study underscores the need for advanced techniques that can
generate precise visual details in images without compromising the ability to respond to diverse and
imaginative user inputs.


2   F IDELITY OF E NTITIES IN T EXT- TO -I MAGE G ENERATION

We provide an overview of existing text-to-image evaluation benchmarks, and show that the fidelity
of entities in generated images is often overlooked in existing evaluation. Next, we discuss the mo-
tivation and design considerations for evaluating the fidelity of entities in text-to-image generation.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Existing evaluation for text-to-image generation. The evaluation of text-to-image generation
models has been a longstanding challenge, and numerous efforts have been made to more accu-
rately measure model performance. Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017) is one of
the most commonly used metrics to evaluate the perceptual quality of model outputs by measuring
the distribution gap between generated images and real-world images. For text-image alignment,
CLIP-T scores (Hessel et al., 2021) are widely used, evaluating the CLIP feature similarity between
the generated image and the input prompt. These metrics typically provide a summary of the quality
of the generated images. Several works evaluate the alignment between generated images and their
text descriptions (Yarom et al., 2024; Gordon et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2023b; Wiles et al., 2024; Cho
et al., 2023). However, these efforts primarily focus on general semantic consistency rather than
fine-grained visual accuracy of depicted entities and specialized visual-world knowledge.
Recent works aim to more thoroughly evaluate models by decomposing the evaluation into multiple
sub-categories, such as attribute binding and numeracy, and propose corresponding benchmarks for
these categories. For example, Gokhale et al. (2022) propose the SR2D dataset and VISOR metric
to benchmark spatial relationships in text-to-image models, measuring whether the objects in the
generated image adhere to the specified spatial relationship (e.g., an orange above a giraffe). Huang
et al. (2023) introduce T2I-CompBench++, which consists of 8,000 compositional text prompts from
four categories (e.g., attribute binding) and eight sub-categories (e.g., color binding), along with
corresponding metrics. Bakr et al. (2023) propose HRS-Bench, which evaluates text-to-image model
performance across 13 skills categorized into five major groups (i.e., bias, fairness, generalization,
accuracy, and robustness). Hu et al. (2023b) introduce TIFA v1.0, a benchmark with 4,000 text
inputs and 25,000 questions across 12 categories, paired with an automatic evaluation metric that
measures image faithfulness via visual question answering. Additionally, Ku et al. (2024) proposes
ImagenHub, which evaluates models across different generation tasks by measuring the semantic
consistency and perceptual quality of the generated images.
Fidelity of entities in text-to-image generation. While text-to-image models enable the possibility
of generating creative images from text descriptions, this can become problematic when visual-
world knowledge is required, i.e., generating the correct visual details of entities. Existing works
have identified this issue and proposed solutions to mitigate hallucination (Lim & Shim, 2024).
However, there is still no clear methodology to systematically assess the limitations of these models,
which is crucial for improving this aspect. In this work, we propose K ITTEN, a benchmark consist-
ing of a diverse range of subjects across various real-world entities such as landmarks, plants, and
animals. Using K ITTEN, we conduct a systematic study on the fidelity of entities in text-to-image
generation models, focusing on their ability to accurately depict a wide range of visual entities. We
evaluate the latest text-to-image models and retrieval-augmented customization models using both
automatic metrics and carefully designed human evaluations, emphasizing the fidelity of entities in
the generated images.

3     K ITTEN B ENCHMARK
To understand the reliability of text-to-image models in generating knowledge-intensive concepts,
we design the K ITTEN benchmark to evaluate the fidelity of entities in image generation models.

3.1   D ESIGN D ESIDERATA OF K ITTEN

The key to creating the benchmark is constructing a set of image-generation prompts that require
grounding in visual-world knowledge. There are two specific properties that differentiate our bench-
mark from prior evaluation frameworks of image generation:
• Specialized knowledge: while many existing evaluation frameworks aim to test the common-
  sense knowledge of image generation models such as spatial or physical relationships (Gokhale
  et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023), we would like to stress-test the image generation models by
  focusing on generating items from specific domains. Therefore, we create the benchmark using
  image concepts from Wikipedia, a rich source of knowledge-intensive data source. Specifically,
  we use the OVEN-Wiki (Hu et al., 2023a) dataset, which contains several domain-specific entities
  and their corresponding images such as landmarks, plants, and animals.
• Fidelity of entity: while most existing image generation benchmarks focus on evaluating the
  instruction-following capability of the models, we would like to understand how well these mod-


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Knowledge Base                             Visual Entities                           Evaluation of
                                              Bandinelli Palace                    Fidelity in Entities

                            Entity-based Prompts                   Support Set       Human Evaluation
        Aircraft
                                                                                            Faithfulness
        Vehicle            Photo of Bandinelli Palace.                                        to Entity

        Cuisine                                                                              Instruction-
                            Bandinelli Palace stands                                          following
        Flower              against snow mountains.
         Insect                                                   Evaluation Set    Automatic Metrics
                              A peacock in front of
       Landmark                Bandinelli Palace.                                           Image-Entity
                                                                                             Alignment
         Plant
                               An oil painting of                                            Image-Text
         Sport                 Bandinelli Palace.                                             Alignment



Figure 2: K ITTEN benchmark is constructed from real-world entities over eight domains. For each
selected entity, we construct four types of image-generation prompts based on the entity. K ITTEN in-
cludes a support set of entity images from the knowledge source for evaluating retrieval-augmented
models. It also contains an evaluation set for assessing the fidelity of the generated entities.

  els are at faithfully representing real-world concepts grounded in visual knowledge sources such
  as Wikipedia. Therefore, we design a specific set of human evaluations targeted at capturing the
  visual fidelity of generated entities grounded on specialized knowledge sources.
Guided by the above principles, next, we clarify the details of the K ITTEN benchmark.

3.2   C REATING E NTITY- BASED P ROMPTS

To create a diverse set of prompts focusing on faithfulness to knowledge-grounded concepts, we
select several categories of entities from the OVEN-Wiki (Hu et al., 2023a) dataset as the basis for
the image generation prompts. Figure 2 shows the process of creating the benchmark. We select
entities from eight specialized domains, including human-made objects (aircraft, vehicle, landmark,
cuisine), natural species (flower, plant, insect), and human activities (sport).
After selecting the entities for the benchmark, we construct four types of prompts evaluating the
models’ ability to respond to diverse and imaginative user inputs.

• The basic prompt: Photo of Bandinelli Palace.
• The entity in a specified place: Bandinelli Palace stands against snow mountains.
• The composition of the entity: A peacock in front of Bandinelli Palace.
• The entity in specific styles / materials: An oil painting of Bandinelli Palace.

For each entity in the selected categories, we collect a set of reference images from Wikipedia
for human evaluation. We also provide a support set of entity images, so that we can evaluate
retrieval-augmented models that can take advantage of external knowledge sources (see discussions
on evaluated models in Section 4). Detailed statistics of the data can be found in Section A.5.

3.3   H UMAN E VALUATION

We design a set of human evaluations targeting the visual fidelity of the target entity in the generated
image. We propose to decompose the evaluation into two different aspects: 1) faithfulness to the
prompt entity; and 2) adherence to prompt instructions beyond the prompt entity. This design allows
the human raters to focus on two clearly defined criteria. It also enables more informative analysis
and comparison of different models, as our results show that there are often trade-offs between these
two aspects. We show the reference images of the prompt entity but also encourage human raters
to conduct their own research to verify the faithfulness of the entity. We use the average of 5 raters
for each generated image as the final human evaluation score. The human annotation interface is
shown in Figure 3. We also include open-ended questions to gather qualitative feedback. Full rater
instructions are shown in Section A.6.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



      1                    2                     3                     4                           5                       User


 Generate an image according to the following description:
      a watercolor painting of the Bandinelli Palace landmark.
 Use the reference images (provided above) to ensure the entity in the prompt (Bandinelli Palace landmark) is
 factually correct. You may conduct your own research (e.g., Google Search) to clarify the appearance of the
 entity and ensure its accurate depiction in the generated image.                                                                    Model


    Faithfulness to Prompt Entity
 How faithfully does the generated image
                                                                   1                   2                     3                      4                  5
 represent the entity mentioned in the prompt?             Not faithful at all   Barely faithful       Somewhat faithful      Mostly faithful   Completely faithful

    Adherence to Prompt Beyond References
 Does the generated image accurately and comprehensively depict any aspects of the scene or entity described in the prompt that are not already
 reflected in the reference images?
    Yes: The generated image accurately and comprehensively depicts aspects of the scene or entity
    described in the prompt that are not already reflected in the reference images.
    No: The generated image fails to accurately and comprehensively depict aspects of the scene or entity
    described in the prompt that are not already reflected in the reference images.



Figure 3: Annotation interface. Raters are asked to: 1) rate the image’s faithfulness to the prompt
entity on a 1-5 scale, and 2) indicate whether the image follows the prompt with a yes or no response.

• Faithfulness to Entity. For the evaluation of faithfulness to the prompt entity, we use a scale of 1
  to 5 where 5 is completely faithful to the prompt entity and 1 means the generated image has no
  similarity at all to the prompt entity.
• Instruction-following. We simply use a yes/no question to evaluate whether the generated image
  adheres to the prompt instructions beyond the entity. We calculate the percentage of prompts with
  an answer of yes.

3.4       AUTOMATIC M ETRICS

We also gather the results of popular automatic metrics for image generation models which mostly
measure the similarity of the generated images with the references or prompts. While metrics are
not specialized to capture the visual fidelity of the generated entity, we still include their results to
provide a comprehensive analysis of whether these widely used metrics are suitable to evaluate the
fidelity of entities in the generated images.
• Image-Text Alignment. We use the CLIP-T Score (Hessel et al., 2021) to measure the alignment
  between the generated image and the text prompt. This score is the cosine similarity between the
  image and text features in CLIP’s feature space (Radford et al., 2021).
• Image-Entity Alignment. To assess the faithfulness between the entities in the generated im-
  age and reality, we measure the average pairwise visual similarity between the generated image
  and reference images of the target entity in the evaluation set, as a proxy for how closely fine-
  grained details match. We compute the cosine similarity in the self-supervised DINO’s feature
  space (Oquab et al., 2024).

4     E VALUATED M ODELS
We would like to provide a comprehensive set of analysis using K ITTEN to understand the visual-
world knowledge learned in current state-of-the-art models. Here we provide details of the text-to-
image models evaluated in the paper.

4.1       T EXT- TO -I MAGE BACKBONE M ODELS

First, we examine general text-to-image backbone models that directly generate images solely based
on text prompts without using additional tools or reference images.
• Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) contains an autoencoder that maps images to a latent
  space, and then a diffusion model is trained in this latent space to reduce computational demands.


                                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) uses a T5-based text encoder and cascade conditional diffusion mod-
  els to generate high-resolution images, showing that advanced language understanding improves
  image fidelity and text-image alignment.
• Imagen-3 (Imagen 3 Team, 2024) is a successor to Imagen, known for handling long and descrip-
  tive prompts and generating rich image details.
• Flux (Black Forest Labs, 2024) is a successor to Stable Diffusion, incorporating multimodal and
  parallel diffusion transformer blocks with flow matching training, enhancing the ability to handle
  complex compositions.

4.2   R ETRIEVAL - AUGMENTED T EXT- TO -I MAGE M ODELS

The retrieval-augmented method is a family of image generation approach that leverages some sup-
port images (e.g., retrieved by the search engine) to augment the model (via either fine-tuning or
in-context learning), and improve the fidelity of entities in its generation. Our goal is to evaluate this
family of models and identify whether methods that incorporate those support reference images into
its modeling could enhance the fine visual fidelity of the entity generation. Particularly, we study a
few models listed below:

• DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023) fine-tunes the Stable Diffusion model to learn a special token en-
  coded the target entity, using an objective of reconstructing the reference images. It then generates
  the entity in new contexts using prompts that include the special token.
• Custom-Diff (Kumari et al., 2023), similar to DreamBooth, fine-tunes partial weights of the back-
  bone Stable Diffusion model to achieve entity-focused generation.
• Instruct-Imagen (Hu et al., 2024) is an image generation model that follows multi-modal instruc-
  tions. We use instruct-Imagen for entity customization through in-context learning, by encoding
  reference entity images into instructions: Generate an image of <entity name>,
    referring to the images <ref image 1>, ..., <ref image K>, and follow the
    caption: <prompt>.

Specifically, we provide some ground-truth reference entity images (hold-out from the entity images
used for evaluation) as the support images to augment the above methods, and then sample new
images from them following the evaluation text prompt.

5     E VALUATION R ESULTS

In this section, we present the evaluation results and analysis of various text-to-image models. We
begin with a discussion of the human evaluation results, followed by an examination of popular
automatic metrics, and explore how they correspond with the human evaluations.

5.1   H UMAN E VALUATION

Improvement in faithfulness and reduction in instruction-following. Figure 4 (Top) shows that
retrieval-augmented models—Custom-Diff, DreamBooth, and Instruct-Imagen—generally exhibit
much better faithfulness to the entity compared to their base models, SD and Imagen. This is
because these models can incorporate reference images during testing, allowing them to generate
visual concepts that are not well-represented in the base models’ parameters. However, we find
that retrieval-augmented models tend to have reduced instruction-following capabilities compared
to their backbone models.
Although the pattern of higher faithfulness and lower instruction-following is consistent across
retrieval-augmented methods, the extent of the impact varies significantly depending on the spe-
cific method used. In particular, Instruct-Imagen shows a marked increase in faithfulness score
(2.81→4.22) but also a substantial reduction in instruction-following score (72.2→46.5). This sug-
gests that while retrieval-augmented methods enhance the model’s ability to generate images that are
more faithful to the entities by incorporating reference images during testing, they often over-rely
on these references and struggle to create novel configurations of the entity as requested in creative
text prompts.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Instruction-following
                                                                            Imagen-3
                                                                                                       Retrieval Models
                                      80                  Flux                                         Backbone Models
                                              SD             Imagen
                                                                       DreamBooth
                                                                Custom-Diff
                                      60
                                                                                                           Instruct-Imagen

                                        2.4        2.6      2.8        3      3.2     3.4      3.6   3.8        4       4.2
                                                                           Faithfulness to Entity
      Image-Text Alignment


                                                            Imagen-3
                                      0.34 SD                                                          Retrieval Models
                                                                                                       Backbone Models
                                                     Flux Imagen
                                      0.33
                                                              DreamBooth
                                      0.32               Custom-Diff

                                      0.31                                                                  Instruct-Imagen
                                        0.34             0.38          0.42       0.46        0.5           0.54         0.58
                                                                           Image-Entity Alignment

Figure 4: Evaluation results of different text-to-image models. Top: Human evaluation showing
the trade-off between Faithfulness and Instruction-following. Bottom: Automatic metrics showing
the relationship between Image-Entity and Image-Text Alignments.


High faithfulness with strong backbone models. Imagen-3 achieves the highest instruction-
following score (83.6) and a high faithfulness score (3.17), outperforming even the retrieval-
augmented models DreamBooth (3.08) and Custom-Diff (2.90). This demonstrates that Imagen-3,
a strong backbone model, is capable of generating specialized entities based solely on text prompts,
without relying on reference images. However, there still exists a significant gap in the fidelity of en-
tities compared to the highest faithfulness score obtained by Instruct-Imagen (4.22). These findings
highlight the need for advanced techniques that improve the fidelity of entities without compromis-
ing the model’s ability to respond to diverse user inputs.
Improved faithfulness without harming instruction-following. The retrieval model DreamBooth
improves entity faithfulness compared to its baseline model, SD (2.51→3.08), without compromis-
ing SD’s instruction-following score (72.2→73.8), shifting its performance to the right in the figure.
Applying DreamBooth to the advanced backbone model Imagen-3 could further enhance faithful-
ness, potentially achieving a sweet spot that balances the fidelity of entities with creative flexibility.
Impact of backbone model improvements. The results indicate that improvements to base models
alone can enhance both instruction-following and faithfulness. For example, Flux outperforms its
predecessor SD by 0.23, and Imagen-3 surpasses its predecessor Imagen by 0.35 in faithfulness.
However, these faithfulness improvements are still minor compared to those achieved by retrieval-
augmented methods, such as DreamBooth, which shows a 0.57 improvement over SD. This suggests
that simply enhancing the text-to-image model is not sufficient; additional methods like retrieval
augmentation are necessary to achieve higher levels of faithfulness. Interestingly, we observe that
the Imagen family, Imagen (2.82) and Imagen-3 (3.17), consistently achieve higher faithfulness
scores compared to the SD family, SD (2.51) and Flux (2.74). Detailed human evaluation scores
across domains can be found in Section A.2.

5.2   AUTOMATIC M ETRIC

Improvement in image-entity alignment and reduction in image-text alignment. Figure 4 (Bot-
tom) shows that retrieval models increase the image-entity alignment score while decreasing the
image-text alignment compared to their respective base models. In particular, Instruct-Imagen stands
out with a substantial increase in the image-entity score (0.386→0.582) and the most significant drop


                                                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                     SD             Imagen        Flux          Imagen-3           Custom-Diff          DreamBooth          Instruct-Imagen


  Image-Text(%)
                    40.0


                                                       35.4


                                                                     35.2


                                                                                                                                                      35.2
                                                       35.1
                                                      34.9
                                                      34.7
                                                      34.6
                                34.5


                                                      34.4


                                                                    34.3


                                                                                    34.3


                                                                                                                                                     34.3
                                                                                                                                                     34.2
                                34.1
                                34.1


                                                                                    33.9
                                                                   33.8


                                                                                   33.7
                                                                                   33.6
                                                                   33.5


                                                                                                                                                    33.5


                                                                                                                                                    33.5
                               33.3
                               33.3


                                                                                   33.3


                                                                                                                                     33.2
                              32.9


                                                                  32.9


                                                                                  32.7


                                                                                                                                    32.6
                                                                                                      32.5
                                                    32.4


                                                                                                                                    32.4
                                                                                                                                    32.4
                                                                                                      32.3
                                                                                                     32.2



                                                                                                     32.2
                                                                                                     32.1


                                                                                                                       31.8


                                                                                                                                   31.6


                                                                                                                                                  31.6
                                                                 31.5


                                                                                                                      31.5
                                                                                                                      31.5
                                                                 31.4


                                                                                                                                   31.4
                                                                                                                      31.2
                                                                                                                        33
                                                                                                                     30.8
                    35.0


                                                                                                                                  30.2
                                                                                 32


                                                                                                     32


                                                                                                                                                29.8
                                                                                                   29.5


                                                                                                                    29.4
                           29.3
                    30.0

                    25.0


                                             75.8


                                                          71.1
  Image-Entity(%)


                    80.0


                                                                                            64.6
                                58.8


                                                     57.6
                                                     57.6
                                                     56.7
                                                     55.9
                               55.5
                                 61


                                                                                                                           54.5
                                                                         53.9
                                                      59


                                                                                                             52.6
                              52.4

                                58


                                                                                                                                                      48.2
                                                    54


                                                                                    47.7
                                                                                   46.9
                    60.0
                           44.9


                                                                                  43.5
                                                                                  43.5
                                                                                    49


                                                                                                                       40.7
                                                                     40.6


                                                                                                                                           45
                                                                                 38.6
                                                                    38.2


                                                                                                                      38.2


                                                                                                                                                   37.9



                                                                                                                                                  37.1
                                                                                                                                                  36.9
                                                                                                                                                  36.9
                                                                   36.7


                                                                                                                      36.6
                                                                   35.9


                                                                                                                     35.3
                                                                   35.1


                                                                                                                     34.3


                                                                                                                                                 33.1
                                                                                                                    30.6


                                                                                                                                                28.8
                                                                 28.5


                                                                                                                                    26.7
                                                                                                      26.3
                    40.0


                                                                                                       28


                                                                                                                                   21.8
                                                                                                                                   21.5
                                                                                                                                  20.7
                                                                                                    19.8
                                                                                                    19.4


                                                                                                                                    25
                                                                                                                                  18.9
                                                                                                    18.1
                                                                                                   15.3
                    20.0

                                  Aircraft           Vehicle       Cuisine         Flower           Insect          Landmark       Plant          Sport


Figure 5: Performance across domains. The model performance depends on the domain-specific
content. Retrieval models perform better in the insect, landmark, and plant domains and get worse in
cuisine and sport domains in the image-entity score, which might be due to the entities’ occurrence
in common image datasets.


in the image-text score (0.329→0.307). These observations align with the human evaluation, where
retrieval-augmented models show improved faithfulness in entity but reduced instruction-following.
In addition, this trend is consistent with observations in recent works (Materzyńska et al., 2023),
which indicate that models incorporating additional inputs, such as reference images, tend to have
lower image-text alignment scores compared to base models. This is due to a trade-off between
aligning with the text and with the images. With longer training times, alignment to reference im-
ages improves, while alignment to the text decreases.
Subtle variations with backbone model improvements. In contrast to the findings from human
evaluations, we observe that improving base models does not necessarily lead to gains in the au-
tomatic metrics. For example, Flux (0.329) performs worse than its predecessor SD (0.338) in the
image-text metric, and Imagen-3 (0.389) shows only a marginal improvement over Imagen (0.386)
in the image-entity score. These findings suggest that automatic metrics have a limited ability to
capture meaningful variations between models of similar quality, even when architectural enhance-
ments or training improvements are made.
Misalignment between automatic metrics and human evaluation. While the overall observations
from the automatic metrics align with the human evaluation, there are notable discrepancies. For
instance, although DreamBooth achieves a higher instruction-following score in the human evalua-
tion compared to its base model SD, it has a lower image-text alignment score. We hypothesize that
the image-text score may not accurately assess the alignment between the generated image and rare
entities. For example, with the prompt “The Teufelsmauer landmark shimmers in the sunlight,” it is
unclear whether the image-text similarity for “Teufelsmauer” is evaluated correctly. This highlights
a potential gap in the traditional metrics (Lee et al., 2024), where it fails to measure true align-
ment between the unique entity and the generated image. On the other hand, Imagen-3 ranks higher
in faithfulness in the human evaluation, yet DreamBooth outperforms Imagen-3 in DINO scores,
showing a misalignment between human perception and the learned semantic features.
Performance across domains. Figure 5 shows that the performance of each method is domain-
dependent. Retrieval-augmented models generally achieve higher image-entity alignment scores
than backbone models in the insect, landmark, and plant domains. These domains contain less
frequent terms in common image datasets (e.g., LAION), meaning that these visual concepts are not
well-represented in the base model’s parameters. The retrieval-augmented models perform better
by incorporating reference images during inference. In contrast, the retrieval-augmented method,
Custom-Diff, performs worse than its base model, SD, in the cuisine and sport domains. These
domains contain common terms, such as snowboarding and guacamole, which the SD model has
well-memorized. The Custom-Diff model’s performance degrades, potentially due to fine-tuning


                                                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


on a smaller reference set. This variability suggests that the effectiveness of a retrieval-augmented
method may be influenced by the nature of the domain-specific content, as well as the model and
customization method used. The results indicate that the optimal choice of retrieval-augmented
method remains an open question and can be task or domain-specific. Detailed automatic metrics
across domains can be found in Section A.3.


5.3   A BLATION S TUDY

Selection of image-entity alignment metrics. We conduct an ablation study to select the most
appropriate image-entity alignment metric in Table 1. Two popular visual features are tested for
calculating cosine similarity scores between reference and generated images: CLIP-Image (Radford
et al., 2021) and DINO (Oquab et al., 2024).
                                                                   Table 1: Image-entity metrics.
We find that DINO scores provide a clearer separation be-
tween models compared to CLIP-Image scores, making it a           Model           CLIP-I DINO
more discriminative metric for assessing image-entity align-
ment. For example, the difference between Custom-Diff and         SD               0.646   0.350
                                                                  Imagen           0.646   0.386
Instruct-Imagen is much larger when using DINO (0.19) com-        Flux             0.639   0.380
pared to CLIP-Image (0.11), suggesting that DINO is better at     Imagen-3         0.650   0.389
capturing subtle differences in faithfulness. This may be due
to DINO’s focus on primary entities, allowing for a more ac-      Custom-Diff      0.643   0.388
curate estimation of similarity between generated images and      DreamBooth       0.674   0.412
                                                                  Instruct-Imagen 0.751    0.582
reference content.
Correlation between automatic metrics and human evaluation. To quantify the consistency
between automatic metrics and human evaluation, we computed Pearson and Spearman correlations
in Table 2. CLIP-Text and CLIP-Image show moderate alignment with user evaluations.
Compared to CLIP-I metrics, DINO demonstrates               Table 2: Correlation between automatic
stronger alignment with user evaluations of faith-          metrics and human evaluation.
fulness, with increasing Pearson (0.239→0.510) and
Spearman (0.340→0.504) correlations. This suggests          Automatic Human          Type       Average
that DINO is more effective at measuring faithfulness                             Pearson        0.337
than CLIP-Image. However, the variability in correla-       CLIP-T    Instruction
                                                                                  Spearman       0.384
tions varies across categories, such as the negative cor-
                                                                                     Pearson     0.239
relation between CLIP-I and faithfulness in the plant       CLIP-I    Faithfulness
                                                                                     Spearman    0.340
domain, highlighting that more precise evaluation met-
rics are still needed to accurately reflect human judg-                              Pearson     0.510
                                                            DINO      Faithfulness
ments. Detailed correlation scores across domains can                                Spearman    0.504
be found in Section A.4.


5.4   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

We present the visual results in Figure 6. In the above example, the backbone models—SD, Flux,
and Imagen—exhibit lower faithfulness to the entity, with mismatches in the tail fin, engine, and
wing shapes compared to the reference image. In contrast, retrieval-augmented models like Custom-
Diff, DreamBooth, and Instruct-Imagen, which use support images during testing, show better visual
alignment with the target. Surprisingly, Imagen-3, despite relying only on text prompts, generates
accurate visual details due to its strong language understanding capability. These observations align
with the evaluation results in Figure 4.
In the example below, Custom-Diff and DreamBooth, show reduced instruction-following compared
to their backbone model, SD. In particular, Custom-Diff struggles to create novel compositions
like placing the target entity ”next to a giant sandcastle.” In contrast, the backbone models excel
in instruction-following and entity faithfulness, likely because “Rolls-Royce Phantom Drophead
Coupé” is well-represented in their training data. The retrieval-augmented models underperform
due to over-relying on the reference images and knowledge forgetting during fine-tuning on small
support sets. These results suggest that the success of retrieval-augmented methods highly depends
on the entity domain and customization approach. More results can be found in Section A.1.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Real Photo          Custom-Diff / 0.52 / 0.36 DreamBooth / 0.53 / 0.35 Instruct-Imagen / 0.78 / 0.32


     SD / 0.49 / 0.33         Imagen / 0.71 / 0.33         Flux / 0.69 / 0.30          Imagen-3 / 0.74 / 0.33


               A painting of Dassault Falcon 900 in a cubist style, parked in a surreal landscape.
       Real Photo          Custom-Diff / 0.61 / 0.39 DreamBooth / 0.38 / 0.40 Instruct-Imagen / 0.59 / 0.41


     SD / 0.53 / 0.41         Imagen / 0.43 / 0.42         Flux / 0.35 / 0.43          Imagen-3 / 0.47 / 0.45


             A toy Rolls-Royce Phantom Drophead Coupé next to a giant sandcastle on the beach.

Figure 6: Qualitative results. Top: The backbone models show lower faithfulness to the entity,
with mismatches in the tail fin, engine, and wing shapes. Bottom: The retrieval models struggle
with instruction-following, over-relying on references and failing to create novel compositions. We
show the DINO and CLIP-T scores together with the generated results.



6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose the K ITTEN— a benchmark for evaluating the fidelity of entities in
text-to-image generation focusing on visual concepts that require specialized knowledge. We con-
struct carefully-designed image generation prompts focusing on domain-specific entities grounded
in Wikipedia, and we design a visual faithfulness human evaluation framework by targeting the fi-
delity of entities in the generated images. Extensive analysis is conducted on several varieties of
state-of-the-art image generation models using the proposed framework. Our results indicate that
while advanced backbone models can generate specialized entities, there remains a notable gap
in the fidelity of entities compared to retrieval-augmented models. Although retrieval-augmented
methods enhance faithfulness to entities, they often struggle with creative prompts. This under-
scores the need for techniques that improve the fidelity of entities without sacrificing the ability to
follow instructions.


                                                     10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Eslam Mohamed Bakr, Pengzhan Sun, Xiaogian Shen, Faizan Farooq Khan, Li Erran Li, and Mo-
  hamed Elhoseiny. HRS-Bench: Holistic, reliable and scalable benchmark for text-to-image mod-
  els. In ICCV, 2023. 3
Black Forest Labs. Flux, 2024. URL https://github.com/black-forest-labs/flux.
  2, 6
Wenhu Chen, Hexiang Hu, Chitwan Saharia, and William W Cohen. Re-imagen: Retrieval-
 augmented text-to-image generator. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14491, 2022. 2
Jaemin Cho, Yushi Hu, Roopal Garg, Peter Anderson, Ranjay Krishna, Jason Baldridge, Mohit
  Bansal, Jordi Pont-Tuset, and Su Wang. Davidsonian scene graph: Improving reliability in fine-
  grained evaluation for text-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.18235, 2023. 3
Shangbin Feng, Vidhisha Balachandran, Yuyang Bai, and Yulia Tsvetkov. Factkb: Generalizable
  factuality evaluation using language models enhanced with factual knowledge. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.08281, 2023. 2
Tejas Gokhale, Hamid Palangi, Besmira Nushi, Vibhav Vineet, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Chitta
  Baral, and Yezhou Yang. Benchmarking spatial relationships in text-to-image generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2212.10015, 2022. 2, 3
Brian Gordon, Yonatan Bitton, Yonatan Shafir, Roopal Garg, Xi Chen, Dani Lischinski, Daniel
  Cohen-Or, and Idan Szpektor. Mismatch quest: Visual and textual feedback for image-text mis-
  alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.03766, 2023. 3
Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. CLIPScore: A
  reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08718, 2021.
  3, 5
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 GANs trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In NeurIPS,
 2017. 3
Hexiang Hu, Yi Luan, Yang Chen, Urvashi Khandelwal, Mandar Joshi, Kenton Lee, Kristina
  Toutanova, and Ming-Wei Chang. Open-domain visual entity recognition: Towards recogniz-
  ing millions of wikipedia entities. In ICCV, 2023a. 2, 3, 4
Hexiang Hu, Kelvin C. K. Chan, Yu-Chuan Su, Wenhu Chen, Yandong Li, Kihyuk Sohn, Yang
  Zhao, Xue Ben, Boqing Gong, William Cohen, Ming-Wei Chang, and Xuhui Jia. Instruct-imagen:
  Image generation with multi-modal instruction. In CVPR, 2024. 2, 6
Yushi Hu, Benlin Liu, Jungo Kasai, Yizhong Wang, Mari Ostendorf, Ranjay Krishna, and Noah A
  Smith. TIFA: Accurate and interpretable text-to-image faithfulness evaluation with question an-
  swering. In ICCV, 2023b. 3
Kaiyi Huang, Kaiyue Sun, Enze Xie, Zhenguo Li, and Xihui Liu. T2I-CompBench: A compre-
  hensive benchmark for open-world compositional text-to-image generation. In NeurIPS, 2023.
  3
Imagen 3 Team. Imagen 3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07009, 2024. 2, 6
Max Ku, Tianle Li, Kai Zhang, Yujie Lu, Xingyu Fu, Wenwen Zhuang, and Wenhu Chen. Imagen-
 hub: Standardizing the evaluation of conditional image generation models. In ICLR, 2024. 2,
 3
Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Multi-concept
  customization of text-to-image diffusion. In CVPR, 2023. 6
Tony Lee, Michihiro Yasunaga, Chenlin Meng, Yifan Mai, Joon Sung Park, Agrim Gupta, Yunzhi
  Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Hannah Teufel, Marco Bellagente, et al. Holistic evaluation of text-
  to-image models. In NeurIPS, 2024. 2, 8

                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Youngsun Lim and Hyunjung Shim. Addressing image hallucination in text-to-image generation
  through factual image retrieval. In IJCAI Workshop, 2024. 3
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, Lubomir Bourdev, Ross Girshick, James Hays, Pietro
  Perona, Deva Ramanan, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Piotr Dollár. Microsoft coco: Common objects
  in context. In ECCV, 2015. 2
Joanna Materzyńska, Josef Sivic, Eli Shechtman, Antonio Torralba, Richard Zhang, and Bryan Rus-
  sell. Customizing motion in text-to-video diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.04966,
  2023. 8
Dor Muhlgay, Ori Ram, Inbal Magar, Yoav Levine, Nir Ratner, Yonatan Belinkov, Omri Abend,
  Kevin Leyton-Brown, Amnon Shashua, and Yoav Shoham. Generating benchmarks for factuality
  evaluation of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06908, 2023. 2
Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Mahmoud Assran, Nico-
 las Ballas, Wojciech Galuba, Russell Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Shang-Wen Li, Ishan Misra, Michael
 Rabbat, Vasu Sharma, Gabriel Synnaeve, Hu Xu, Hervé Jegou, Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut, Ar-
 mand Joulin, and Piotr Bojanowski. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision.
 In TMLR, 2024. 5, 9
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML,
  2021. 5, 9
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In ICML, 2021. 2
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022. 2
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, 2022. 2, 5
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In CVPR,
  2023. 6
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. In NeurIPS, 2022. 2, 6
Olivia Wiles, Chuhan Zhang, Isabela Albuquerque, Ivana Kajić, Su Wang, Emanuele Bugliarello,
  Yasumasa Onoe, Chris Knutsen, Cyrus Rashtchian, Jordi Pont-Tuset, et al. Revisiting text-
  to-image evaluation with gecko: On metrics, prompts, and human ratings. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.16820, 2024. 3
Michal Yarom, Yonatan Bitton, Soravit Changpinyo, Roee Aharoni, Jonathan Herzig, Oran Lang,
 Eran Ofek, and Idan Szpektor. What you see is what you read? improving text-image alignment
 evaluation. In NeurIPS, 2024. 3


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
In this appendix, we first present additional qualitative results from the K ITTEN benchmark for
both the backbone and retrieval-augmented models. Second, we provide detailed human evalua-
tion scores, including metrics for entity faithfulness and instruction-following across eight domains.
Third, we offer a comprehensive breakdown of automatic metric scores for image-text alignment
and image-entity alignment. Fourth, we include the per-domain correlation scores between human
evaluations and automatic metrics. Fifth, we present statistics for our K ITTEN benchmark. Finally,
we provide the instructions given to human raters for evaluating the generated images in the K ITTEN
benchmark.

A.1   A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES

We present additional qualitative examples evaluating the backbone models—SD, Imagen, Flux,
and Imagen-3—as well as the retrieval models—Custom-Diff, DreamBooth, and Instruct-Imagen—
across various domains in the K ITTEN benchmark. The results for the aircraft, vehicle, cuisine,
flower, insect, landmark, plant, and sport domains are shown in Figure 7, Figure 8, Figure 9, Fig-
ure 10, Figure 11, Figure 12, Figure 13, Figure 14, respectively.
Figure 9 presents the results for the cuisine domain. For the prompt, “A Wakame dish with a cherry
flower on top of it,” retrieval-based models such as Custom-Diff, DreamBooth, and Instruct-Imagen
successfully generate the entity Wakame. However, Custom-Diff fails to capture the composition
of the cherry flower. In contrast, the backbone models—Imagen, Flux, and Imagen-3—correctly
generate the cherry flower, but the representation of Wakame does not align with its real-world
appearance. In the example prompt, “photo of a Hot and sour soup,” the backbone models introduce
incorrect ingredients that significantly deviate from a real-world hot and sour soup, demonstrating
how these models hallucinate entities instead of reproducing real-world knowledge accurately.
Figure 11 shows the results for the insect domain. For the prompt, “Satyrium liparops sitting at
the beach with a view of the sea,” all models correctly generate the beach scene as instructed.
However, the backbone models hallucinate the insect’s appearance, generating a completely dif-
ferent insect, while the retrieval models accurately depict the visual details of the Satyrium liparops.
For the prompt, “Promachus hinei wearing sunglasses,” the backbone models demonstrate strong
instruction-following ability, with Imagen and Imagen-3 correctly composing the sunglasses on the
insect. In contrast, the retrieval models fail to generate this composition. However, the backbone
models do not generate an accurate representation of the insect itself, while the retrieval models
correctly generate the entity.
Figure 13 presents the results for the plant domain. In the example, “An impressionistic painting
of Cirsium andersonii,” none of the models effectively follow the prompt in generating the ”im-
pressionistic painting,” highlighting the challenge of rendering specific artistic styles. However, the
retrieval models generate the entity more accurately than the backbone models. In another example,
“Penstemon rydbergii on a rustic wooden table next to a rose plant,” although the generated entity
lacks the fine details of the reference, the backbone models successfully capture the composition of
”next to a rose,” demonstrating their stronger instruction-following ability.
These observations align with the quantitative results, further demonstrating that while advanced
backbone models can generate specialized entities, there is a notable gap in the fidelity of entities
compared to retrieval-augmented models. Although retrieval-augmented methods improve faithful-
ness to entities, they often struggle with creative prompts, highlighting the need for techniques that
enhance entity accuracy without compromising instruction-following abilities.

A.2   D ETAILS OF THE H UMAN E VALUATION S CORES

In Figure 4 (Top), we present the human evaluation results for backbone and retrieval-augmented
text-to-image models, comparing their performance in terms of entity faithfulness and instruction-
following accuracy. We provide a detailed breakdown of the human evaluation results across eight
domains of the K ITTEN benchmark in Table 3 and Table 4.
We observe that the performance of each method varies across domains. For instance, while the
overall faithfulness scores of Custom-Diff and DreamBooth are lower than the backbone model
Imagen-3, these retrieval models consistently perform better in the insect, landmark, and plant do-

                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


mains. When comparing backbone models, Flux outperforms SD in the overall score; however, SD
demonstrates higher faithfulness in the insect, landmark, and plant domains, suggesting that Flux
struggles to generate less frequent entities. Additionally, the retrieval models, DreamBooth and
Custom-Diff, improve faithfulness over SD in some cases but show reduced performance in the cui-
sine and sport domains. In terms of instruction-following score, Instruct-Imagen performs notably
lower in the flower (31.3) and insect (21.9) domains, while Imagen-3 achieves significantly higher
scores in the cuisine (93.8) and sport (96.9) domains.


              Table 3: Detailed breakdown of human evaluation: faithfulness to entity.
 Model               Aircraft   Vehicle   Cuisine   Flower   Insect   Landmark   Plant   Sport   Overall
   SD                 2.07       3.57      3.42      2.36    1.61       1.95     2.09    3.02     2.51
   Imagen             3.19       3.62      3.55      3.21    1.54       2.11     2.04     3.3     2.82
   Flux               3.51       3.89      3.35      2.52    1.44       1.77     1.83    3.59     2.74
   Imagen-3           3.74       4.04      4.26      3.37    1.63       2.31     1.98    4.04     3.17
   Custom-Diff        2.59       3.90     2.52     3.82     2.37      3.02     2.85      2.10     2.90
   DreamBooth         3.26       3.88     3.23     3.18     2.46      3.06     2.64      2.93     3.08
   Instruct-Imagen    4.23       4.70     4.43     4.48     3.78      4.06     4.02      4.08     4.22
                       ( : Text-to-Image Models, : Retrieval-augmented Models)



              Table 4: Detailed breakdown of human evaluation: instruction-following.
 Model               Aircraft   Vehicle   Cuisine   Flower   Insect   Landmark   Plant   Sport   Overall
   SD                 68.8       75.0      62.5      87.5    62.5       65.6     84.4    71.9     72.2
   Imagen             59.4       84.4      75.0      84.4    53.1       59.4     84.4    78.1     72.2
   Flux               56.3       87.5      96.9      78.1    59.4       71.9     84.4    81.3     76.9
   Imagen-3           78.1       87.5      93.8      84.4    71.9       71.9     84.4    96.9     83.6
   Custom-Diff        59.4       75.0     65.6     78.1     71.9      65.6     81.3      59.4     69.5
   DreamBooth         68.8       71.9     71.9     81.3     68.8      75.0     78.1      75.0     73.8
   Instruct-Imagen    46.9       56.3     56.3     31.3     21.9      50.0     59.4      50.0     46.5
                       ( : Text-to-Image Models, : Retrieval-augmented Models)


A.3   D ETAILS OF THE AUTOMATIC M ETRIC S CORES

In Figure 4 (Bottom) and Figure 5, we present the automatic metric evaluation for backbone and
retrieval-augmented text-to-image models, including image-text alignment and image-entity align-
ment scores. Here, we include a detailed breakdown of the automatic metrics across eight domains
of the K ITTEN benchmark in Table 5. Specifically, we include a detailed ablation study of the
image-entity alignment metric using cosine similarity scores based on two popular image features:
the CLIP-Image and the DINO features.
The retrieval models—Custom-Diff, DreamBooth, and Instruct-Imagen—consistently outperform
the backbone models in DINO score across the insect, landmark, and plant domains. In contrast,
Custom-Diff shows notably worse DINO and CLIP-T scores in the cuisine and sport domains. These
results are consistent with human evaluations.

A.4   D ETAILS OF THE C ORRELATION B ETWEEN AUTOMATIC AND H UMAN M ETRICS

To quantify the consistency between automatic metrics and human evaluation results, we computed
Pearson and Spearman correlations in Table 2. CLIP-Text and CLIP-Image show moderate align-
ment with user evaluations. Here, we provide a detailed breakdown of the correlation across eight
domains in Table 6. While these metrics show some alignment with human evaluations, discrep-
ancies remain in certain categories. Notably, the correlation between CLIP-T and the instruction-
following score in the landmark domain, as well as the correlation between CLIP-I and the faithful-
ness score in the plant domain, are negative. This underscores the limitations of automatic metrics in
fully capturing human judgment. Although DINO demonstrates stronger alignment with user eval-
uations of faithfulness, correlation variability persists across categories. For instance, correlations


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Table 5: Detailed breakdown of automatic metrics.
 Model               Aircraft      Vehicle    Cuisine   Flower   Insect   Landmark    Plant    Sport     Overall
                                       Image-Text Alignment: CLIP-Text
  SD                   0.341       0.354       0.343    0.336    0.322       0.330    0.332    0.342     0.338
  Imagen               0.329       0.344       0.338    0.337    0.323       0.312    0.316    0.335     0.329
  Flux                 0.341       0.346       0.329    0.327    0.320       0.308    0.314    0.343     0.329
  Imagen-3             0.345       0.351       0.352    0.343    0.325       0.315    0.324    0.352     0.338
  Custom-Diff          0.333       0.349       0.314    0.339    0.321       0.315    0.326    0.298     0.324
  DreamBooth           0.333       0.347       0.335    0.333    0.322       0.318    0.324    0.335     0.331
  Instruct-Imagen      0.293       0.324       0.315    0.320    0.295       0.294    0.302    0.316     0.307
                                      Image-Entity Alignment: CLIP-Image
  SD                   0.640       0.655       0.673    0.719    0.619       0.616    0.628    0.618     0.646
  Imagen               0.678       0.650       0.671    0.733    0.630       0.632    0.630    0.545     0.646
  Flux                 0.652       0.653       0.663    0.738    0.609       0.614    0.618    0.561     0.639
  Imagen-3             0.677       0.656       0.665    0.726    0.623       0.638    0.632    0.582     0.650
  Custom-Diff          0.688       0.678       0.593    0.759    0.619       0.655    0.662    0.491     0.643
  DreamBooth           0.698       0.676       0.692    0.742    0.660       0.681    0.657    0.589     0.674
  Instruct-Imagen      0.776       0.719       0.746    0.825    0.810       0.735    0.751    0.648     0.751
                                           Image-Entity Alignment: DINO
  SD                   0.449       0.540       0.367    0.386    0.181       0.306    0.189    0.379     0.350
  Imagen               0.610       0.559       0.359    0.469    0.198       0.353    0.207    0.331     0.386
  Flux                 0.524       0.576       0.382    0.477    0.153       0.343    0.218    0.369     0.380
  Imagen-3             0.588       0.590       0.351    0.435    0.194       0.366    0.215    0.369     0.389
  Custom-Diff          0.555      0.576    0.285    0.490 0.263        0.382     0.267         0.288     0.388
  DreamBooth           0.580      0.567    0.406    0.435 0.280        0.407     0.250         0.371     0.412
  Instruct-Imagen      0.758      0.711    0.539    0.646 0.526        0.545     0.450         0.482     0.582
                         ( : Text-to-Image Models, : Retrieval-augmented Models)



are lower in the vehicle and landmark domains, highlighting the need for more accurate automatic
metrics to better reflect human evaluations and assess model performance.


         Table 6: Per-category correlation between automatic metrics and human evaluation.
Automatic Human             Type        Aircraft Vehicle Cuisine Flower Insect Landmark Plant Average
                            Pearson        0.138   0.499     0.105   0.788    0.567   -0.299    0.564      0.337
CLIP-T       Instruction
                            Spearman       0.168   0.454     0.286   0.836    0.554   -0.166    0.558      0.384
                            Pearson        0.330   0.195     0.100   0.215    0.528   0.356     -0.051     0.239
CLIP-I       Faithfulness
                            Spearman       0.548   0.323     0.238   0.287    0.503   0.623     -0.143     0.340
                            Pearson        0.655   0.367     0.549   0.551    0.277   0.680     0.492      0.510
DINO         Faithfulness
                            Spearman       0.575   0.311     0.735   0.430    0.210   0.700     0.565      0.504


A.5    DATASET S TATISTICS

We present the design of the K ITTEN benchmark, which focuses on evaluating faithfulness to
knowledge-grounded concepts in Figure 2 and Section 3.2. To ensure diversity, we select enti-
ties from eight specialized domains and construct diverse prompts in each domain for evaluation.
For each entity, we collect a set of support images as inputs to assess retrieval-augmented models,
where support images are used to enhance the model’s predictions. In addition, we collect a set of
evaluation images for conducting human evaluation. A detailed breakdown of the data statistics is
provided in Table 7.


                                                        15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Table 7: Statistics of K ITTEN benchmark.
      Domain       #Entities    #Prompts   #Support Images    #Eval Images    # (Entitiy, Prompt)
      Aircraft        48           20            469               237                960
      Vehicle         50           20            500               250               1000
      Flower          18           20            180                90                360
      Insect          50           20            500               250               1000
      Plant           48           20            480               240                960
      Landmark        50           20            500               250               1000
      Cuisine         31           20            310               155                620
      Sport           27           20            270               135                540



A.6   H UMAN A NNOTATION I NSTRUCTIONS

We provide the complete instructions given to human raters for evaluating the generated images in
the K ITTEN benchmark.

R ATER I NSTRUCTIONS

In this task, you will be provided with a Prompt, Reference Images, and a Generated Image. Your
job is to assess the factual accuracy of the generated image with respect to the prompt and the
reference images. The goal is to ensure that the entity described in the prompt is factually correct and
accurately represented. While the reference images offer a visual starting point, you may conduct
your own research (e.g., Google Search) to clarify the appearance of the entity and ensure its accurate
depiction in the generated image.
Part 1: Reference Alignment
Faithfulness to Prompt Entity (Factuality)
Your first task is to evaluate how faithfully the generated image represents the reference entity.
Consider whether the key features and overall appearance of the reference entity are accurately
depicted.
Question: How faithfully does the generated image represent the entity mentioned in the prompt?
Candidate Answers:
1 (Not faithful at all): The generated image does not represent the reference entity at all. There are
no discernible visual similarities to the reference entity.
2 (Barely faithful): The generated image faintly represents the reference entity, with significant
effort needed to see any resemblance. Minor visual elements may be present, but crucial features or
characteristics are missing or significantly misrepresented.
3 (Somewhat faithful): The generated image somewhat represents the reference entity, but it’s not
prominent. There is a clear visual connection in terms of composition, style, or some key elements,
but there are noticeable differences, omissions, or misinterpretations.
4 (Mostly faithful): The generated image mostly represents the reference entity and clearly presents
it. The generated image draws strong visual inspiration with a strong connection in terms of overall
composition, style, key elements, and/or subject matter, despite some variations in details.
5 (Completely faithful): The generated image fully represents the reference entity accurately. It
captures all key elements, composition, and style in a way that is almost identical to the reference
entity.
Open Questions for Reference Alignment
Visual Similarities: Describe any visual similarities between the generated image and the reference
images, focusing on elements that enhance the recognizability of the entity. Be specific about shape,
color, texture, composition, objects, or overall style.
Visual Differences: Describe any differences in the generated image that negatively impact its faith-
fulness to the entity in the prompt and are not specified by the prompt. Focus on aspects that affect
recognizability, and avoid mentioning changes that do not impact identification (e.g., angle or color
for cars or aircraft).


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Part 2: Text-Image Adherence
Adherence to Prompt Beyond References
Next, evaluate whether the generated image accurately and comprehensively depicts all aspects of
the scene or entity described in the prompt that are not already reflected in the reference images. This
involves checking for details in the prompt that go beyond what is shown in the reference images.
Question: Does the generated image accurately and comprehensively depict any aspects of the scene
or entity described in the prompt that are not already reflected in the reference images?
Candidate Answers:
Yes: The generated image accurately and comprehensively depicts aspects of the scene or entity
described in the prompt that are not already reflected in the reference images.
No: The generated image fails to accurately and comprehensively depict aspects of the scene or
entity described in the prompt that are not already reflected in the reference images.
If the answer is No:
Misalignments: Explain the misalignments between the generated image and the prompt text. Focus
on elements or concepts that are not present in the reference images. Be specific about which aspects
are missing, inaccurate, or misrepresented.
Optional: Open-Ended Feedback
Question: Do you have any other comments or observations about the generated image? (optional)


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Real Photo          Custom-Diff / 0.52 / 0.36 DreamBooth / 0.53 / 0.35 Instruct-Imagen / 0.78 / 0.32


    SD / 0.49 / 0.33         Imagen / 0.71 / 0.33         Flux / 0.69 / 0.30          Imagen-3 / 0.74 / 0.33


              A painting of Dassault Falcon 900 in a cubist style, parked in a surreal landscape.
      Real Photo          Custom-Diff / 0.50 / 0.38 DreamBooth / 0.60 / 0.33 Instruct-Imagen / 0.83 / 0.27


    SD / 0.62 / 0.35         Imagen / 0.69 / 0.33         Flux / 0.65 / 0.37          Imagen-3 / 0.58 / 0.43


       A Bombardier Challenger 600 series aircraft sculpture made from marble in a grand art gallery.
      Real Photo          Custom-Diff / 0.81 / 0.29 DreamBooth / 0.78 / 0.29 Instruct-Imagen / 0.87 / 0.31


    SD / 0.69 / 0.31         Imagen / 0.77 / 0.29         Flux / 0.71 / 0.27          Imagen-3 / 0.76 / 0.30


                                  photo of a British Aerospace 125 aircraft.

  Figure 7: Qualitative results for the aircraft domain, including the DINO and CLIP-T scores.

                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Real Photo            Custom-Diff / 0.59 / 0.43 DreamBooth / 0.59 / 0.41 Instruct-Imagen / 0.72 / 0.40


    SD / 0.53 / 0.41           Imagen / 0.62 / 0.42        Flux / 0.65 / 0.41        Imagen-3 / 0.69 / 0.43


                       A Hummer H2 car resting beneath the cherry blossoms in full bloom.
      Real Photo            Custom-Diff / 0.61 / 0.39 DreamBooth / 0.38 / 0.40 Instruct-Imagen / 0.59 / 0.41


    SD / 0.53 / 0.41           Imagen / 0.43 / 0.42        Flux / 0.35 / 0.43        Imagen-3 / 0.47 / 0.45


            A toy Rolls-Royce Phantom Drophead Coupé next to a giant sandcastle on the beach.
      Real Photo            Custom-Diff / 0.75 / 0.34 DreamBooth / 0.74 / 0.34 Instruct-Imagen / 0.80 / 0.34


    SD / 0.71 / 0.34           Imagen / 0.68 / 0.31        Flux / 0.74 / 0.33        Imagen-3 / 0.75 / 0.32


                                           photo of a Bentley Arnage.

  Figure 8: Qualitative results for the vehicle domain, including the DINO and CLIP-T scores.

                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Real Photo        Custom-Diff / 0.38 / 0.35 DreamBooth / 0.56 / 0.36 Instruct-Imagen / 0.53 / 0.40


    SD / 0.49 / 0.39      Imagen / 0.29 / 0.37         Flux / 0.41 / 0.34          Imagen-3 / 0.38 / 0.36


                            A Wakame dish with a cherry flower on top of it.
      Real Photo        Custom-Diff / 0.36 / 0.35 DreamBooth / 0.18 / 0.33 Instruct-Imagen / 0.49 / 0.40


    SD / 0.32 / 0.38      Imagen / 0.39 / 0.37         Flux / 0.33 / 0.34          Imagen-3 / 0.35 / 0.41


                         A Takoyaki on a rooftop restaurant with a skyline view.
      Real Photo        Custom-Diff / 0.72 / 0.35 DreamBooth / 0.76 / 0.33 Instruct-Imagen / 0.77 / 0.32


    SD / 0.63 / 0.31      Imagen / 0.71 / 0.32         Flux / 0.66 / 0.30          Imagen-3 / 0.60 / 0.30


                                     photo of a Hot and sour soup.

  Figure 9: Qualitative results for the cuisine domain, including the DINO and CLIP-T scores.

                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Real Photo           Custom-Diff / 0.38 / 0.35     DreamBooth / 0.56 / 0.36 Instruct-Imagen / 0.53 / 0.40


    SD / 0.49 / 0.39         Imagen / 0.29 / 0.37            Flux / 0.41 / 0.34        Imagen-3 / 0.38 / 0.36


                       Alstroemeria on top of a mountain with sunrise in the background.
      Real Photo           Custom-Diff / 0.53 / 0.37     DreamBooth / 0.48 / 0.37 Instruct-Imagen / 0.65 / 0.41


    SD / 0.30 / 0.38         Imagen / 0.49 / 0.40            Flux / 0.58 / 0.39        Imagen-3 / 0.48 / 0.41


                           Phlox paniculata at a beach with a view of the seashore.
      Real Photo           Custom-Diff / 0.65 / 0.38     DreamBooth / 0.69 / 0.37          Imagen / 0.66 / 0.34


    SD / 0.56 / 0.36     Instruct-Imagen / 0.70 / 0.33       Flux / 0.65 / 0.36        Imagen-3 / 0.71 / 0.36


                                         Photo of a Passiflora flower.

  Figure 10: Qualitative results for the flower domain, including the DINO and CLIP-T scores.

                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Real Photo        Custom-Diff / 0.36 / 0.32 DreamBooth / 0.42 / 0.37 Instruct-Imagen / 0.78 / 0.36


    SD / 0.29 / 0.31       Imagen / 0.24 / 0.35          Flux / 0.17 / 0.31             Imagen-3 / 0.18 / 0.34


                       Satyrium liparops sitting at the beach with a view of the sea.
      Real Photo        Custom-Diff / 0.52 / 0.30 DreamBooth / 0.34 / 0.31 Instruct-Imagen / 0.65 / 0.29


    SD / 0.28 / 0.30       Imagen / 0.35 / 0.34          Flux / 0.50 / 0.31             Imagen-3 / 0.58 / 0.31


                                  Promachus hinei wearing sunglasses.
      Real Photo        Custom-Diff / 0.44 / 0.30 DreamBooth / 0.44 / 0.30 Instruct-Imagen / 0.48 / 0.30


    SD / 0.23 / 0.30       Imagen / 0.22 / 0.30          Flux / 0.20 / 0.29             Imagen-3 / 0.23 / 0.30


                                     Photo of a Rivula propinqualis.

  Figure 11: Qualitative results for the insect domain, including the DINO and CLIP-T scores.

                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Real Photo           Custom-Diff / 0.39 / 0.37 DreamBooth / 0.33 / 0.38 Instruct-Imagen / 0.76 / 0.30


    SD / 0.42 / 0.39          Imagen / 0.15 / 0.35         Flux / 0.22 / 0.37       Imagen-3 / 0.10 / 0.34


                                  A peacock in front of the Bandinelli Palace.
      Real Photo           Custom-Diff / 0.59 / 0.29 DreamBooth / 0.62 / 0.28 Instruct-Imagen / 0.72 / 0.29


    SD / 0.60 / 0.30          Imagen / 0.59 / 0.29         Flux / 0.61 / 0.27       Imagen-3 / 0.59 / 0.28


                       The Ammersoyen Castle, made of crystal, shimmers in the sunlight.
      Real Photo           Custom-Diff / 0.66 / 0.32 DreamBooth / 0.58 / 0.33 Instruct-Imagen / 0.58 / 0.31


    SD / 0.55 / 0.32          Imagen / 0.60 / 0.32         Flux / 0.61 / 0.31       Imagen-3 / 0.61 / 0.32


                         Photo of a Church of St. John the Baptist (Nizhny Novgorod).

Figure 12: Qualitative results for the landmark domain, including the DINO and CLIP-T scores.

                                                     23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Real Photo           Custom-Diff / 0.55 / 0.35 DreamBooth / 0.44 / 0.35 Instruct-Imagen / 0.74 / 0.30


    SD / 0.51 / 0.32          Imagen / 0.43 / 0.34         Flux / 0.29 / 0.29         Imagen-3 / 0.61 / 0.32


                              An impressionistic painting of Cirsium andersonii.
      Real Photo           Custom-Diff / 0.46 / 0.30 DreamBooth / 0.34 / 0.32 Instruct-Imagen / 0.67 / 0.31


    SD / 0.36 / 0.30          Imagen / 0.32 / 0.31         Flux / 0.34 / 0.30         Imagen-3 / 0.31 / 0.33


                       Penstemon rydbergii on a rustic wooden table next to a rose plant.
      Real Photo           Custom-Diff / 0.64 / 0.29 DreamBooth / 0.68 / 0.28 Instruct-Imagen / 0.78 / 0.30


    SD / 0.24 / 0.25          Imagen / 0.44 / 0.28         Flux / 0.58 / 0.30         Imagen-3 / 0.46 / 0.28


                                       Photo of Nemastylis geminiflora.

  Figure 13: Qualitative results for the plant domain, including the DINO and CLIP-T scores.

                                                     24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Real Photo        Custom-Diff / 0.28 / 0.28 DreamBooth / 0.56 / 0.36 Instruct-Imagen / 0.70 / 0.32


    SD / 0.40 / 0.33      Imagen / 0.37 / 0.32        Flux / 0.46 / 0.33       Imagen-3 / 0.69 / 0.37


                            A man with a beard doing the Rings gymnastics.
      Real Photo        Custom-Diff / 0.23 / 0.24 DreamBooth / 0.65 / 0.35 Instruct-Imagen / 0.63 / 0.35


    SD / 0.65 / 0.36      Imagen / 0.63 / 0.37        Flux / 0.25 / 0.29       Imagen-3 / 0.61 / 0.37


                                    A police officer doing Mushing.
      Real Photo        Custom-Diff / 0.55 / 0.35 DreamBooth / 0.56 / 0.35 Instruct-Imagen / 0.55 / 0.36


    SD / 0.48 / 0.37      Imagen / 0.46 / 0.37        Flux / 0.56 / 0.38       Imagen-3 / 0.51 / 0.38


                                A woman doing Wheelchair basketball.

  Figure 14: Qualitative results for the sport domain, including the DINO and CLIP-T scores.

                                                 25
