Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T RANSFORMERS P ROVABLY S OLVE PARITY
E FFICIENTLY WITH C HAIN OF T HOUGHT
 Juno Kim1,2∗ Taiji Suzuki1,2
 1
   Department of Mathematical Informatics, University of Tokyo
 2
   Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN
 ∗
   junokim@berkeley.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         This work provides the first theoretical analysis of training transformers to solve
         complex problems by recursively generating intermediate states, analogous to
         fine-tuning for chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning. We consider training a one-layer
         transformer to solve the fundamental k-parity problem, extending the work on
         RNNs by Wies et al. (2023). We establish three key results: (1) any finite-precision
         gradient-based algorithm, without intermediate supervision, requires substantial
         iterations to solve parity with finite samples. (2) In contrast, when intermediate
         parities are incorporated into the loss function, our model can learn parity in one
         gradient update when aided by teacher forcing, where ground-truth labels of the
         reasoning chain are provided at each generation step. (3) Even without teacher
         forcing, where the model must generate CoT chains end-to-end, parity can be
         learned efficiently if augmented data is employed to internally verify the soundness
         of intermediate steps. Our findings, supported by numerical experiments, show
         that task decomposition and stepwise reasoning naturally arise from optimizing
         transformers with CoT; moreover, self-consistency checking can improve multi-
         step reasoning ability, aligning with empirical studies of CoT.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) based on the transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) have
achieved astounding success across a variety of natural language processing and machine learning
tasks (see e.g. Wan et al., 2024; Minaee et al., 2024; Naveed et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024). However,
they often struggle when tasked with solving complex reasoning problems, especially in a zero-shot
setting without any form of intermediate guidance or supervision (Geva et al., 2021; Rae et al.,
2022; Arkoudas, 2023; Wang et al., 2024). These failures are particularly evident in tasks requiring
multi-hop reasoning or compounded logical steps (Sakarvadia et al., 2024).
A promising approach to overcome these limitations is chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning, where the
model is prompted or fine-tuned to solve complex tasks step-by-step by explicitly making intermediate
reasoning steps to arrive at the desired answers (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022). Since its
discovery, CoT reasoning has been shown to significantly enhance the problem-solving capabilities of
LLMs while also increasing the interpretability and trustworthiness of the reasoning process, and has
spawned numerous prompting techniques (Liu et al., 2023; Qiao et al., 2023) and applications for a
variety of downstream tasks including common-sense reasoning, mathematical problem-solving, and
symbolic or multi-modal reasoning; see e.g. Zhang et al. (2023b); Yu et al. (2023); Chu et al. (2024)
for surveys on CoT. In particular, besides being used as a prompting method, directly training or
fine-tuning models to generate CoT has also been shown to significantly improve multi-step reasoning
performance (Nye et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022; Zelikman et al., 2022; Lightman et al., 2024).
Despite these empirical successes, however, the theoretical understanding of the CoT mechanism
and task decomposition in transformers is still limited. Existing works focus on characterizing the
expressivity of transformers equipped with CoT, providing constructions which can solve certain
complexity classes (Feng et al., 2023; Merrill & Sabharwal, 2023; 2024; Li et al., 2024b), studying
the class of functions that can be learned in-context with CoT (Li et al., 2023; Bhattamishra et al.,
2024), or analyzing the estimation error of multi-step models (Hu et al., 2024). Nevertheless, such


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


approaches do not indicate how such capabilities might emerge when training transformers to generate
reasoning chains. Li et al. (2024a) analyze the training dynamics of a one-layer transformer in an
in-context learning setting and show that CoT ability may be acquired; however, they do not consider
explicitly training with CoT chains, which is a more difficult problem since the objective depends on
the recursive application of the transformer to itself.
In this paper, we seek to formalize the mechanism through which stepwise reasoning emerges in
transformers optimized to generate CoT chains. We focus on the specific problem of bit subset parity
(learning the parity of an unknown subset of k bits from a d-bit input), which is known to be impossible
to learn end-to-end with any finite-precision gradient-based algorithm in polynomial steps (Shalev-
Shwartz et al., 2017; Shamir, 2018). In contrast, Wies et al. (2023) have demonstrated that recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) can solve parity efficiently when provided with intermediate supervision. We
build on this direction to establish positive optimization guarantees for the transformer architecture.
Our object of study is a one-layer transformer incorporating a softmax attention layer, feedforward
layer and positional encoding, that is recursively applied to its own output to generate a sequence of
intermediate parity computations to arrive at the desired output, analogous to CoT generation. Our
contributions are summarized as follows.

 • We extend the impossibility result for parity (Theorem 1), which was established only for
   population gradient descent, to the more realistic finite-sample setting in Theorem 2. We prove
   that any iterative algorithm with access to an approximate gradient oracle for the end-to-end
   empirical loss cannot solve a random target parity within a specific polynomial number of steps.
 • In contrast, we show that when the loss is summed over all intermediate states, by utilizing
   teacher forcing, a form of process supervision wherein ground-truth intermediate steps are
   provided during training,1 our model can learn any parity in a single gradient update (Theorem 5).
   This shows the benefits of training directly with CoT chains to acquire task decomposition ability.
 • We further consider training with CoT generated end-to-end without teacher forcing,2 and show
   that parity can still be learned in a logarithmic number of steps if augmented data is employed to
   check the validity of intermediate steps (Theorem 7), thereby mimicking self-consistency checks
   often used in CoT reasoning (Zelikman et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023a).
 • We conduct numerical experiments supporting our findings (Section 4 and Appendix D).

Our results provide theoretical insights into how transformers can naturally and efficiently optimize
to perform task decomposition, emphasizing the role of explicit intermediate supervision for complex
tasks. Moreover, these findings corroborate recent empirical studies on CoT reasoning demonstrating
improved performance through process supervision and internal validation of reasoning chains
(Huang et al., 2023a; Tian et al., 2024; Lightman et al., 2024).

1.1    R ELATED W ORKS

Complexity of transformers. A line of work aims to understand the effectiveness of CoT from
the perspective of complexity theory. Feng et al. (2023) show that autoregressive transformers of
constant size can solve basic arithmetic tasks by recursively generating CoT reasoning steps, which
is not possible when directly generating the solution; this separation arises because looping the
generated outputs back to its inputs increases the ‘effective depth’ of the model. Works such as
Chiang et al. (2023); Merrill & Sabharwal (2023) study the expressivity of fixed-precision transformer
architectures in terms of classes of formal languages. Merrill & Sabharwal (2024); Li et al. (2024b)
show that CoT reasoning enables recognizing wider language classes, and characterizes the increased
expressivity depending on the length of the reasoning chain. Sanford et al. (2024) studies the relation
between transformers and massively parallel computation protocols, showing that logarithmic depth
suffices to solve multi-hop induction tasks that cannot be efficiently solved by other sequence models.
    1
      Teacher forcing or process supervision is a training procedure for recurrent models in which the model
receives the ground truth output at time t as input at time t + 1 during training (Goodfellow et al., 2016, p.377).
Many fine-tuning methods with ground-truth CoT chains implement teacher forcing, being more effective than
output supervision with chains generated end-to-end (Deng et al., 2023; Tian et al., 2024; Lightman et al., 2024).
    2
      Teacher forcing can induce exposure bias where a model is not robust to its own errors. In practice, partial
(scheduled or random) teacher forcing methods are used to overcome this issue (Bengio et al., 2015; Goyal et al.,
2017; Mihaylova & Martins, 2019).


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Additionally, Li et al. (2023); Bhattamishra et al. (2024) study the class of functions that can be
learned in context by transformers with CoT from the point of view of in-context learning.

Optimization and generalization of CoT. Zhu et al. (2024) study the ‘reversal curse’ via the
training dynamics of a one-layer transformer and shows that the model fails to generalize from
A → B, B → C to A → C as an argument for the necessity of explicit step-by-step reasoning. Hu
et al. (2024) study CoT prompting from a statistical estimation perspective by introducing a multi-step
latent variable model for CoT and analyzing its approximation, generalization and prompting-based
errors. Notably, Li et al. (2024a) study the training dynamics of a one-layer attention-only transformer
model in an in-context learning setting and show that CoT generalization capability can be obtained.
However, this does not address the possibility or benefits of training with CoT chains. Lightman et al.
(2024) empirically study training LLMs with either process or outcome supervision, showing that the
former significantly outperforms the latter when training to solve challenging reasoning tasks.

Parity and task decomposition. The difficulty of learning parity without task decomposition is
established in Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2017); Shamir (2018). The work most relevant to our paper is
Wies et al. (2023), which study task decomposition for parity with classical Elman RNNs. They show
that by incorporating intermediate states into the loss function and utilizing teacher forcing, parity
can be solved with polynomial iterations and embedding size. Our Theorem 5 extends this positive
result to autoregressive transformers, rigorously establishing the benefits of CoT-based training.

2     P ROBLEM S ETUP
Notation. We write [n] := {1, 2, · · · , n} for any integer n. Scalar operations apply componentwise
to vectors, e.g. for z ∈ Rn we write ϕ(z) = (ϕ(z1 ), · · · , ϕ(zn ))⊤ , z 2 = z ⊙ z = (z12 , · · · , zn2 ) and
|z| = (|z1 |, · · · , |zn |)⊤ . The 2-norm is always denoted by ∥·∥. The multi-linearPn inner product or
contraction of z1 , · · · , zr ∈ Rn for any r ∈ N is denoted as ⟨z1 , · · · , zr ⟩ := i=1 z1,i · · · zr,i . In
particular, ⟨z1 ⟩ = z1⊤ 1n and ⟨z1 , z2 ⟩ = z1⊤ z2 .

2.1   T HE PARITY P ROBLEM

Let d ≥ k ≥ 2 be integers and let P denote the set of size k subsets of {1, · · · , d} equipped with the
uniform distribution. In this paper, we study the k-parity problem for d-bit inputs x = (xj )dj=1 ∼
Unif({±1}d ), where the output y = j∈p xj is determined by the parity of an unknown subset of
                                      Q
       ∈ P . We abuse notation and identify the set of indices p with the corresponding parity mapping
bits p Q
x 7→ j∈p xj . Given n samples (xi , y i )i∈[n] , our goal is to predict the parity of any test input.
It is known that parity is fundamentally difficult in the sense that it cannot be solved in polynomial
time by any finite-precision gradient-based algorithm, such as neural networks. More precisely,
let {fθ | θ ∈ Θ} be any differentiable (w.r.t. θ) parametrized model with polynomially
                                                                                              bounded

gradients, ∥∇fθ (x)∥ = O(poly(d)), and define the population loss L̄ = Ex (y − fθ (x))2 . We
presume access to an ε-approximate gradient oracle ∇    e for L, which takes any θ ∈ Θ as query and
returns a vector ∇e L̄(θ) satisfying ∥∇
                                      e L̄(θ) − ∇L̄(θ)∥2 ≤ ε, potentially in an adversarial manner.
Then the following holds:
Theorem 1 (Wies et al. (2023), Theorem 4). Let ℓ0−1 be the zero-one loss. There exists an O(e−d/3 )-
                   e such that3 the output θ(A) of any iterative algorithm A which sequentially
approximate oracle ∇
makes at most O(poly(d)) queries to ∇e L̄ must satisfy
                           Ex ℓ0−1 (p(x), fθ(A) (x)) ≥ 21 − O(e−d )


with probability at least 1 − O(e−d/3 ), when the target parity p is uniformly sampled from P .

The intuition is that the set P of parity functions is exponentially large in the sense that all elements
of P are pairwise orthogonal with respect to the data distribution. This implies that the variance of
   3
     The original paper states that A can be any iterative gradient-based algorithm which receives an Ω(e−d/3 )-
approximation of the gradient at each step. However, to be more precise, the result is only valid for certain
adversarial perturbation schemes.


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  h=3                                                      x23 = y


  h=2                                 x21                                           x22


  h=1                    x17                      x18                     x19                   x20


  h=0             x1    x2   x3   x4       x5    x6   x7       x8   x9 x10 x11 x12 x13 x14 x15 x16

Figure 1: A hierarchical decomposition of an 8-parity problem for d = 16. Here x17 = x1 x4 so that
c1 [17] = 1, c2 [17] = 4, p[17] = 21 and h[17] = 1.


each gradient call ∇L̄(θ) with respect to the target parity p is exponentially small (Shalev-Shwartz
et al., 2017) and is drowned out by the noise from the adversarial oracle, so that no information can
be gained on the target without exponentially many queries. See Section 3.1 for more details.

Task decomposition. As in Wies et al. (2023), we assume k = 2v for an integer v for simplicity
and decompose the problem into a hierarchy of 2-parity computations which can be efficiently learned
in a sequential manner by our model. This is expressed as a complete binary tree T of height v and
2k − 1 nodes. The lowest level contains k nodes representing the bits xjm for m ∈ [k]. The remaining
nodes are labeled xd+1 , · · · , xd+k−1 starting from the next lowest level and moving upwards, left
                                                                                Pℓ
to right. The largest index in level ℓ for 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ v is denoted as dℓ = d + j=1 2v−j , d0 = d.
Also, for each m > d, the indices of the two child nodes of xm are denoted as c1 [m], c2 [m] where
1 ≤ c1 [m] < c2 [m] < m. In addition, the parent node index of xm is denoted as p[m] and the level
or height of xm is denoted as h[m], so that dh[m]−1 < m ≤ dh[m] .

2.2       T RANSFORMER M ODEL


                                                                     e1                   em

          e1 e2         ed ed+1             em
          ↓   ↓         ↓    ↓         ↓                             x1                 x̂m            ··· ···
      i           ···          ···             ···
  x
          x1 x2         xd x̂d+1            x̂m x̂d+k−1 = ŷ
                                                                     u1                 ûm

                                  ϕ                                                       ι◦ϕ
          (a) Recursive generation of intermediate states.          (b) Filtered generation with data augmentation.

Figure 2: Illustration of the recursive data generation process by the transformer model. (a) Each
token consists of a one-hot positional encoding ej and parity data xj . The d input tokens (blue)
are fixed. The token x̂m is generated at the (m − d)th step by computing attention scores based on
position, combining the previous tokens and applying the feedforward layer ϕ. x̂d+k−1 is returned as
the model prediction. (b) For the no teacher forcing setup in Section 3.3, data augmentation uj is
implemented to check for self-consistency. If the augmented outputs from the previous generation
(red) are uninformative, a filter ι is applied to zero out the subsequent output.

We study a one-layer transformer architecture employing absolute positional encoding and a single-
head softmax attention layer followed by a shallow feedforward layer; skip connections are omitted
for simplicity. See Figure 2 for a visualization of our setup.


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Data encoding: Each input token xj = (xij )ni=1 for j ∈ [d] is the n-dimensional vector consisting
of the jth bit of each sample xi . We also add dummy tokens xd+1 , · · · , xd+k−1 initially set to 0n ,
which will learn to sequentially generate the actual intermediate nodes. Each xj is concatenated
with the one-hot positional encoding ej ∈ Rd+k−1 for j ∈ [d + k − 1] to form the internal input
                       n+d+k−1
pj = (x⊤     ⊤ ⊤
         j ej ) ∈ R            to the attention layer.
Softmax attention layer: The attention layer is defined as in (1) in terms of key, query and value
matrices K, Q, V. We fix the first n columns of K, Q to zero so that the attention scores are
determined by only the positional encodings. This ensures that the transformer focuses on learning
which positions contribute to the parity at each step. K, Q are then reparametrized by a single matrix
                2
W ∈ R(d+k−1) ; conversely, the value matrix is set to only preserve the x component, as follows.

                ⊤            0n×n        0n×(d+k−1)
              K Q=                                      , V = In×n 0n×(d+k−1) .
                         0(d+k−1)×n           W
This type of reparametrization is common in the literature to make dynamical analysis tractable
(Zhang et al., 2023a; Huang et al., 2023b; Mahankali et al., 2023; Kim & Suzuki, 2024).
Feedforward layer: The feedforward layer realizes a fixed link function ϕ : [−1, 1] → [−1, 1],
applied elementwise and only to the xj component; the positional encodings are not affected. To
exploit the decomposition of our task into 2-parities, we choose ϕ such that ϕ(0) = −1, ϕ(±1) = 1
so that sums are converted into parities, i.e. ϕ( a+b
                                                   2 ) = ab for a, b ∈ {±1}. Moreover, we require
that ϕ′ (0) = ϕ′ (±1) = 0 and assume ϕ is symmetric and sufficiently regular, so that we may expand
ϕ(t) = −1 + ct2 + O(|t|4 ) and ϕ′ (t) = 2ct + O(|t|3 ).
The transformer computes TF(x1 , · · · , xd+k−1 ; W) = (x̂1 , · · · , x̂d+k−1 ) where the original data
x̂j = xj , j ∈ [d] remain unchanged and tokens x̂d+1 , · · · , x̂d+k−1 are computed as
                                  m−1
                                  X                                          m−1
                                                                             X
            x̂m = ϕ(ẑm ), ẑm =       Vp̂j · softmax(p̂⊤  j K   ⊤
                                                                   Qp̂ m ) =     σj (wm )xj ,       (1)
                                    j=1                                    j=1
                                          wj,m
                                                Pm−1
where the softmax scores σj (wm ) = e          / α=1 ewα,m . Here, we have implicitly added the
causal mask wj,m ← −∞ to the attention layer for j ≥ m or m ≤ d. Note that each ẑm , x̂m will be
contained in the cube [−1, 1]d as long as the input tokens are also contained in [−1, 1]d .

Chain of thought. Consider repeatedly applying TF(·) to its own output to generate a ‘reasoning
chain.’ Since the input tokens are fixed, the token x̂d+1 will be updated once and then always yield
the same value afterwards. Next, since x̂d+2 depends on the input tokens and x̂d+1 , it will be updated
twice before becoming fixed. Repeating this, the entire chain stops updating after at most k − 1 steps,
yielding the output
                    TF(k−1) (x1 , · · · , xd , 0n , · · · , 0n ; W) = (x̂1 , · · · , x̂d+k−1 )
                                                                                     Pm−1
where the intermediate predictions are recursively computed as x̂m = ϕ( j=1 σj (wm )x̂j ). Finally,
the top node is returned as the model prediction ŷ = x̂d+k−1 .
This process can be seen as a simplified version of CoT reasoning, albeit not in an in-context learning
setting: instead of one-shot predicting y i from xi , the model starts by solving simpler subtasks and
uses the information to attack compound problems, learning to generate intermediate reasoning steps
xd+1 → · · · → xd+k−1 to finally arrive at the desired solution. Importantly, this process is not
possible if the model is only trained on the one-shot data (xi , y i )i∈[n] as we show in Section 3.1.
Instead, we incorporate the prediction error for all intermediate states directly into our loss function
(Lightman et al., 2024). We also consider shortening the reasoning chain by using a different causal
mask in Section 3.3, which will result in improved control of error and faster convergence.

3     M AIN R ESULTS
3.1   H ARDNESS OF PARITY WITHOUT C OT

Before analyzing our transformer model, we first prove a negative learning result in the absence of
intermediate supervision that extends Theorem 1, which was stated with respect to the population
objective L̄ and zero-one test loss ℓ0−1 , to finite samples and mean squared loss.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let fθ : {±1}d → R be any differentiable parametrized model and suppose we select the target
parity p uniformly at random from P . In the finite-sample setting, n i.i.d. samples (xi , y i )i∈[n] are
generated as xi ∼ Unif({±1}d ), y i = p(xi ) and we are given access to (approximate) gradients
from the empirical loss
                                          n
                                      1 X i                  1
                          Ln (θ) =          (y − fθ (xi ))2 = ∥p − fθ ∥2n ,
                                     2n i=1                  2

where ∥·∥n is the empirical norm. It is important that the model fθ is applied to each xi separately
and does not cross-reference between different samples, as there exist more efficient parity-learning
algorithms if the data is allowed to be manipulated freely. For example, Gaussian elimination can
solve parity with O(d) samples and O(d3 ) iterations (Raz, 2018). Moreover, this implies that neural
networks trained with stochastic gradient descent can also solve parity in polynomial time (Abbe &
Sandon, 2020). Instead, in our setting the model is forced to learn from the averaged gradient signal
and can only implicitly utilize the correlation between samples.
We show the following result for learning parities with finite-samples in Appendix A:
Theorem 2 (hardness of finite-sample parity). Suppose k = Θ(d).
(1) If n = eΩ(d) and fθ has polynomially bounded gradients, there exists an e−Ω(d) -approximate
    gradient oracle ∇e such that with probability 1 − e−Ω(d) over random sampling, the output θ(A)
    of any iterative (possibly randomized) algorithm which makes at most O(poly(d)) queries to
    ∇L
    e n has L2 -loss lower bounded as

                              Ep∈P,x (p(x) − fθ(A) (x))2 ≥ 1 − e−Ω(d) .



(2) If n = Ω(dν ) and ∥∇fθ ∥ = O(dν1 ), there exists an O(d−ν2 )-approximate gradient oracle ∇ e
                                    −Ω(d)
    such that with probability 1 − e      over random sampling, the output θ(A) of any iterative
    (possibly randomized) algorithm which makes at most O(dν3 ) queries to ∇L
                                                                           e n has L2 -loss lower
    bounded, where ν = 4ν1 + 4ν2 + 2ν3 + 2ν4 + 1, as
                            Ep∈P,x (p(x) − fθ(A) (x))2 ≥ 1 − O(d−ν4 ).



We remark that the bounds are asymptotically optimal since fθ ≡ 0 is a valid estimator. Moreover,
the expectation over p ∈ P can be replaced by the corresponding ‘with high probability’ statement.
A counter-intuitive aspect of the above result is that parity becomes potentially more difficult when
the number of samples increases. Indeed, with exponential samples n = eΩ(d) (1) we basically
recover the statement of Theorem 1, while the guarantees for n = poly(d) (2) are also polynomial in
d. This is because the difficulty of parity (Theorem 1) fundamentally depends on the following result:
Proposition 3 (Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2017), Theorem 1). Suppose x be a random variable in
Rd . Let H be a class of bounded real-valued functions on Rd such that Ex [h(x)h′ (x)] = 0 for
any two distinct h, h′ ∈ H and fθ a differentiable parametric model with gradients bounded by
Ex [∥∇fθ ∥2 ] ≤ F (θ)2 . Then for the loss Fh (θ) := Ex [(h(x) − fθ (x))2 ] where h is chosen uniformly
at random from H, the gradient variance is bounded as
                                                                   F (θ)2
                 Var(θ; H) := Eh∈H ∥∇Fh (θ) − Eh′ ∈H [∇Fh′ (θ)]∥2 ≤

                                                                          .
                                                                    |H|

Since all kd = eΘ(d) parities in P are pairwise orthogonal with respect to the uniform distribution


Unif({±1}d ), it follows that the variance of ∇L̄ is exponentially small and the target signal can
be drowned out by a correspondingly small noise from the oracle. However, this is not true for the
empirical distribution which cannot distinguish all elements in P with only poly(d) samples; the
empirical correlation of two random parities will generally be Θ(n−1/2 ). Therefore a more careful
decorrelation argument is needed, resulting in the weaker guarantees of Theorem 2(2). Another
technical difference is that Theorem 1 only considers the strong zero-one loss (more formally, their
results can be seen to hold for any parity estimator p̂θ(A) ∈ P depending on the algorithm output),
while we prove the L2 lower bound for any real-valued estimator fθ(A) .


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2   C OT WITH T EACHER F ORCING

When training with teacher forcing, at each position d + 1 ≤ m ≤ d + k − 1, the ground-truth labels
of the preceding intermediate states x1 , · · · , xm−1 are fed into the transformer input to obtain the
predictor x̂m at the mth position,
                          x̂m = TF(x1 , · · · , xm−1 , 0n , · · · , 0n ; W)m .
The loss function then computes the squared error over all states,
                                                   d+k−1
                                                 1 X
                                    L(W) =               ∥x̂m − xm ∥2 .                                      (2)
                                                2n
                                                      m=d+1
Since each sequence of values x̂d+1,i , · · · , x̂d+k−1,i are generated depending only on the correspond-
ing sample xi and the parameter matrix W, this can be rewritten in terms of the augmented labels
ȳ i = (xid+1 , · · · , xid+k−1 )⊤ as
                       n
                  1 X i
      L(W) =            ∥ȳ − f ◦ (xi ; W)∥2 ,         ◦
                                                      fm (xi ; W) = x̂m,i ,   d+1≤m≤d+k−1
                 2n i=1
                                                  2
for a fixed mapping f ◦ : {±1}d × R(d+k−1) → Rk−1 , mirroring the setting of Theorem 2. Hence
our model does not cross-reference between samples; moreover, the gradient of f ◦ is bounded as
                                                                      √
Lemma 4. For all x, W it holds uniformly that ∥∇W f ◦ (x; W)∥ ≤ O( d).
At inference time, test inputs x1 , · · · , xd are randomly generated and the prediction for ytest =
p(x1 , · · · , xd ) is computed by iterating TF to generate all k − 1 reasoning steps without reference
to ground-truth labels; ŷtest = TF(k−1) (x1 , · · · , xd , 0n , · · · , 0n ; W)d+k−1 . Our positive learning
result in this setting is as follows.
Theorem 5 (CoT with teacher forcing). Suppose n = Ω(d2+ϵ ) for ϵ > 0, d is sufficiently large and
    e be any O(d−2−ϵ/8 )-approximate gradient oracle.4 Set initialization W(0) = 0 and learning
let ∇
rate η = Θ(d2+ϵ/16 ). Then for any target parity p ∈ P , it holds with probability 1 − exp(−dϵ/2 )
over random sampling that the one-step update W(1) = W(0) − η ∇L(W            e    (0)
                                                                                       ) w.r.t. the objective (2)
                                                                    −ϵ/8
with teacher forcing achieves loss ∥ŷtest − ytest ∥∞ ≤ O(d               ).
On the other hand, Theorem 2(2) shows that when n = Ω(d11+ϵ ), any iterative algorithm querying an
O(d−2−ϵ/8 )-approximate oracle, with gradients bounded as in Lemma 4, requires more than Ω(d      e ϵ/4 )
                                  1
queries to attain a nontrivial (< 2 ) loss. This establishes a strict separation between learning parities
without intermediate supervision and our CoT transformer. The gap increases with more samples as ϵ
increases; moreover, when n = eΩ(d) , we have a much stronger separation by Theorem 2(1), where
an exponential number of queries is required to learn p.
Sketch of proof. The result is shown by explicitly calculating the gradient with respect to each weight
wj,m and extracting the gradient signal. As the softmax scores are uniform at initialization, the
gradient can be expanded to obtain multilinear contraction or ‘interaction’ terms between the tokens
x1 , · · · , xm−1 , one such example being
                            1                        1      X
                              ⟨xm , ẑm , ẑm ⟩ =              ⟨xm , xα , xβ ⟩ .
                            n                     n(m − 1)2
                                                                α,β

In the above equation, if α, β are the two child nodes of m, the parity xα xβ xm ≡ 1 will be
trivial and ⟨xm , xα , x√β ⟩ = n. On the other hand, for nontrivial parities the interaction strength
will generally be O( n log d) due to sample concentration. For sufficiently large n, the trivial
parities dominate, allowing us to extract the leading term. Performing these computations up to
fourth order interaction terms, we show that the dominating signal of the gradient is Θ(d−2 ) when
j = c1 [m], c2 [m] and O(d−2−ϵ/8 ) otherwise. Hence the transformer learns to increase only the
weights at the relevant positions for each subtask, and is able to compute the desired 2-parity
x̂m ≈ ϕ( 12 (x̂c1 [m] + x̂c2 [m] )) ≈ x̂c1 [m] x̂c2 [m] at each node during its forward pass. The full proof is
provided in Appendix B.
    4
      In fact, we only require that each component of the gradient has error at most O(d−2−ϵ/8 ) for Theorems 5,
7, which follows since the L∞ error is bounded above by L2 .


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.3    C OT WITHOUT T EACHER F ORCING

In this section, we extend Theorem 5 to training a transformer without teacher forcing, which is
employed alongside teacher forcing in practice to ensure robustness at test time (Bengio et al., 2015;
Goyal et al., 2017; Mihaylova & Martins, 2019). The main difficulty in this setting is that wrong
answers propagate to later generation steps, exponentially amplifying errors and drowning out the
main gradient signals. Error accumulation is also a central practical issue of CoT (Zhang & Parkes,
2023; Wang et al., 2023). To solve this issue, we make some modifications to our transformer model.
First, we minimize the number of required reasoning steps by imposing a slightly stronger form of
                                                                             +
autoregressivity where each intermediate state x+ m depends on all tokens xj , j = 1, · · · , dh[m]−1
up to the previous level, rather than the immediately preceding token. This can be expressed as the
causal mask wj,m ← −∞ for j > dh[m]−1 or m ≤ d; see Figure 3. This ensures that the model
gradients are polynomially bounded as in Theorem 2 and that errors can propagate a logarithmic
rather than a linear number of steps, and can be easily implemented as the indices dℓ are known.


                          m=d                                    d0
                                                                 d1
                                                                 d2

Figure 3: Causal mask for W⊤ with teacher forcing (left); without teacher forcing (right). The gray
entries are set to −∞.

Second, we implement a data augmentation technique where random d-bit strings ui ∼ Unif({±1}d ),
i ∈ [n′ ] are appended to the original dataset (xi )i∈[n] . The resulting augmented tokens are denoted
                           n+n′                ′
as x+         ⊤ ⊤ ⊤
     j = (xj uj ) ∈ R           , uj = (uij )ni=1 so that pj = ((x+    ⊤ ⊤ ⊤
                                                                    j ) ej ) (the notation is extended
to j > d), and the key, query and value matrices are appropriately enlarged. The ground truth labels
as well as the intermediate states for the augmented data are unknown, so they are not included in
the loss function. Nevertheless, unlabeled data can still suffice for self-consistency (Huang et al.,
2023a); their purpose is to filter for ‘faulty reasoning’ in the following sense. If the weights are not
sufficiently trained, the output of a node xj will consist of all nearly −1s and thus be uninformative
for computing any parities. If the augmented tokens newly generated in the previous iteration of
TF(·) (i.e. up to udℓ−1 ) are uninformative, we zero out its output on the basis that all subsequent
reasoning will be wrong. This is achieved by adding the following filter after the feedforward layer ϕ:

             +     n+n′         +        0      ∥uj + 1n′ ∥∞ < ε0 for any dℓ−2 < j ≤ dℓ−1 ,
          ∀z ∈ R        , ιℓ (z ) =        +
                                         z      otherwise.
Without teacher forcing, during training the entire reasoning chain is generated by iteratively applying
TF to its own output until convergence, which takes v = log2 k rather than k − 1 steps due to the
imposed block autoregressivity. Hence TF(v) (x+                   +                           +             +
                                                     1 , · · · , xd , 0n+n′ , · · · ; W) = (x̂1 , · · · , x̂d+k−1 )
                   +               +
where the tokens x̂d+1 , · · · , x̂d+k−1 are recursively generated per level as
                                                                dh[m]−1
                                                                 X
                            x̂+               +
                              m = ιh[m] ◦ ϕ(ẑm ),
                                                          +
                                                        ẑm =             σj (wm )x̂+
                                                                                    j .                        (3)
                                                                 j=1

The loss is computed against the ground-truth labels as in (2). As before, each sequence of generated
states depends only on each sample xi and the augmented data U = (ui )i∈[n′ ] , so we may express
                                     n
                                 1 X i
                L(W, U) =              ∥ȳ − f × (xi ; W, U)∥2 ,           ×
                                                                          fm (xi ; W, U) = x̂m,i               (4)
                                2n i=1

for a fixed mapping f × , so that the samples are again not cross-referenced. By considering the
propagation of gradients up the chain, the gradient of f × can be shown to be bounded as follows.
Lemma 6. For all x, W, U we have ∥∇W f × (x; W, U)∥ ≤ O(dg ) where g = log2 ∥ϕ′ ∥∞ + 1/2.


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The exact exponent g depends on the shape of ϕ. Since ϕ(0) = −1 and ϕ(1) = 1, it must hold that
∥ϕ′ ∥∞ > 2. Conversely, any such ∥ϕ′ ∥∞ may be achieved by taking ϕ to be locally quadratic around
0, ±1 and smoothly joining the curve segments with straight lines of slope ±(2 + ϵ). Furthermore,
such a link function can be realized by a simple shallow feedforward layer using e.g. O(1) ReQU
neurons. Hence g can be taken to be arbitrarily close to 1.5.
Finally, we implement a simple weight quantization method by rounding each entry of W to the
nearest integer after every update; W(t+1) = r[W(t) − η ∇      e W L(W(t) , U)], where r : R → Z is
the nearest-integer operator. Equivalently, the gradients themselves are quantized. Integer-based
quantization methods are widely used in practice to accelerate training and reduce memory usage
(Wu et al., 2020; Jacob et al., 2018), and have been successfully implemented in LLMs to facilitate
efficient fine-tuning (Dettmers et al., 2022; 2023). In our theoretical setting, quantization also allows
us to simplify computations involving propagation of error.
In this setting, we obtain the following learning result.
Theorem 7 (CoT without teacher forcing). Suppose n = Ω(d2+ϵ ) for ϵ > 0, n′ = poly(d),5 d is
sufficiently large and let ∇ e be any O(d−2−ϵ/8 )-approximate gradient oracle. Set W(0) = 0 and
          2+ϵ/16
η = Θ(d          ). Then for any target parity p ∈ P , it holds with probability 1 − exp(−d(ϵ∧1)/2 )
over random sampling of (original and augmented) data that the sequence of updates W(t+1) =
r[W(t) − η ∇L(W
              e      (t)
                         , U)] w.r.t. the objective (4) without teacher forcing achieves exponentially
small loss ∥ŷtest − ytest ∥∞ ≤ exp(−Ω(dϵ/16 )) in log2 k iterations.

This gives the same order of separation from Theorem 2(2) as in Section 3.2. Hence transformers can
learn parities even without teacher forcing, if the consistency of the chain of reasoning is suitably
controlled for. Moreover, our result shows that logarithmic time suffices to learn parity by exploiting
the hierarchical decomposition in Figure 1. This extends the circuit complexity result in Merrill &
Sabharwal (2024), which states that bounded-depth transformers with a logarithmic number of CoT
steps can express problems in log-space; Theorem 7 guarantees that transformers of depth one can
learn by gradient descent any such function in the exponentially large class P .
Sketch of proof. The idea is to inductively show that each 2-parity subtask xm at level ℓ will become
solved at time t = ℓ. When t ≤ ℓ − 2, xm cannot utilize its child nodes xc1 [m] , xc2 [m] since they will
also not be optimized, so the weights do not change. At time ℓ − 1, its child nodes learn to output
their parities with high precision, so the objective is approximately equivalent to that of Theorem 5.
Then the gradient signal will similarly concentrate on wc1 [m],m , wc2 [m],m and xm will become solved
in the next step. It remains to bound the gradients arising from the loss terms further down the chain
xd+1 → · · · → xd+k−1 (propagation of error), and verify that irrelevant weights wj,m (p[j] ̸= m)
and already optimized weights do not change. The full proof is provided in Appendix C.

4        N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we present numerical experiments which support and complement our theoretical
findings. Compared to the carefully calibrated step sizes and weight updates in Theorems 5 and 7,
these experiments study a more realistic training scenario by taking relatively small learning rates and
tracking the loss trajectories over a longer period of training. We train one-layer transformers based
on the architecture described in Section 2 to solve a random k-parity problem with 64-bit inputs for
k = 8, 16, 32. Specifically, we implement and compare the following four models.

    • Direct: TF(·) is applied to itself k − 1 times to generate the reasoning chain end-to-end and the
                                                                                               1
      model prediction ŷ is directly compared to the ground truth y with the prediction loss 2n ∥ŷ −y∥2 .
    • CoT: TF(·) is applied to itself to generate the reasoning chain end-to-end and the sequence of
      intermediate states is compared to the ground truth as in (2). Here, we also implement the causal
      mask in Figure 3 (right) so that only log2 k iterations are needed, for additional stability.
    • CoT + teacher forcing: implements the model in Section 3.2 with teacher forcing.
    • CoT + self-consistency: implements the model in Section 3.3 with the causal mask in Figure 3
      (right) and data augmentation for consistency checks. Weight quantization is omitted.
     5
         Any polynomial order suffices for the number of augmented data samples.


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: CoT loss (left) and prediction loss (right) curves for the four models when d = 64, k = 32.
For the CoT+consistency model, dashed lines indicate when the filters of each level are deactivated.


All models are optimized using full-batch gradient descent on 100K 64-bit samples with a single
                                                                                    1
Tesla T4 GPU. The three CoT models are trained with the ‘CoT loss’ (2) scaled by k−1    to match the
prediction loss of the direct model. Figure 4 shows training curves for the CoT loss (left) and the
prediction loss (right) over 350 epochs when k = 32; results for all k and more details are provided
in Appendix D.
We first note that the direct model (red) completely fails to learn the target, plateauing almost
immediately. We observed that the weights become nearly uniform so that ŷ ≈ 0n and the prediction
error is stuck at 0.5. This was not improved by using a multilayer transformer instead of repeated
composition. The basic CoT model (yellow) is able to significantly decrease CoT loss but fails to fully
solve the problem and eventually becomes unstable. Moreover, the prediction loss never improves
beyond 0.5. Indeed, due to the hierarchical structure of parity, the model has no chance of making
an informative prediction at the last level xd+k−1 unless all preceding levels have been fully solved.
In contrast, we verify that CoT with teacher forcing (blue) solves parity efficiently as predicted in
Section 3.2, even with a small learning rate. After a burn-in phase, the CoT loss steadily decreases to
nearly zero, at which point the prediction loss also decreases rapidly as the final level is solved.
CoT with self-consistency (green) is also able to solve parity efficiently as predicted. Furthermore,
the corresponding CoT loss curve clearly exhibits multiple learning stages. In the beginning, the
model is essentially optimizing only the first level as subsequent outputs are zeroed out. After a
short burn-in phase, the weights are optimized so that the softmax scores concentrate on the relevant
nodes, at which point the CoT loss sharply decreases and the filters for the next level are deactivated,
unlocking the next learning stage. This phased optimization repeats until all levels are fully solved
and is crucial to arriving at the correct answer (in essence, teacher forcing is doing this at all levels
simultaneously). Notably, a similar behavior seems to arise in the basic CoT model as well but fails
due to accumulating error, further justifying the use of the filtering mechanism.
These results confirm that training explicitly for CoT generation can improve performance on multi-
step tasks, and that controlling error accumulation via teacher forcing or self-consistency is key to
ensuring proper step-by-step learning.


5   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, by focusing on the k-parity problem, we provide an initial theoretical foundation for
training transformers with CoT to perform stepwise reasoning. Our results show that gradient-based
learning of parity requires significant iterations without intermediate supervision, but task decom-
position using teacher forcing enables efficient learning in a single gradient update. Furthermore,
when transformers are trained to generate reasoning chains end-to-end, data augmentation and self-
consistency checks can enhance their ability to solve complex tasks. Our work takes the first steps
towards understanding how CoT can be leveraged to improve multi-step reasoning capability of
foundation models.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
JK was partially supported by JST CREST (JPMJCR2015). TS was partially supported by JSPS
KAKENHI (24K02905, 20H00576) and JST CREST (JPMJCR2115).

R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe and Colin Sandon. On the universality of deep learning. In Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Konstantine Arkoudas. GPT-4 Can’t Reason. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03762, 2023.
Samy Bengio, Oriol Vinyals, Navdeep Jaitly, and Noam Shazeer. Scheduled sampling for sequence
  prediction with recurrent neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2015.
Satwik Bhattamishra, Arkil Patel, Phil Blunsom, and Varun Kanade. Understanding in-context
  learning in transformers and LLMs by learning to learn discrete functions. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
David Chiang, Peter Cholak, and Anand Pillay. Tighter bounds on the expressivity of transformer
  encoders. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Zheng Chu, Jingchang Chen, Qianglong Chen, Weijiang Yu, Tao He, Haotian Wang, Weihua Peng,
  Ming Liu, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. Navigate through enigmatic labyrinth: a survey of chain of
  thought reasoning: advances, frontiers and future. In Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2024.
Yuntian Deng, Kiran Prasad, Roland Fernandez, Paul Smolensky, Vishrav Chaudhary, and Stu-
  art Shieber. Implicit chain of thought reasoning via knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.01460, 2023.
Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, and Luke Zettlemoyer. GPT3.int8(): 8-bit matrix
  multiplication for transformers at scale. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and
  Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. QLoRA: efficient finetuning
  of quantized LLMs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Guhao Feng, Bohang Zhang, Yuntian Gu, Haotian Ye, Di He, and Liwei Wang. Towards revealing
  the mystery behind chain of thought: a theoretical perspective. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2023.
Mor Geva, Daniel Khashabi, Elad Segal, Tushar Khot, Dan Roth, and Jonathan Berant. Did Aristotle
 Use a laptop? A question answering benchmark with implicit reasoning strategies. Transactions of
 the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:346–361, 2021.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016. http:
  //www.deeplearningbook.org.
Kartik Goyal, Chris Dyer, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. Differentiable scheduled sampling for credit
  assignment. In Association for Computational Linguistics, 2017.
Xinyang Hu, Fengzhuo Zhang, Siyu Chen, and Zhuoran Yang. Unveiling the statistical foundations
  of chain-of-thought prompting methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.14511, 2024.
Jiaxin Huang, Shixiang Gu, Le Hou, Yuexin Wu, Xuezhi Wang, Hongkun Yu, and Jiawei Han. Large
   language models can self-improve. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods
   in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1051–1068, Singapore, December 2023a. Association for
   Computational Linguistics.
Yu Huang, Yuan Cheng, and Yingbin Liang. In-context convergence of Transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.05249, 2023b.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Benoit Jacob, Skirmantas Kligys, Bo Chen, Menglong Zhu, Matthew Tang, Andrew Howard, Hartwig
  Adam, and Dmitry Kalenichenko. Quantization and training of neural networks for efficient
  integer-arithmetic-only inference. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, 2018.

Juno Kim and Taiji Suzuki. Transformers learn nonlinear features in context: nonconvex mean-field
  dynamics on the attention landscape. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2022.

Hongkang Li, Meng Wang, Songtao Lu, Xiaodong Cui, and Pin-Yu Chen. How do nonlinear
  transformers acquire generalization-guaranteed CoT ability? In High-dimensional Learning
 Dynamics 2024: The Emergence of Structure and Reasoning, 2024a.

Yingcong Li, Kartik Sreenivasan, Angeliki Giannou, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Samet Oymak. Dis-
  secting chain-of-thought: compositionality through in-context filtering and learning. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.

Zhiyuan Li, Hong Liu, Denny Zhou, and Tengyu Ma. Chain of thought empowers transformers to
  solve inherently serial problems. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024b.

Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
  Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig.
  Pre-train, prompt, and predict: a systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language
  processing. ACM Comput. Surv., 55(9), January 2023.

Arvind Mahankali, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Tengyu Ma. One step of gradient descent is
  provably the optimal in-context learner with one layer of linear self-attention. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.03576, 2023.

William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. A logic for expressing log-precision transformers. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.

William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The expressive power of transformers with chain of thought.
 In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Tsvetomila Mihaylova and André F. T. Martins. Scheduled sampling for transformers. In Association
  for Computational Linguistics: Student Research Workshop, 2019.

Shervin Minaee, Tomas Mikolov, Narjes Nikzad, Meysam Chenaghlu, Richard Socher, Xavier
  Amatriain, and Jianfeng Gao. Large language models: a survey, 2024.

Humza Naveed, Asad Ullah Khan, Shi Qiu, Muhammad Saqib, Saeed Anwar, Muhammad Usman,
  Naveed Akhtar, Nick Barnes, and Ajmal Mian. A comprehensive overview of large language
  models, 2024.

Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
 Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, Charles Sutton, and
 Augustus Odena. Show your work: scratchpads for intermediate computation with language
 models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00114, 2021.

Shuofei Qiao, Yixin Ou, Ningyu Zhang, Xiang Chen, Yunzhi Yao, Shumin Deng, Chuanqi Tan, Fei
  Huang, and Huajun Chen. Reasoning with language model prompting: a survey. In Anna Rogers,
  Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 5368–5393, Toronto,
  Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jack W. Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, Eliza Rutherford, Tom Hennigan,
  Jacob Menick, Albin Cassirer, Richard Powell, George van den Driessche, Lisa Anne Hendricks,
  Maribeth Rauh, Po-Sen Huang, Amelia Glaese, Johannes Welbl, Sumanth Dathathri, Saffron
  Huang, Jonathan Uesato, John Mellor, Irina Higgins, Antonia Creswell, Nat McAleese, Amy Wu,
  Erich Elsen, Siddhant Jayakumar, Elena Buchatskaya, David Budden, Esme Sutherland, Karen
  Simonyan, Michela Paganini, Laurent Sifre, Lena Martens, Xiang Lorraine Li, Adhiguna Kuncoro,
  Aida Nematzadeh, Elena Gribovskaya, Domenic Donato, Angeliki Lazaridou, Arthur Mensch,
  Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Nikolai Grigorev, Doug Fritz, Thibault Sottiaux,
  Mantas Pajarskas, Toby Pohlen, Zhitao Gong, Daniel Toyama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume,
  Yujia Li, Tayfun Terzi, Vladimir Mikulik, Igor Babuschkin, Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas,
  Aurelia Guy, Chris Jones, James Bradbury, Matthew Johnson, Blake Hechtman, Laura Weidinger,
  Iason Gabriel, William Isaac, Ed Lockhart, Simon Osindero, Laura Rimell, Chris Dyer, Oriol
  Vinyals, Kareem Ayoub, Jeff Stanway, Lorrayne Bennett, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
  and Geoffrey Irving. Scaling language models: methods, analysis and insights from training
  Gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446, 2022.
Ran Raz. Fast learning requires good memory: a time-space lower bound for parity learning. J. ACM,
  66(1), 2018.
Mansi Sakarvadia, Aswathy Ajith, Arham Khan, Daniel Grzenda, Nathaniel Hudson, André Bauer,
 Kyle Chard, and Ian Foster. Memory injections: correcting multi-hop reasoning failures during
 inference in transformer-based language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05605, 2024.
Clayton Sanford, Daniel Hsu, and Matus Telgarsky. Transformers, parallel computation, and logarith-
  mic depth. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09268, 2024.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Ohad Shamir, and Shaked Shammah. Failures of gradient-based deep learning.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Ohad Shamir. Distribution-specific hardness of learning neural networks. Journal of Machine
 Learning Research, 19, August 2018.
Yijun Tian, Yikun Han, Xiusi Chen, Wei Wang, and Nitesh V. Chawla. TinyLLM: learning a small
  student from multiple large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04616, 2024.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2017.
Zhongwei Wan, Xin Wang, Che Liu, Samiul Alam, Yu Zheng, Jiachen Liu, Zhongnan Qu, Shen Yan,
  Yi Zhu, Quanlu Zhang, Mosharaf Chowdhury, and Mi Zhang. Efficient large language models: a
  survey. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. ISSN 2835-8856. Survey Certification.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Zhiwei Wang, Yunji Wang, Zhongwang Zhang, Zhangchen Zhou, Hui Jin, Tianyang Hu, Jiacheng
  Sun, Zhenguo Li, Yaoyu Zhang, and Zhi-Qin John Xu. Towards understanding how transformer
  perform multi-step reasoning with matching operation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15302, 2024.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Noam Wies, Yoav Levine, and Amnon Shashua. Sub-task decomposition enables learning in sequence
  to sequence tasks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Hao Wu, Patrick Judd, Xiaojie Zhang, Mikhail Isaev, and Paulius Micikevicius. Integer quantization
  for deep learning inference: principles and empirical evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.09602,
  2020.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zihan Yu, Liang He, Zhen Wu, Xinyu Dai, and Jiajun Chen. Towards better chain-of-thought
  prompting strategies: a survey, 2023.
Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah Goodman. STaR: bootstrapping reasoning with
  reasoning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Hugh Zhang and David C. Parkes. Chain-of-thought reasoning is a policy improvement operator,
  2023.
Ruiqi Zhang, Spencer Frei, and Peter L. Bartlett. Trained Transformers learn linear models in-context.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09927, 2023a.
Zhuosheng Zhang, Yao Yao, Aston Zhang, Xiangru Tang, Xinbei Ma, Zhiwei He, Yiming Wang, Mark
  Gerstein, Rui Wang, Gongshen Liu, and Hai Zhao. Igniting language intelligence: the hitchhiker’s
  guide from chain-of-thought reasoning to language agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.11797,
  2023b.
Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min,
 Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, Yifan Du, Chen Yang, Yushuo Chen, Zhipeng Chen,
 Jinhao Jiang, Ruiyang Ren, Yifan Li, Xinyu Tang, Zikang Liu, Peiyu Liu, Jian-Yun Nie, and
 Ji-Rong Wen. A survey of large language models, 2024.
Hanlin Zhu, Baihe Huang, Shaolun Zhang, Michael Jordan, Jiantao Jiao, Yuandong Tian, and Stuart
  Russell. Towards a theoretical understanding of the ’reversal curse’ via training dynamics. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2405.04669, 2024.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX
A     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
                                                                         Pn
Denote the empirical inner product on Rd by ⟨f, g⟩n = n1                          i    i
                                                                          i=1 f (x )g(x ) and the corresponding
norm as ∥f ∥2n = ⟨f, f ⟩n . We also write
                                                           n
                                       1                1 X
                        Ln,p (θ) =       ∥p − fθ ∥2n =        (p(xi ) − fθ (xi ))2
                                       2               2n i=1
                                                                              d

to emphasize the dependency of Ln on p. Note that (d/k)k ≤                    k       ≤ (ed/k)k so that |P | = eΘ(d) .

Bounding gradient variance. Consider the variance of the empirical gradient ∇Ln,p w.r.t. the
target parity p:
                 Varn (θ; P ) := Ep∈P ∥∇Ln,p (θ) − Ep′ ∈P [∇Ln,p′ (θ)]∥2 .


We proceed to evaluate the magnitude of Varn (θ; P ). For p, p′ ∈ P with p ̸= p′ it holds that
                                                                            
                                 n                             n
                              1 X    Y      Y              1  X      Y
                  ⟨p, p′ ⟩n =       xi          xi ′  =                 xij  .
                              n i=1 j∈p j ′ ′ j            n i=1         ′
                                                     j ∈p                              j∈p∆p

Since j∈p∆p′ xij is i.i.d. Unif({±1}) for fixed p, p′ , by applying a union bound over Hoeffding’s
      Q
                               p
inequality, it follows for δ := 4d/n that
                                !                                     2              2d
                                                            nδ 2

                         ′                                             d            2
        Pr sup |⟨p, p ⟩n | ≥ δ ≤ |P |(|P | − 1) exp −             ≤       e−2d ≤         .
               p̸=p′                                         2         k            e

Then with probability at least 1 − e−Ω(d) over random sampling, every off-diagonal component of
the Gram matrix GP := (⟨p, p′ ⟩n )p,p′ ∈P has magnitude at most δ, while the diagonal entries are
equal to 1. By the Gershgorin circle theorem, the maximum eigenvalue of GP satisfies
                                       |λmax (GP ) − 1| ≤ (|P | − 1)δ,
thus λmax (GP ) ≤ 2(1 ∨ |P |δ). This implies that P constitutes a partial frame for the empirical L2
norm with the corresponding frame upper bound. More specifically, for f : Rd → R, decompose
                                  X
                             f=       cp · p + f0 , f0 ∈ (span P )⊥ ,
                                       p∈P

for some coefficient sequence c = (cp )p∈P . It follows that
                                                                          1/2
                                               X
                      ∥f ∥2n ≥ ∥f − f0 ∥2n =         cp cp′ ⟨p, p′ ⟩n = ∥GP c∥2
                                                     p,p′ ∈P

and                                                           !2
               X                 X      X
                                                        ′
                    ⟨f, p⟩2n =                  cp′ ⟨p, p ⟩        = ∥GP c∥2 ≤ λmax (GP )∥f ∥2n .
              p∈P                p∈P    p′ ∈P

Denoting D = dim Θ, we can therefore bound Varn (θ; P ) as
      Varn (θ; P ) = inf Ep∈P ∥∇Ln,p (θ) − µ∥2

                     µ∈RD
                                                                                             
                                 n                                    n                     2
                              1 X                                 1 X
                   ≤ Ep∈P         (fθ (xi ) − p(xi ))∇fθ (xi ) −         fθ (xi )∇fθ (xi ) 
                             n i=1                                n i=1
                                            
                             D                             D
                           X                      1 XX
                   = Ep∈P  ⟨∇θj fθ , p⟩2n  =                ⟨∇θj fθ , p⟩2n
                            j=1
                                                 |P  |    j=1      p∈P



                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       D
                       X λmax (GP )
                   ≤                     ∥∇θj fθ ∥2n
                       j=1
                                 |P |
                                   r         !
                              1         4d
                   ≤2             ∨              sup∥∇fθ (x)∥2 .
                             |P |       n        θ,x

Now by Chebyshev’s inequality, for any ε > 0 it holds that
                                                                            Varn (θ; P )
                    Pr (∥∇Ln,p (θ) − Ep′ ∈P [∇Ln,p′ (θ)]∥ > ε) ≤                         .
                                                                                ε2

Constructing the oracle. As in Shamir (2018), we define the ε-approximate oracle ∇
                                                                                 e as

           e n,p (θ) = Ep′ ∈P [∇Ln,p′ (θ)] ∥∇Ln,p (θ) − Ep′ ∈P [∇Ln,p′ (θ)]∥ ≤ ε,
          ∇L
                         ∇Ln,p (θ)         otherwise.
By union bounding, we see that during T steps the oracle always defaults to the mean gradient and
does not reveal any information on the true parity p, with probability at least
                                                    r !
                                      2T      1        4d
                        Pr(Q) ≥ 1 − 2             ∨         sup∥∇fθ (x)∥2 ,
                                       ε     |P |      n θ,x
where Q ⊆ P denotes the corresponding subset of the hypothesis space. Note that the argument
can be extended to any randomized algorithm and random initialization in a straightforward manner
by lifting to the product probability space, and so we consider Q to be fixed. Then for any target
parity p ∈ Q, the output θ(A) of the algorithm after T steps does not depend on p, so the predictor
f = fθ(A) is also fixed.

Lower bounding the loss. We first remark that a simpler proof can be given for the sup norm
error, which is enough to establish a separation. Consider arbitrary p, p′ ∈ P with p ̸= p′ and let
x ∈ {±1}d be such that p(x) ̸= p′ (x), then
                |p(x) − f (x)| + |p′ (x) − f (x)| ≥ |1 − f (x)| + |−1 − f (x)| ≥ 2.
Now let σ : Q → Q be any automorphism of Q with no fixed points. The L∞ error can be bounded
below by restricting to the noninformative set Q as follows.

   Ep∈P sup p(x) − fθ(A) (x) ≥ Ep∈P 1{p∈Q} sup |p(x) − f (x)|
            x                                           x

                                        1 X
                                    =             sup |p(x) − f (x)| + sup |σ ◦ p(x) − f (x)|
                                      2|P |         x                   x
                                                       p∈Q
                                            1
                                        ≥       · 2|Q| = Pr(Q).
                                          2|P |
For mean squared error, we similarly restrict to Q so that
              Ep∈P,x (p(x) − fθ(A) (x))2 ≥ Ep∈P,x 1{p∈Q} (p(x) − f (x))2 .


Since the range of p is contained in [−1, 1], the above loss will not increase when f is replaced by its
clipped version f¯(x) = (f (x) ∧ 1) ∨ (−1). Moreover, in Lemma 8 (proved at the end of the section)
we show that |Ep∈P [p(x)]| ≤ e−Ω(d) holds with probability 1 − e−Ω(d) over the sample space of x,
so that
               Ep∈P,x p(x)f¯(x) ≤ (1 − e−Ω(d) )Ep∈P [p(x)] + e−Ω(d) ≤ e−Ω(d)


and also
           Ep∈P,x 1{p∈Q} p(x)f¯(x) = Ep∈P,x p(x)f¯(x) − Ep∈P,x 1{p∈Q}    p(x)f¯(x)

                                                                       /

                                    ≤ e−Ω(d) + (1 − Pr(Q))Ex |f¯(x)|


                                                              (1 − Pr(Q))2   Pr(Q)
                                         ≤ e−Ω(d) +                                Ex f¯(x)2 .

                                                                           +
                                                                 2 Pr(Q)       2

                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Therefore we may bound
  Ep∈P,x (p(x) − fθ(A) (x))2 ≥ Ep∈P,x 1{p∈Q} (p(x) − f¯(x))2


                              = Pr(Q) − 2Ep∈P,x 1{p∈Q} p(x)f¯(x) + Pr(Q) · Ex f¯(x)2


                                                         (1 − Pr(Q))2
                                         ≥ Pr(Q) −                    − 2e−Ω(d)
                                                            Pr(Q)
                                               1
                                         ≥2−      − 2e−Ω(d)
                                            Pr(Q)
                                                        r !
                                            4T    1      4d
                                         ≥1− 2        ∨     sup∥∇fθ (x)∥2 − 2e−Ω(d) ,                (5)
                                             ε   |P |    n θ,x

where we have used the inequality 2 − (1 − t)−1 ≥ 1 − 2t, valid for t ∈ [0, 21 ].
The proof is completed by evaluating the following cases.
(1) If n = eΩ(d) and T, ∥∇fθ ∥ = O(poly(d)), the gradient variance is bounded as Varn (θ; P ) ≤
    e−Ω(d) . By taking ε = Varn (θ; P )1/3 , it follows that Pr(Q) = 1 − e−Ω(d) and (5) yields the
    lower bound 1 − e−Ω(d) .
(2) If n = Ω(dν ), ∥∇fθ ∥ = O(dν1 ), ε = Θ(d−ν2 ) and T = O(dν3 ), the gradient variance is
    bounded as Varn (θ; P ) ≤ O(d2ν1 +ν3 +1/2−ν/2 ) = O(d−2ν2 −ν4 ) and (5) yields the lower bound
    1 − O(d−ν4 ).


Lemma 8. If k = Θ(d), it holds with probability at least 1 − e−Ω(d) over random sampling that

                                                |Ep∈P [p(x)]| ≤ e−Ω(d) .

Proof. Let m denote the number of −1s in x. By the Chernoff bound for the binomial distribution,
                                                             2
                                   d     δd                    δ d
                         Pr m −        ≤      ≥ 1 − 2 exp −
                                   2      2                     6
for a constant δ ∈ (0, 1) to be determined, so we assume the above event throughout the proof.
Moreover denoting the complement parity pc = [d] \ p, it holds that p(x) = x1 · · · xd · pc (x) and
|Ep∈P [p(x)]| = |Ep∈P [pc (x)]|, so it suffices to consider the case where 2k ≤ d.
Without loss of generality, we may assume that x = (−1, · · · , −1, 1, · · · , 1) so that p(x) is decided
as (−1)|p∩[m]| . We bound the cardinality of the set P+ := {p ∈ P | p(x) = 1}. Each parity in P+
can be determined by choosing 2j elements from [m] and k − 2j elements from [d] \ [m]. Denoting
by [t]j the coefficient of operator of order j, we can evaluate
                   ⌊m/2⌋
                   X         m         d−m
         |P+ | =
                   j=0
                             2j        k − 2j
                   ⌊m/2⌋                                ⌊m/2⌋
                   X         m                    d−m
                                                         X m
              =                   [t]k−2j (1 + t)     =           [t]k (1 + t)d−m t2j
                   j=0
                             2j                          j=0
                                                               2j
                                        ⌊m/2⌋
                                         X          m 2j   1
              = [t]k (1 + t)d−m                         t = [t]k (1 + t)d−m ((1 + t)m + (1 − t)m )
                                         j=0
                                                    2j     2

                1 d    1              ′             ′
              =      + [t]k (1 − t2 )m (1 + st)d−2m
                2 k    2
                          ⌊k/2⌋         ′
                       sk X                  d − 2m′

                1 d                     m
              =      +          (−1)j                  ,
                2 k    2 j=0            j     k − 2j


                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where m′ = m ∧ (d − m) and s = ±1. It further follows that
                            ⌊k/2⌋                           ⌊k/2⌋
                         1 X m′           d − 2m′

         |P+ | 1                                         1 X ⌊d/2⌋            ⌊δd⌋
               −    ≤                                ≤
          |P |   2     2|P | j=0    j      k − 2j      2|P | j=0    j        k − 2j
                                −1                                                   −1
                       ⌊k/2⌋ d         ⌊d/2⌋      ⌊δd⌋       d d − ⌊d/2⌋ − ⌊δd⌋
                    ≤                                     ≤
                          2    k       ⌊k/2⌋ ⌊δd/2⌋          4 k − ⌊k/2⌋ − ⌊δd/2⌋
                                  −1         −k/4
                       d ⌊d/4⌋          d d
                    ≤                 ≤              = e−Θ(d) .
                       4 ⌊k/4⌋          4 k

Here, we have chosen δ = 14 ∧ 2d k
                                    = Θ(1) and used the inequality ab11+a 2 +a3      a1 a2 a3

                                                                       +b2 +b3 ≥ b1 b2 b3 .
From this, we conclude that
                                                      |P \ P+ | − |P+ |
                               |Ep∈P [p(x)]| =                          ≤ e−Ω(d)
                                                            |P |

with probability 1 − e−Ω(d) .


B    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5

Proof of Lemma 4. For each d + 1 ≤ m ≤ d + k − 1 and 1 ≤ j < m, the only component of f ◦
                      ◦
depending on wj,m is fm and
                ◦
              ∂fm (x; W)                  ∂ ẑm
                         = |ϕ′ (ẑm )| ·
                ∂wj,m                    ∂wj,m

                                               ∂σj (wm )      X ∂σα (wm )
                             ≤ ∥ϕ′ ∥∞                    xj +             xα
                                                ∂wj,m            ∂wj,m
                                                              α̸=j

                                                                                     X
                             = ∥ϕ′ ∥∞ σj (wm )(1 − σj (wm ))xj − σj (wm )                   σα (wm )xα
                                                                                     α̸=j
                                                                                         X
                             ≤ ∥ϕ′ ∥∞ σj (wm )(1 − σj (wm )) + ∥ϕ′ ∥∞ σj (wm )                 σα (wm )
                                                                                        α̸=j

                             ≤ 2∥ϕ′ ∥∞ σj (wm ).
Hence it follows that
          d+k−1
           X                                      d+k−1
                                                   X m−1X
                        ◦ 2
                   ∥∇W fm ∥ ≤ 4∥ϕ′ ∥2∞                        σj (wm )2 ≤ 4∥ϕ′ ∥2∞ (k − 1) = O(d),
          m=d+1                                   m=d+1 j=1

as desired.
We say that a parity xj1 · · · xjr for 1 ≤ j1 , · · · , jr ≤ d + k − 1 is trivial if it always equals 1, or
equivalently if its reduction to the independent bits x1 , · · · , xd cancel out mod 2. For example, the
parity x1 x4 x17 in Figure 1 is trivial. Define Ir,m as the set of nontrivial index r-tuples less than m:
                   Ir,m = {(j1 , · · · , jr ) | 1 ≤ j1 , · · · , jr ≤ m − 1, xj1 · · · xjr ̸≡ 1}.
In particular, I1,m = [m − 1] since no single parity is trivial.
Lemma 9 (concentration of interaction terms). If each bit xij for i ∈ [n], j ∈ [d] is i.i.d. generated
from the uniform distribution on {±1}, for any p > 0 it holds with probability at least 1 − p that
                                                                  s
                                    |⟨xj1 , · · · , xjr ⟩|          2     32d4
                           max                             ≤ κ :=     log      .
                          1≤r≤4               n                     n      p
                         (j1 ,··· ,jr )∈Ir,m


                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Each tuple (j1 , · · · , jr ) ∈ Ir,m computes a specific nontrivial parity xj1 · · · xjr for which the
bits xij1 · · · xijr , i = 1, · · · , n are i.i.d. Unif({±1}) due to symmetry. By Hoeffding’s inequality we
have that
                                                                       2
                                 Pr (|⟨xj1 , · · · , xjr ⟩| ≥ λ) ≤ 2e−λ /2n .
Moreover, |Ir,m | ≤ (d + k − 1)r ≤ (2d − 1)r so that
                    |I1,m | + · · · + |I4,m | ≤ (2d − 1) + · · · + (2d − 1)4 < (2d)4 .
Therefore it follows by union bounding that

                                                                              2
                  Pr         max         |⟨xj1 , · · · , xjr ⟩| ≥ λ ≤ 32d4 e−λ /2n ,
                       1≤r≤4,(j1 ,··· ,jr )∈Ir,m

which implies the statement.

In particular, we take n = Ω(d2+ϵ ) and p = exp(−dϵ/2 ) so that κ = O(d−1−ϵ/4 ). This will ensure
that the informative gradient signals will dominate the irrelevant interaction terms.
We now proceed to the main proof of Theorem 5. The superscript (0) at initialization is omitted for
simplicity. The loss can be written more explicitly as
                                 d+k−1                                  m−1
                               1 X                                      X
                   L(W) =              ∥ϕ(ẑm ) − xm ∥2 ,       ẑm =            σj (wm )xj .
                              2n                                           j=1
                                  m=d+1

It is straightforward to verify for 1 ≤ α < m that
                 ∂σα (wm )
                           = (δjα − σα (wm ))σj (wm ) = (δjα − σj (wm ))σα (wm )
                  ∂wj,m
and
                           m−1
                   ∂ ẑm   X
                         =     (δjα − σj (wm ))σα (wm )xα = σj (wm )(xj − ẑm ).
                  ∂wj,m    α=1

Then the gradient of L with respect to each element wj,m at initialization can be computed as
                  ∂L         1                  ∂ϕ(ẑm )
                       (W) = (ϕ(ẑm ) − xm )⊤
                 ∂wj,m       n                   ∂wj,m
                             σj (wm )
                           =          ⟨ϕ(ẑm ) − xm , ϕ′ (ẑm ), xj − ẑm ⟩                              (6)
                                 n
                                   1
                           =−            ⟨xm , 2cẑm , xj − ẑm ⟩                                        (7)
                               n(m − 1)
                                      1                   2
                               +              −1n + cẑm    , 2cẑm , xj − ẑm                           (8)
                                  n(m − 1)
                                      1
                               +              O(|ẑm |4 ), 2cẑm , xj − ẑm                              (9)
                                  n(m − 1)
                                      1
                               +              ϕ(ẑm ) − xm , O(|ẑm |3 ), xj − ẑm .                    (10)
                                  n(m − 1)

Computing interaction strengths. The term (7) will be shown to contain the dominating gradient
signal when j = c1 [m], c2 [m], while the other terms can be bounded as perturbations. Let ℓ = h2 [m]
so that xm computes a 2ℓ -parity.
                                     1
                                        P
For term (7), we substitute ẑm = m−1      α xα at initialization to expand

      1                             1    X                       1       X
        ⟨xm , ẑm , xj − ẑm ⟩ =            ⟨xm , xα , xj ⟩ −          2
                                                                           ⟨xm , xα , xβ ⟩ ,
      n                          n(m − 1) α                   n(m − 1)
                                                                                      α,β



                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the dummy indices α, β, · · · are taken to run over [m − 1]. Let us evaluate the third-order
interaction terms ⟨xm , xα , xβ ⟩. If h[α] = ℓ, xm xα computes the parity of 2ℓ+1 independent bits
from x1 , · · · , xd so xm xα xβ cannot be trivial, hence (m, α, β) ∈ I3,m and |⟨xm , xα , xβ ⟩| ≤ nκ by
Lemma 9. Similarly, h[β] = ℓ implies that (m, α, β) ∈ I3,m . Suppose h[α], h[β] ≤ ℓ − 1; unless
h[α] = h[β] = ℓ − 1, the combined parity xα xβ will not contain enough independent bits to cancel
out the 2ℓ bits in xm , so again (m, α, β) ∈ I3,m . Moreover if h[α] = h[β] = ℓ − 1, xm xα xβ will be
trivial if and only if {α, β} = {c1 [m], c2 [m]}, in which case ⟨xm , xα , xβ ⟩ = n. Thus we have that
            1X                            1      X
                    ⟨xm , xα , xβ ⟩ = 2 +                 ⟨xm , xα , xβ ⟩ = 2 + O((m − 1)2 κ).
            n α                           n
                                         (m,α,β)∈I3,m

Similarly, the contraction ⟨xm , xα , xj ⟩ can be nontrivial only if p[j] = m and only when α is the
other child node of xm , so that

                      1X                         1 + O((m − 1)κ) p[j] = m,
                             ⟨xm , xα , xj ⟩ =
                      n α                        O((m − 1)κ)          otherwise.

Since κ = O(d−1−ϵ/4 ) and d < m ≤ 2d − 1, we can therefore isolate the leading term of order
Θ(d−2 ) as
                        1
                   −         ⟨xm , 2cẑm , xj − ẑm ⟩
                    n(m − 1)
                          2c                             2c
                   =−          (1{p[j]=m} + O(dκ)) +           (2 + O(d2 κ))
                      (m − 1)2                        (m − 1)3
                          2c
                   =−          1{p[j]=m} + O(d−2−ϵ/4 ).
                      (m − 1)2

Next, for term (8), we expand
  1            2                        2c               2c 2        2c2 3            2c2 4
     −1n + cẑm  , 2cẑm , xj − ẑm = − ⟨ẑm , xj ⟩ +         ẑm +       ẑm , xj −      ẑm .
  n                                     n                n            n                n
The second-order terms can be computed as
                                                                 !
          1                    1                  X                     1
            ⟨ẑm , xj ⟩ =            ⟨xj , xj ⟩ +      ⟨xα , xj ⟩ =          + O(κ),
          n                n(m − 1)                                  m−1
                                                  α̸=j
                                                                   !
          1 2               1       X                X                     1
             ẑm =                2
                                       ⟨xα , xα ⟩ +      ⟨xα , xβ ⟩ =            + O(κ).
          n            n(m − 1)     α
                                                                        m−1
                                                        α̸=β

We evaluate the fourth-order interaction terms by looking at when (α, β, γ, δ) ∈
                                                                               / I4,m can occur.
Without loss of generality, suppose h[α] ≤ h[β] ≤ h[γ] ≤ h[δ].
   (i) If h[β] < h[γ] < h[δ], the parities of xα , xβ , xγ must combine without overlaps to cancel out
       xδ , so it must hold that xγ is a child of xδ and xα , xβ are the two children of the other child.
       This subtree is fully determined by the choice of the index δ and one of its child nodes, so there
       are at most O(d) trivial 4-tuples in this case.
  (ii) If h[β] = h[γ] < h[δ], it still must hold that h[γ] = h[δ] − 1. Moreover, both xβ , xγ must
       be children of xδ ; otherwise, the bits of xδ and the non-child node cannot be canceled out
       by the remaining nodes. Then either xβ = xγ or xβ xγ = xδ , and in both cases we see that
       xα xβ xγ xδ cannot be trivial.
 (iii) If h[β] < h[γ] = h[δ], it must be that γ = δ, otherwise the bits of xγ xδ cannot be canceled out
       by xα xβ . It follows that xα xβ ≡ 1 and α = β, so there are O(d2 ) trivial 4-tuples in this case.
 (iv) If h[β] = h[γ] = h[δ], it must again hold that two indices must be equal, and the remaining
       two indices must also be equal, so there are also O(d2 ) trivial 4-tuples.
Hence it follows that
             1 4         1      X
                ẑm =             ⟨xα , xβ , xγ , xδ ⟩
             n        n(m − 1)4
                                     α,β,γ,δ


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             1                   X                   1                  X
                      =                                      n+                                     O(nκ)
                          n(m − 1)4                               n(m − 1)4
                                            (α,β,γ,δ)∈I
                                                     / 4,m                         (α,β,γ,δ)∈I4,m

                          |[m − 1]4 \ I4,m |    |I4,m |
                      =               4
                                             +          O(κ) = O(d−2 + κ).
                              (m − 1)          (m − 1)4
Furthermore, suppose α, β, γ, δ are constrained to contain the index j. Then case (i) above counts
O(1) nontrivial tuples, while case (i), while cases (iii),(iv) count at most O(d) tuples since there is
only one free index to be determined. Hence we also have
      1 3                  1      X                              O(d)
         ẑm , xj =            3
                                        ⟨xα , xβ , xγ , xj ⟩ =           + O(κ) = O(d−2 + κ).
      n               n(m − 1)                                 (m − 1)3
                                      α,β,γ

Combining the above, we obtain that
    1                                          2c          2c       O(κ)
                   2
          −1n + cẑm , 2cẑm , xj − ẑm = −         2
                                                      +         2
                                                                  +      = O(d−2−ϵ/4 ).
 n(m − 1)                                   (m − 1)     (m − 1)     m−1

For term (9), we note that |ẑm |4 = ẑm 4
                                             = O(nd−2 + nκ) as derived above. Then since each
component of ẑm , xj − ẑm are contained in [−1, 1], [−2, 2], respectively, we have that
            1                                        4c
                  O(|ẑm |4 ), 2cẑm , xj − ẑm =          O( |ẑm |4 ) = O(d−2−ϵ/4 ).
         n(m − 1)                                 n(m − 1)
Finally for term (10), by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality we have
                                  n
              1           1X
                |ẑm |3 =       |ẑm,i |3
              n           n i=1
                               n
                                         !1/2             n
                                                                        !1/2
                          1 X 2                           X
                                                                  4                1 2 1/2 4 1/2
                        ≤          ẑ                           ẑm,i          =     ẑ    ẑm
                          n i=1 m,i                       i=1
                                                                                   n m
                              1
                             = O(nd−1 )1/2 · O(nd−2 + nκ)1/2 = O(d−1−ϵ/8 ),
                              n
and so we may bound
        1                                               4
              ϕ(ẑm ) − xm , O(|ẑm |3 ), xj − ẑm =          O( |ẑm |3 ) = O(d−2−ϵ/8 ).
     n(m − 1)                                        n(m − 1)
From (7)-(10) we conclude that
                           ∂L              2c
                                (W) = −          1{p[j]=m} + O(d−2−ϵ/8 ),
                          ∂wj,m         (m − 1)2
and the same result applies to the approximate gradient ∇
                                                        e w L at initialization since the cutoff does
                                                           j,m

not apply and each component of the noise is bounded by O(d−2−ϵ/8 ).

Concentration of softmax scores.             Taking η = d2+ϵ/16 , the updated weights W(1) = −η ∇L(W)
                                                                                                e
become
                                (1)         2cd2+ϵ/16
                               wj,m =                 1{p[j]=m} + O(d−ϵ/16 ).
                                            (m − 1)2
In particular, for each j ̸= c1 [m], c2 [m] the softmax scores satisfy
                                 (1)          (1)      (1)    (1)
                                                     w     −w
                      (1)
                          ) = ewj,m / α ewα,m ≤ e j,m c1 [m],m ≤ exp(−Ω(dϵ/16 )).
                                      P
                σj (wm
                                                                   (1)                  (1)
As softmax scores must sum to 1, it holds that σc1 [m] (wm ) + σc2 [m] (wm ) ≥ 1 − exp(−Ω(dϵ/16 ))
and moreover
                       (1)
             σc1 [m] (wm )       w
                                      (1)         (1)
                                              −wc [m],m
                       (1)
                              = e c1 [m],m        2       ≤ exp(O(d−ϵ/16 )) ≤ 1 + O(d−ϵ/16 )
             σc2 [m] (wm )

                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                 (1)             (1)
from the inequality et ≤ 1 + O(t) for small t > 0. By symmetry, σc2 [m] (wm )/σc1 [m] (wm ) ≤
1 + O(d−ϵ/16 ). By simple algebraic manipulation, we can conclude that
                  1                                                  1
                    − O(d−ϵ/16 ) ≤ σc1 [m] (wm
                                             (1)              (1)
                                                 ), σc2 [m] (wm   ) ≤ + O(d−ϵ/16 ).
                  2                                                  2
                                       (1) P          (1)
That is, the updated attention layer ẑm = j σj (wm )xj has learned to take the average of the two
child nodes and ignore the remaining input tokens at each step.

Evaluating the forward pass. Now to bound the updated prediction loss, we evaluate the error
   (1)
∥x̂m − xm ∥∞ of each step of the forward pass for d + 1 ≤ m ≤ d + k − 1. More precisely, define
the increasing sequence
                                            (1)
                           ϵm = max x̂j − xj            , ϵd = 0.
                                            d<j≤m                     ∞
Then
                  (1)                           (1)
                 x̂c1 [m] − xc1 [m]         , x̂c2 [m] − xc1 [m]            ≤ ϵc1 [m] , ϵc2 [m] ≤ ϵm−1 ,
                                       ∞                               ∞
                                      (1)
and for the intermediate values ẑm we have
                                                                      (1)          (1)
                (1)     xc1 [m] + xc2 [m]               (1)
                                                                     x̂c1 [m] + x̂c2 [m]
              ẑm   −                               ≤ ẑm   −                                  + ϵm−1
                                2              ∞                               2
                                                                                           ∞
                  X
                                (1)               (1)    1             (1)    1
             ≤             σj (wm   ) + σc1 [m] (wm   )−   + σc2 [m] (wm   )−   + ϵm−1
                                                         2                    2
                 p[j]̸=m

             ≤ 2d exp(−Ω(dϵ/16 )) + O(d−ϵ/16 ) + ϵm−1
             ≤ C1 d−ϵ/16 + ϵm−1 ,
for some constant C1 > 0. Since ϕ behaves like a quadratic near 0, ±1, it follows that

                                            xc1 [m] + xc2 [m]
             (1)                 (1)
     ϵm = ∥x̂m − xm ∥∞ = ϕ(ẑm ) − ϕ                               ≤ C2 (C1 d−ϵ/16 + ϵm−1 )2
                                                    2           ∞
for some constant C2 > 0 depending only on ϕ. Then for sufficiently large d, by choosing C3 such
that C2 (C1 + C3 d−ϵ/16 )2 ≤ C3 , for ϵm−1 ≤ C3 d−ϵ/8 it follows that
                              ϵm ≤ C2 (C1 d−ϵ/16 + C3 d−ϵ/8 )2 ≤ C3 d−ϵ/8 ,
                                                                                                 (1)       (1)
thus ϵm = O(d−ϵ/8 ) inductively for all m. We conclude that ∥ŷ − y∥∞ = ∥x̂d+k−1 − xd+k−1 ∥∞
is bounded for all inputs as O(d−ϵ/8 ).

C      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 7
Proof of Lemma 6. For the iterative generation scheme (3), each wj,m affects x̂m as well as all
nodes x̂α on higher levels h[α] > h[m] through x̂m . We bound the contribution of each term to the
total gradient inductively with respect to the level. Define for each d < m ≤ d+k −1, 1 ≤ j ≤ m−1
and 0 < ℓ ≤ v the quantity
                                                           ∂ x̂α
                                        ξj,m,ℓ := max              .
                                                   α≤dℓ ∂wj,m

We denote κ := ∥ϕ′ ∥∞ for brevity. Clearly ξj,m,ℓ = 0 for ℓ < h[m] and
                                       ∂ x̂m
                    ξj,m,h[m] =              ≤ κσj (wm )|xj − ẑm | ≤ 2κσj (wm ).
                                      ∂wj,m
Moreover for any α with h[α] = ℓ > h[m], we can bound by the chain rule
                                                      dℓ−1
                     ∂ x̂α                            X                       ∂ x̂β
                           ≤ |ϕ′ (ẑα )| ·                        σβ (wα )          ≤ κξj,m,ℓ−1 ,
                    ∂wj,m                                                    ∂wj,m
                                                β=dh[m] +1



                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


yielding the relation ξj,m,ℓ ≤ κξj,m,ℓ−1 . Iterating, we obtain that ξj,m,ℓ ≤ 2κℓ−h[m]+1 σj (wm ).
Therefore we can bound the total gradient by the following.
       d+k−1
        X                   Xv    Xdℓ
             ∥∇W fα× ∥2 =               ∥∇W fα× ∥2
      α=d+1                    ℓ=1 α=dℓ−1 +1
                               v          dℓ      d+k−1
                                                   X m−1                    2
                               X          X             X           ∂ x̂α
                           =
                                                                   ∂wj,m
                               ℓ=1 α=dℓ−1 +1 m=d+1 j=1
                               d+k−1
                                X m−1 v
                                     XX
                                                                2
                           ≤                       (dℓ − dℓ−1 )ξj,m,ℓ
                               m=d+1 j=1 ℓ=1
                               d+k−1
                                X m−1X                      v
                                                            X
                           ≤                    σj (wm )2         2v−ℓ · 4κ2ℓ−2h[m]+2
                               m=d+1 j=1                    ℓ=1
                                d+k−1                       v   2  ℓ                 d+k−1
                                 X                          X  κ                 4κ2  X
                           ≤4              2v κ−2h[m]+2                     ≤    2
                                                                                           κ2v−2h[m]+2
                                                                    2           κ −2
                                m=d+1                       ℓ=1                          m=d+1
                                      2   v                                        4     v
                                4κ        X                                      4κ      X
                           ≤                    (dℓ − dℓ−1 )κ2v−2ℓ+2 =                         (2κ2 )v−ℓ
                               κ2 − 2                                           κ2 − 2
                                          ℓ=1                                            ℓ=1
                                  4κ2
                           ≤ 2               (2κ2 )v = O(d2 log2 κ+1 ),
                            (κ − 2)(2κ2 − 1)
since 2v = k = O(d).
We first provide a concentration bound for the augmented data, which we take to hold throughout the
proof by conditioning on the high probability event.
                                                                                                           √
Lemma 10 (concentration of augmented data). For n′ = poly(d), with probability 1 − e−Ω( d)
over random sampling of the augmented data u1 , · · · , ud , it holds that ∥uj + 1n′ ∥∞ = 2 for all
1 ≤ j ≤ d + k − 1 and
                                        dℓ
                                    1 X
                              max          x+
                                            j        ≤ O(d−1/4 ).
                             0≤ℓ≤v dℓ
                                       j=1
                                                             ∞

Proof. The nodes xdℓ−1 +1 , · · · , xdℓ at each level ℓ compute independent parities, even though parities
at different levels can be correlated. By Hoeffding’s inequality and union bounding over coordinates,
it follows that
                                          s                                  s
                        dℓ                                        ′
                       X                                       2n      v−ℓ+1        2n′
                              x+j      ≤ 2(dℓ − dℓ−1 ) log          =2 2       log
                                                                p                     p
                   j=dℓ−1 +1
                                      ∞
with probability at least 1 − p. Again union bounding, the above holds for all levels 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ v
simultaneously with probability at least 1 − vp, so that
                                  v−ℓ′ +1
                                          s                     s
              dℓ               ℓ
          1 X               X    2 2            2n′      √        1     2n′
                 xj+
                          ≤                 log     ≤ 2( 2 + 1)     log     = O(d−1/4 )
          dℓ j=1             ′
                                    d            p                d      p
                               ℓ =0
                       ∞
                 √
                − d
for all ℓ if p = e . In addition, the probability that uj = −1n′ for some j ≤ d + k − 1 is bounded
              ′
by 2d · 2−n = e−Ω(d) ; otherwise, at least one entry is equal to 2.

Now to prove Theorem 7, we show by induction that with high probability, the weights can be written
for constants Cℓ = Θ(1) as
                                             ϵ/16
                                  
                                  r[Ch[m] d      ] h[m] ≤ t, p[j] = m,
                            (t)
                          wj,m = −∞                 j > dh[m]−1 or m ≤ d,                      (11)
                                  
                                    0               otherwise.
Clearly (11) is satisfied when t = 0. Suppose (11) holds at time t − 1 for t ≥ 1.


                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Evaluating the forward pass. We first evaluate the forward pass iteration of the transformer up to
level h[m] ≤ t; fixing 0 < C < minℓ≤v Cℓ , it holds that

               (t)                                             1
          σj (wm   )≤           (t)               (t)
                                                                                               ≤ exp(−Cdϵ/16 )
                           exp(wc1 [m],m ) + exp(wc2 [m],m ) + dh[m]−1 − 2

when p[j] ̸= m and
                          1 − d exp(−Cdϵ/16 )             (t)              (t)   1
                                              ≤ σc1 [m] (wm   ), σc2 [m] (wm   )≤ .
                                   2                                             2
For the augmented tokens, define the increasing per-level error sequence
                                                              +(t)
                                   ϵℓ = max              x̂j         − x+
                                                                        j        ,   ϵ0 = 0.
                                            d<j≤dℓ                           ∞

We recursively bound ϵℓ as before up to ϵt ; this will simultaneously verify that the filter ι is not
                                           (t)
applied for the first t + 1 levels since ∥uj + 1n′ ∥∞ ≥ 2 − ϵt due to Lemma 10.
                  +(t)
For each state ẑm       with h[m] = ℓ we have

                    +(t)
                               x+         +
                                c1 [m] + xc2 [m]
                  ẑm    −
                                       2
                                                         ∞
                      X
                                    (t)                   (t)           1             (t)    1
                 ≤             σj (wm   )+      σc1 [m] (wm   )−          + σc2 [m] (wm   )−   + ϵℓ−1
                                                                        2                    2
                     p[j]̸=m

                 ≤ (2d − 2) exp(−Cdϵ/16 ) + ϵℓ−1 .
Since ϕ behaves like a quadratic near 0, ±1, it follows that

                                  ϵℓ ≤ C2 ((2d − 2) exp(−Cdϵ/16 ) + ϵℓ−1 )2 ,
                                                                                      +(t)
and we can inductively verify ϵℓ ≤ exp(−Cdϵ/16 ) as well as ∥ẑm                                +
                                                                                             − zm ∥∞ ≤ 2d exp(−Cdϵ/16 )
holds for all ℓ ≤ t for sufficiently large d.
On the other hand, for the forward pass for levels h[m] > t the softmax scores are uniform over
dh[m]−1 tokens; moreover, the filter ι will be applied to all tokens on level t + 2 and higher. Indeed,
the output of nodes on level h[m] = t + 1 reads
                                             1 +(t)             +(t)  1
     x̂+(t)
       m
                  +(t)
            = ϕ(ẑm    ),          +(t)
                                 ẑm    =      (x̂  + · · · + x̂dt ) = (x+ + · · · + x+
                                                                                      dt ) + O(ϵℓ ),
                                             dt 1                     dt 1
          +(t)
so that ∥ẑm ∥∞ ≤ O(d−1/4 ) by Lemma 10. Then
                                                                    −1/2
                                 ∥û(t)                 +(t) 2
                                    m + 1n′ ∥∞ ≤ C2 ∥|ẑm | ∥ ≤ O(d      )
so that if O(d−1/2 ) < ε0 , the filter zeroes out the output of each node on level t + 2. Then the
intermediate states of nodes xm′ on level t + 2 read
                                +(t)        1          +(t)                 +(t)       dt +(t)
                               ẑm′ =             (x̂1        + · · · + x̂dt ) =          ẑ   ,
                                           dt+1                                       dt+1 m
which again activates the filter. Repeating this process for the remaining levels, we conclude that
   +(t)                            +(t)
∥ẑm ∥∞ ≤ O(d−1/4 ) and so ∥x̂m + 1n+n′ ∥∞ ≤ O(d−1/2 ) holds simultaneously for all nodes
h[m] > t (and all timesteps t for which (11) is valid).

                                                (t)           Pdt
Evaluating the updates. Define z̄m = d1t                           j=1 xj so that

                                                         d t
                            (t)     (t)               1 X       (t)
                         ∥ẑm   − z̄m   ∥∞ ≤                 ∥x̂ − xj ∥∞ ≤ exp(−Cdϵ/16 ).
                                                      dt j=1 j


                                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We proceed to evaluate the gradient of L at (11). For the weights wj,m with h[m] = t + 1, by isolating
the errors from the forward pass we have
                                     *                               +
                                                               (t)
     ∂       1                    1                      ∂ϕ(ẑm    )
               ∥x̂(t) − xm ∥2 =        ϕ(ẑm(t)
                                                ) − xm ,
  ∂wj,m 2n m                      n                       ∂wj,m
                                           (t)
                                     σj (wm ) D                                     (t)
                                                                                               E
                                  =               ϕ(ẑm(t)
                                                           ) − xm , ϕ′ (ẑm(t)
                                                                               ), x̂j − ẑm(t)
                                         n
                                      1 D                                               E
                                 =         ϕ(z̄m(t)
                                                    ) − xm , ϕ′ (z̄m
                                                                   (t)
                                                                       ), xj − z̄m  (t)
                                     ndt

                                               4             ′          ′′           (t)    (t)
                                       +O         (1 + ∥ϕ ∥∞ + ∥ϕ ∥∞ )∥ẑm − z̄m ∥∞
                                               dt
                                      1 D                                               E
                                 =         ϕ(z̄m(t)
                                                    ) − xm , ϕ′ (z̄m
                                                                   (t)
                                                                       ), xj − z̄m  (t)
                                                                                          + O(exp(−Cdϵ/16 )).
                                     ndt
Then the first term is identical to the initial gradient (6) analyzed in the proof of Theorem 5 except
for the differences in indices, and from the same computation we obtain the leading term:

                      ∂       1                             2c
                                 ∥x̂m − xm ∥ = − 2 1{p[j]=m} + O(d−2−ϵ/8 ),
                                    (t)         2
                   ∂wj,m 2n                                 dt
which holds with probability 1 − exp(−dϵ/2 ) if n = Ω(d2+ϵ ) under the same setting of Lemma 9.
For all other nodes on level t + 1 or below, the output does not depend on the weight wj,m , so the
gradient of the squared error with respect to wj,m is zero. Moreover, all nodes on level t + 2 or above
are zeroed out due to the filter and hence also has zero gradient. Then the oracle error is absorbed
into the second term and the update after time t + 1 with learning rate fixed to η = d2+ϵ/16 η0 reads
                                                 2+ϵ/16
                 (t)     e w L(W(t) , U) = 2cη0 d
                wj,m − η ∇                              1{p[j]=m} + O(d−ϵ/16 ).
                            j,m                  2
                                                dh[m]−1
By choosing η0 such that none of the leading terms lands exactly on a half-integer, we have that for
sufficiently large d,
                                       "             #
                (t+1)      (t+1)            d2+ϵ/16        (t+1)
              wc1 [m],m = wc2 [m],m = r 2cη0 2         , wj,m = r[O(d−ϵ/16 )] = 0
                                            dh[m]−1
if p[j] ̸= m. We verify that
                                   cη0            d2+ϵ/16
                                       ≤ Cℓ = 2cη0 2      ≤ 2cη0 .
                                    2              dℓ−1
Also, the weights wj,m such that h[m] ≥ t + 2 only affect the nodes that are zeroed out, so that the
                                            (t+1)
gradient is also bounded as O(d−ϵ/16 ) and wj,m = 0.
It remains to evaluate the gradient signal of weights wj,m with h[m] ≤ t, which have already been
updated in previous steps. Define the error
                                                              (t)
                                                          ∂ x̂α
                                       ξj,m,ℓ := max                    .
                                                1≤α≤dℓ    ∂wj,m
                                                                    ∞
This is similar to the error control in the proof of Lemma 6, but we exploit the fact that parities up to
level t are solved to obtain a much tighter bound. Let us expand ϕ′ (t) = 2c′ (1 − t) + O((1 − t)2 )
near 1 and 2c′ (−1 − t) + O((1 + t)2 ) near −1 for some positive constant c′ . Recall
                            ∥ẑα+(t) − zα+ ∥∞ ≤ 2d exp(−Cdϵ/16 ),           h[α] ≤ t
                                                   (t)
holds in the forward pass, so each component ẑα,i is O(exp(−Cdϵ/16 ))-close to either of ±1. It
                    (t)
follows that |ϕ′ (ẑα,i )| = O(exp(−Cdϵ/16 )), so we can bound
                                 (t)
                               ∂ x̂m
              ξj,m,h[m] =                  ≤ 2∥ϕ′ (ẑm
                                                     (t)
                                                         )∥∞ σj (wm ) ≤ O(exp(−Cdϵ/16 )).
                               ∂wj,m
                                       ∞


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Moreover, for any α on level h[α] = ℓ, h[m] < ℓ ≤ t the magnitude of the derivative of the output
  (t)
x̂α can be bounded as
            (t)                             dℓ−1                       (t)
        ∂ x̂α                               X                      ∂ x̂β
                       ≤ ϕ′ (ẑα(t) )              σβ (wα(t) )                    ≤ O(exp(−Cdϵ/16 ))ξj,m,ℓ−1 .
        ∂wj,m                           ∞                          ∂wj,m
                   ∞                        β=1                              ∞

This implies that ξj,m,t = ξj,m,t−1 = · · · = ξj,m,h[m] ≤ O(exp(−Cdϵ/16 )). Furthermore, for any α
on level h[α] = t + 1 it holds that
           (t)                    dt                         (t)
        ∂ x̂α                     X                     ∂ x̂β
                       ≤ ∥ϕ′ ∥∞         σβ (wα(t) )                    ≤ ∥ϕ′ ∥∞ ξj,m,t ≤ O(exp(−Cdϵ/16 )).
        ∂wj,m                                           ∂wj,m
                   ∞              β=1                              ∞

Thus we have for all α with h[α] ≤ t + 1,
                                   *                    +
                                                    (t)          (t)
   ∂      1     (t)       2      1     (t)      ∂ x̂α        ∂ x̂α
             ∥x̂α − xα ∥ =           x̂α − xα ,           ≤2                                    = O(exp(−Cdϵ/16 )),
 ∂wj,m 2n                        n              ∂wj,m        ∂wj,m
                                                                                            ∞

and the nodes on level t + 2 or above are zeroed out due to the filter. Hence the gradient signal is
exponentially small and
                        e w L(W(t) , U) = O(d exp(−Cdϵ/16 )) + O(d−2−ϵ/8 ),
                        ∇  j,m

         (t+1)          (t)                            (t)
so that wj,m      = r[wj,m + O(d−ϵ/16 )] = wj,m . This concludes the proof of (11).
Finally, after time t = v the weights at all levels have been updated, so that repeating the analysis of
the forward pass yields that
                                               (t)
                  ∥ŷtest − ytest ∥∞ = x̂d+k−1 − xd+k−1                          ≤ ϵv ≤ exp(−Cdϵ/16 ),
                                                                             ∞

as was to be shown.

D    E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
For the transformer architecture, the feedforward layer was fixed to the following piecewise quadratic
link function:
                                            2
                                      
                                      −4t − 8t − 3 t ∈ [−1, −0.5)
                             ϕ(t) = 4t − 12
                                                         t ∈ [−0.5, 0.5)
                                        −4t2 + 8t − 3 t ∈ [0.5, 1].
                                      

For all CoT models, learning rates were fixed to η = 15, 50, 100 for k = 8, 16, 32. For the direct
model, the learning rate was scaled to 0.01η to ensure stability of training. For the self-consistency
model, filtering was done through an equivalent weight-based filter, which checks if any softmax
score exceeds a threshold value, here set to 0.4. Moreover, we found that adding a 10% fraction of
the gradient from the prediction loss to that of the CoT loss resulted in more stable training.
Figure 5 shows CoT loss and prediction loss curves for k = 8, 16, 32, extending Figure 4. The direct
model fails to learn parity in all cases, while CoT with teacher forcing always learns efficiently. For
CoT with self-consistency, a similar analysis as in Section 4 can be applied for k = 8, 16 with two
or three distinct learning stages. We also observe that the basic CoT model manages to fully solve
the problem for k = 8 (two intermediate levels) but not for k = 16, 32 (three and four intermediate
levels), indicating that assistance (teacher forcing or self-consistency checking) becomes necessary
for more complex tasks.


                                                             26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: CoT loss (left) and prediction loss (right) curves for the four models when d = 64, k = 32
(top), k = 16 (middle) and k = 8 (bottom). For the CoT+consistency model, dashed lines indicate
when the filters of each level are deactivated.


                                                27
