Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S HEDDING L IGHT ON T IME S ERIES C LASSIFICATION
USING I NTERPRETABILITY G ATED N ETWORKS

 Yunshi Wen1∗, Tengfei Ma2∗, Ronny Luss3 , Debarun Bhattacharjya3 ,
 Achille Fokoue3 , Agung Julius1
 1
  Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 2 Stony Brook University, 3 IBM Research
 weny2@rpi.edu, tengfei.ma@stonybrook.edu
 {rluss, debarunb, achille}@us.ibm.com
 agung@ecse.rpi.edu



                                            A BSTRACT
         In time-series classification, interpretable models can bring additional insights but
         be outperformed by deep models since human-understandable features have limited
         expressivity and flexibility. In this work, we present InterpGN, a framework that in-
         tegrates an interpretable model and a deep neural network. Within this framework,
         we introduce a novel gating function design based on the confidence of the inter-
         pretable expert, preserving interpretability for samples where interpretable features
         are significant while also identifying samples that require additional expertise. For
         the interpretable expert, we incorporate shapelets to effectively model shape-level
         features for time-series data. We introduce a variant of Shapelet Transforms to
         build logical predicates using shapelets. Our proposed model achieves comparable
         performance with state-of-the-art deep learning models while additionally provid-
         ing interpretable classifiers for various benchmark datasets. We further show that
         our models improve on quantitative shapelet quality and interpretability metrics
         over existing shapelet-learning formulations. Finally, we show that our models
         can integrate additional advanced architectures and be applied to real-world tasks
         beyond standard benchmarks such as the MIMIC-III and time series extrinsic
         regression datasets.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Time series classification is a fundamental task for time series (TS) data. Depending on the number of
observed variables, TS classification problems can be categorized as either univariate or multivariate.
Both categories are involved in a wide range of applications. Univariate TS data includes image
outlines, sound, and spectrographs, and multivariate TS data include electroencephalogram (EEG),
electrocardiogram (ECG), and human activity recognition (HAR). These types of TS data appear in
essential applications such as healthcare, neuroscience, and automation. In recent years, there has
been an increasing trend of employing deep learning models to TS classification problems. However,
despite achieving state-of-the-art performance, deep models typically lack interpretability.
As a motivating example for interpretable TS classification, consider the problem of classifying ECG
data using machine learning (Neves et al., 2021; Abdullah et al., 2023; Aziz et al., 2021). While
models might be accurate, doctors may hesitate to rely on them without understanding why a patient’s
heartbeat as measured by an ECG was classified as being indicative of reduced bloodflow to the heart
(known as myocardial ischemia). Our model seeks to provide such trust by discovering classifiers
based on understandable concepts, such as those illustrated in Figure 1 (middle), where heartbeats
are classified according to the existence of patterns known as shapelets. In this example, shapelet
s11 , representing a downward trend, and s12 , representing an upward trend, serve as discriminative
patterns that classify normal and ischemic heartbeats. A doctor may gain confidence in seeing such
patterns with straightforward interpretations, such as in Figure 1 (right), that were deemed important
to the predictions.
   ∗
     Most of the work was done while at IBM Research. Corresponding to Yunshi Wen (weny2@rpi.edu)
and Tengfei Ma (tengfei.ma@stonybrook.edu).


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Shapelets                                       Classifier                                     Interpretations
   Length: 10%   30%    50%    80%                          Class 1: Normal       Class 2: Ischemia
                                                  Importance             Importance

                                                     +1.56                   +1.42


                                        Include
                                                                                                      Local Explanation: This time-series is
                                                     +0.47                   +1.30                    Ischemia because it contains


                                                               (Omit small importance)                                 and            .


                                        Exclude
                                                     -1.10                   -0.30                    Global Explanation:
                                                                                                      1. Normal samples should include s12, while
                                                                                                      exclude s11 and s1.
                                                     -1.15                   -1.56                    2. Ischemia samples should include s11 and
                                                                                                      s1, while exclude s12.


Figure 1: An example of shapelet-based interpretable TS classification on the ECG200 dataset.
(Left) The set of shapelets with various lengths to capture features with different scales. (Middle) A
classifier that associates the shapelets with categories, assigning importance scores to them. (Right)
Two methods to interpret the classifier result in rule-like explanations.


Interpretability can be significant from two perspectives. Firstly, in applications such as healthcare
and physical systems where safety is essential, interpreting a model allows us to validate reliability,
trustworthiness, and fairness. Secondly, in challenging tasks, we can gain knowledge about the
problem by interpreting patterns found by machine learning models during training. Existing
interpretable time series methods (Zhao et al., 2023) include post hoc explainability which explain
the behavior of a trained deep learning model often using a surrogate model (Queen et al., 2023), and
self-explainable models for which model predictions are directly interpretable.
In this study, we focus on self-explainable models. A recent self-explainable TS model, Neuro-
Symbolic Time Series Classification (NSTSC) (Yan et al., 2022), combines a neuro-symbolic model
(Riegel et al., 2020) with signal temporal logic (Mehdipour et al., 2021); soft-logic predicates are
defined on each time stamp, and logic rules are learned to describe the classes. Although such
approaches are defined to be interpretable, identifying the logical rules when applied to complex tasks
can result in numerous predicates and logical operators. Furthermore, it is known that interpretability
may lead to lower classification performance due to incomplete coverage of interpretable concepts or
limited expressivity (Koh et al., 2020; Oikarinen et al., 2022; Havasi et al., 2022); such is the case for
Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) (Koh et al., 2020), a popular interpretable model in computer
vision. Similarly in TS, time-domain features (such as shapes and trends) are easy to understand but
may not be able to capture other essential features such as those in the frequency domain.
In addition to post-hoc explanations, the literature on combining black-box models with interpretable
models includes approaches such as performing logical reasoning on concepts discovered by deep
models (Lee et al., 2022) or using deep models to select from a set of interpretable primitives, which
are then composed to form the final predictions (Okajima & Sadamasa, 2019). In this paper, with the
goal of maintaining interpretability when appropriate while allowing for additional complexity where
concept-level information is not significant, we propose an Interpretability Gated Network (InterpGN)
that combines an interpretable expert with a deep neural network (DNN) expert. InterpGN uses a
novel gating function to decide whether to use the interpretable expert’s prediction or to rely on the
DNN’s expertise (as likely needed on challenging samples). Our interpretable expert, termed the
Shapelet Bottleneck Model (SBM), introduces a variant of the Shapelet Transform (Lines et al., 2012)
to build expressive yet interpretable predicates based on learned shapelets (Ye & Keogh, 2011) such
as the patterns in Figure 1 (left). Our interpretable expert holds several advantages over existing
methods such as fewer parameters than neuro-symbolic method NSTSC, improved shapelet selection
due to our Shapelet Transform, and better accuracy due to gating on challenging samples.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows: (1) a novel gating function that assigns samples
to experts based on the confidence level of the interpretable expert, (2) a novel variant of the Shapelet
Transform that improves interpretability compared to existing shapelet-based methods, and (3)
quantitative metrics for interpretability and shapelet quality, where we show that our models improve
in both metrics over existing shapelet-learning formulations. We further demonstrate that InterpGN
outperforms state-of-the-art methods on the UEA multivariate TS classification archive (Bagnall
et al., 2018), illustrate the interpretability of InterpGN on multivariate TS classification datasets, and
finally apply our framework on a real-world healthcare dataset, MIMIC-III (Johnson et al., 2016).


                                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2    R ELATED W ORK
Machine Learning Methods for TS Analysis Classical deep learning models such as Multilayer
Perceptron (MLP), Fully Convolutional Network (FCN), and Residual Network (ResNet) (Wang
et al., 2017) are usually considered as baselines. ROCKET (Dempster et al., 2020) uses random
convolution kernels with various lengths to transform TS data and trains a linear classifier. Another
direction is representation learning that uses unsupervised approaches to learn from positive and
negative samples (Franceschi et al., 2019). For instance, TapNet (Zhang et al., 2020) proposes an
attention prototype network to learn multivariate TS representations and address the issue of limited
labeled data. Time Series Transformer (TST) (Zerveas et al., 2021) reconstructs TS from masked data
to learn a pre-trained model that can be used for multiple types of downstream tasks. Recent works
also find that when combined with deep neural networks such as Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017),
the patch-based modeling, which segments TS into channel-independent patches, is more effective
than timestamp-based modeling in various tasks (Zuo et al., 2023; Nie et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023).
Although the above methods may achieve state-of-the-art performance, they lack interpretability.

Interpretable Methods Pattern-based methods usually have some level of interpretability. (Zhao
et al., 2023) surveys many methods for interpretable TS classification. A subset of pattern-based
methods use shapelets, defined as discriminatory subsequences of TS data (Ye & Keogh, 2011)
selected based on information gain. ShapeNet (Li et al., 2021) learns embeddings that encode
subsequences with different lengths into a unified space using triplet loss, and then selects the
most representative shapelets to use with Shapelet Transforms. Shapelets can also be learned using
gradient-based methods (Grabocka et al., 2014), relaxing the definition of shapelets as sequences
with certain patterns. However, with the original formulation, the learned shapelets have poor quality
as they may not look similar to the actual subsequences. ADSN (Ma et al., 2020) improves shapelet
quality using adversarial training. ShapeConv (Qu et al., 2024) initializes the shapelets as the cluster
means of TS subsequence and uses an additional regularization to keep shapelets close to the actual
subsequence during training. Besides shapelet-based methods, a recent pattern-based method RLPAM
(Gao et al., 2022) first transform TS to a sequence of patterns and uses reinforcement learning to
select the most informative patterns for classification.

3    P ROBLEM F ORMULATIONS
Notation Let D = {(xi , yi )|i = 1, . . . , N } denotes a TS classification dataset with N samples,
where xi ∈ RM ×T is a TS sample and yi ∈ {1, . . . , C} is the class label. Here, M is the number
of variables, T is the length in timestamps, and C is the number of categories. A multivariate TS
sample xi can be viewed as a set of univariate TS samples where xm          T
                                                                      i ∈ R denotes the TS of the
  th           m                                  m
m variable. xi,t1 :t2 denotes a subsequence of xi between timestamps t1 and t2 .

Shapelets Shapelets were originally defined as discriminative TS subsequences to distinguish
different categories (Ye & Keogh, 2011). Learning Time-series Shapelets (LTS) (Grabocka et al.,
2014) combines Shapelet Transform with gradient-based optimization to learn a set of shapelets from
scratch, where the definition of shapelets is relaxed to be short sequences with certain patterns. In
this work, we follow the definition of LTS where the shapelets are the model’s parameter to train.

Shapelet-based TS Modeling Independently modeling each channel of a multivariate TS has been
demonstrated to be an effective approach (Wu et al., 2023; Nie et al., 2023). In this paper, we consider
a similar approach by formulating univariate shapelets for each variable separately. Let
                          S = {sm,l
                                k |k = 1, . . . , K; m = 1, . . . , M ; l ∈ L}

denote a set of shapelets, where sm,l
                                    k    ∈ Rl denotes a shapelet on the mth channel with length l
and index k, i.e., we learn K shapelets for each possible length and channel. In this paper, we
consider shapelets with multiple lengths where L = {max(⌈δT ⌉, 3)|δ = 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5, 0.8}.
Therefore, S has a total of M K|L| shapelets.

Interpretability Existing methods gain different levels of interpretability by inputting interpretable
features (Zuo et al., 2023) into a simple model such as a linear layer (Ma et al., 2020; Qu et al., 2024)


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Interpretable Expert - Shapelet Bottleneck Model

                                                Shapelets


                                                                                                                     Hybrid Output



        Time-series

                                                                           Predicates                             Confidence-based


                                                                                             Classifier
                                                                                                                       Gating
                       Channel-wise
                      Instance Norm.


                                                                                                              Deep Neural Network Expert



                                         Figure 2: Overview of InterpGN.


or SVM (Li et al., 2021). However, such approaches usually fail to provide explanations of their
predictions based on distances features. For the interpretable expert, we build logical predicates using
shapelets and the classifier directly provides rule-like explanations. Combining interpretable features
with logic allows this approach to select essential shapelets since model weights associated with
shapelets represent corresponding importance to predictions (Riegel et al., 2020).

4     T HE M IXTURE - OF -E XPERTS F RAMEWORK : I NTERP GN
In this section, we present the details of Interpretability Gated Networks (InterpGN). We first discuss
the proposed variant of Shapelet Transforms to build logical predicates and the formulations of the
Shapelet Bottleneck Model (SBM), and then discuss how explanations can be derived from SBM.
Lastly, we present the novel gating function used by InterpGN along with the training procedure. An
overview of InterpGN is given in Figure 2.

4.1   B UILDING L OGICAL P REDICATES USING S HAPELETS

A straightforward way to express predictions with               RBF-based          Threshold-based
                                                           2                   2
logical classifiers is to use predicates built on fea-     0                   0
tures such as distances. Mueen et al. (2011) con-          1 0 100 200 300 1 0 100 200 300
structed a logical predicate with a threshold dis-         0                   0
                                                           1                   1
tance; however, when combined with LTS, we find            0 0 100 200 300 0 0 100 200 300
this approach reduces shapelet quality (essential          2                   2
shapelets are not similar to the TS) as well as in-          0 100 200 300        0 100 200 300
terpretability (notion of distance can vary across Figure 3: Comparison between shapelets
datasets) since the threshold distance does not di- learned by (left) radial basis function (RBF)
rectly reflect the existence of a shapelet (see Figure based predicates and (right) threshold based
3 for an example). Therefore, analogous to con- predicates. The three most important shapelets
cepts in CBM, we view shapelets as interpretable are visualized.
concepts for TS and build logical predicates directly
from shapelet distances. Consider the distance between sm,lk  and xmi defined as:

                                       dm,l
                                        i,k =         min          dist(sm,l  m
                                                                         k , xi,t:t+l ),                                                   (1)
                                                 t=1,...,T −l

where dist(sm,l      m
                k , xi,t:t+l ) is the Euclidean distance between the two sequences. We introduce a
variant of the Shapelet Transform, formally defined by
                                                                                   m,l                    2
                                                                                         ,xm
                                   pm,l
                                    i,k =           max          e−(ϵ·dist(sk              i,t:t+l ))                                      (2)
                                                t=1...,T −l

using a Gaussian radial basis function on the distance to measure the likelihood that sm,l
                                                                                       k   exists
in xm
    i , where ϵ is a scaling parameter that controls the steepness of the kernel. We say that the


                                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                     M K|L|
h of shapelets S transforms each sample ixi ∈ D to predicates pi ∈ R
set                                                                         , where pi =
  m,l
 pi,k | k = 1, . . . , K; m = 1, . . . , M ; l ∈ L .

4.2   S HAPELET B OTTLENECK M ODEL - T HE I NTERPRETABLE E XPERT

When constructing the SBM, we adopt a similar approach to LTS and CBM to preserve interpretability
and produce rule-like classifiers. Formally, the predicates pi are fed into a linear layer to compute the
outputs                               X               m,l m,l
                    ri,c =                          wc,k  pi,k , ∀c ∈ {1, . . . , C}.                 (3)
                         k=1,...,K;m=1,...,M ;l∈L

The SBM’s output is ri ∈ RC = [ri,1 , . . . , ri,C ]. An overview of SBM is given in Figure 2. Note
that the different shapelet lengths are illustrated vertically under the Shapelet Bottleneck; each row
allows shapelets of length l across all variables.

Training SBM is end-to-end differentiable and trained using gradient-based optimization. The
                                                                m,l
parameters to be trained include the linear classifier weights wc,k and the shapelets sm,l
                                                                                       k , both of
which are randomly initialized. In practice, gradients of the max operator in Equation 2 can be
substituted by gradients of softmax using straight-through estimation. The objective function
contains the following three loss functions:
• Classification loss: softmax cross-entropy loss Lce on (ri , yi ),
• Shapelet diversity loss (Ma et al., 2020) to regulate learning redundant shapelets:
                                           M X X
                                               K K
                                    1                  m,l  m,l
                                                   e−∥sk1 −sk2 ∥2 ,
                                          X      X
                         Ldiv =                                                                          (4)
                                  2KM |L| m=1
                                                 l∈L k1 =1 k2 =1
                                                          k2 ̸=k1
                                                    m,l
• L1 regularization Lreg on the classifier weights wc,k to encourage sparsity, select the most informa-
tive concepts, and produce simple classifiers.
The overall loss function is Lint = Lce + λdiv Ldiv + λreg Lreg , where λdiv , and λreg are hyperparameters.

4.3   I NTERPRETATIONS

A concept probability pm,l                                                                         m,l
                        i,k is a logical predicate whose value measures the existence of shapelet sk .
The linear classifier behaves like weighted linear logic analogous to the operators in Riegel et al.
                          m,l
(2020), where weights wc,k    specify the importance of shapelet sm,l
                                                                  k   to class c. We propose two ways
to interpret the model.

Local Explainability Local explanations answer why the classification decision for a sample xi
was made. In SBM, the explanation has the form of “sample xi belongs to class c because xi contains
shapelet sm,l                         m,l m,l
          k ”, whose corresponding wc,k pi,k is significant. Consider Figure 1 in the Introduction
                                                           m,l m,l
where we visualize the two shapelets with the largest wc,k    pi,k for each class. Such interpretations
allow us to visually validate the correctness of learned shapelets and classifiers. Note that, to the best
of our knowledge, most existing shapelet-based methods (Qu et al., 2024) and post-hoc explanation
methods (Queen et al., 2023) only provide local explainability.

Global Explainability Global explanations provide knowledge about the classification problem,
expressed in SBM by inductive logics without pertaining to particular samples. SBM offers the
                                   m,δ
following global explanation: (1) wc,k > 0: samples in class c should contain sm,δ      m,δ
                                                                               k , (2) wc,k = 0:
sm,δ
 k
                                   m,δ
     is unrelated to class c, (3) wc,k < 0: samples in class c should not contain sm,δ
                                                                                   k .

Most figures in this paper visualize shapelets with the highest weights in the linear classifier, validating
the correctness of the global explanation. For some challenging tasks, we use local explanations to
provide visually better explanations for specific samples. Note the difference between local and global
explainability: local explanations discuss what does occur in a sample whereas global explanations
discuss what should occur in a sample.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.4      M IXTURE - OF -E XPERTS G ATING

In the previous section, the shapelet bottleneck transforms TS into low-dimensional representations
in the form of logical predicates. While the max operator in Equation (2) makes the classifier more
interpretable, it also reduces expressiveness. For example, the predicates can only measure the
existence of shapelets but lose information about the number of occurrences and corresponding
timestamps. In TS with discriminative features in other domains, such as the frequency domain
instead of the time domain, the shapelet bottleneck may not capture essential features for classification.
To address this limitation, we employ a Mixture-of-Experts approach to build a partially-interpretable
hybrid model.
A Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) combines the output of multiple expert models with a gating network
(Shazeer et al., 2017). Experts have different structures to capture different aspects of the data and
the gating network assigns the work to the experts. IME (Ismail et al., 2023) views a simple model
(such as linear regression or soft decision tree) as an interpretable gating network. From a different
perspective, the interpretable expert itself can serve as the gating network, which reduce the number
of parameters and improves interpretability. We introduce a gating function to assign the work to
experts based on the confidence level of the interpretable expert.
The outputs ri minimizes Lce during training. Denote r̂i = softmax(ri ) with components r̂i,c
corresponding to Equation (3). Then the optimal r̂i is a one-hot vector with r̂i,c = 1 if yi = c.
Diversity of r̂i,c thus measures confidence of the model. When combining an interpretable model
and a DNN with MoE, the use of DNN should be inverse proportional to the confidence level of the
interpretable model to maximize interpretability. Therefore, we design the gating function
                                                PC
                                            C · c=1 (r̂i,c )2 − 1
                                   η(xi ) =                       ,                                   (5)
                                                   C −1
which is a modified Gini Index that measures the diversity of variables in r̂i . Intuitively, η(xi ) = 0
when values in r̂i are identical, and η(xi ) = 1 when r̂i is a one-hot vector. During training, the
output of the hybrid model is then a mixture of the outputs of the interpretable expert and the DNN
with ratio η(xi ):
                                  hi = ri · η(xi ) + zi · (1 − η(xi )),                                (6)
where zi is the output of the DNN with input xi . During inference, we activate only the SBM and
discard the DNN if the confidence of SBM is high. Specifically, given a gating value η, we set
η(xi ) = 1 if η(x1 ) > η.

4.5      T RAINING OF I NTERP GN

The overall objective of the InterpGN framework is to minimize Lhybrid = βLint + L̄ce . Here, L̄ce
is another softmax cross-entropy loss on (hi , yi ) to optimize the overall performance of the hybrid
model. β ∈ [0, 1] is a scalar to weight the training of the interpretable expert, which is set to be either
a constant hyperparameter or decaying with a cosine schedule. Intuitively, the Lint term directly
optimizes the SBM component, which ensure that the SBM is actively encouraged to find meaningful
shapelets. This design prevents InterpGN from collapsing into a pure DNN model whenever the
shapelet-based features are useful (see Figure 18 and Figure 19). The hybrid model is still end-to-end
differentiable and trained using gradient-based optimizations methods.

5       E XPERIMENTS
We first compare InterpGN against various methods on the UEA multivariate TS classification archive,
presenting insights gained from visualizing concept representations. Results from SBM without the
additional expert are also given. We then demonstrate the benefits of our models on the real-world
application of in-hospital mortality early prediction (Harutyunyan et al., 2019) using the MIMIC III
dataset. We conclude with ablation studies on the effects of each component in our model. As a basic
InterpGN design, we combine the SBM with a Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) since it has best
performance among the three basic deep models for TS classification (Wang et al., 2017). Details of
the experimental setup are provided in Appendix A. 1
    1
        Code is available at: https://github.com/YunshiWen/InterpretGatedNetwork.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparison on 30 datasets from the UEA archive. The best accuracy for each dataset is
marked with bold, the second-best is marked with italic, and the third-best is marked with underline.

                      Classical                             Deep Learning                                   With Interpretable Features            Ours
 Dataset            STRF    DTW      FCN     TS2Vec    TimesNet       TST     PatchTST     SVP-T      ShapeNet      RLPAM      ShapeConv   SBM      InterpGN
 Avg. Accuracy      0.645   0.650    0.746   0.704         0.702      0.709        0.611     0.730         0.697     0.740        0.743    0.726      0.760
 Avg. Rank          9.700   9.138    5.000   7.533         7.517      6.778       10.414     5.267         6.567     5.400        5.500    5.733      3.500
 Num. Top-1            2       1        4       0             1          4            0         5             2        7             2        3         8
 Num. Top-3            2       1       14       2             3          9            1        11             5        13           10        8        16
 Wins/Draws           28      27       23      27            25         18           27        19            25        20           20       20         -
 Losses                2       2        7       3             4          9            2        11             5        10           10       10         -
 Wilcoxon p-value   0.000   0.000    0.003   0.000         0.000      0.001        0.000     0.066         0.001     0.112        0.009    0.003        -


5.1        M ULTIVARIATE T IME S ERIES C LASSIFICATION

First, we evaluate the performance of InterpGN on 30 datasets from the UEA multivariate TS
classification archive and compare with baseline methods including (1) classical search-based method:
Shapelet Transform with Random Forest Classifier (STRF) and DTW (Chen et al., 2013), (2) black-
box deep learning methods: FCN (Wang et al., 2017), TS2Vec (Yue et al., 2022), TimesNet (Wu
et al., 2023), TST (Zerveas et al., 2021), PatchTST (Nie et al., 2023), SVP-T (Zuo et al., 2023),
and (3) methods with interpretable features: ShapeNet (Li et al., 2021), RLPAM (Gao et al., 2022),
ShapeConv (Qu et al., 2024).
Table 1 presents average classification accuracy across the UEA datasets; the full results are included
in Table 5 of Appendix B.1. Based on the average rank across the 30 datasets, InterpGN outperforms
the baseline methods and SBM achieves comparable performance without help from the FCN.

5.1.1       I NTERPRETABILITY
In addition to its effective performance, SBM provides interpretable logical classifiers. Figure 4
visualizes shapelets learned by SBM on a multivariate TS dataset from global explanations, where
the blue shapelets have the highest positive weights and the red shapelets have the lowest negative
weights. Figure 4 visually confirms that the models capture discriminative shapelet features.

                                                Straight           Straight       Straight      Straight            CW            CCW
                    Angle           Square        Left              Right           Up           Down              Circle         Circle


                      (a)            (b)             (c)             (d)             (e)             (f)             (g)            (h)


Figure 4: Visualization of the UGL dataset from the UEA archive with accelerometer readings of
eight gestures. For example, in (g), the classifier can be interpreted as: a “CW Circle” gesture should
contain the blue shapelet but not the red shapelet in channel 1.


5.1.2       S HAPELET B OTTLENECK R EPRESENTATION
We explore the effectiveness of the shapelet predicates by viewing probabilities pi as representations
for TS data. Figure 5 displays the EP dataset using the dimensionality reduction technique t-SNE
(van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008). Representations learned by SBM and InterpGN are clearly more
separable than the raw TS data. While a few samples are mixed into incorrect clusters (e.g., blue
mixed into green), the DNN in the InterpGN model can make corrections and result in better accuracy
than SBM. Shading intensity of data points in Figure 5 (c) represents η(xi ). Intuitively, predictions
of shaded points are interpretable as they are based on SBM while lighter points rely more on the
DNN. We observe that most transparent points lie along the cluster boundaries, meaning InterpGN
learns to use interpretable logical classifier for easier-to-classify samples while relying on the DNN
to classify the difficult boundary samples which can be identified as requiring additional expertise. In
Figure 17, we further present the behavior of InterpGN by visualizing the distribution of η(xi ). We
can conclude that the predictions of InterpGN is consistent with SBM when η(xi ) is high, preserving
interpretability for those samples.


                                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                              and


                      (a)                                             (b)                                     (c)


Figure 5: t-SNE dimensionality reduction of (a) raw data xi , (b) pi of SBM, and (c) pi of InterpGN
on the EP dataset. Each color represents samples with a specific label. Samples with low η(xi )
from InterpGN lie on the boundary, i.e., are more difficult to predict and can benefit from additional
expertise.


5.2   P REDICTING I N - HOSPITAL M ORTALITY

The MIMIC-III dataset contains electronic healthcare records from ICU patients. We follow the
procedure in (Harutyunyan et al., 2019) to preprocess and generate data to predict in-hospital mortality
based on patient records from the first 48 hours after entering an ICU. Setup details are provided in
Appendix A.2. Table 2 shows results illustrating how InterpGN helps SBM on the difficult samples.

Interpretability Clinical records from the Table 2: Results for in-hospital mortality predica-
MIMIC-III dataset are challenging due to sam- tion on the MIMIC-III dataset.
ple diversity and missing values. Figure 6 high-
lights an example of local explanations on two       Metric      STRF FCN SBM InterpGN
samples. For better representation, we visualize     Accuracy    0.653 0.693 0.658       0.703
the five most essential shapelets on their cor-      F1          0.639 0.675 0.657       0.657
responding channels and omit other channels.         Recall      0.615 0.634 0.657       0.569
The model captures long-term discriminative          Precision   0.666 0.734 0.659       0.784
trends in three channels, HR, MBP and OS. The        ROC-AUC 0.653 0.698 0.658           0.703
shapelets and classifier can be interpreted as: the
first patient passed away due to decreasing HR, increasing MBP, and drop in OS; whereas the second
survived because of increasing HR after a local drop, rapid decrease in MBP, and steady OS. In
real-world scenarios, these interpretations could bring more insights to clinical applications than
DNNs that only provide black-box predictions.

                         Patient Did Not Survive                                           Patient Survived


               Time (hours)                        Time (hours)             Time (hours)                      Time (hours)


Figure 6: Local explanations of SBM for in-hospital mortality predication. The variables in the figure
are: Heart Rate (HR), Mean Blood Pressure (MBP), Oxygen Saturation (OS), Respiratory Rate (RR),
and Temperature (Temp).


5.3   E FFECTS OF H YPERPARAMETERS ON I NTERPRETABILITY AND S HAPELET Q UALITY

Analogous to the results presented in Figure 1 and Section 5.1.1, existing interpretable models
mainly demonstrate qualitative results on interpretability by visualizing the interpretable features (Ma
et al., 2020; Qu et al., 2024). However, there remains a lack of quantitative metrics to measure the
level of interpretability and quality of features. Therefore, we introduce two additional metrics to
quantitatively assess the interpretable models.


                                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Interpretability metric: Naturally, the prediction from the model is considered more interpretable if
fewer features are needed to simulate and understand the prediction. With a linear classifier taking
logical predicates as inputs, interpretability of SBM can be measured by the sparsity of the classifier
weights since fewer shapelets contribute to the prediction as weight sparsity increases. As a metric for
sparsity, we choose three empirical thresholds and compute the ratio of weights above each threshold.
Formally, the sparsity metrics are defined as
                                    1 X
                         ratio =             1(|w| > t), for t ∈ {1, 0.5, 0.1}.                      (7)
                                  |W|
                                      w∈W

Additionally, as a relative sparsity measurement, we also compute the Gini coefficient of |w|.
Shapelet quality metric: In order to produce reliable representations in shapelet-based models,
the shapelets need to be “close” to the actual TS subsequences. Therefore, shapelet quality can be
measured by shapelet distances (defined by Equation 1). In a prediction, more important shapelets
should be expected to have higher quality. Therefore, for our SBM, the shapelet quality metric is
defined as
                          1(ŷi = yi ) X
                                       M XX
                                          K
       shapelet error =                             max(0, wym,l
                                                              i ,k
                                                                   )d(xm    m,l
                                                                       i , sk ), (xi , yi ) ∈ Dtest   (8)
                           M K|L|     m=1 l∈L k=1

which measures the shapelet distances for samples that are correctly classified, averaged over all
                                                                                 m,l
shapelets in SBM and weighted by their corresponding classifier weight if wc,k       > 0. Low shapelet
error reflects that the essential shapelets for the prediction are close to the actual TS subsequences
which represent high shapelet quality.

Results and Analysis We conduct an ablation study on the effect of hyperparameters on classi-
fication accuracy, interpretability, shapelet quality, and interpretable expert utility. Details for the
ablation study setup are summarized in Appendix A.4. The results are summarized in Tables 6, 7, 8
and Figures 20, 21, 22, 23, which lead to the following respective conclusions:
• Number of shapelet K determines the expressiveness of SBM. Table 6 shows that increasing K
improving accuracy while additionally improving shapelet quality since the shapelet could capture
more sample-specific patterns. Although the classifier weights also become sparser, the absolute
number of weights above the threshold values may also increase. Therefore, the effect of K on
interpretability may not be clearly concluded. In InterpGN, the SBM utility rate η also increase as K
increase since the SBM becomes more expressive.
• Schedule of of loss weighting β controls the training of the interpretable expert in InterpGN. If
β decays with a cosine schedule, the SBM no longer trains on samples that cannot be confidently
predicted as the models get trained. Table 7 shows that, compared to a constant schedule, models
trained with the cosine schedule result in slightly worse accuracy but improve in both shapelet quality
and interpretability since the SBMs focus more on samples where shapelet features are useful. As
less samples are fitted, η also decreases.
• Predicate type defines the method of building logical predicates from shapelet distances. In our
models, the SBM uses the RBF predicates defined in Equation 2. Another commonly used formulation
is a linear predicate (Mueen et al., 2011; Yan et al., 2022) which computes threshold-based predicates
by pm,l                  m,l     m,l
      i,k = sigmoid(ck − di,k ) where ck
                                             m,l
                                                  is the threshold value to learn. Table 8 shows that our
RBF predicates outperform linear predicates in accuracy, shapelet quality, and interpretability.
• ϵ affects the steepness of the RBF kernels. A large ϵ defines a tight kernel and pushes the shapelet
to be close to the TS data. Figure 20 demonstrates that increasing ϵ improves shapelet quality in the
SBM but significantly reduces the accuracy for ϵ ≥ 5. ϵ = 1 offers the best balance between shapelet
quality and accuracy.
• Weight regularization λreg affects the sparsity of classifier weights and the number of shapelets
contributing to the predictions. Figure 23 shows that increasing λreg improves interpretability without
significantly affecting the accuracy for 0 ≤ λreg ≤ 1.
• Shapelet diversity regularization λdiv encourages learning different shapelets. Figure 22 leads us
to conclude that λdiv does not have a significant effect on the three metrics.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• Gating value η controls the threshold of discarding the DNN during inference. Prediction of
samples with η(xi ) > η only rely on the SBM, maximizing their interpretability. Figure 21 shows
that reducing the gating value results in slight degrade in accuracy, where the difference in average
accuracy between using η = 0.5 and η = 1 is 0.0035.

5.4   E XTENDED E XPERIMENTS

Finally, we provide preliminary results for more extensive experiments, including the following:
• Architecture of the DNN expert within the InterpGN: We experiment with four supervised deep
learning models: FCN, Transformer, PatchTST, and TimesNet (see Appendix C.1). Among the tested
architectures, InterpGN with FCN achieves the highest accuracy on most datasets. Interestingly, we
observe that the choice of DNN significantly affects η for each dataset, reflecting the compatibility
between the SBM and the DNN. This highlights a complex relationship between the features learned
by the SBM and those captured by different DNN architectures, which may be worth more in-depth
study.
• Shapelet distance metric and classifier architecture in the SBM: For the shapelet distance
function dist, we further compare cosine similarity and Pearson correlation with the conventional
Euclidean distance (see Appendix C.2). For the classifier in SBM, we compare bi-linear and
attention-based classifiers, which could model more complex relationships between shapelets, with the
conventional linear classifier (see Appendix C.3). These variants sometimes yield better performance
on some datasets, but not consistently, indicating that they could be meaningful architecture choices
to tune for each dataset.
• Faithfulness of shapelets learned by SBM: We follow Alvarez Melis & Jaakkola (2018) to
assess the faithfulness of shapelets learned by the SBM, which measures the correlation between
the presence of essential shapelets and the predictions of SBM (see Appendix B.2.1). Over the
30 UEA datasets, we observe high faithfulness on most of the datasets. Notably, all datasets have
faithfulness greater than 0, indicating that the learned shapelets are always positively correlated with
the predictions.
• Time series extrinsic regression: To further examine the generalizability and limitations of the
proposed methods, we apply them to time series extrinsic regression tasks (Tan et al., 2021). In
order to leverage classification models for regression, we train and evaluate them using an ordinal
regression framework, employing the Continuous Ranked Probability Score (CRPS) (Gneiting &
Raftery, 2007) as the performance metric. Additional details are provided in Appendix C.4.

6     C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS
In this paper, we address the limitations of existing TS classification methods. We introduce InterpGN,
which leverages the trade-off between interpretability and performance. We present a variant of the
Shapelet Transform to build logical predicates from shapelets and propose a novel gating function
design based on confidence of the interpretable model. Our experiments demonstrate that InterpGN
outperforms existing methods while preserving interpretability for most samples. We also interpreted
and analyzed patterns and classifiers learned by the models on various datasets, and applied our
models to the MIMIC-III dataset to provide interpretable features and discover knowledge on a
real-world task. In the future, we plan to extend the shapelet-based approaches to other time series
analysis tasks (Ansari et al., 2024) and build scalable interpretable models (Wen et al., 2024).
We note two limitations of our study. Firstly, in some classification rules, the most important
shapelet for class c may not look similar to subsequences of TS in class c. Such rules tend to have
interpretations with form “xi belongs to class c since it does not contain the essential shapelets for
c′ ̸= c” or “xi belongs to class c since other c′ ̸= c do not contain shapelet s”. For example, the
blue shapelet in Figure 4 (a) may not capture the essential trend for the “Angle” movement but it
can still be correctly categorized since it does not contain the essential shapelets for other categories.
Secondly, note that we have studied a simple design which includes one interpretable expert and one
DNN. Analogous to the MoE (Shazeer et al., 2017) framework, InterpGN can scale up by integrating
more experts. For example, multiple interpretable models can be included using a hierarchical gating
approach, while multiple DNN models can be combined using the original MoE approach.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is funded through the IBM-RPI Future of Computing Research Collaboration. We thank
the teams at UCR, UEA, and Monash University for their efforts in creating and publicly sharing
the benchmark datasets. We also appreciate Wu et al. for providing the open-source time series
benchmarking repository. Finally, we are grateful to the anonymous reviewers of NeurIPS 2024 and
ICLR 2025 for their insightful and constructive feedback, which greatly enhanced the quality and
scope of our work.

R EFERENCES
Talal AA Abdullah, Mohd Soperi Mohd Zahid, Waleed Ali, and Shahab Ul Hassan. B-lime: An
  improvement of lime for interpretable deep learning classification of cardiac arrhythmia from ecg
  signals. In Processes, 2023.
Taha Aksu, Gerald Woo, Juncheng Liu, Xu Liu, Chenghao Liu, Silvio Savarese, Caiming Xiong, and
  Doyen Sahoo. Gift-eval: A benchmark for general time series forecasting model evaluation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2410.10393, 2024.
David Alvarez Melis and Tommi Jaakkola. Towards robust interpretability with self-explaining neural
  networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Abdul Fatir Ansari, Lorenzo Stella, Ali Caner Turkmen, Xiyuan Zhang, Pedro Mercado, Huibin Shen,
  Oleksandr Shchur, Syama Sundar Rangapuram, Sebastian Pineda Arango, Shubham Kapoor, Jasper
  Zschiegner, Danielle C. Maddix, Hao Wang, Michael W. Mahoney, Kari Torkkola, Andrew Gordon
  Wilson, Michael Bohlke-Schneider, and Bernie Wang. Chronos: Learning the language of time
  series. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. ISSN 2835-8856.
Saira Aziz, Sajid Ahmed, and Mohamed-Slim Alouini. Ecg-based machine-learning algorithms for
  heartbeat classification. In Nature: Scientific Reports, volume 11, 2021.
Anthony Bagnall, Hoang Anh Dau, Jason Lines, Michael Flynn, James Large, Aaron Bostrom, Paul
  Southam, and Eamonn Keogh. The UEA multivariate time series classification archive, 2018.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00075, 2018.
Yanping Chen, Bing Hu, Eamonn Keogh, and Gustavo EAPA Batista. DTW-D: time series semi-
  supervised learning from a single example. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD international
  conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 383–391, 2013.
Angus Dempster, François Petitjean, and Geoffrey I Webb. Rocket: exceptionally fast and accurate
  time series classification using random convolutional kernels. Data Mining and Knowledge
 Discovery, 34(5):1454–1495, 2020.
Jean-Yves Franceschi, Aymeric Dieuleveut, and Martin Jaggi. Unsupervised scalable representation
  learning for multivariate time series. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Ge Gao, Qitong Gao, Xi Yang, Miroslav Pajic, and Min Chi. A reinforcement learning-informed
  pattern mining framework for multivariate time series classification. In 31st International Joint
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2022.
Tilmann Gneiting and Adrian E Raftery. Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation.
  Journal of the American statistical Association, 102(477):359–378, 2007.
Josif Grabocka, Nicolas Schilling, Martin Wistuba, and Lars Schmidt-Thieme. Learning time-series
  shapelets. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
  discovery and data mining, pp. 392–401, 2014.
Hrayr Harutyunyan, Hrant Khachatrian, David C Kale, Greg Ver Steeg, and Aram Galstyan. Multitask
  learning and benchmarking with clinical time series data. Scientific data, 6(1):96, 2019.
Marton Havasi, Sonali Parbhoo, and Finale Doshi-Velez. Addressing leakage in concept bottleneck
 models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:23386–23397, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Aya Abdelsalam Ismail, Sercan O Arik, Jinsung Yoon, Ankur Taly, Soheil Feizi, and Tomas Pfister.
  Interpretable mixture of experts. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023. ISSN
  2835-8856.

Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen, Li-wei H Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad
  Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. Data
  descriptor: Mimic-iii, a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific data, 3(160035):1–9,
  2016.

Pang Wei Koh, Thao Nguyen, Yew Siang Tang, Stephen Mussmann, Emma Pierson, Been Kim, and
  Percy Liang. Concept bottleneck models. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  5338–5348. PMLR, 2020.

Seungeon Lee, Xiting Wang, Sungwon Han, Xiaoyuan Yi, Xing Xie, and Meeyoung Cha. Self-
  explaining deep models with logic rule reasoning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:3203–3216, 2022.

Guozhong Li, Byron Choi, Jianliang Xu, Sourav S Bhowmick, Kwok-Pan Chun, and Grace Lai-Hung
  Wong. Shapenet: A shapelet-neural network approach for multivariate time series classification. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 35, pp. 8375–8383, 2021.

Jason Lines, Luke M Davis, Jon Hills, and Anthony Bagnall. A shapelet transform for time series
  classification. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
  discovery and data mining, pp. 289–297, 2012.

Qianli Ma, Wanqing Zhuang, Sen Li, Desen Huang, and Garrison Cottrell. Adversarial dynamic
  shapelet networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp.
  5069–5076, 2020.

Noushin Mehdipour, Cristian-Ioan Vasile, and Calin Belta. Specifying user preferences using
 weighted signal temporal logic. IEEE Control Systems Letters, 5(6):2006–2011, 2021. doi:
 10.1109/LCSYS.2020.3047362.

Abdullah Mueen, Eamonn Keogh, and Neal Young. Logical-shapelets: an expressive primitive for
  time series classification. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
 Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1154–1162, 2011.

I. Neves, D. Folgado, S. Santos, M. Barandas, A. Campagner, L. Ronzio, F. Cabitza, and H. Gamboa.
   Interpretable heartbeat classification using local model-agnostic explanations on ecgs. In Computers
   in Biology and Medicine, 2021.

Yuqi Nie, Nam H Nguyen, Phanwadee Sinthong, and Jayant Kalagnanam. A time series is worth 64
  words: Long-term forecasting with transformers. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.

Tuomas Oikarinen, Subhro Das, Lam M Nguyen, and Tsui-Wei Weng. Label-free concept bottleneck
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Yuzuru Okajima and Kunihiko Sadamasa. Deep neural networks constrained by decision rules. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 2496–2505, 2019.

Eric Qu, Yansen Wang, Xufang Luo, Wenqiang He, Kan Ren, and Dongsheng Li. Cnn kernels can be
  the best shapelets. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Owen Queen, Tom Hartvigsen, Teddy Koker, Huan He, Theodoros Tsiligkaridis, and Marinka
 Zitnik. Encoding time-series explanations through self-supervised model behavior consistency. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 32129–32159, 2023.

Ryan Riegel, Alexander Gray, Francois Luus, Naweed Khan, Ndivhuwo Makondo, Ismail Yunus
  Akhalwaya, Haifeng Qian, Ronald Fagin, Francisco Barahona, Udit Sharma, Shajith Ikbal, Hima
  Karanam, Sumit Neelam, Ankita Likhyani, and Santosh Srivastava. Logical neural networks, 2020.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hinton, and
  Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Chang Wei Tan, Christoph Bergmeir, Francois Petitjean, and Geoffrey I Webb. Time series extrinsic
  regression. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, pp. 1–29, 2021.
Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. In Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, volume 9, pp. 2579–2605, 2008.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is All you Need. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017.
Zhiguang Wang, Weizhong Yan, and Tim Oates. Time series classification from scratch with deep
  neural networks: A strong baseline. In 2017 International joint conference on neural networks
  (IJCNN), pp. 1578–1585. IEEE, 2017.
Yunshi Wen, Tengfei Ma, Tsui-Wei Weng, Lam M. Nguyen, and Anak Agung Julius. Abstracted
  shapes as tokens - a generalizable and interpretable model for time-series classification. In The
  Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Haixu Wu, Tengge Hu, Yong Liu, Hang Zhou, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Timesnet:
  Temporal 2d-variation modeling for general time series analysis. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.
Ruixuan Yan, Tengfei Ma, Achille Fokoue, Maria Chang, and Agung Julius. Neuro-symbolic
  models for interpretable time series classification using temporal logic description. In 2022 IEEE
  International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), pp. 618–627. IEEE, 2022.
Lexiang Ye and Eamonn Keogh. Time series shapelets: a novel technique that allows accurate,
  interpretable and fast classification. Data mining and knowledge discovery, 22:149–182, 2011.
Zhihan Yue, Yujing Wang, Juanyong Duan, Tianmeng Yang, Congrui Huang, Yunhai Tong, and
  Bixiong Xu. TS2Vec: Towards universal representation of time series. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 8980–8987, 2022.
George Zerveas, Srideepika Jayaraman, Dhaval Patel, Anuradha Bhamidipaty, and Carsten Eickhoff.
  A transformer-based framework for multivariate time series representation learning. In Proceedings
  of the 27th ACM SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 2114–2124,
  2021.
Xuchao Zhang, Yifeng Gao, Jessica Lin, and Chang-Tien Lu. Tapnet: Multivariate time series
  classification with attentional prototypical network. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on
  artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp. 6845–6852, 2020.
Ziqi Zhao, Yucheng Shi, Shushan Wu, Fan Yang, Wenzhan Song, and Ninghao Liu. Interpretation of
  time-series deep models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14582, 2023.
Rundong Zuo, Guozhong Li, Byron Choi, Sourav S Bhowmick, Daphne Ngar-yin Mah, and Grace LH
  Wong. Svp-t: a shape-level variable-position transformer for multivariate time series classification.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 11497–11505,
  2023.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A        E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Environment. All the experiments are implemented using Python 3.11 and PyTorch 2.4.0. All the
experiments run on a NVIDIA V100-SXM2-32GB GPUs. The SBM and InterpGN are trained on a
single GPU. The STRF is implemented using Random Shapelet Transforms from the Aeon Toolkit 2
and Random Forest Classifiers from the Scikit-learn package, which runs on CPU using 64 threads.

A.1       UEA M ULTIVARIATE T IME - SERIES C LASSIFICATION A RCHIVE

The UEA multivariate TS classification archive               Table 3: Default hyperparameters.
(Bagnall et al., 2018) contains 30 datasets col-
lected from various domains. Details of the               Hyperprameter               Default value
30 datasets are provided in Table 4. Data pre-
processing and training procedure follow the              Number of shapelet             K = 10
benchmarking repository provided by Wu et al.             Steepness of RBF kernels        ϵ=1
(2023) 3 . The default hyperparameter to produce          Diversity loss weight         λdiv = 0.1
results in Table 1 and Table 5 are summarized in          Sparsity loss weight          λreg = 0.1
Table3. For each dataset, we train the models on          β schedule                     constant
the default training split with 5 different random        Inference gating value          η=1
seeds and report the average accuracy on the test         Optimizer                       Adam
split. Statistics on experiment variations could          Learning rate                   0.005
refer to Appendix B.4.                                    Weight decay                       0
                                                          Batch size                        32

The metrics in Table 1 and Table 5 are:

          • Avg. Accuracy: Average test accuracy.
          • Avg. Rank: Average ranking of the method among all baseline methods.
          • Num. Top-1: Number of datasets the method performs the best among all baseline methods.
          • Num. Top-3: Number of datasets the method achieves top-3 accuracy among all baseline
            datasets.
          • Wins/Draws: Number of datasets that InterpGN achieves better/same accuracy compared to
            other baseline methods.
          • Looses: Number of datasets that InterpGN achieves worse accuracy compared to other
            baseline methods.
          • Wilcoxon p-value: p-value in the Wilcoxon signed-rank test, which measures if the perfor-
            mance of InterpGN is statistically significant compared to the baseline methods. A small
            p-value indicates significance, while a large p-value indicates the InterpGN and the baseline
            method have comparable performance on the UEA datasets.


    2
        The Aeon Toolkit is available at www.aeon-toolkit.org
    3
        The benchmarking repository is available at github.com/thuml/Time-Series-Library


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Table 4: Information of the 30 benchmark datasets from the UEA archive.

  Dataset                     Dataset Code    Train Size   Test Size   Variables   Length   Categories
                                                Ntrain       Ntest        M          T          C
  ArticularyWordRecognition   AWR                 275         300          9         144       25
  AtrialFibrillation          AF                   15          15          2         640        3
  BasicMotions                BM                   40          40          6         100        4
  CharacterTrajectories       CT                 1422        1436          3         119       20
  Cricket                     CK                  108          72          6        1197       12
  DuckDuckGeese               DDG                  50          50        1345        270        5
  ERing                       ER                   30         270          4          65        6
  EigenWorms                  EW                  128         131          6       17948        5
  Epilepsy                    EP                  137         138          3         206        4
  EthanolConcentration        EC                  261         263          3        1751        4
  FaceDetection               FD                 5890        3524        144          62        2
  FingerMovements             FM                  316         100         28          50        2
  HandMovementDirection       HM                  160          74         10         400        4
  Handwriting                 HW                  150         580          3          52       26
  Heartbeat                   HB                  204         205         61         405        2
  InsectWingbeat              IW                25000       25000        200          22       10
  JapaneseVowels              JV                  270         370         12          29        9
  LSST                        LSST               2459       2466          6           36       14
  Libras                      LB                  180         180          2          45       15
  MotorImagery                MI                  278         100         64        3000        2
  NATOPS                      NT                  180         180         24          51        6
  PEMS-SF                     PM                  267         173        263         144        7
  PenDigits                   PD                 7494        3498          2           8       10
  PhonemeSpectra              PH                 3315        3353         11         217       39
  RacketSports                RS                  151         152          6          30        4
  SelfRegulationSCP1          SCP1                268         293          6         896        2
  SelfRegulationSCP2          SCP2                200         180          7        1152        2
  SpokenArabicDigits          SAD                6599        2199         13          93       10
  StandWalkJump               SWJ                  12          15          4        2500        3
  UWaveGestureLibrary         UGL                 120         320          3         315        8



A.2   P REDICTING I N - HOSPITAL M ORTALITY ON MIMIC-III

From the original MIMIC-III dataset, we first extract time-series and impute missing values using
the method proposed by Harutyunyan et al. (2019). For predicting in-hospital mortality, the data is
highly imbalance, with more than 80% positive samples (patient survived). Therefore we randomly
select a subset of 1500 positive and 1500 negative samples to evaluate our models. A sample in the
dataset is a TS with M = 9 and T = 48. We further divide the subset into 80% training and 20%
validation to evaluate the performance using 5-fold cross validation. Omitting categorical variables in
the MIMIC-III datasets, the TS data has the following 9 variabels:

      1. Diastolic blood pressure (DBP),
      2. Fraction inspired oxygen (FIO),
      3. Heart Rate (HR),
      4. Mean blood pressure (MBP),
      5. Oxygen saturation (OS),
      6. Respiratory rate (RR),
      7. Systolic blood pressure (SBP),
      8. Temperature (Temp),
      9. Glucose (Glu).


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3   L IMITATION IN I MPLEMENTATION

When combining shapelet learning with modern deep learning frameworks such as PyTorch, the
learning suffers from a memory overhead. Intuitively, the transformations in Equation 1 and Equation
2 slide sm,l
         k   over xi and take the minimum/maximum, which is analogous to a convolution layer with
pooling. In practice, for efficiency concern, the memory cost of this operation is O(T · l). When T is
large (e.g. T > 2000) this operation requires numerous GPU memory, mainly due to the unnecessary
intermediate variables and gradients are retained . However, the traditional convolution operation
does not suffer from this because of low-level optimizations from CUDA, which does not retain the
intermediate gradients. Note that ShapeConv (Qu et al., 2024) makes a connection between shapelet
transform and convolution by:
                                                     "                              #
                     m m,l                              m,l  m   ∥sm,l  2      m 2
                                                                    k ∥2 + ∥xi ∥2
                 d(xi , sk ) = −2         max          sk ∗ xi −                      ,            (9)
                                      j=1,...,T −l+1                      2

where sm,l
       k   ∗ xm
              i is the convolution (cross-correlation) operation. However, we found that, in actual
implementations, the additional norm term still suffers from the memory overhead.
To address this memory limitation on very long sequences, we provide two implementations for the
time-memory trade-off:

      1. A time-efficient implementation using large matrix operations:
         x = x.unfold(2, shapelet_length, 1)
         x = x.permute((0, 2, 1, 3)).unsqueeze(2)
         d = dist(x - shapelets).mean(dim=-1)

      2. A memory-efficient implementation using loops:
         class ShapeletDistanceFunc(torch.autograd.Function):
             def forward(ctx, x, s):
                 ctx.save_for_backward(x, s)
                 output = torch.cat([dist(s - x[:, :, i:i+s.shape[-1]])
                     for i in range(x.shape[-1] - s.shape[-1]+1)], dim=1)
                 return output
             def backward(ctx, grad_output):
                 # Compute gradient of s
                 return 0, grad_s

         def ShapeletDistance(x, s):
             return ShapeletDistanceFunc.apply(x, s)

         d = ShapeletDistance(x, shapelet)

         On the largest datasets, this memory-efficient implementation takes less than 12 GB of GPU
         memory, but requires significantly more time to compute.

Another method to mitigate this issue is by using stride. For example, compared to traditional convo-
lution operation Conv1d(), sm,lk   transforms xi into pm,l
                                                        i,k using Equation 2 with in channels = 1,
out channels = 1, kernel size = l, stride = 1, padding = 1, and dilation = 1.
Memory cost reduces as stride increase. When l is large, this would not bring significant effects
since the learned shapelets are abstracted patterns. In practice, we find that setting stride = log(l)
results in the same level of performance as stride = 1 on most datasets.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4   A BLATION S TUDY S ETUP C HOICES AND E XPLANATIONS

      • Main experiment: Unlike existing methods that perform dataset-specific hyperparameter
        tuning to achieve optimal performance, we use the same set of default hyperparameters
        across all datasets, and later study the effect of each hyperparameter on the metrics in
        ablation study.
      • Ablation study: Ablation study in Section 5.3 is conducted on the 30 UEA datasets.
        For each ablation case, we only change the hyperparameter of interest and keeping other
        hyperparameters as the default values. A summary of the ablation results are presented in
        Section 5.3 and detailed results are included in Appendix B.4.
      • Diversity loss: In the SBM training, we incorporate a regularization (Ma et al., 2020) to
        encourage the learning of more diverse shapelets (Equation 4). However, the ablation study,
        we find that the weight of the diversity regularization λdiv does not introduce substantial
        effects to the metrics of interests (see Figure 22). These results suggest that the diversity
        loss could be omitted, considering its high computational complexity. Nevertheless, we
        chose to retain it because it is used in other shapelet-based literature (Qu et al., 2024) and
        may still promote favorable properties for shapelet learning, which would require further
        investigations.
      • Number of shapelets: In the ablation study, we consider the number shapelets K = 10
        and K = 5 which are rather compact. Although using large K would test the scalability
        of SBM, we believe that interpretability favors a compact model with a small number of
        concepts whenever possible. Using a large K would compromise interpretability by making
        the SBM more complex and less plausible for human understanding. Furthermore, if the
        features of a dataset is so complex that require a large K to express, we prefer to leverage
        the DNN component of InterpGN for such cases.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B      A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
B.1        F ULL R ESULTS ON 30 DATASETS FROM THE UEA A RCHIVE

For the performance of baseline methods, we reproduce STRF, FCN, TimesNet and PatchTST to
obtain their performance on the UEA datasets. Performance of DTW and TS2Vec are obtained from
Yue et al. (2022). Performance of TST and SVP-T are obtained from Zuo et al. (2023). Performance
of ShapeNet, RLPAM, and ShapeConv are obtained from the corresponding paper.
Due to the limitations in model architectures, some method may fail on certain datasets. For example,
TimesNet and PatchTST fail on the EigenWorms datasets as the time series exceed their input length
limits. For fair comparison, in Table 5, we additionally report the statistics of the methods with “N/A”
dropped, keeping the datasets where all the method have a valid result.

Table 5: Accuracy and comparison of the methods on 30 datasets from the UEA archive. The best
accuracy for each dataset is marked with bold, the second-best is marked with italic, and the third-best
is marked with underline.
                               Classical                        Deep Learning                          With Interpretable Features            Ours
 Dataset                     STRF    DTW     FCN     TS2Vec   TimesNet   TST     PatchTST   SVP-T   ShapeNet   RLPAM      ShapeConv   SBM      InterpGN
 ArticularyWordRecognition   0.917   0.987   0.990   0.987     0.953     0.983    0.938     0.993    0.987      0.923        0.994    0.993      0.991
 AtrialFibrillation          0.267   0.200   0.333   0.200     0.507     0.200    0.467     0.400    0.400      0.733        0.521    0.453      0.333
 BasicMotions                0.925   0.975   1.000   0.975     0.965     0.965    0.560     1.000    1.000      1.000        0.997    1.000      1.000
 CharacterTrajectories       0.849   0.989   0.998   0.995     0.980      N/A     0.859     0.990    0.980      0.978        0.981    0.983      0.997
 Cricket                     0.944   1.000   0.997   0.972     0.839     0.958    0.883     1.000    0.986      1.000        0.998    0.981      1.000
 DuckDuckGeese               0.380   0.600   0.668   0.680     0.404     0.480     N/A      0.700    0.725      0.700        0.648    0.384      0.480
 EigenWorms                  0.672   0.618   0.759   0.847      N/A       N/A     0.415     0.923    0.878      0.908        0.802    0.582      0.835
 Epilepsy                    0.978   0.964   0.975   0.964     0.836     0.920    0.565     0.986    0.987      0.978        0.972    0.993      0.988
 ERing                       0.889   0.133   0.894   0.874     0.914     0.933    0.872     0.937    0.133      0.819        0.774    0.967      0.933
 EthanolConcentration        0.677   0.323   0.297   0.308     0.300     0.337    0.263     0.331    0.312      0.369        0.253    0.301      0.298
 FaceDetection               0.567   0.529   0.584   0.501     0.686     0.681    0.559     0.512    0.602      0.621        0.635    0.657      0.659
 FingerMovements             0.500   0.530   0.622   0.480     0.608     0.776    0.564     0.600    0.580      0.640        0.587    0.600      0.616
 HandMovementDirection       0.419   0.231   0.446   0.338     0.416     0.608    0.568     0.392    0.338      0.635        0.413    0.473      0.459
 Handwriting                 0.104   0.286   0.612   0.515     0.239     0.305    0.112     0.433    0.452      0.522        0.527    0.357      0.617
 Heartbeat                   0.746   0.717   0.780   0.683     0.739     0.712    0.724     0.790    0.756      0.779        0.784    0.736      0.779
 InsectWingbeat              0.208    N/A    0.654   0.466     0.593     0.684    0.276     0.184    0.250      0.352        0.509    0.492      0.653
 JapaneseVowels              0.676   0.949   0.991   0.984     0.972     0.994    0.876     0.978    0.984      0.935        0.993    0.963      0.990
 Libras                      0.817   0.870   0.953   0.867     0.806     0.844    0.642     0.833    0.856      0.794        0.887    0.860      0.969
 LSST                        0.491   0.551   0.394   0.537     0.406     0.381    0.315     0.666    0.590      0.643        0.608    0.636      0.597
 MotorImagery                0.510   0.500   0.584   0.510     0.614      N/A     0.600     0.650    0.610      0.610        0.674    0.642      0.630
 NATOPS                      0.794   0.883   0.982   0.928     0.904     0.900    0.730     0.906    0.833      0.950        0.937    0.879      0.983
 PEMS-SF                     0.925   0.711   0.824   0.682     0.857     0.919    0.764     0.867    0.751      0.632        0.801    0.851      0.873
 PenDigits                   0.855   0.977   0.990   0.989     0.981     0.974    0.961     0.938    0.977      0.982        0.968    0.971      0.990
 PhonemeSpectra              0.155   0.151   0.303   0.233     0.119     0.088    0.033     0.176    0.298      0.175        0.192    0.255      0.320
 RacketSports                0.842   0.803   0.903   0.855     0.855     0.829    0.738     0.842    0.882      0.868        0.863    0.897      0.901
 SelfRegulationSCP1          0.846   0.775   0.902   0.812     0.895     0.925    0.835     0.884    0.782      0.802        0.858    0.864      0.917
 SelfRegulationSCP2          0.489   0.539   0.577   0.578     0.559     0.589    0.559     0.600    0.578      0.632        0.624    0.522      0.578
 SpokenArabicDigits          0.679   0.963   0.995   0.988     0.987     0.993    0.748     0.986    0.975      0.621        0.979    0.994      0.997
 StandWalkJump               0.467   0.200   0.493   0.467     0.600     0.267    0.507     0.467    0.533      0.667        0.587    0.573      0.507
 UWaveGestureLibrary         0.762   0.903   0.889   0.906     0.812     0.903    0.778     0.941    0.906      0.944        0.936    0.913      0.911
 Avg. Accuracy               0.645   0.650   0.746   0.704     0.702     0.709     0.611    0.730    0.697      0.740        0.743    0.726      0.760
 Avg. Rank                   9.700   9.138   5.000   7.533     7.517     6.778    10.414    5.267    6.567      5.400        5.500    5.733      3.500
 Num. Top-1                     2       1       4       0         1         4         0        5       2          7             2       3           8
 Num. Top-3                     2       1      14      2         3         9         1       11        5          13           10       8          16
 Wins/Draws                    28      27      23      27        25        18        27       19       25         20           20       20          -
 Losses                         2       2       7       3         4         9         2       11        5         10           10       10          -
 Wilcoxon p-value            0.000   0.000   0.003   0.000     0.000     0.001     0.000    0.066    0.001      0.112        0.009    0.003         -
 Statistics without N/A
 Avg. Accuracy               0.669   0.646   0.749   0.705     0.710     0.719    0.622     0.738    0.699      0.747        0.748    0.748      0.768
 Avg. Rank                   9.520   9.280   5.040   7.920     7.640     6.960    10.520    5.480    6.760      5.360        5.600    5.440      3.320
 Num. Top-1                    2        1       3       0         1         3         0        4       1          7             1       3           8
 Num. Top-3                    2        1      12      1         3         8         1        8        3         11             9       7          14
 Wins/Draws                   23       24      21      24        21        17        23       17       22         17           17       16          -
 Losses                        2        1       4       1         4         8         2        8        3          8            8       9           -
 Wilcoxon p-value            0.000   0.000   0.001   0.000     0.000     0.003     0.000    0.030    0.000      0.138        0.007    0.019         -


                                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2             A DDITIONAL I NTERPRETABILITY A NALYSIS

B.2.1                         FAITHFULNESS
We follow Alvarez Melis & Jaakkola (2018) to asses the faithfulness of shapelets learned by the SBM.
Specifically, for each concept (i.e., shapelet predicate p), we measure its relevance by calculating the
change in the probability of a certain prediction before and after removing it (i.e., set p = 0). The
faithfulness score is then determined by the correlation between the relevance of a shapelet concept
and its assigned importance w.
Formally, given a sample (xi , yi = c), the SBM first provides the set of shapelet predicates
pi ∈ R|S| = [pi,1 , . . . , pi,|S| ] and their corresponding classifier weights w ∈ R|S|×C =
[w1,c , . . . , w|S|,c | c ∈ {1, . . . , C}]. Then, the predicted class probabilities are computed by
r̂i = softmax(w⊤ pi ) and r̂i = [r̂1 , . . . , r̂C ]. Then, we have
                                     (k)               (k)           (k)                         (k)
                                    ∆i     = r̂i,c − r̂i,c , where r̂i     = softmax(w⊤ pi ),
                                                                                                                                      (10)
                                                                     (k)
                                                                    pi     = [pi,j | j = {1, . . . , |S|, pi,j = 0 if j = k}].
                         (k)
Here ∆i measures the changes in the predicted class probability with the absence of shapelet
concept sk . The faithfulness of the sample xi is then quantified by the correlation coefficient between
                                           (1)        (|S)
the vectors of relevance values ∆i = [∆i , . . . , ∆i ] and the importance weights of the predicted
class wc :
                                     Faithfulness(xi ) = ρ(wi , ∆i ).                                (11)
where ρ denotes the Pearson correlation coefficient. Aggregating Faithfulness(xi ) across all (xi , yi ) ∈
D, we generate the box plots shown in Figure 7. On most datasets, regardless of the varying
performance levels of the SBM, we observe consistently high faithfulness estimates (i.e., greater than
0.5).

                              1.0


                              0.8
      Faithfulness Estimate


                              0.6


                              0.4


                              0.2


                              0.0
                                    AWR AF        BM    CT     CK DDG ER            EW EP       EC     FD   FM    HM    HW       HB
                                                                                  Dataset
                              1.0


                              0.8
      Faithfulness Estimate


                              0.6


                              0.4


                              0.2


                              0.0
                                    IW      JV LSST LB         MI    NT      PM     PD PH       RS SCP1 SCP2 SAD SWJ UGL
                                                                                  Dataset

Figure 7: Faithfulness estimate: aggregated correlation statistics between shapelet concept relevance
and importance.


                                                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2.2   V ISUALIZATION OF E XPLANATIONS
Global explanations . We visualize the global explanations of the UWaveGestureLibrary, BasicMo-
tions, SelfRegulationSCP1, and SelfRegulationSCP2 datasets. We choose these datasets since their
dimensions are favored for visualizations (i.e., M and C are not too high). UWaveGestureLibrary
and BasicMotions are representitives for human motion data; SelfRegulationSCP1 and SelfRegu-
lationSCP2 are representatives for EEG data. In each figure, for each category, we visualize the
time-series samples (left, in gray), the top-5 positively relevant shapelets (middle, in blue), and the
top-5 negatively relevant shapelets (right, in red).


     Figure 8: Global explanations of the SBM on the UWaveGestureLibrary dataset. (Part 1)


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Figure 9: Global explanations of the SBM on the UWaveGestureLibrary dataset. (Part 2)


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Figure 10: Global explanations of the SBM on the BasicMotions dataset.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: Global explanations of the SBM on the SelfRegulationSCP1 dataset. For clarity, we
visualize 30 time-series samples.


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: Global explanations of the SBM on the SelfRegulationSCP2 dataset. For clarity, we
visualize 30 time-serie samples.


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Local explanations. We visualize the local explanations for the four datasets. In each Figure, a
sub-figure visualizes a time-series sample (in gray) along with the top-5 most important shapelets.
The color of each shapelet indicates its importance, with blue representing the highest importance,
followed by orange, green, red, and purple for progressively lower importance.


         Figure 13: Local explanations of the SBM on the UWaveGestureLibrary dataset.


                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Figure 14: Local explanations of the SBM on the BasicMotions dataset.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The local explanations reflect the limitation we discussed in Section 6, where explanations for
certain categories may appear counterfactual. For example, in the BasicMotions dataset, the most
important shapelets for Category 1 may not represent the most characteristic features of that category.
Despite this, the SBM can still make accurate predictions due to the strong feature representation
for other categories. This issue becomes more pronounced in datasets with two categories, such as
SelfRegulationSCP1 and SelfRegulationSCP2. These findings suggest that for binary classification
tasks, using a single binary classifier with one unified “rule” might be a more effective and reasonable
design, rather than assigning a separate “rule” to each class.


          Figure 15: Local explanations of the SBM on the SelfRegulationSCP1 dataset.


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Figure 16: Local explanations of the SBM on the SelfRegulationSCP2 dataset.


                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.3     B EHAVIOR OF THE INTERPRETABILITY GATING FUNCTION

B.3.1    D ISTRIBUTION OF THE GATING VALUES
In Figure 17, we present the relationship between values of η(xi ) and predictions of InterpGN to fur-
ther study the behavior of the proposed interpretability gating function. We conclude that InterpGN’s
predictions is consistent with SBM’s predictions when η(xi ) is high, preserving interpretability for
those samples. The DNN makes corrections when η(xi ) is low to improve performance. Note that
there are cases where the DNN changes SBM’s predictions to incorrect, suggesting that InterpGN’s
performance can be further improved using more advanced DNNs.


Figure 17: Histogram of values η(xi ), and the prediction consistency between the interpretable expert
and InterpGN.


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.3.2   T RAINING CURVES OF I NTERP GN
In Figure 18 and Figure 19, we visualize the loss and η during the training of InterpGN. The figures
present how the loss function design Lhybrid = βLint + L̂ce could encourage the use of SBM during
training, preventing the InterpGN from collapsing into a pure DNN when possible.

                               1.0                                   1.0
                                                         Loss
               Training Loss   0.8                                   0.8
                               0.6                                   0.6
                               0.4                                   0.4
                               0.2                                   0.2
                               0.0                                   0.0
                                     0 10 20 30 40 50 60                   0   10   20        30   40   50   60
                                     Num. Samples Trained (103)            Num. Samples Trained (103)

Figure 18: Training curves for InterpGN on the BasicMotions dataset: (left) Lhybrid and (right) average
η.


                               2.5                                   1.0
                                                         Loss
                               2.0                                   0.8
               Training Loss


                               1.5                                   0.6
                               1.0                                   0.4

                               0.5                                   0.2
                                                                     0.0
                                     0       10        20                  0             10             20
                                     Num. Samples Trained (103)            Num. Samples Trained (103)

Figure 19: Training curves for InterpGN on the UWaveGestureLibrary dataset: (left) Lhybrid and
(right) average η.


                                                                30
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 B.4                A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS

                              Table 6: Number of shapelet                                                                                                              Table 7: β schedule of InterpGN
    model               K      accu.       quality      |w| > 1        |w| > 0.5           |w| > 0.1      Gini(|w|)          η                     β              K     accu.      quality         |w| > 1        |w| > 0.5                 |w| > 0.1           Gini(|w|)          η
    SBM                  5     0.720       0.103         0.050             0.144                0.523       0.460             -                constant            5    0.761       0.079          0.034               0.109                 0.429               0.422            0.405
    SBM                 10     0.726       0.074         0.026             0.084                0.412       0.467             -                constant           10    0.760       0.061          0.014               0.060                 0.343               0.420            0.441
  InterpGN               5     0.761       0.079         0.034             0.109                0.429       0.422           0.405               cosine             5    0.759       0.077          0.031               0.096                 0.427               0.422            0.374
  InterpGN              10     0.760       0.061         0.014             0.060                0.343       0.420           0.441               cosine            10    0.761       0.059          0.015               0.060                 0.334               0.424            0.435


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.14
                                                                                                                                                     0.75                                                                                                             SBM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      InterpGN


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Shapelet error
                                                                                                                                                     0.70
                                                                                                                 2
                        Table 8: Predicate types in SBM                                                                                                                                                                   0.10


                                                                                                                                          Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                     0.65
                                                                                                                                                     0.60                                                                 0.08
   Predicate                 K         accu.           quality         |w| > 1              |w| > 0.5            |w| > 0.1                           0.55                                                                 0.06
      RBF                     5     0.728              0.101               0.051                  0.141              0.513                           0.50                                                                 0.04
      RBF                    10     0.734              0.073               0.027                  0.083              0.405                                                SBM
                                                                                                                                                     0.45
     Linear                   5     0.718              0.171               0.084                  0.181              0.499                                                InterpGN                                        0.02
     Linear                  10     0.722              0.121               0.054                  0.125              0.433                           0.40
                                                                                                                                                                0.5     1.0        2.0       5.0       10.0                          0.5       1.0          2.0         5.0         10.0


                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 20: Ablation on ϵ

                                                                              0.5                                                                        0.78                                                                 0.20
           0.76                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SBM: |w| > 1
                                                                              0.4                                                                                                                                                                        InterpGN: |w| > 1
                                                                 Percentage


                                                                                                                                                         0.76                                                                 0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SBM: |w| > 0.5
Accuracy


                                                                                                                                              Accuracy
                                                                              0.3                                                                                                                                                                        InterpGN: |w| > 0.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ratio
           0.74
                                                                                                                                                         0.74                                                                 0.10
                                                                              0.2
           0.72
                                                                              0.1                                                                        0.72                                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                                                                          SBM
                                                                              0.0
                                                                                                % above gating value                                                      InterpGN
           0.70                                                                                                                                          0.70                                                                 0.00
                  0.5        0.6   0.7          0.8    0.9     1.0                  0.5     0.6     0.7    0.8       0.9     1.0                                 0.0     0.1         1.0      10.0     100.0                          0.0          0.1          1.0        10.0     100.0
                            Gating Value                                                   Gating Value                                                                              div                                                                        div

                                   Figure 21: Ablation on η                                                                                                               Figure 22: Ablation on λdiv

                                         0.78                                                                0.20
                                                                                     SBM                                               SBM: |w| > 1                                  0.75               SBM
                                                                                     InterpGN                                          InterpGN: |w| > 1                             0.70
                                                                                                                                                                                                        InterpGN
                                         0.76                                                                0.15
                                                                                                                                       SBM: |w| > 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                           Gini Coeff.
                              Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                     0.65
                                                                                                                                       InterpGN: |w| > 0.5
                                                                                                        Ratio


                                         0.74                                                                0.10                                                                    0.60
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.55

                                                                                                             0.05                                                                    0.50
                                         0.72
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.40
                                         0.70                                                                0.00
                                                 0.0     0.1         0.5       1.0        5.0      10.0               0.0        0.1    0.5       1.0           5.0     10.0                 0.0      0.1          0.5           1.0         5.0         10.0
                                                                           reg                                                                reg                                                                             reg

                                                                                                        Figure 23: Ablation on λreg

                                                        Table 9: Full results and variations on number of shapelets K

           model                   K                     accu.                                  quanlity                           |w| > 1                              |w| > 0.5                            |w| > 0.1                                                 η
            SBM                     5             0.72 ± 0.014                            0.103 ± 0.023                      0.05 ± 0.017                             0.144 ± 0.051                   0.523 ± 0.109                                                    -
            SBM                    10            0.726 ± 0.011                            0.074 ± 0.014                     0.026 ± 0.008                             0.084 ± 0.022                   0.412 ± 0.085                                                    -
     InterpGN                      5             0.761 ± 0.012                            0.079 ± 0.019                     0.034 ± 0.011                             0.109 ± 0.036                   0.429 ± 0.105                                      0.405 ± 0.091
     InterpGN                      10             0.76 ± 0.01                             0.061 ± 0.014                     0.014 ± 0.006                              0.06 ± 0.024                   0.343 ± 0.092                                      0.441 ± 0.112


    3
      Results in this table are averaged over 28 datasets since the models with linear predicates fail on the datasets
 EigenWorms and MotorImagery


                                                                                                                                       31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Table 10: Full results and variations on β schedule in InterpGN

 β schedule    K          accu.           quanlity        |w| > 1         |w| > 0.5       |w| > 0.1          η
  constant      5     0.761 ± 0.012    0.079 ± 0.019    0.034 ± 0.011   0.109 ± 0.036   0.429 ± 0.105   0.405 ± 0.091
  constant     10      0.76 ± 0.01     0.061 ± 0.014    0.014 ± 0.006    0.06 ± 0.024   0.343 ± 0.092   0.441 ± 0.112
   cosine      5      0.759 ± 0.016    0.077 ± 0.019    0.031 ± 0.014   0.096 ± 0.028   0.427 ± 0.103   0.374 ± 0.099
   cosine      10     0.761 ± 0.011    0.059 ± 0.014    0.015 ± 0.007     0.06 ± 0.02    0.334 ± 0.09    0.435 ± 0.1


                                      Table 11: Full results and variations on ϵ

  model        ϵ          accu.           quanlity         |w| > 1        |w| > 0.5       |w| > 0.1          η
   SBM         0.5    0.715 ± 0.014     0.136 ± 0.03    0.033 ± 0.008   0.089 ± 0.028   0.383 ± 0.091         -
   SBM         1.0    0.726 ± 0.011    0.074 ± 0.014    0.026 ± 0.008   0.084 ± 0.022   0.412 ± 0.085         -
   SBM         2.0     0.723 ± 0.01    0.061 ± 0.011    0.029 ± 0.008   0.111 ± 0.034   0.465 ± 0.095         -
   SBM         5.0    0.586 ± 0.029    0.015 ± 0.004    0.031 ± 0.009   0.063 ± 0.016   0.138 ± 0.022         -
   SBM        10.0    0.415 ± 0.026    0.012 ± 0.004    0.023 ± 0.008   0.042 ± 0.014   0.072 ± 0.011         -
 InterpGN     0.5     0.749 ± 0.015    0.087 ± 0.025    0.016 ± 0.004    0.05 ± 0.018   0.251 ± 0.093    0.31 ± 0.114
 InterpGN      1.0      0.76 ± 0.01    0.061 ± 0.014    0.014 ± 0.006    0.06 ± 0.024   0.343 ± 0.092   0.441 ± 0.112
 InterpGN      2.0     0.76 ± 0.009     0.057 ± 0.01    0.023 ± 0.009   0.097 ± 0.028   0.431 ± 0.094   0.488 ± 0.098
 InterpGN      5.0     0.75 ± 0.012    0.014 ± 0.004    0.029 ± 0.008   0.054 ± 0.016   0.136 ± 0.028   0.263 ± 0.059
 InterpGN     10.0    0.752 ± 0.012    0.009 ± 0.003    0.024 ± 0.007    0.04 ± 0.014   0.072 ± 0.017   0.118 ± 0.038


                                   Table 12: Full results and variations on λreg

  model       λreg        accu.           quanlity         |w| > 1        |w| > 0.5       |w| > 0.1          η
   SBM         0.0     0.726 ± 0.01    0.113 ± 0.023    0.046 ± 0.01     0.121 ± 0.03    0.487 ± 0.09         -
   SBM         0.1    0.726 ± 0.011    0.074 ± 0.014    0.026 ± 0.008   0.084 ± 0.022   0.412 ± 0.085         -
   SBM         0.5     0.726 ± 0.01    0.059 ± 0.012    0.017 ± 0.006   0.059 ± 0.017   0.338 ± 0.073         -
   SBM         1.0    0.726 ± 0.011    0.048 ± 0.007    0.014 ± 0.004   0.047 ± 0.011   0.259 ± 0.064         -
   SBM         5.0    0.716 ± 0.011    0.022 ± 0.004    0.007 ± 0.002   0.024 ± 0.008    0.1 ± 0.028          -
   SBM        10.0    0.701 ± 0.012    0.014 ± 0.003    0.005 ± 0.001   0.014 ± 0.004   0.058 ± 0.015         -
 InterpGN     0.0     0.759 ± 0.013     0.067 ± 0.02    0.017 ± 0.011   0.071 ± 0.031   0.381 ± 0.093   0.463 ± 0.114
 InterpGN      0.1      0.76 ± 0.01    0.061 ± 0.014    0.014 ± 0.006    0.06 ± 0.024   0.343 ± 0.092   0.441 ± 0.112
 InterpGN      0.5     0.76 ± 0.011    0.049 ± 0.01      0.01 ± 0.004   0.046 ± 0.016   0.271 ± 0.081    0.44 ± 0.104
 InterpGN      1.0    0.759 ± 0.011    0.042 ± 0.009    0.009 ± 0.004    0.038 ± 0.01   0.221 ± 0.069   0.432 ± 0.096
 InterpGN      5.0     0.757 ± 0.01    0.02 ± 0.004     0.004 ± 0.002   0.018 ± 0.006    0.09 ± 0.036   0.358 ± 0.093
 InterpGN     10.0    0.755 ± 0.013    0.013 ± 0.003    0.004 ± 0.002   0.011 ± 0.005    0.047 ± 0.02   0.299 ± 0.092



                                   Table 13: Full results and variations on λdiv

  model       λdiv         accu.           quanlity        |w| > 1        |w| > 0.5       |w| > 0.1           η
   SBM          0.0    0.726 ± 0.011    0.072 ± 0.013   0.025 ± 0.005   0.085 ± 0.019   0.413 ± 0.093         -
   SBM          0.1    0.726 ± 0.011    0.074 ± 0.014   0.026 ± 0.008   0.084 ± 0.022   0.412 ± 0.085         -
   SBM          1.0     0.726 ± 0.01    0.079 ± 0.016   0.026 ± 0.009   0.083 ± 0.022   0.417 ± 0.089         -
   SBM         10.0     0.725 ± 0.01    0.089 ± 0.017   0.027 ± 0.009   0.085 ± 0.024    0.42 ± 0.079         -
   SBM        100.0    0.724 ± 0.011    0.097 ± 0.019   0.028 ± 0.009   0.086 ± 0.022   0.406 ± 0.091         -
 InterpGN      0.0     0.762 ± 0.012    0.062 ± 0.014   0.016 ± 0.007   0.067 ± 0.021   0.362 ± 0.102   0.451 ± 0.112
 InterpGN      0.1      0.76 ± 0.01     0.061 ± 0.014   0.014 ± 0.006    0.06 ± 0.024   0.343 ± 0.092   0.441 ± 0.112
 InterpGN      1.0      0.76 ± 0.011    0.065 ± 0.013   0.017 ± 0.006   0.063 ± 0.021   0.338 ± 0.084   0.443 ± 0.107
 InterpGN     10.0     0.758 ± 0.011    0.073 ± 0.016   0.018 ± 0.009   0.064 ± 0.027   0.331 ± 0.086   0.437 ± 0.109
 InterpGN     100.0    0.762 ± 0.011    0.081 ± 0.018   0.018 ± 0.008   0.066 ± 0.023   0.331 ± 0.099   0.437 ± 0.113


                                                            32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     P RELIMINARY R ESULTS ON E XTENDED D ESIGNS

We further provide preliminary results on extended designs for SBM and InterpGN, where we hope
they could provide insights for future research. For simplicity, we experiment with a subset of the
UEA archive containing 10 datasets that are commonly used in evaluating deep learning methods
(Wu et al., 2023).

C.1   A RCHITECTURE OF THE DNN E XPERT IN I NTERP GN

Table 14: Ablation on the architecture of the DNN expert in InterpGN. The best performance for
each dataset is highlighted with bold.

  DNN Expert of InterpGN:             FCN            Transformer          PatchTST          TimesNet
  Dataset                        accu.       η       accu.      η       accu.        η     accu.    η
  EthanolConcentration          0.298     0.008      0.320    0.236     0.276     0.833    0.302   0.401
  FaceDetection                 0.663     0.709      0.657    0.568     0.652     0.756    0.670   0.517
  Handwriting                   0.612     0.022      0.127    0.545     0.115     0.266    0.214   0.024
  Heartbeat                     0.779     0.246      0.735    0.671     0.729     0.954    0.740   0.576
  JapaneseVowels                0.991     0.758      0.970    0.920     0.919     0.871    0.974   0.831
  PEMS-SF                       0.861     0.480      0.800    0.671     0.206     0.980    0.834   0.560
  SelfRegulationSCP1            0.917     0.428      0.878    0.448     0.851     0.407    0.902   0.437
  SelfRegulationSCP2            0.580     0.036      0.559    0.700     0.576     0.587    0.578   0.363
  SpokenArabicDigits            0.998     0.959      0.993    0.984     0.991     0.985    0.992   0.969
  UWaveGestureLibrary           0.909     0.646      0.803    0.365     0.791     0.295    0.829   0.205


C.2   S HAPELET D ISTANCE M EASUREMENTS

In this paper, as defined in Equation 1, we follow the conventional definition of shapelet distance
and use Euclidean distance, but the shapelet distance can be general and replaced by other metrics.
Here we explore two alternative distance measures: cosine similarity and Pearson correlation. These
metrics may offer favorable properties compared to Euclidean distance in some cases. For instance,
cosine similarity can capture shapelets that are invariant to changes in offset. Table 15 presents the
classification accuracy of SBM and InterpGN variants utilizing these three distance measures. The
results indicate that cosine similarity and Pearson correlation can yield better performance on certain
datasets, but no metric can be universally better than others. This suggests that the choice of shapelet
distance metric could possibly serve as a hyperparameter requiring dataset-specific tuning depending
on the needs. For example, motion datasets such as UWaveGestureLibrary may benefit from cosine
similarity due to the presence of offset-invariant shapelet features. In Figure 24, we visualize an
example of local explanations of SBM using euclidean distance and cosine similarity as the shapelet
distance measurement, which suggests that they both could learn high-quality shapelets.


                   (a) SBM with Euclidean Distance        (b) SBM with Cosine Similarity


Figure 24: Local explanations of SBM using (a) euclidean distance and (b) cosine similarity as the
shapelet distance measurement.



                                                     33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 15: Classification accuracy of the SBM using three shapelet distance metrics. The best accuracy
for each dataset is marked with bold. The training of SBM using Pearson correlation fails on some
datasets due to infinite gradients.

      Model:                                      SBM                                   InterpGN
      Distance metric:            Euclidean       Cosine      Pearson       Euclidean     Cosine   Pearson
      EthanolConcentration          0.301          0.297       0.304          0.298       0.304     0.291
      FaceDetection                 0.657          0.680       0.682          0.659       0.683     0.682
      Handwriting                   0.357          0.395       0.042          0.617       0.613     0.042
      Heartbeat                     0.736          0.738       0.740          0.779       0.789     0.779
      JapaneseVowels                0.963          0.966       0.084          0.990       0.989     0.084
      PEMS-SF                       0.850          0.830       0.173          0.853       0.853     0.173
      SelfRegulationSCP1            0.864          0.857       0.855          0.917       0.900     0.901
      SelfRegulationSCP2            0.522          0.553       0.556          0.578       0.578     0.579
      SpokenArabicDigits            0.994          0.991       0.100          0.997       0.995     0.100
      UWaveGestureLibrary           0.913          0.946       0.125          0.911       0.936     0.125


C.3    C LASSIFIER A RCHITECTURE IN SBM

In this paper, we focus on using a linear classifier with shapelet predicates, in line with existing
shapelet-based methods. While the linear classifier is often preferred for its interpretability, its
simplicity introduces limitations such as neglect of the interaction/correlation among shapelets, as
discussed in Section 6. To mitigate the issues, we present two additional classifier architectures:
a bi-linear classifier and an attention-based classifier. Here, for simplicity, we denote the set of
shapelets predicates as pi = [pi,1 , . . . , pi,|S| ]. Specifically, they are formulated as

        • Bi-linear classifier:
                                         |S|               |S| |S|
                                                                     1(k ̸= j)wj,k pi,k pi,j .
                                         X                 X   X
                              ri,c =           wk pi,k +                                                     (12)
                                         k=1               k=1 j=1

        • Attention-based classifier:
                                  |S|
                                  X
                         ri,c =         wk · attention(Q(pi ) + PE, K(pi ) + PE, pi,k ),                     (13)
                                  k=1

          where attention is the scaled dot-product attention, PE denotes the positional em-
          beddings, Q and K are learnable linear projections. In our implementations, we keep
          low-dimensional projections Q : R1 7→ R16 and K : R1 7→ R16 .

Compared to the linear classifier, the bi-linear and attention-based classifiers can capture relationships
between shapelet concepts while retaining some level of interpretability. For example, the bi-linear
classifier could express “shapelet sk and sj both exist in xi ”. Although the attention mechanism
(i.e., Q and K projections) may not be considered as fully interpretable, attention(Q(pi ) +
PE, K(pi ) + PE, pi,k ) produces predicates that combines shapelet predicates based on attention
weights, which preserves some level of interpretability
In Table 16 we compare the three SBM classifier architectures on a subset of the UEA datasets.
Our results indicate that the advanced classifiers improve performance for both SBM and InterpGN
on certain datasets. Considering the simplicity, good interpretability of linear classifier and its
comparable performance to more advanced classifiers on most datasets, we suggest that it is still
favorable to use linear classifier in practice; however it is good to try more advanced classifiers to
achieve better performance. We will also leave the exploration of other advanced classifiers (such as
energy-based or graph-based ones) for future work.


                                                        34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 16: Classification accuracy for the three SBM classifier architectures. The best accuracy for
each dataset and model is marked with bold. The PEMS-SF dataset is omitted since due to the
quadratic memory cost in bi-linear and attention-based classifiers and its high dimensionality, which
fail to run.

    Model:                                 SBM                              InterpGN
    Classifier:               Linear    Bi-linear     Attention   Linear   Bi-linear   Attention
    EthanolConcentration       0.301     0.299         0.302      0.298     0.307       0.290
    FaceDetection              0.657     0.638         0.644      0.659     0.642       0.642
    Handwriting                0.357     0.314         0.282      0.617     0.605       0.609
    Heartbeat                  0.736     0.738         0.733      0.779     0.736       0.745
    JapaneseVowels             0.963     0.951         0.936      0.990     0.898       0.989
    SelfRegulationSCP1         0.864     0.859         0.866      0.917     0.883       0.914
    SelfRegulationSCP2         0.522     0.530         0.566      0.578     0.562       0.582
    SpokenArabicDigits         0.994     0.990         0.987      0.997     0.989       0.995
    UWaveGestureLibrary        0.913     0.873         0.854      0.911     0.902       0.902


                                                 35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.4   T IME S ERIES E XTRINSIC R EGRESSION

To further investigate the generalizability and limitations of the proposed methods, we apply them to
time series extrinsic regression tasks using datasets from the Monash, UEA, and UCR Time Series
Extrinsic Regression Repository (Tan et al., 2021). Because the proposed methods are inherently
classification models, we recast the regression tasks as ordinal regression problems. Moreover,
given that some datasets exhibit highly imbalanced target value distributions, we discretize the target
variable into 10 equally sized bins spanning the minimum and maximum target values of the training
split for each dataset.
Since the models produce probabilistic predictions over the ordinal categories (i.e., the bins), we
employ the Continuous Ranked Probability Score (CRPS) (Gneiting & Raftery, 2007), which is also
widely used in probabilistic forecasting (Aksu et al., 2024), as the performance metric for training
and evaluation. Formally, the CRPS is defined as:
                                           B  X   i                    2
                                                      r̂j − 1(j ≥ B) ,
                                           X
                            CRPS(r̂, b) =                                                       (14)
                                             i=1    j=1

where r̂ is the predicted probabilities for each bins, b is the true target bin, and B is the total number
of bins. Table 17 summarizes the results obtained for the SBM, InterpGN, and three deep learning
models. It should be noted, however, that this experimental setup is preliminary and may require
further refinement; our primary objective is to demonstrate the feasibility of extending our proposed
methods to regression tasks.

Table 17: Continuous Ranked Probability Score (CRPS) of the methods on the time series extrinsic
regression datasets. The best result for each dataset is marked with bold, and the second best is
marked with italic.

  Model:                          SBM               InterpGN                      Deep Learning
  DNN Type:                         -      FCN     PatchTST    TimesNet    FCN    PatchTST    TimesNet
  AppliancesEnergy                0.844   0.834     1.274       0.937     0.878     1.331         1.135
  BIDMC32HR                       0.275   0.550     0.369       0.378     0.981     2.026         1.505
  BeijingPM10Quality              0.549   0.425     0.835       0.441     0.415     1.157         0.424
  BeijingPM25Quality              0.477   0.332     0.569       0.332     0.313     1.440         0.317
  BenzeneConcentration            0.966   1.038     2.997       1.250     1.031     2.234         1.258
  Covid3Month                     0.013   0.014     0.017       0.017     0.000     0.000         0.000
  FloodModeling1                  0.006   0.006     0.008       0.008     0.000     0.000         0.000
  HouseholdPowerConsumption1      0.456   0.405     1.318       0.935     0.409     1.079         0.807
  IEEEPPG                         1.122   2.285     2.896       2.862     2.250     2.619         3.077
  LiveFuelMoistureContent         0.491   0.501     0.649       0.648     0.494     0.644         0.644
  NewsHeadlineSentiment           0.001   0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000     0.000         0.000


                                                   36
