Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARNING MIRROR MAPS IN POLICY MIRROR DESCENT
 Carlo Alfano∗                           Sebastian Towers†              Silvia Sapora†
 Department of Statistics                FLAIR                          FLAIR, Department of Statistics
 University of Oxford                    University of Oxford           University of Oxford

 Chris Lu                                                Patrick Rebeschini
 FLAIR                                                   Department of Statistics
 University of Oxford                                    University of Oxford



                                                 A BSTRACT
             Policy Mirror Descent (PMD) is a popular framework in reinforcement learning,
             serving as a unifying perspective that encompasses numerous algorithms. These
             algorithms are derived through the selection of a mirror map and enjoy finite-time
             convergence guarantees. Despite its popularity, the exploration of PMD’s full
             potential is limited, with the majority of research focusing on a particular mirror
             map—namely, the negative entropy—which gives rise to the renowned Natural
             Policy Gradient (NPG) method. It remains uncertain from existing theoretical
             studies whether the choice of mirror map significantly influences PMD’s efficacy.
             In our work, we conduct empirical investigations to show that the conventional
             mirror map choice (NPG) often yields less-than-optimal outcomes across several
             standard benchmark environments. Using evolutionary strategies, we identify more
             efficient mirror maps that enhance the performance of PMD. We first focus on
             a tabular environment, i.e. Grid-World, where we relate existing theoretical bounds
             with the performance of PMD for a few standard mirror maps and the learned one.
             We then show that it is possible to learn a mirror map that outperforms the negative
             entropy in more complex environments, such as the MinAtar suite. Additionally,
             we demonstrate that the learned mirror maps generalize effectively to different
             tasks by testing each map across various other environments.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Policy gradient (PG) methods (Williams & Peng, 1991; Sutton et al., 1999; Konda & Tsitsiklis, 2000;
Baxter & Bartlett, 2001) are some of the most widely-used mechanisms for policy optimization
in reinforcement learning (RL). These algorithms are gradient-based methods that optimize over
a class of parameterized policies and have become a popular choice for RL problems, both in
theory (Kakade, 2002; Peters & Schaal, 2008; Bhatnagar et al., 2009; Schulman et al., 2015; Mnih
et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2017; Lan, 2022a) and in practice (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016; Berner
et al., 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022).
Among PG methods, some of the most successful algorithms are those that employ some form of reg-
ularization in their updates, ensuring that the newly updated policy retains some degree of similarity
to its predecessor. This principle has been implemented in different ways. For instance, trust region
policy optimization (TRPO) Schulman et al. (2015) imposes a Kullback-Leibler divergence Kullback
& Leibler (1951) hard constraint for its updates, while proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman
et al., 2017) uses a clipped objective to penalize large updates. A framework that has recently
attracted attention and belongs to this heuristic is that of policy mirror descent (PMD) (Tomar et al.,
2022; Lan, 2022a; Xiao, 2022; Kuba et al., 2022; Vaswani et al., 2022; Alfano et al., 2023), which
applies mirror descent Nemirovski & Yudin (1983) to RL to regularize the policy updates.
PMD consists of a wide class of algorithms, each derived by selecting a mirror map that introduces
distinct regularization characteristics. In recent years, PMD has been investigated through numerical
    ∗
        Correspondence to carlo.alfano@stats.ox.ac.uk.
    †
        Equal contribution.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


experiments (Tomar et al., 2022), but it has mainly been analysed from a theoretical perspective.
To the best of our knowledge, research has been mostly focused either on the particular case of the
negative entropy mirror map, which generates the natural policy gradient (NPG) algorithm (Kakade,
2002; Agarwal et al., 2021), or on finding theoretical guarantees for a generic mirror map.
NPG has been proven to converge to the optimal policy, up to a difference in expected return (or
error floor), in several settings, e.g. using tabular, linear, general parameterization (Agarwal et al.,
2021) or regularizing rewards (Cen et al., 2021). It has been shown that NPG benefits from implicit
regularization (Hu et al., 2022), that it can exploit optimism (Zanette et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023),
and some of its variants have been evaluated in simulations (Vaswani et al., 2022; 2023). When
considering other specific mirror maps investigated in the RL literature, the Tsallis entropy has been
noted for enhancing performance in offline settings (Tomar et al., 2022) and for offering improved
sample efficiency in online settings (Li & Lan, 2023), when compared to the negative entropy.
There is a substantial body of theoretical research focused on the general case of mirror maps.
This research demonstrates that PMD achieves convergence to the optimal policy under the same
conditions as NPG, as evidenced by various studies (Xiao, 2022; Lan, 2022b; Yuan et al., 2023;
Alfano et al., 2023). Except for the setting where we have access to the true value of the policy,
convergence guarantees in stochastic settings are subject to an error floor due to the inherent
randomness or bias within the algorithm. In the majority of PMD analyses involving generic mirror
maps, both the convergence rate and the error floor show mild dependence on the specific choice
of mirror map. Typically, the effect of the mirror map appears explicitly as a multiplicative factor
in the convergence rate and it appears implicitly in the error floor. These analyses often rely on upper
bounds, meaning they may not accurately reflect the algorithms’ actual performance in applications.
In this work, we contribute to the literature with an empirical investigation of PMD, with the
objectives of finding a mirror map that consistently outperforms the negative entropy mirror map and
of understanding how the theoretical guarantees of PMD relate to simulations. We first consider a set
of tabular environments, i.e. Grid-World (Oh et al., 2020), where we compare the empirical results to
the theoretical guarantees given by Xiao (2022), which we can compute as we have full control over the
environment. In this setting, we provide a learned mirror map which outperforms the negative entropy
in all tested environments. Our experiments suggest that the error floor appearing in prototypical PMD
convergence guarantees is not a good performance indicator: our learned mirror map achieves the
best value while presenting the worst theoretical error floor, implying that the upper bounds typically
considered in the PMD literature are loose with respect to the choice of the mirror map. Additionally,
our experiments indicate that having small policy updates leads to smoother value improvements
over time with less instances of performance degradation, as suggested by the monotonic policy
improvement property given by Xiao (2022). We then consider two non-tabular settings, i.e. the Basic
Control Suite and the MinAtar Suite, which are more realistic but also more complex, and therefore
prevent us from computing the exact theoretical guarantees. We learn a mirror map for each of these
environments and, also in this case, show that the learned mirror maps lead to a higher performance
of PMD than the negative entropy. Moreover, we show that the learned mirror maps generalize well
to other tasks, by testing each of the learned mirror maps on all the other environments. Lastly, we
tackle continuous control tasks in MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012), where we show that the mirror
map learned on one environment surpasses the negative entropy across several environments.
To establish our findings, we employ the standard formulation of PMD (Xiao, 2022) for the tabular
setting and the continuous control tasks, and we used a generalized version, Approximate Mirror
Policy Optimization (AMPO) (Alfano et al., 2023), for the non-tabular setting with discrete action
spaces. To allow optimization over the space of mirror maps, we introduce parameterization schemes
for mirror maps, one for PMD and one for AMPO. Specifically, we propose a parameterization for
ω-potentials, which have been shown to induce a wide class of mirror maps (Krichene et al., 2015).
We use evolution strategies (ES) to search for the mirror map that maximizes the performance of
PMD and AMPO over an environment.
AMPO (Alfano et al., 2023) is a recently-proposed PMD framework designed to integrate general
parameterization schemes, in our case neural networks, and arbitrary mirror maps. It benefits from
theoretical guarantees, as Alfano et al. (2023) show that AMPO has quasi-monotonic updates as
well as sub-linear and linear convergence rates, depending on the step-size schedule. These desirable
properties make AMPO particularly suitable for our numerical investigation.



                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ES are a type of population-based stochastic optimization algorithm that leverages random noise
to generate a diverse pool of candidate solutions, and have been successfully applied to a variety
of tasks (Real et al., 2019; Salimans et al., 2017; Such et al., 2018). The main idea consists in
iteratively selecting higher-performing individuals, w.r.t. a fitness function, resulting in a gradual
convergence towards the optimal solution. ES algorithms are gradient-free and have been shown to
be well-suited for optimisation problems where the objective function is noisy or non-differentiable
and the search space is large or complex (Beyer, 2000; Lu et al., 2022; 2023). We use ES to search
over the parameterized classes of mirror maps we introduce, by defining the fitness of a particular
mirror map as the value of the last policy outputted by PMD and AMPO, for fixed hyper-parameters.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the setting of RL as well as
the PMD and AMPO algorithms. We describe the methodology behind our numerical experiments in
Section 3, which are then discussed in Section 4. Finally, we discuss related works from the literature
on automatic discovery of machine learning algorithms in Appendix A and give our conclusions
in Section 5.

2       P RELIMINARIES
2.1       R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Define a discounted Markov Decision Process (MDP) as the tuple M = (S, A, P, r, γ, µ), where
S and A are respectively the state and action spaces, P (s′ | s, a) is the transition probability from
state s to s′ when taking action a, r(s, a) ∈ [0, 1] is the reward function, γ is a discount factor, and
µ is a starting state distribution. A policy π ∈ (∆(A))S , where ∆(A) is the probability simplex
over A, represents the behavior of an agent on an MDP, whereby at state s ∈ S the agents takes
actions according to the probability distribution π(· | s).
Our objective is for the agent to find a policy that maximizes the expected discounted cumulative
reward for the starting state distribution µ. That is, we want to find
                                       π ⋆ ∈ argmax Es∼µ [V π (s)].                                      (1)
                                             π∈(∆(A))S

Here V π : S → R denotes the value function associated with policy π and is defined as
                                     h X∞                                i
                         V π (s) := E         γ t r(st , at ) | π, s0 = s ,
                                                 t=0
where st and at are the current state and action at time t and the expectation is taken over the
trajectories generated by at ∼ π(·|st ) and st+1 ∼ P (·|st , at ).
Similarly to the value function, we define the Q-function associated with a policy π as
                                     h X∞                                        i
                      Qπ (s, a) := E          γ t r(st , at ) | π, s0 = s, a0 = a ,
                                              t=0
where the expectation is once again taken over the trajectories generated by the policy π. When the
state and action spaces are finite, the Q-function can be expressed as Qπ = (I − γP π )−1 r, where
P π is a square matrix where the position ((s, a), (s′ , a′ )) is occupied by π(a′ |s′ )P (s′ |s, a). We also
define the discounted state visitation distribution as
                                                 h X∞                               i
                       dπµ (s) := (1 − γ)Es0 ∼µ              γ t P (st = s | π, s0 ) ,
                                                           t=0

where P (st = s | π, s0 ) represents the probability of the agent being in state s at time t when
following policy π and starting from s0 . The probability distribution over states dπµ (s) represents
the proportion of time spent on state s when following policy π.

2.2       P OLICY M IRROR D ESCENT

We review the PMD framework, starting from mirror maps (Bubeck, 2015). Let X ⊆ RA be a
convex set. A mirror map h : X → R is a strictly convex, continuously differentiable and essentially
smooth function1 that satisfies ∇h(X ) = RA . In particular, we consider mirror maps belonging to
the ω-potential mirror map class, which contains most mirror maps used in the literature.
    1
        A function h is essentially smooth if limx→∂X ∥∇h(x)∥2 = +∞, where ∂X denotes the boundary of X .


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 2.1 (ω-potential mirror map (Krichene et al., 2015)). For u ∈ (−∞, +∞], ω ≤ 0, an
ω-potential is defined as an increasing C 1 -diffeomorphism ϕ : (−∞, u) → (ω, +∞) such that
                                                           Z 1
                      lim ϕ(x) = ω, lim ϕ(x) = +∞,             ϕ−1 (x)dx ≤ ∞.
                      x→−∞                 x→u                     0

For any ω-potential ϕ, we define the associated mirror map hϕ as
                                         X       Z π(a|s)
                              hϕ (πs ) =                  ϕ−1 (x)dx.
                                                 a∈A       1

When ϕ(x) = ex we recover the negative entropy mirror map, which is the standard choice of
mirror map in the RL literature (Agarwal et al., 2021; Tomar et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2022; Vaswani
et al., 2022; 2023), while we recover the ℓ2 -norm when ϕ(x) = x (see Appendix B.1). Mirror maps
belonging to this class are particularly advantageous as they can be defined by a single scalar function
ϕ, without having to account for the dimension of the action space A. The Bregman divergence
(Bregman, 1967; Censor & Zenios, 1997) induced by the mirror map h is defined as
                             Dh (x, y) := h(x) − h(y) − ⟨∇h(y), x − y⟩,
where Dh (x, y) ≥ 0 for all x, y ∈ X . As we further discuss in Appendix C, the Bregman divergence
measures how far two points are in a geometry induced by the mirror map. Given a starting policy
π 0 , a learning rate η and a mirror map h, PMD can be formalized as an iterative algorithm: for all
iterations t ≥ 0,
                     π t+1 ∈ argmaxπ∈(∆(A))S Es∼dtµ [ηt ⟨Qts , πs ⟩ − Dh (πs , πst )],               (2)
                                             t                 t       t
where we used the shorthand: V t := V π , Qt := Qπ , dtµ := dπµ and ys := y(s, ·) ∈ RA , for any
function y : S × A → R. PMD benefits from several theoretical guarantees and, in particular, Xiao
(2022) shows that PMD enjoys quasi-monotonic updates and convergence to the optimal policy. We
give here a slight modification of the statements of these results. Specifically, we do not upper-bound
a term regarding the distance between subsequent policies in the result on quasi-monotonic updates,
which we use to draw connections between theory and practice. Additionally, to obtain the
convergence rate for PMD with constant step-size in the setting where we do not have access to
the true Q-function, we combine the analyses on the sublinear convergence of PMD and linear
convergence of inexact PMD given by Xiao (2022). We provide a proof in Appendix D.
Theorem 2.2 (Xiao (2022)). Following update (2), we have that, for all t ≥ 0
                                             1
                 V t+1 (µ) − V t (µ) ≥ −             b ts − Qts
                                                 max Q            max πst+1 − πst 1 ,
                                                                ∞ s∈S
                                                                                                     (3)
                                           1 − γ s∈S
where ∥·∥∞ and ∥·∥1 represent the ℓ∞ and the ℓ1 norms, respectively, and Q   b is an estimate of the
true Q-function. Additionally, at each iteration T > 0, we have
                                                ⋆   0
                                                                   !       max Q   b ts − Qts
          X E[V t (µ)]       1    E s∼d ⋆ [Dh (π , π )]       1                               ∞
   ⋆                                    µ       s   s                    t<T,s∈S
  V (µ) −                ≤                              +            + 4                        . (4)
                   T         T         ηt (1 − γ)         (1 − γ)2             (1 − γ)2
           t<T


The statement of Theorem 2.2 is similar to many results in the literature on PMD and NPG (Agarwal
et al., 2021; Xiao, 2022; Lan, 2022b; Hu et al., 2022). That is, the convergence guarantee
involves two terms, i.e. a convergence rate, which involves the Bregman divergence between
the optimal policy and the starting policy, and an error floor, which involves the estimation error
maxs∈S ∥Q b ts − Qts ∥∞ . Given that by setting η0 = Es∼d⋆ [Dh (πs⋆ , πs0 )](1 − γ) we obtain the
                                                                µ

convergence rate 2(T (1 − γ)2 )−1 , and that the error floor has no explicit dependence on the mirror
map, Equation (4) suggests that the mirror map has a mild influence on the performance of PMD.
The only way the mirror map seems to affect the convergence guarantee is, implicitly, by changing
the path of the algorithm and therefore influencing the estimation error. Similar observations can be
made for several results in the PMD literature that share the same structure of convergence guarantees.
On the other hand, Equation (3) suggests that mirror maps that prevent large updates of the policy
cause the PMD algorithm to be less prone to performance degradation, as the lower bound is close
to 0 when the policy update distance maxs∈S ∥πst+1 − πst ∥1 is small. One of the contributions of


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


our work is to challenge and refute the conclusion that the mirror map has little influence on the
convergence of PMD, highlighting a gap between theoretical guarantees, which are based on upper
bounds, and the actual performance observed in PMD-based methodologies. Our empirical studies
reveal that the choice of mirror map significantly influences both the speed of convergence and the
minimum achievable error floor in PMD. Additionally, we provide evidence that a mirror map that
prevents large updates throughout training leads to a better performance, as suggested by (3).
When applying PMD to continuous control tasks, we replace the tabular policy in (2) with a
parametrized one. That is, for all iterations t ≥ 0, we obtain the updated policy as
            πθt+1 ∈ argmaxπθ :θ∈Θ Es∼dtµ [ηt Ea∼πθ (·|s) (Qt (s, a)) − Dh (πθ (·|s), π t (·|s))],       (5)

where {πθ : θ ∈ Θ} is a class of parametrized policies.

2.3     A PPROXIMATE M IRROR P OLICY O PTIMIZATION

AMPO is a theoretically sound framework for deep reinforcement learning based on mirror descent,
as it inherits the quasi-monotonic updates and convergence guarantees from the tabular case (Alfano
et al., 2023). Given a parameterized function class F Θ = {f θ : S × A → R, θ ∈ Θ}, an initial
                      0
scoring function f θ , a step-size η and an ω-potential mirror map hϕ , AMPO can be described, for
all iterations t, by the two-step update
                         π t (a | s) = σ(ϕ(ηf t (s, a) + λts ))    ∀s ∈ S, a ∈ A,                       (6)

                                                                                                  2
    θt+1 ∈ argmin Es∼dtµ ,a∼π(·|s) f θ (s, a) − Qt (s, a) − η −1 max(ηf t (s, a) + λts , ϕ−1 (0))

                                                                                                      (7)
             θ∈Θ
                                                                                                    t
where λts ∈ R is a normalization factor to ensure πst ∈ ∆(A) for all s ∈ S, f t := f θ , and
σ(z) = max(z, 0) for z ∈ R. Theorem 1 by Krichene et al. (2015) ensures that there always exists
a normalization constant λts ∈ R. As shown by Alfano et al. (2023), AMPO recovers the standard
formulation of PMD in (2) in the tabular setting. Assuming for simplicity that ϕ(x) > 0 for all x ∈ R,
the minimization problem in (7) implies that, at each iteration t, f t is an approximation of the sum of
                                               Pt−1
the Q-functions up to that point, that is f t ≃ i=0 Qi . Therefore, the scoring function f t serves as
an estimator of the value of an action.

3     M ETHODOLOGY

Denote by H the class of ω-potentials mirror maps. Our objective is to search for the mirror map that
maximizes the value of the last policy outputted by our mirror descent based algorithms, for a fixed
time horizon T . That is, we want to find
                                     h⋆ ∈ argmax E V T (µ) ,

                                                                                                  (8)
                                                 h∈H

where the expectation is taken over the randomness of the policy optimization algorithm and the
policy updates are based on the mirror map h. Depending on the setting, we parameterize the mirror
map by parameterizing either ϕ−1 or ϕ as monotonically increasing functions. One of the primary
objectives of this work it to motivate further research into the choice of mirror maps, as influenced
by the choice of the function ϕ, moving beyond the conventional use of ϕ(x) = ex . This is achieved
by examining how different choices of ϕ influence the trajectory of training and demonstrating that,
in many cases, there is a mirror map that outperforms the negative entropy by a large margin.

3.1     P OLICY M IRROR D ESCENT

We parameterize ϕ−1 as a one layer neural network with 126 hiden units, where all kernels are
non-negative and the activation functions are equally split among the following convex and concave
                                            1/2    1/3
monotonic non-linearities: x3 , (x)2+ , (x)+ , (x)+ , log((x)+ + 10−3 ) and ex , where (x)+ =
max(x, 0). To ensure that we are able to recover the negative entropy and the ℓ2 -norm, we add
ax + b log(x) to the final output, where a, b ≥ 0


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To search for the best mirror map within this class, we employ a slight variation of the OpenAI-ES
strategy (Salimans et al., 2017), adapted to the multi-task setting (Jackson et al., 2024). Denote by ψ
the parameters of the mirror map and by F (ψ) the objective function in (8). Given a distribution of
tasks E, we estimate the gradient ∇ψ F (ψ) as
                                   h       h ϵ                                ii
                      Eϵ∼N (0,Id ) Ee∼E         (Fe (ψ + σϵ) − Fe (ψ − σϵ)) ,                        (9)
                                            2σ
where N (0, Id ) is the multivariate normal distribution, d is the number of parameters, and σ > 0
is a hyperparameter regulating the variance of the perturbations. To account for different reward
scales across tasks, we perform a rank transformation of the objective functions, whereby, for each
sampled task e, we return 1 for the higher performing member between ψ + σϵ and ψ − σϵ, and
0 for the other. We note that, when the distribution of tasks E covers a single task, we recover the
standard OpenAI-ES strategy.

3.2   A PPROXIMATE M IRROR P OLICY O PTIMIZATION

As non-tabular environments with discrete action space, we consider the Basic Control Suite (BCS)
and the MinAtar suite. Given the higher computational cost of simulations on these environments
w.r.t. to the tabular setting, we replace the neural network parameterization for the mirror map with
one with fewer parameters, in order to reduce the dimension of the mirror map class we search over.
We define the parameterized class Φ = {ϕψ : R → [0, 1], ψ ∈ Rn+ }, with
                                
                                
                                  0                 if x ≤ 0,
                                 x
                                
                                   ψ n               if 0 < x ≤ ψ1 ,
                       ϕψ (x) = j 1 x−Pji=1 ψi          Pj              Pj+1
                                
                                
                                  n +     nψj+1     if i=1 ψi < x ≤ i=1 ψi ,
                                
                                   1                 if x > 1,
where 1 ≤ j ≤ n − 1. In other words, ϕ is
defined as a piece-wise linear function with n
                               Pj
steps where, for all j ≤ n, ϕ( i=1 ψi ) = j/n
and subsequent points are interpolated with a
straight segment. This is illustrated in Figure 1.
We note that the ω-potentials within Φ violate
some of the constraints in Definition 2.1, as
they are non-decreasing instead of increasing
and limx→∞ ϕ(x) = 1 for all ϕ ∈ Φ. In
Appendix B.2, we show that, if ϕ ∈ Φ, we can
construct an ω-potential ϕ′ that satisfies the con-
straints in Definition 2.1 such that ϕ and ϕ′ in-
duce the same policies along the path of AMPO.
To effectively learn the hyperparameters, we
employ the Separable Covariance Matrix Figure 1: A plot visually demonstrating the param-
Adaptation Evolution Strategy (sep-CMA) eterization for ϕ.
(Ros & Hansen, 2008), a variant of the popular
algorithm CMA-ES (Hansen & Ostermeier,
2001). CMA-ES is, essentially, a second-order method adapted for gradient free optimization. At
every generation, it samples n new points from a normal distribution, parameterized by a mean
vector mk and a covariance matrix Ck . That is, the samples for generation k, xk1 , . . . , xkn , are
distributed i.i.d. according to xki ∼ N (mk , Ck ). For each generation k, denote       Pmthe m ∗k   ≤ n best
                            ∗k             ∗k
performing
Pm          samples   as  x 1  , . . . , x m  . Then update the mean  vector as mk+1 =        w   x
                                                                                          i=1 i i , where
       w
   i=1 i   =   1, so that  the   next     generation  is distributed around  the weighted mean    of the best
performing samples. Ck+1 is also updated to reflect the covariance structure of x∗k         1  , . . . , x∗k
                                                                                                          m , in
a complex way beyond the scope of this text. Due to the need to update Ck based on covariance
information, CMA-ES exhibits a quadratic scaling behavior with respect to the dimensionality
of the search space, potentially hindering its efficiency in high-dimensional settings. To improve
computational efficiency, we adopt sep-CMA, which introduces a diagonal constraint on the
covariance matrix and reduces the computational complexity of the algorithm.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Comparison between the learned map and the negative entropy and ℓ2 -norm mirror maps
across a range of held-out configurations of Grid-World. We display the average over 256 runs and
report the standard error as a shaded region. The column “Random tasks”, reports the averaged
metrics for 256 randomly sampled configurations of Grid-World.


4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we discuss the results of our numerical experiments. We start by presenting the tabular
setting, where we track errors in order to understand what properties are desirable in a mirror map,
and proceed by showing our results in the non-tabular setting.

4.1   TABULAR SETTING : G RID -W ORLD

As tabular setting we adopt a discounted and infinite horizon version of Grid-World (Oh et al., 2020),
which is a large class of tabular MDPs.

Model architecture and training We define the tabular policy as a one-layer neural network with
a softmax head, which takes as input a one-hot encoding of the environment state and outputs a
distribution over the action space. We train the policy using the PMD update in (2), where we solve
the minimization problem through stochastic gradient descent and estimate the Q-function through
generalized advantage estimation (GAE) (Schulman et al., 2016). We perform a simple grid-search
over the hyperparameters to maximize the performance for the negative entropy and the ℓ2 -norm
mirror maps, in order to have a fair comparison. We report the chosen hyperparameters in Appendix E.
The training procedure is implemented in Jax, using evosax (Lange, 2022a) for the evolution. We run
on four A40 GPUs, and the optimization process takes roughly 12 hours.

Environment We adopt the version of Grid-World implemented by Jackson et al. (2024), and adapt
it to the discounted and infinite horizon setting. We learn a single mirror map by training PMD on a
continuous distribution of Grid-World environments, and test PMD with the learned mirror map on
five held-out configurations from previous publications (Oh et al., 2020; Chevalier-Boisvert et al.,
2024) and on 256 randomly sampled configurations. For all PMD iterations t, we track two quantities
that appear in Theorem 2.2, that is the estimation error maxs∈S ∥Q      b ts − Qts ∥∞ , and the distance
                                       t+1      t
between policy updates maxs∈S ∥πs − πs ∥1 . To obtain the true Q-function, we compute the
                      t                                                                     t
transition matrix P π and use the formula specified in Section 2, that is Qt = (I − γP π )−1 r. PMD
is run for 128 iterations and 218 ≃ 250k total environment steps for all Grid-World configurations.
We show the results of our simulations in Figure 2. As shown by the first row, the learned mirror
map, the ℓ2 -norm, and the negative entropy consistently rank first, second and third, respectively,
in all tested configurations, in terms of final value. These results advocate the effectiveness of our
methodology, as we are able to find a mirror map that outperforms the benchmark mirror maps in all
tested environments. We highlight that the first five environments in Figure 2 are not part of the task


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Comparison between the learned mirror map, the ℓ2 -norm and the negative entropy across a
range of standard environments. The top plots present the performance of AMPO for all mirror maps,
reporting the average over 100 realizations and a shaded region denoting the standard error around
the average. The middle plots report the ω-potentials that induce the mirror maps. The bottom plots
report the policy distribution according to (6), for each mirror map and score scales. The score scales
are obtained by multiplying the vector [1, . . . , |A|] by a variable c ∈ [0, 4].

distribution used during the evolution, demonstrating the generalizability of our approach. Moreover,
we have that the ℓ2 -norm consistently outperforms the negative entropy, further proving that the
negative entropy is not always the best choice of mirror map. Another shared property among all
training curves, is that the learned mirror map presents a slower convergence in the initial iterations
w.r.t. the ℓ2 -norm and to the negative entropy, as testified by a lower value, but convergence to a
higher value in the long run. Lastly, we note that in all environments most of the value improvement
happens in the first 50k environment steps.
To gain a better understanding of why the learned mirror maps outperforms the negative entropy and
the ℓ2 -norm, and to draw connections with the theoretical results outlined in Section 2.2, we report
the estimation error and the distance between policy updates for all mirror maps. The first conclusion
that we draw is that a smaller estimation error does not seem to be related to a higher performance.
On the contrary, the second row of Figure 2 shows how the three mirror maps consistently have the
same ranking in both value and estimation error, which is exactly the opposite of what Theorem 2.2
would suggest. On the other hand, the first and third rows of Figure 2 show how the lower bound
on the performance improvement in (3) brings some valid insight on the behaviour of PMD during
its first iterations, which are the ones that bring the largest improvement. In all configurations, we
have that in the initial iterations of PMD the learned mirror map induces the smallest policy update
distances as well as the performance curve with fewer dips in value, while both the negative entropy
and the ℓ2 -norm induce larger policy update distances and performance curves with several dips in
value. This observation confirms the behaviour described by (3), whereby a small distance between
policy updates prevents large performance degradation in policy updates.


4.2   N ON - TABULAR SETTING : BASIC C ONTROL AND M INATAR SUITES

Model architecture and training We define the scoring function as a deep neural network, which
we train using the AMPO update in (7) and (6), where (7) is solved through Adam and the Q-function
is estimated through GAE. We optimize the hyper-parameters of AMPO for the negative entropy
mirror map for each suite, using the hyper-parameter tuning framework Optuna (Akiba et al., 2019).
This is done to ensure we are looking at a fair benchmark of performance when using the negative
entropy mirror map. We report the chosen hyper-parameters in Appendix E. We then initialize the


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: The table contains, for each entry, the value of the final policy outputted by AMPO trained
on the environment corresponding to the column with the mirror map learned on the environment
corresponding to the row. The last row represents the performance of AMPO with the negative
entropy for the corresponding column environments. The value is averaged over 100 runs. Green
cells correspond to a value higher than that associated to the negative entropy.


                                    Acrobot      CartPole     Asterix     Freeway      SpaceInvaders
                Acrobot              -88.49       476.41       24.03       56.00           144.01
                CartPole             -83.76       499.93       27.26       52.26           100.07
                 Asterix            -103.55       490.86       30.22       58.56           122.00
                Freeway              -82.51       457.47        3.20       58.21           143.93
              SpaceInvaders          -78.29       489.56        4.36       22.27           170.24
             Negative entropy       -105.63       359.14       17.80       53.69            81.77



parameterized mirror map to be an approximation of the negative entropy2 and run Sep-CMA-ES on
each environment separately. The whole training procedure is implemented in JAX, using gymnax
environments (Lange, 2022b) and evosax (Lange, 2022a) for the evolution. We run on 8 GTX 1080Ti
GPUs, and the optimization process takes roughly 48 hours for a single environment.

Environments We test AMPO on the Basic Controle Suite (BCS) and the MinAtar Suite. For BCS,
we run the evolution for 600 generation, each with 500k timesteps. For MinAtar, we run the evolution
for 500 generation with 1M timesteps, then run 100 more generations with 10M timesteps.
Our empirical results are illustrated in Figure 3, where we show the performance of AMPO for the
learned mirror map, for the negative entropy and for the ℓ2 -norm. For all environments and mirror
maps, we use the hyper-parameters returned by Optuna for AMPO with the negative entropy. Our
learned mirror map leads to a better overall performance in all environments, apart from Acrobot,
where it ties with the ℓ2 -norm. We observe the largest improvement in performance on Asterix and
SpaceInvaders, where the average return for the learned mirror map is more than double the one
for the negative entropy. Figure 3 also suggests that different mirror maps may result in different
error floors, as shown by the performance curves in Acrobot, Asterix and SpaceInvaders, where the
negative entropy converges to a lower point than the learned mirror map.
The second and third row of Figure 3 illustrate the properties of the learned mirror map, in comparison
to the negative entropy and the ℓ2 -norm. In particular, the second row shows the corresponding
ω-potential, while the third row shows the policy distribution induced by the mirror map according to
(6), depending on the scores assigned by the scoring function to each action. A shared property among
all the learned mirror maps is that they all lead to assigning 0 probability to the worst actions for
relatively small score scales, whilst the negative entropy always assigns positive weights to all actions.
In more complex environments, where the evaluation of a certain action may be strongly affected
by noise or where the optimal state may be combination locked (Misra et al., 2020), this behaviour
may lead to a critical lack of exploration. However, it appears that this is not the case in these
environments, and we hypothesise that by setting the probability of the worst actions to 0 the learned
mirror maps avoid wasting samples and hence can converge to the optimal policy more rapidly.
Our last result consists in testing each learned mirror map across the other environments we consider.
In Table 1, we report the value of the final policy outputted by AMPO for all learned maps, plus the
negative entropy, and for all environments, averaged over 100 runs. The table shows that the learned
mirror maps generalize well to different environments and to different sets of hyper-parameters, which
are shared within BCS and MinAtar but not between them. In particular, we have that the mirror maps
learned in Acrobot and Asterix outperform the negative entropy in all environments, those learned in
CartPole and Freeway outperform the negative entropy in 4 out of 5 environments, and that learned
in SpaceInvaders outperforms the negative entropy in 3 out of 5 environments. These results show
that our methodology can be useful in practice, as it benefits from good generalization across tasks.

   2
       We achieve this by assigning ψi ∝ log(i/(i − 1)), for i = 2, . . . , n, and setting ψ1 ∝ 3 log(10).


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.3                C ONTINUOUS C ONTROL : M U J O C O

Model architecture and training We define the policy as a deep neural network and optimize it us-
ing the PMD update in (5), which is computed using Adam and the estimate of the Q-function obtained
through GAE. As previously discussed, we ensure a fair comparison by tuning the hyper-paramers
to maximize the performance of the negative entropy. We report the chosen hyper-parameters in
Appendix E. The mirror map is initialized to be close to the negative entropy and is trained for 256
generations using OpenAI-ES on a single MuJoCo environment. We run on eight A40 GPUs, and the
optimization process takes roughly 24 hours.

Environments We use the brax library (Freeman et al., 2021) to simulate three MuJoCo environ-
ments, i.e. Hopper, Halfcheetah, and Ant. The mirror map is learned on Hopper and is then tested on
all environments, using 107 environment steps and 488 PMD update steps.
                                 Hopper                                            Halfcheetah                                               Ant
        1400                                                  2500
                                                                                                                   2500
        1200                                                  2000
                                                                                                                   2000
        1000                                                  1500
                                                                                                                   1500
Value


        800                                                   1000
                                                                                                                   1000
        600
                                                              500

        400                                                                                                        500
                                                                0

        200                                                                                                          0
                                                               500

               0      100      200        300     400   500          0    100       200       300      400   500          0   100      200         300    400   500
                            Policy update steps                                 Policy update steps                                 Policy update steps
                                                                         Learned          Negative entropy


Figure 4: Comparison between the mirror map learned on Hopper and the negative entropy on three
MuJoCo environments. The plots present the performance of PMD for both mirror maps, reporting
the average over 8 realizations and a shaded region denoting the standard error around the average.

Figure 4 shows that the mirror map learned on Hopper significantly improves in terms of final perfor-
mance upon the negative entropy in both train and test environments. This result confirms the ability
of our methodology to learn generalizable mirror maps, even in complex continuous control tasks.

5              C ONCLUSION
Our study presents an empirical examination of PMD, where we successfully test the possibility
of learning a mirror map that outperforms the negative entropy in both the tabular and non-tabular
settings. In particular, we have shown that the learned mirror maps perform well on a set of
configurations in Grid-World and that they can generalize to different tasks in BCS, in MinAtar, and
in MuJoCo. Additionally, we have compared the theoretical findings established in the literature and
the actual performance of PMD methods in the tabular setting, highlighting how the estimation error is
not a good indicator of performance and validating the intuition that small policy updates lead to less
instances of performance degradation. Our findings indicate that the choice of mirror map significantly
impacts PMD’s effectiveness, an aspect not adequately reflected by existing convergence guarantees.
Our research introduces several new directions for inquiry. From a theoretical perspective, obtaining
convergence guarantees that reflect the impact of the mirror map is an area for future exploration. On
the practical side, investigating how temporal awareness (Jackson et al., 2024) or specific environmen-
tal challenges, such as exploration, robustness to noise, or credit assignment (Osband et al., 2019),
can inform the choice of a mirror map to improve performance represents another research focus.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Carlo Alfano is funded by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council. Patrick Rebes-
chini was funded by UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) under the UK government’s Horizon
Europe funding guarantee [grant number EP/Y028333/1]. For the purpose of Open Access, the
authors have applied a CC BY public copyright licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript (AAM)
version arising from this submission.


                                                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
The implementation of our experiments can be found at https://github.com/c-alfano/
Learning-mirror-maps.

R EFERENCES
Agarwal, A., Kakade, S. M., Lee, J. D., and Mahajan, G. On the theory of policy gradient methods:
  Optimality, approximation, and distribution shift. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2021.

Akiba, T., Sano, S., Yanase, T., Ohta, T., and Koyama, M. Optuna: A next-generation hyperparameter
  optimization framework, 2019.

Alfano, C., Yuan, R., and Rebeschini, P. A novel framework for policy mirror descent with general
  parametrization and linear convergence. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023.

Baxter, J. and Bartlett, P. L. Infinite-horizon policy-gradient estimation. Journal of Artificial
  Intelligence Research, 2001.

Belousov, B. and Peters, J.      f-divergence constrained policy improvement.          arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1801.00056, 2017.

Berner, C., Brockman, G., Chan, B., Cheung, V., Debiak, P., Dennison, C., Farhi, D., Fischer, Q.,
  Hashme, S., Hesse, C., et al. Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1912.06680, 2019.

Beyer, H.-G. Evolutionary algorithms in noisy environments: theoretical issues and guidelines for
  practice. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 2000.

Bhatnagar, S., Sutton, R. S., Ghavamzadeh, M., and Lee, M. Natural actor-critic algorithms.
  Automatica, 2009.

Bregman, L. M. The relaxation method of finding the common point of convex sets and its application
  to the solution of problems in convex programming. USSR Computational Mathematics and
  Mathematical Physics, 1967.

Bubeck, S. Convex optimization: Algorithms and complexity. Foundations and Trends in Machine
  Learning, 2015.

Cen, S., Cheng, C., Chen, Y., Wei, Y., and Chi, Y. Fast global convergence of natural policy gradient
  methods with entropy regularization. Operations Research, 2021.

Censor, Y. and Zenios, S. A. Parallel Optimization: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications. Oxford
  University Press, USA, 1997.

Chevalier-Boisvert, M., Dai, B., Towers, M., Perez-Vicente, R., Willems, L., Lahlou, S., Pal, S.,
  Castro, P. S., and Terry, J. Minigrid & miniworld: Modular & customizable reinforcement learning
  environments for goal-oriented tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.

Freeman, C. D., Frey, E., Raichuk, A., Girgin, S., Mordatch, I., and Bachem, O. Brax - a differentiable
  physics engine for large scale rigid body simulation, 2021. URL http://github.com/
  google/brax.

Hansen, N. and Ostermeier, A. Completely derandomized self-adaptation in evolution strategies.
  Evolutionary Computation, 2001.

Houthooft, R., Chen, Y., Isola, P., Stadie, B., Wolski, F., Jonathan Ho, O., and Abbeel, P. Evolved
  policy gradients. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.

Hu, Y., Ji, Z., and Telgarsky, M. Actor-critic is implicitly biased towards high entropy optimal
  policies. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jackson, M. T., Jiang, M., Parker-Holder, J., Vuorio, R., Lu, C., Farquhar, G., Whiteson, S., and
  Foerster, J. Discovering general reinforcement learning algorithms with adversarial environment
  design. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Jackson, M. T., Lu, C., Kirsch, L., Lange, R. T., Whiteson, S., and Foerster, J. N. Discovering
  temporally-aware reinforcement learning algorithms. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024.
Kakade, S. M. A natural policy gradient. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2002.
Kirsch, L., van Steenkiste, S., and Schmidhuber, J. Improving generalization in meta reinforcement
  learning using learned objectives. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Konda, V. and Tsitsiklis, J. Actor-critic algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2000.
Krichene, W., Krichene, S., and Bayen, A. Efficient bregman projections onto the simplex. In IEEE
  Conference on Decision and Control, 2015.
Kuba, J. G., De Witt, C. A. S., and Foerster, J. Mirror learning: A unifying framework of policy
  optimisation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
Kullback, S. and Leibler, R. A. On Information and Sufficiency. The Annals of Mathematical
 Statistics, 1951.
Lan, G. Policy mirror descent for reinforcement learning: Linear convergence, new sampling
  complexity, and generalized problem classes. Mathematical programming, 2022a.
Lan, G. Policy optimization over general state and action spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.16715,
  2022b.
Lange, R. T. evosax: Jax-based evolution strategies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04180, 2022a.
Lange, R. T. gymnax: A JAX-based reinforcement learning environment library, 2022b. URL
  http://github.com/RobertTLange/gymnax.
Li, Y. and Lan, G. Policy mirror descent inherently explores action space. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.04386, 2023.
Liu, Q., Weisz, G., György, A., Jin, C., and Szepesvari, C. Optimistic natural policy gradient: a
  simple efficient policy optimization framework for online rl. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023.
Lu, C., Kuba, J., Letcher, A., Metz, L., Schroeder de Witt, C., and Foerster, J. Discovered policy
  optimisation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Lu, C., Willi, T., Letcher, A., and Foerster, J. N. Adversarial cheap talk. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2023.
Misra, D., Henaff, M., Krishnamurthy, A., and Langford, J. Kinematic state abstraction and provably
 efficient rich-observation reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning,
 2020.
Mnih, V., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap, T., Harley, T., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu, K.
 Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, 2016.
Nemirovski, A. and Yudin, D. B. Problem Complexity and Method Efficiency in Optimization. Wiley
  Interscience, 1983.
Oh, J., Hessel, M., Czarnecki, W. M., Xu, Z., van Hasselt, H. P., Singh, S., and Silver, D. Discovering
  reinforcement learning algorithms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Orabona, F. A modern introduction to online learning, 2020. URL https://open.bu.edu/
  handle/2144/40900.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Osband, I., Doron, Y., Hessel, M., Aslanides, J., Sezener, E., Saraiva, A., McKinney, K., Lattimore,
  T., Szepesvari, C., Singh, S., et al. Behaviour suite for reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S.,
  Slama, K., Ray, A., et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Peters, J. and Schaal, S. Natural actor-critic. Neurocomputing, 2008.
Real, E., Aggarwal, A., Huang, Y., and Le, Q. V. Regularized evolution for image classifier
  architecture search. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2019.
Ros, R. and Hansen, N. A simple modification in cma-es achieving linear time and space complexity.
  In International conference on parallel problem solving from nature. Springer, 2008.
Salimans, T., Ho, J., Chen, X., Sidor, S., and Sutskever, I. Evolution strategies as a scalable alternative
  to reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03864, 2017.
Schulman, J., Levine, S., Abbeel, P., Jordan, M., and Moritz, P. Trust region policy optimization. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.
Schulman, J., Moritz, P., Levine, S., Jordan, M., and Abbeel, P. High-dimensional continuous control
  using generalized advantage estimation. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2016.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and Klimov, O. Proximal policy optimization
  algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Shalev-Shwartz, S., Shammah, S., and Shashua, A. Safe, multi-agent, reinforcement learning for
  autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.03295, 2016.
Such, F. P., Madhavan, V., Conti, E., Lehman, J., Stanley, K. O., and Clune, J. Deep neuroevolution:
  Genetic algorithms are a competitive alternative for training deep neural networks for reinforcement
  learning, 2018.
Sutton, R. S., McAllester, D. A., Singh, S. P., and Mansour, Y. Policy gradient methods for
  reinforcement learning with function approximation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 1999.
Todorov, E., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In 2012
  IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2012.
Tomar, M., Shani, L., Efroni, Y., and Ghavamzadeh, M. Mirror descent policy optimization. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Vaswani, S., Bachem, O., Totaro, S., Müller, R., Garg, S., Geist, M., Machado, M. C., Castro, P. S.,
  and Le Roux, N. A general class of surrogate functions for stable and efficient reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2022.
Vaswani, S., Kazemi, A., Babanezhad, R., and Roux, N. L. Decision-aware actor-critic with function
  approximation and theoretical guarantees. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023.
Williams, R. J. and Peng, J. Function optimization using connectionist reinforcement learning
 algorithms. Connection Science, 1991.
Xiao, L. On the convergence rates of policy gradient methods. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  2022.
Yuan, R., Du, S. S., Gower, R. M., Lazaric, A., and Xiao, L. Linear convergence of natural policy gra-
  dient methods with log-linear policies. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023.
Zanette, A., Cheng, C.-A., and Agarwal, A. Cautiously optimistic policy optimization and exploration
  with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, 2021.


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     R ELATED W ORKS
Discovering reinforcement learning algorithm has been an active area of research in the last years,
where researchers have shown that handcrafted algorithms are not always optimal and can be
outperformed by automatically discovered algorithms. Oh et al. (2020) obtained an algorithm capable
of solving GridWorld and Atari tasks without relying on common notions in the field, such as Q-value
functions. Houthooft et al. (2018) used ES to meta-train a policy loss network that outperforms
PPO and Kirsch et al. (2020) discovered a new loss function for deterministic policies. Most closely
related to our work are Lu et al. (2022) and Jackson et al. (2024), who employ ES to discover RL
algorithms within the Mirror Learning class (Kuba et al., 2022). Given a function f , the class of
algorithms they consider follows the policy update step

                                                                                 πθ (·|s)
        πθt+1 ∈ argmaxπθ :θ∈Θ Es∼dtµ ηt Ea∼πθ (·|s) (Qt (s, a)) − Ea∼πt (·|s)                  ,
                                                                                 π t (·|s)
This update is similar the the one in (5) but replaces the Bregman divergence with a different penalty
term called drift, which recovers the f -divergences when f is a convex function. To the best of our
knowledge, this class of algorithms has fewer theoretical guarantees than PMD, in particular we are
not aware of finite-time convergence guarantees or convergence guarantees involving approximation
or estimation errors (Belousov & Peters, 2017; Kuba et al., 2022).

B     F URTHER DISCUSSION ON ω- POTENTIALS
B.1   N EGATIVE ENTROPY AND ℓ2 - NORM

If ϕ(x) = ex−1 , then the associated mirror map hϕ is the negative entropy. We have that
                  Z 1              Z 1
                      ϕ−1 (x)dx =      log(x)dx = [x log(x) − x]10 = −1 ≤ +∞.
                   0                 0
The mirror map hϕ becomes the negative entropy, up to a constant, as
                       X Z π(a|s)                         X
            hϕ (πs ) =            log(x)dx = |A| − 1 +        π(a | s) log(π(a | s)).
                        a∈A   1                              a∈A

If ϕ(x) = x, then the associated mirror map hϕ is the ℓ2 -norm. We have that
                         Z 1              Z 1           2  1
                               −1                       x       1
                             ϕ (x)dx =        xdx =           = ≤ +∞.
                          0                0             2 0    2
The mirror map hϕ becomes the ℓ2 -norm, up to a constant, as
                                   X Z π(a|s)          1X
                        hϕ (πs ) =             xdx =          π(a | s)2 − 1.
                                        1              2
                                   a∈A                    a∈A


B.2   PARAMETRIC ϕ

We show here that the parametric class of ω-potentials we introduce in Section 3 results in a well
defined algorithm when used for AMPO, even if it breaks some of the constraints in Definition 2.1.
In particular, ω-potentials within Φ are not C 1 -diffeomorphisms and are only non-decreasing. We
can afford not meeting the first constraint as the proof for Theorem 1 by Krichene et al. (2015),
which establishes the existence of the normalization constant in Equation (6), only requires Lipschitz-
continuity. As to the second constraint, we build an augmented class Φ′ that contains increasing
ω-potentials and show that it results in the same updates for AMPO as Φ.
Let ∆n be the n-dimensional probability simplex.        We define the parameterized class
Φ′ = {ϕ′ψ : R → [0, 1], ψ ∈ ∆n }, with
                                x
                               
                                 e −1        if x ≤ 0,
                                x
                               
                                              if 0 < x ≤ ψ1 ,
                                  ψ n
                     ϕ′ψ (x) = j 1 x−Pji=1 ψi    Pj            Pj+1
                               
                               
                                 n +  nψj+1  if i=1 ψi < x ≤ i=1 ψi ,
                               
                                  x           if x > 1,


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where 1 ≤ j ≤ n − 1. The functions within Φ′ are increasing and continuous. We start by showing
that ϕ′ψ ∈ Φ′ and ϕψ ∈ Φ are equivalent for Equation (6), for the same parameters ψ. At each
iteration t, we have that
                            π t+1 (a | s) = σ(ϕ′ (ηf t+1 (s, a) + (λ′ )t+1
                                                                       s ))
                                         = σ(ϕ(ηf t+1 (s, a) + (λ′ )t+1
                                                                    s ))
                                         = σ(ϕ(ηf t+1 (s, a) + λt+1
                                                                s )).

This due to the following two facts. For x ≤ 0, σ(ϕ′ (x)) and σ(ϕ(x)) are the same function. Also,
σ(ϕ′ (ηf t+1 (s, a) + (λ′ )t+1
                           s )) has to be less or equal to 1, as a result of the projection, meaning that
ηf t+1 (s, a) + (λ′ )t+1
                     s   ≤  1, where σ(ϕ′ (·)) and σ(ϕ(·)) are equivalent.
Since ϕ and ϕ′ induce the same policy, share that same normalization constant, and have the same
value at 0, they also induce the same expression for Equation (7).

C     F URTHER DISCUSSION ON B REGMAN DIVERGENCE
To provide an intuition on the Bregman divergence, we report here some discussion from Orabona
(2020). Given a mirror map h, the associated Bregman divergence between two points x, y ∈ X is
defined as
                            Dh (x, y) := h(x) − h(y) − ⟨∇h(y), x − y⟩.
Since h is convex, the Bregman divergence is always non-negative for x, y ∈ X . We can build more
intuition for the Bregman divergence using Taylor’s theorem. Assume that h is twice differentiable in
an open ball B around y and x ∈ B. Then there exists 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 such that
                                                                  1
            Bψ (x; y) = h(x) − h(y) − ∇h(y)⊤ (x − y) =              (x − y)⊤ ∇2 h(z)(x − y),
                                                                  2
where z = αx + (1 − α)y. Therefore, the Bregman divergence can be approximated by squared local
norms that depend on the Hessian of the mirror map h. This means that the Bregman divergence will
behave differently on different areas of X , depending on the value of Hessian of the mirror map.

D     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2.2
In this section we outline how we use the proofs given by Xiao (2022) in order to obtain Theorem 2.2.

D.1    P RELIMINARY L EMMAS

We start by presenting two preliminary lemmas, which are ubiquitous in the literature on PMD. The
first characterizes the difference in value between two policies, while the second characterizes the
PMD update.
Lemma D.1 (Performance difference lemma, Lemma 1 in Xiao (2022)). For any policy π, π ′ ∈
∆(A)S and µ ∈ ∆(S),
                                       ′        1         h    ′
                                                                           i
                         V π (µ) − V π (µ) =       Es∼dπµ ⟨Qπs , πs − πs′ ⟩ .
                                              1−γ
Lemma D.2 (Three-point decent lemma, Lemma 6 in Xiao (2022)). Suppose that C ⊂ Rm is
a closed convex set, f : C → R is a proper, closed 3 convex function, Dh (·, ·) is the Bregman
divergence generated by a mirror map h. Denote rint dom h as the relative interior of dom h. For
any x ∈ rint dom h, let
                              x+ ∈ arg       min         {f (u) + Dh (u, x)}.
                                         u ∈ dom h ∩ C

Then x+ ∈ rint dom h ∩ C and for any u ∈ dom h ∩ C,
                       f (x+ ) + Dh (x+ , x) ≤ f (u) + Dh (u, x) − Dh (u, x+ ).
   3
     A convex function f is proper if dom f is nonempty and for all x ∈ dom f , f (x) > −∞. A convex
function is closed, if it is lower semi-continuous.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2    Q UASI - MONOTONIC UPDATES

We first prove that PMD enjoys quasi-monotonic updates (Equation (3)), that is PMD updates have
an upper bound on how much they can deteriorate performance.
Proposition D.3 (Lemma 11 in Xiao (2022)). At each time t ≥ 0, we have
                                              b ts , πst+1 − πst ⟩ ≥ 0.
                                          ⟨ηt Q
Additionally, we have that
                                             1
               V t+1 (µ) − V t (µ) ≥ −               b ts − Qts
                                                 max Q            max πst+1 − πst 1 .
                                                                ∞ s∈S
                                                                                                      (10)
                                           1 − γ s∈S

Proof. Using Lemma D.2 with x+ = πst+1 , C = ∆(A), f (u) = ⟨Q
                                                            b ts , u⟩, x = π t and u = π t+1 , we
obtain
                    b ts , πst − πst+1 ⟩ ≤ Dh (πst , πst ) − Dh (πst+1 , πst ) − Dh (πst , πst+1 ).
                ⟨ηt Q                                                                                 (11)
By rearranging terms and noticing Dh (πst , πst ) = 0, we have
                          b t , π t+1 − π t ⟩ ≥ Dh (π t+1 , π t ) + Dh (π t , π t+1 ) ≥ 0.
                      ⟨ηt Q                                                                           (12)
                            s    s       s           s       s           s     s

Equation (10) can be obtained using the performance difference lemma and (12):
                                         1
               V t+1 (µ) − V t (µ) =
                                                       t t+1
                                                      ⟨Qs , πs − πst ⟩

                                             Es∼dt+1
                                       1−γ       µ


                                         1           h
                                                         b ts , πst+1 − πst ⟩
                                                                              i
                                     =       Es∼dt+1   ⟨Q
                                       1−γ       µ


                                           1             h
                                                             b t − Qt , π t+1 − π t ⟩
                                                                                       i
                                       +       Es∼dt+1    ⟨ Q   s     s   s          s
                                         1−γ       µ


                                           1            h
                                                             b ts − Qts
                                                                                            i
                                     ≥−       Es∼dt+1       Q            ∞
                                                                               πst+1 − πst 1 .
                                         1−γ       µ


D.3    C ONVERGENCE GUARANTEE

We can now prove the convergence guarantee reported in Equation (4). The proof of our result is
obtained combining the analysis from the sublinear convergence guarantee with the analysis for the
inexact linear convergence guarantee given by (Xiao, 2022, Theorems 8 and 13). For two different
                                                                                               ′
time t, t′ ≥ 0, denote the expected Bregman divergence between the policy π t and policy π t , where
the expectation is taken over the discounted state visitation distribution of the optimal policy d⋆µ , by
                                                   h            ′
                                                                  i
                                    Dtt′ := Es∼d⋆µ Dh (πst , πst ) .

Similarly, denote the expected Bregman divergence between the optimal policy π ⋆ and π t by
                                   Dt⋆ := Es∼d⋆µ Dh (πs⋆ , πst ) .


Theorem D.4 (Theorems 8 and 13 in Xiao (2022)). Consider the PMD update in (2), at each iteration
T ≥ 0, we have
                                  E[D0⋆ ]

            X               1                    1             4
  V ⋆ (µ) −    E[V t (µ)] ≤               +             +           E  max   b ts − Qts
                                                                             Q           ∞
                                                                                              .
                            T ηt (1 − γ) (1 − γ)2          (1 − γ)2     s∈S
             t<T


Proof. Using Lemma D.2 with x+ = πst+1 , C = ∆(A), f (u) = ⟨Q
                                                            b t , u⟩, x = π t and u = π t+1 , we
                                                              s
have that
                    b ts , πs⋆ − πst+1 ⟩ ≤ Dh (π ⋆ , π t ) − Dh (π ⋆ , π t+1 ) − Dh (π t+1 , π t ),
                ⟨ηt Q


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which can be decomposed as
          b ts , πst − πst+1 ⟩ + ⟨ηt Q
      ⟨ηt Q                          b ts , πs⋆ − πst ⟩ ≤ Dh (π ⋆ , π t ) − Dh (π ⋆ , π t+1 ) − Dh (π t+1 , π t ).
Taking expectation with respect to the distribution d⋆µ over states and with respect to the randomness
of PMD and dividing both sides by ηt , we have

                                                  b ts , πs⋆ − πst ⟩ ≤ 1 E[Dt⋆ − Dt+1
    h      h                      ii  h         h                   ii
  E Es∼d⋆µ ⟨Q b ts , πst − πst+1 ⟩ + E Es∼d⋆ ⟨Q                                    ⋆
                                                                                        − Dtt+1 ]. (13)
                                              µ
                                                                       ηt
We lower bound the two terms on the left hand side of (13) separately. For the first term, we have that
         h                 i   (a) 1                  h                        i
              t   t    t+1                                 t     t       t+1
E Es∼d⋆µ ⟨Qs , πs − πs ⟩
            b                  ≥         E Es∼dt+1      ⟨Qs , πs − πs ⟩
                                                         b
                                   1−γ            d⋆
                                                   µ
                                                                                                         i
                1                t t         t+1
                                                           1                     h
                                                                                      t     t   t    t+1
         =          E Es∼dt+1   ⟨Qs , πs − πs ⟩ +               E Es∼dt+1          ⟨Qs − Qs , πs − πs ⟩
                                                                                    b
             1−γ           d⋆
                            µ                           1−γ                 d⋆µ
                                                                                             i
         (b)      t ⋆        t+1 ⋆
                                           1                   h
                                                                     t       t    t     t+1
          = E V (dµ ) − V        (dµ ) +        E Es∼dt+1        ⟨Qs − Qs , πs − πs ⟩
                                                                   b
                                         1−γ              d⋆
                                                           µ
                                                                                                  i
                  t ⋆       t+1 ⋆
                                           1                 h
                                                                     t      t         t+1     t
         ≥ E V (dµ ) − V        (dµ ) −        E Es∼dt+1          Qs − Qs ∞ πs − πs 1
                                                                   b
                                         1−γ             d⋆
                                                          µ

                  t ⋆       t+1 ⋆
                                           2                 t         t
         ≥ E V (dµ ) − V        (dµ ) −        E max Qs − Qs ∞
                                                           b
                                         1−γ        s∈S

where (a) follows from Lemmas D.3 and the fact that dt+1
                                                       d⋆  (s) ≥ (1 − γ)d⋆µ (s) ∀s ∈ S, and (b)
                                                        µ
follows from D.1. For the second term, we have that
  h       h               ii         h                      i    h       h                           ii
            bt , π⋆ − πt ⟩    = E Es∼d⋆µ ⟨Qts , πs⋆ − πst ⟩ + E Es∼d⋆µ ⟨Q   b ts − Qts , πs⋆ − πst ⟩

E Es∼d⋆µ ⟨Q   s   s    s

                              (b)
                                                                h       h                          ii
                              = E[V ⋆ (µ) − V t (µ)](1 − γ) + E Es∼d⋆µ ⟨Q  b ts − Qts , πs⋆ − πst ⟩ ,

                                       ⋆        t                2                 t      t
                              ≥ E[V (µ) − V (µ)](1 − γ) −           E max Qs − Qs ∞ ,
                                                                                 b
                                                               1−γ      s∈S

where (b) follows from Lemma D.1.
Plugging the two bounds in (13), dividing both sides by (1 − γ) and rearranging, we obtain

           E[Dtt+1 ]       ⋆         t       E[Dt⋆ − Dt+1⋆
                                                            ] E V t (d⋆µ ) − V t+1 (d⋆µ )
                     + E[V (µ) − V (µ)] ≤                    +
          ηt (1 − γ)                            ηt (1 − γ)               1−γ

                                                    4                 t    t
                                             +            E max Qs − Qs ∞ .
                                                                    b
                                                (1 − γ)2     s∈S

Summing up from 0 to T − 1 and dropping some positive terms on the left hand side and some
negative terms on the right hand side, we have

                     ⋆
                             X
                                      t        E[D0⋆ ]     E V 0 (d⋆µ ) − V T (d⋆µ )
                 T V (µ) −        E[V (µ)] ≤            −
                                             ηt (1 − γ)             1−γ
                             t<T

                                                     4                 t     t
                                             +            E max Qs − Qs ∞ .
                                                                    b
                                                 (1 − γ)2    s∈S

                                        1
                0 ⋆         T   ⋆

Notice that E V (dµ ) − V (dµ ) ≤ 1−γ as r(s, a) ∈ [0, 1]. By dividing T on both side, we yield
the statement.

E    T RAINING DETAILS
We give the hyper-parameters we use for training in Tables 2, 3 and 4. Hyper-parameter tuning
was performed differently for each method. For Gridworld, we performed a grid search over the
hyper-parameters and selected those that maximized the averaged performance of the negative entropy


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and ℓ2 -norm over 256 randomly sampled Gridworld environments. For Basic Control Suite and
MinAtar, we used the optuna library to search over the hyper-parameters to maximize the average
performance of the negative entropy over all environments. We used “CmaEsSampler” as option for
the sampler. Lastly, we used Weights and Biases to optimize the hyperparameters for MuJoCo in
order to maximimize the average performance of the negative entropy over all environments.

          Table 2: Hyper-parameter settings of PMD for different sets of environments

                              Parameter             Grid-World     MuJoCo
                    Number of environment steps     218 ≃ 2.5e5      1e7
                    Number of environments               64         2048
                    Unroll length                        32           10
                    Number of minibatches                 1          128
                    Number of update epochs              32           8
                    Adam learning rate                    -         1e-4
                    Sgd learning rate                    40            -
                    Gamma                               0.99        0.99
                    Max grad norm                         -          1.0
                    η                                    0.1         0.5

         Table 3: Hyper-parameter settings of AMPO for different sets of environments

                                  Parameter            BCS      MinAtar
                        Number of environment steps    5e5       1e7
                        Number of environments           4       256
                        Unroll length                  128       128
                        Number of minibatches            4         8
                        Number of update epochs         16         8
                        Adam learning rate             4e-3      7e-4
                        Gamma                          0.99      0.99
                        Max grad norm                   1.4        1
                        AMPO learning rate              0.9       0.9

Table 4: Hyper-parameter settings of OpenAI-ES, which we used in the tabular setting, and of
Sep-CMA-ES, which we used in the non-tabular case.

                                              OpenAI-ES           Sep-CMA-ES
                Population Size                   512                 128
                Number of generations    512 (256 for MuJoCo)         600
                Sigma init                         0.5                 2
                Sigma Decay                      0.995                 -
                Learning rate                     0.01                 -


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F    C OMPUTATIONAL COSTS OF ES
The computational costs associated with ES are inevitable in this field of research that focuses
on automatically discovering optimizers. In the literature, the most popular methods to discover
optimizers are meta-gradients (Oh et al., 2020; Jackson et al., 2023) and ES (Lu et al., 2022).
Discovering algorithms using meta-gradients consists in introducing some meta-parameters that
influence the agent training procedure, training a batch of agents, and differentiating through the
training procedure w.r.t. the meta-parameters to maximize the final performance of the agents.
ES consists in running several training procedures in parallel and estimating the meta-gradient as
in (9), therefore avoiding the need for differentiation. This property is particularly desirable in
settings, like ours, where the agent is updated many times and differentiating through the whole
training procedure is unfeasible due to memory constraints, meaning that it is necessary to limit the
differentiation to the final updates. We decided to employ ES due to this property and because it has
been found to be more successful in discovering optimizers (Jackson et al., 2024). Additionally, our
experiments are implemented in JAX, which through parallelism and just in time compilation renders
the computational costs of ES feasible.


                                                19
