Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


IDA-VLM: T OWARDS M OVIE U NDERSTANDING VIA
ID-AWARE L ARGE V ISION -L ANGUAGE M ODEL
  Yatai Ji1,2 , Shilong Zhang1 , Jie Wu3 , Peize Sun1 ,
 Weifeng Chen3 , Xuefeng Xiao3 , Sidi Yang2 , Yujiu Yang2∗, Ping Luo1∗
 1                                  2                      3
   The University of Hong Kong,       Tsinghua University,   ByteDance



                                             A BSTRACT

           The rapid advancement of Large Vision-Language models (LVLMs) has demon-
           strated a spectrum of emergent capabilities. Nevertheless, current models only
           focus on the visual content of a single scenario, while their ability to associate
           instances across different scenes has not yet been explored, which is essential for
           understanding complex visual content, such as movies with multiple characters
           and intricate plots. Towards movie understanding, a critical initial step for LVLMs
           is to unleash the potential of character identities memory and recognition across
           multiple visual scenarios. To achieve the goal, we propose visual instruction tun-
           ing with ID reference and develop an ID-Aware Large Vision-Language Model,
           IDA-VLM. Furthermore, our research introduces a novel benchmark MM-ID, to
           examine LVLMs on instance IDs memory and recognition across four dimensions:
           matching, location, question-answering, and captioning. Our findings highlight
           the limitations of existing LVLMs in recognizing and associating instance identi-
           ties with ID reference. This paper paves the way for future artificial intelligence
           systems to possess multi-identity visual inputs, thereby facilitating the compre-
           hension of complex visual narratives like movies.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Our real world contains a wide variety of information, such as texts, images, sounds, etc. Towards
multimodal comprehension (Guo et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2023), inspired by the success of Large
Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023a; vicuna, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Meta, 2024; Google,
2023a), there is a surging interest in Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs), such as LLaVA (Liu
et al., 2023a), Otter (Li et al., 2023a), GPT-4V (OpenAI, 2023b), Gemini (Google, 2023b), and
others. In the quest for Artificial General Intelligence (AGI), LVLMs serve as pivotal milestones,
enhancing machines’ capabilities in multimodal perception, reasoning, and knowledge.
Typical LVLMs incorporate visual encoders with LLMs, such as LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023a),
MiniGPT4 (Zhu et al., 2023). These models project an image’s visual features into the embed-
ding space of language models and employ visual instruction tuning, allowing users to complete
a variety of visual tasks through language instructions, as depicted in Figure 1(a). However, pure
language interaction makes VLMs hard to receive precise Region-of-Interest references from users,
thus hindering their capability to focus on specific regions of an image. To address this issue, a series
of works (Chen et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2023; Cai et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023a; Zhao et al.,
2023b; Rasheed et al., 2023) attempts to allow adding RoI references to language instructions and
then use region-level data to align these RoI references to the image. As shown in Figure 1(b), these
excellent works usually support using position coordinates or visual prompts as the RoI reference,
which provides a more flexible interactive experience within specific areas.
Previous LVLMs have demonstrated versatile capabilities for visual understanding from the image
level to Region-of-Interest. However, these models can only process the visual input of a single
scenario, and their ability to associate instances across different scenes has not yet been explored,
which requires the model to memorize the instance identity and recognize it in different scenes.
This ability, which we call ‘ID awareness’, is a fundamental human visual competency essential for
    ∗
        Corresponding author.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Comparison of different Visual Instruction Tuning Formats. For visual instruction
tuning with ID reference, we arrange the names and images of each character as references. The
model should be able to recognize the correct character identity and then answer the user’s instruc-
tions.



comprehending complex multi-identity visual inputs, such as movies and animations. In the context
of movie understanding, viewers should remember the name and appearance of each character,
then recognize them across disparate scenes correctly, linking instances across diverse images for
accurate narrative interpretation.
To achieve ID awareness in LVLMs like humans, as shown in Figure 1(c), we propose visual in-
struction tuning with ID reference, which allows users to utilize the name and a reference image
of the character (ID image) to define the identity in the prompt, and raise questions about test im-
ages. However, there is no off-the-shelf visual tuning data with ID reference, so we meticulously
craft a dual-stage instruction tuning dataset based on existing datasets. The initial phase leverages
annotations in datasets such as VCR (Zellers et al., 2019), Flickr30k (Plummer et al., 2017), and
RefCOCO (Kazemzadeh et al., 2014) with our data configuration strategies, to tutor the model on
associating the instances of ID images with test images, where ID references are extracted from
the test image. The subsequent phase utilizes MovieNet (Huang et al., 2020) to generate Q&A
and caption instruction tuning data with GPT-4V (OpenAI, 2023b). The second stage data con-
tains ID references of higher quality, which is more similar to real movie understanding. These
tuning data unleash the potential of LVLMs to memorize and recognize instance identities in dif-
ferent scenes. Based on the visual instruction tuning with ID reference, we develop an ID-aware
LVLM, called IDA-VLM, suitable for multi-identity visual comprehension. Our model learns the
fine-grained identity information from ID references and generalizes to recognize characters from
different scenes of test images. We also introduce a specialized component, termed ID-Former, to
enhance the model’s capability of recognizing character identities.
To measure ID recognition capability for movie understanding, we propose a new benchmark,
namely MM-ID. Our MM-ID aims at challenging LVLMs to remember and recognize instance iden-
tities, further understanding complex visual scenes. MM-ID dissects LVLMs’ competency across
four progressively complex levels: matching, location, question-answering, and captioning. MM-
ID comprises a collection of 585 diverse testing samples, whose instance identities source from the
characters of movies, the roles of animations, and individualized animals and objects. We test both
open-source models and closed-source APIs, which exposes their apparent deficiencies in identity
memory and recognition, and the results are unsatisfactory even for GPT-4V. The evaluation results
not only reveal the current limitations of LVLMs in instance recognition with ID reference but also
highlight our benchmark’s significance. In contrast, IDA-VLM achieves the best performance on
MM-ID, which demonstrates the effectiveness of our instruction tuning strategies and model design.
In a nutshell, our contributions are summarized as follows:


      • This paper is the first attempt to investigate ID awareness of LVLMs for complex multi-
        identity visual recognition and comprehension, which is a critical challenge towards movie
        understanding. We propose visual instruction tuning with ID reference and construct cor-
        responding tuning datasets.


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • We develop an ID-aware LVLM, IDA-VLM to recognize character identities and under-
         stand visual content in an end-to-end manner. We adopt a dual-stage fine-tuning method to
         unleash the potential of LVLMs in identity memory and recognition across diverse scenes.
       • We propose MM-ID, a novel benchmark to examine LVLMs on identity memory and recog-
         nition. We evaluate representative LVLMs on our benchmark, uncovering the limitations of
         existing LVLMs in contextual identity recognition. Furthermore, our IDA-VLM can serve
         as a reference and inspirational baseline model on MM-ID.


2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   L ARGE V ISION -L ANGUAGE M ODELS

Conventional multimodal models consist of uni-modal encoders and cross-modal fusion encoders.
Relying on vision-language pre-training (Tan & Bansal, 2019; Lu et al., 2019; Dou et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2021; Ji et al., 2023b), they have shown an impressive cross-modal semantic alignment
ability (Ji et al., 2023a; Tu et al., 2023), which brings substantial advances on various downstream
tasks (Goyal et al., 2019; Plummer et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2014). However, due to the limitations
of model size and training data scale, the performance of vision-language pre-training models is
unsatisfied in open-ended scenarios.
Nowadays, Large language model (LLM) has exhibited remarkable abilities to understand, reason,
and generate texts. Large Vision-Language Model (LVLM) (Chen et al., 2023c; Dai et al., 2023;
Dong et al., 2024) incorporates visual encoder and LLM, aligning visual features to the embedding
space of LLM. Leveraging strong generalization and emergent capability of LLM, LVLM realizes
free multimodal interactions with human. Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022) is a pioneering work on
extending LLMs to vision-language pretraining by inserting additional cross-attention layers for vi-
sual input. BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023d) proposes Q-former to map the visual features to the hidden
space of language models. To date, various works have shown encouraging progress with instruc-
tion tuning, including MiniGPT-4 (Zhu et al., 2023), LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023a), Otter (Li et al.,
2023a), which demonstrate impressive results on natural instruction-following and visual reasoning
capabilities. The perceptual capabilities of LVLMs are evolving towards fine-grained understanding.
Numerous models (Zhang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023a; Chen et al., 2023b; Wang et al., 2023) focus
on region-level understanding, using visual instruction tuning with RoI reference, so that users could
ask questions about specific instances within the content. Moreover, there are some LVLMs equiped
with Stable Diffusion, which can produce multimodal outputs (Koh et al., 2023; Ge et al., 2023;
Sun et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023c). LVLMs hold the potential to perform a wider array of functions
and to understand more intricate visual information. For instance, movie is considered as one of
the most intricate mediums for conveying visual information. This paper researches on recognizing
characters across disparate scenes with ID reference, towards movie content understanding.

2.2   M ULTIMODAL B ENCHMARK

Previous evaluation for multimodal models measures some specific abilities, such as VQAv2 (Goyal
et al., 2019), GQA (Hudson & Manning, 2019) for visual question answering, Ref-
COCO (Kazemzadeh et al., 2014) for visual grounding, Visual7W (Zhu et al., 2016) for PointQA,
VCR (Zellers et al., 2019) for commonsense reasoning in an image, ChartMimic (Shi et al., 2024)
for chart understanding. Recently, there is a surging interest in developing comprehensive bench-
marks for evaluating LVLMs. MMBench (Liu et al., 2023b) consists of multiple-choice questions
and introduces a CircularEval strategy for evaluation framework. LLaVA-Bench (Liu et al., 2023a)
employs GPT-4 to assess responses from both GPT-4 and the model under evaluation, then pro-
vides scores and explanations for the answers. MM-Vet (Yu et al., 2023) assesses LVLMs across
six fundamental visual-linguistic capabilities, utilizing a GPT-4-based evaluator for open-ended re-
sponses. MME (Fu et al., 2023) tests for perception and cognition competencies across 14 distinct
subtasks, which requires models to provide simple ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answers. SEED-Bench (Li et al.,
2023b) covers 12 evaluation dimensions and adopts an answer ranking strategy to evaluate LVLMs
via multiple-choice questions. POPE (Li et al., 2023e) is a dedicated benchmark for assessing object
hallucination. Existing benchmarks evaluate multifaceted performance of LVLMs, yet they predom-
inantly focus on visual scenarios that lack character identities and intricate plots.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: IDA-VLM is an end-to-end vision-language model for processing instructions that con-
tain references to specific instances. We introduce ID reference as using a correlating character
reference image and corresponding name to characterize an identity, exemplified as Julia is <ID-
Img{i}>. During tokenization and conversion to embeddings, the embedding of <ID-Img{i}> and
<Test-Img{i}> in the instruction are replaced with the ID and Test image embeddings respectively.
A simple yet effective image feature projector termed ID-Former is proposed to enhance the ID
identification ability. As the output in the figure, IDA-VLM can memorize these character IDs, rec-
ognize them in test images, and respond to user instructions with the correct ID references.


3     M ETHOD
Movie understanding represents a considerable departure from conventional video understanding,
which typically limits to a single scenario or activity. To understand complex visual input, for
example, a movie or animation, the model need memorize and recognize character identities, linking
characters in distinct scenes, with each scene represented by an image in our setting. As shown in
Figure 2, we simplify movie understanding as given ID images of certain characters and keyframes
from the movie or animation served as test images, the model completes instruction tasks. The ID
images, test images, and instruction text are sent to the model together for inference in an interleaved
format of images and text. The model need to memorize instance identities in ID references and
recognize them in test images for providing responses.

3.1   M ODEL A RCHITECTURE

In this paper, we adopt Qwen-VL-Chat (Bai et al., 2023) as our baseline model. In order to adapt
the model to the task of instance ID recognition, we employ a dual-stage visual instruction tuning
with ID reference. The architecture of IDA-VLM comprises three components: a visual encoder,
ID-Former consisting of cross-attention mechanisms, and a subsequent large language model.
As shown in Figure 2, the ID-Former is designed to project visual features into the input semantic
space of LLM and contribute to recognizing instance identities. This is achieved by two cross-
attention modules. The first one interacts learnable queries with the visual features through cross-
attention, effectively compressing the visual semantics into a shorter, fixed-length feature encoding.
The second cross-attention utilizes queries of ID images to modulate test image embeddings, acti-
vating identity information of test images.

3.2   F IRST- STAGE T UNING

In the first phase, we harness the off-the-shelf annotations available in existing datasets along with
our proposed data configuration strategies, reducing the cost for extra annotations about ID recog-
nition. Specifically, we utilize the public datasets containing instance spatial information, including
Visual Commonsense Reasoning (VCR) (Zellers et al., 2019), RefCOCO (Kazemzadeh et al., 2014),
and Flickr30k (Plummer et al., 2017) datasets, to construct visual instruction tuning data with ID
reference, which contains three instruction tasks: question-answering (Q&A), location, captioning.
VCR dataset consists of questions that require commonsense reasoning to answer, as well as choos-
ing the reasons. These questions ask about particular people or objects, which have location anno-


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                             Crop, filter, augmentation

 First-stage                                                                            Naming

                             Q: How is [person1] feeling?                                                                   John              Lina
      VCR                    A: [person1] is embarrassed that [person2] is with him.                              Q: How is John feeling?
                             R: [person2] is behind [person1] and [person1] looks annoyed.                        A: John is embarrassed that Lina is with him.
                                                                                                                  R: Lina is behind John and Lina looks annoyed.

   RefCoco                                              Reference:
                                                                                                                                                                     Templates        Visual Instruction
                                                        black man in a grey and                                Grounding John.
                                                        white suite with brown tie                             [140, 212, 255, 427]
                                                                                                                                                                                       tuning data with
                                                        visible                                                                                                                         ID reference
  Flickr30k
                                                                                                       John

                                                     Caption:
                                                                                                                         Caption:
                                                     A girl in a bathing suit on the
                                                                                                                         Brandon in a bathing suit on the beach
                                                     beach plays with a soccer ball
                                                                                                                         plays with a soccer ball while Timothy in
                                                     while a man in the background
                                                                                                                         the background watches.
                                                     watches.
                                                                                                     Brandon      Timothy



 Second-stage


  MovieNet
                               Kairi [213, 102, 799, 683]                Kairi [200, 71, 734, 686]                Kairi [191, 26, 706, 683]                  Kairi [156, 224, 538, 630]
                               Momo [704, 249, 1081, 691]                Momo [789, 109, 1181, 691]               Momo [692, 40, 1254, 683]                  Momo [510, 190, 826, 607]



                  You are a helpful and precise assistant for providing a story description for some
                                                                                                                                                          Kairi and Momo navigate through a busy
                   continuous images according to the following rules. User will give the image size
                                                                                                                                                      corridor filled with students. They then engage
                    (width, height) and some images. For each image, user will give some character
                                                                                                                                                      in an outdoor conversation where Kairi reaches
                names and their positions in the image. The description should be accurate and brief.
                                                                                                                                                       out a hand and seems to explain something to
                      You should describe the changes in the characters' states and interactions
                                                                                                                                                           Momo. Momo appears to be focused on
                             throughout the entire images sequence as much as possible...
                                                                                                                          GPT4-Vision                   something in Kairi's hand. Their interaction
                                                                                                                                                       progresses to a more relaxed moment as both
                                                                                                                                                          sit by a flowerbed, appreciating flowers.


                                                                                                                                      Visual Instruction tuning
                                                                                                      Templates                       data with ID reference
       Kairi                         Momo


            Figure 3: First-stage and second-stage instruction tuning data construction pipelines.


tations. We crop sub-images of the individuals and assign them identifiable labels, such as person
names. By replacing the people in the questions and answers with these labels, we gain a new set of
QA data that necessitates ID recognition. RefCOCO (and variants RefCOCO+ and RefCOCOg) is a
dataset targeted on visual localization based on descriptions. For the items to be localized, we create
ID images after cropping them from the original images to perform localization tasks. Flickr30k, a
dataset comprising image descriptions, includes coordinates for the people or objects mentioned in
the descriptions. We extract the areas associated with individuals to produce ID images and provide
names to generate corresponding descriptions. Additionally, we conduct some data augmentation
and cleaning operations, such as filtering out samples with only one person or those with sub-images
of inappropriate sizes. The annotation pipeline is shown in the upper part of Figure 3.
The essential purpose of this stage is to train the model on its ability to build relationships between
multiple images, using the ID images to identify and accurately locate or describe objects within test
images. However, the instance ID images are cropped from the original images, which reduces the
difficulty of recognition.


3.3     S ECOND - STAGE T UNING

The second-stage fine-tuning data is based on the MovieNet (Huang et al., 2020) dataset. The
original annotations in the MovieNet dataset encompass the names of the characters present in each
movie shot and their coordinate location information. In the MovieNet, we select pictures that
contain only a single character to serve as ID images, while those containing multiple characters
are used as test images. This approach allows us to naturally develop a dataset for location task.
Moreover, we compile ID images featuring the same character to construct data for matching task.
For Q&A and caption tasks, we adopt GPT-4V to convert annotations from the MovieNet dataset
into the question format that refers to specific roles. Specifically, as illustrated in the lower part
of Figure 3, we feed test images along with their character location information into GPT-4V, and
encourage the model to generate captions or question-answer pairs via prompt engineering. The
detailed prompts used for generating descriptions or question-answer pairs are shown in Appendix


                                                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                       Question:
                                                                                                                                       Kazan is <img0> In the following four images, Which is Kazan? Image 1:
                                                                                                                                       <img1> Image 2: <img2> Image 3: <img3> Image 4: <img4>

                                                                                                                                       Model output:
                                                                                                                                       Image 2
      <img0>                 <img1>                <img2>                   <img3>                              <img4>


                                                                                                                   Question:
                                                                                                                   Wutiaowu is <img0>, Xiayoujie is <img1>, Lizi is
                                                                                                                   <img2>. In the image <img3>, identify Xiayoujie with
                                                                                                                   grounding.

                                                                                                                   Model output:
                                                                                                                   <ref>Xiayoujie</ref><box>(787,109),(998,975)</box>
               <img0>                 <img1>                <img2>                        <img3>


                                                                                                                                 Question:
                                                                                                                                 Shatang is <img0>, Abeiduo is <img1>, Kong is <img2>. In the
                                                                                                                                 image: <img3> Who is holding a sword?

                                                                                                                                 Model output:
                                                                                                                                 Kong is holding a sword.


                <img0>                    <img1>               <img2>                           <img3>


                                                                                                                             Question:
                                                                                                                             Charlie is <img0>, David is <img1>, Elise is <img2>. In the image: <img3> Give
                                                                                                                             a description.

                                                                                                                             Model output:
                                                                                                                             Charlie is standing and appears to be in conversation with David, who is seated
                                                                                                                             at a dining table. Elise is seated across from David, slightly turned towards him.
               <img0>                   <img1>                  <img2>                              <img3>                   They are in an outdoor dining area with other patrons in the background.


                                                                         Question:
                                                                         Julia is <img0>, Jack is <img1>. Give a description of the following images: <img2><img3><img4><img5>.

                                                                         Model output:
                                                                         Jack and Julia are seated side by side in a vehicle, looking out at a desolate landscape. In a subsequent scene, Jack is seen
                                                                         standing and appears to be interacting with something or someone outside the vehicle while Julia is seated, watching him. The
                                                                         scene shifts to Jack attending to an injured Julia, who is lying on the ground. Finally, Jack is seen running away while Julia rests in
                    <img0>                         <img1>                a cave, observing his actions.


                  <img2>                           <img3>                              <img4>                                          <img5>


Figure 4: Data samples of MM-ID. Each sample consists of ID images of each character, and test
images containing multiple characters. Our model can memorize the identity information in ID
reference and generalizes to recognize characters from different scenes.


B. Finally, we integrate ID images, test images and results of GPT-4V into conversation templates,
producing second-stage instruction tuning data.
After completing data construction process, we train our model with next-token prediction loss in
two stages. The first stage tuning data contains approximately 80,000 samples, while the second
one comprises around 60,000 samples. Moreover, to ensure that the model would not forget its
previously learned knowledge during ID recognition training, we integrate instruction tuning data
from LLaVA and ShareGPT4V with the aforementioned data, training them simultaneously.


4     MM-ID

4.1    P ROBLEM D EFINITION

To measure ID recognition capability of models, we propose a new benchmark, MM-ID. We appraise
the capability of models to recognize IDs across four incrementally complex levels. The first sub-
task we investigate is matching: given an instance image, which could feature a person, an animal,
or a building, the model must choose an image from four options that contains the same instance.
The second sub-task involves localizing the instance within a test image based on the ID image,
and providing coordinates of the bounding box, with the challenge coming from numerous similar
distractor objects or individuals present in the test image. The third and fourth sub-tasks—question-
answering and caption generation—require the model to recoginize the identities in the test images,
then either respond to related questions or produce a comprehensive description. These represents
the most difficult level of tasks, as the model should not only recognize each instance’s identity in the
image but also provide appropriate answers based on information related to their names, including
states, actions, locations, and more. The samples of sub-tasks are shown in Figure 4.


                                                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.2      DATA A NNOTATION AND S TATISTICS

In the construction of MM-ID benchmark, we initially collect images that meet the specified condi-
tions. To evaluate the model’s capability of recognizing instance-level information, the images used
for testing need to contain multiple characters. Furthermore, each character requires distinctiveness,
such as different actions, clothing attributes, etc., to facilitate the design of questions. Our data
sources primarily encompass three types: shot images of movie scenes from the MovieNet dataset,
animated images with download links collected from the internet, and pictures of buildings, vehi-
cles, and animals gathered from object re-identification (Re-ID) datasets (Ye et al., 2024; Jiao et al.,
2023). In each example, there exists ID images corresponding to each character and one or more
test images for inquiry.
Following preparing images of MM-ID, we annotate questions and standard answers manually. For
description and localization sub-tasks, we use GPT-4 to generate question templates. In question-
answering task, annotators pose questions regarding specific characters’ actions, attributes, clothing
colors, positions, relationships, emotions, etc., following detailed annotation documents and guid-
ance examples. The question design ensures that the model can only provide a correct answer when it
accurately recognizes the characters. After question annotation, we request other individuals’ assis-
tance in refinement and balancing, increasing the diversity of expression and grammatical structure.
Finally, the correct answers are labeled manually by other four annotators, providing accurate and
detailed descriptions for caption task and correct answers for Q&A task. Everyone participates in
discussions and makes peer reviews for each other. The instructions for question annotations and
quantitative evaluation of inter-annotator agreement are shown in Appendix C.


                                     (a)                                              (b)


Figure 5: MM-ID data statistics. (a) Sample number and data sources of four sub-tasks. (b) The
proportion of each perspective of Q&A.

Totally, we collect and annotate 585 samples. The data composition is shown in Figure 5 (a). The
“Q&A” and “Caption” sub-tasks are main parts of MM-ID benchmark. Because we use GPT-41
for scoring, it is costly to have too many evaluation samples and we select the most representative
samples for MM-ID. As shown in Figure 5 (b), Questions of “Q&A” task comprehensively cov-
ers different perspectives of characters (actions, states, attributes, positions, emotions), which can
sufficiently evaluate the ID recognition capability of LVLMs.

4.3      E VALUATION S TRATEGY

Quantitative evaluation for open-domain LVLMs has always been challenging. Our MM-ID incor-
porates four sub-tasks, each presenting its unique answer format. For matching task, which resem-
bles multiple-choice questions, accuracy is used as a metric. In localization task, we compare the
predicted bounding box to the actual bounding box, computing the Intersection over Union (IoU)
metric to measure accuracy. When IoU exceeds a threshold of 0.5, we consider the model recognizes
instance identity accurately.
For question-answering and caption generation tasks, due to the open-ended nature of the generated
responses, it is challenging to employ rule-based evaluations. Hence, inspired by MM-Vet and
LLaVA-Bench, GPT-4 is used to score the results. Under the condition of provided questions and
correct answers, we design prompts to guide GPT-4 to focus on correspondence of character names
and their states or actions, scoring the accuracy of characters’ descriptions within model predictions.
   1
       version: gpt-4-1106-preview


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: The comparison results on MM-ID. Notably, The scores of ‘Q&A’ and ‘Caption’ are eval-
uated with GPT-4 absolute scoring strategy. ‘-’ indicates the model can’t complete corresponding
instruction.
                     Model                        Matching Location Q&A Caption
      Open-source Models
             MMICL (Zhao et al., 2023a)                  –            –         3.53      3.18
               SEED (Ge et al., 2023)                    –            –         3.19      3.58
          LLaVA-OneVision (Li et al., 2024)              –            –         3.91      2.86
           Qwen-VL-Chat (Bai et al., 2023)               –          0.504       3.63      2.65
      InternLM-XComposer2 (Dong et al., 2024)            –          0.106       3.44      2.93
      Closed-source APIs
          Qwen-VL-Plus (Bai et al., 2023)              0.313        0.187       3.87      3.79
          Qwen-VL-Max (Bai et al., 2023)               0.224        0.301       4.64      4.23
           Gemini-pro (Google, 2023b)                  0.687        0.081       4.97      4.04
            GPT-4V (OpenAI, 2023b)                     0.627        0.244       4.77      4.67
                     IDA-VLM                           0.716        0.821       5.71      5.15


It is found that outputs of GPT-4 still exist variance, so we utilize GPT-4 to score the predictions by
5 times and report average scores.
We use both absolute and relative scoring strategies. Absolute scoring rates a model’s prediction di-
rectly against the correct answer on a ten-point scale, while relative scoring pits two models’ results
against each other, providing more immediate comparative insights into the models’ performance
with a fraction. The prompts used for GPT-4 scoring are shown in Appendix C. Besides using
GPT-4 scoring, we also employ conventional caption metrics like METEOR and CIDEr.


5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1    Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

We use Qwen-VL-Chat for model initialization, which has 9.6B parameters. During IDA-VLM
training, we set learning rate as 1e-5 for the first stage and 5e-6 for the second stage. The model is
trained for 5 epochs in both the first and second stages. The batch size with gradient accumulation
is set to 128. The visual encoder is fixed, while ID-Former and LLM are fine-tuned.
We compare IDA-VLM with other open-source LVLMs (Zhao et al., 2023a; Ge et al., 2023; Bai
et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2024) and closed-source APIs (Bai et al., 2023; Google, 2023b; OpenAI,
2023b) on MM-ID. To meet the requirement of ID recognition, the models selected for testing should
support multiple images input. Because they are not fine-tuned for this task, the prompt is crucial
for guiding models on ID awareness. We design appropriate prompts to guide them to respond
according to character names. The details can be found in Appendix D.
As illustrated in Table 1, our model achieves the best performance on MM-ID. According to the
quantitative results, Gemini-pro exhibits best performance on matching and Q&A sub-tasks among
previous models. In the location sub-task, Qwen-VL-Chat gains the highest score, even higher than
other closed-source APIs. As for the caption sub-task, GPT-4V surpasses other models. Overall,
our model outperforms previous LVLMs by a significant margin on four sub-tasks. The results
demonstrate visual instruction tuning with ID reference unleashes the potential of LVLM on ID
awareness, which can not be realized only by prompt engineering.
As shown in Table 2, we calculate relative scores using GPT-4 to provide a further demonstration
on the ‘Q&A’ and ‘Caption’ sub-tasks. We compare the predictions from various closed-source
APIs against those from our model respectively. All relative scores are below 1, signifying that
our model outperforms its counterparts. Among the closed-source APIs evaluated, GPT-4V exhibits
comparatively superior results. In Table 3, our model also gains best performance on traditional
metrics of caption task.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Table 2: Using relative scoring strategy to com-           Table 3: METEOR and CIDEr metrics
 pare previous LVLMs with our model. Each re-               evaluation on ‘Caption’ sub-task. Both
 sult is the ratio of the first model’s score to that of    metrics take into account the semantic
 the second model’s, after feeding the predictions          similarity of the captions.
 of two models into GPT-4 for comparison.
                                                                  Model         METEOR CIDEr
               Model                Q&A Caption
                                                             Qwen-VL-Chat         0.052    0.031
     GPT-4V / IDA-VLM               0.925      0.793         Qwen-VL-Plus         0.119    0.140
    Gemini-pro / IDA-VLM            0.892      0.704         Qwen-VL-Max          0.134    0.083
   Qwen-VL-Chat / IDA-VLM           0.765      0.396          Gemini-pro          0.121    0.185
   Qwen-VL-Plus / IDA-VLM           0.796      0.544           GPT-4V             0.144    0.078
   Qwen-VL-Max / IDA-VLM            0.918      0.636          IDA-VLM             0.191    0.515


Table 4: Performance of IDA-VLM on standard benchmarks. “w/o LLaVA data” means finetuning
with only constructed ID reference datasets.
                                                     MME           SEED-Bench
                       Model
                                             Perception Cognition Image Video
                 Qwen-VL-Chat                     1441.4      387.5      0.650     0.397
            IDA-VLM (w/o LLaVA data)              1167.5      349.6      0.441     0.311
                  IDA-VLM                         1484.6      383.6      0.647     0.412

To assess the basic multimodal capabilities, we also evaluate IDA-VLM with the baseline model
Qwen-VL-Chat on standard benchmarks. As shown in Table 4, the perception metric on MME gets
improved, which is due to the ID-level recognition learning boosts fine-grained perception ability.
On SEED-Bench, our training samples containing multiple test images enhance video understand-
ing ability. Comparing the last two rows, the inclusion of LLaVA and ShareGPT4V data greatly
contributes to preserving the original capabilities.

5.2   Q UALITATIVE C OMPARISON

As shown in Figure 6, we qualitatively compare the results of IDA-VLM with other models. In
the first case, GPT-4V does not exhibit accurate localization ability, and Qwen-VL-Chat mistakenly
recognizes Leizi as another similar person. In the second case, the model should determine which
person walks in front and match the person with the given characters. Our model gives the right
answer ‘Ariadne’ while GPT-4V and Gemini-pro recognizes inaccurately. In the last case, models
are asked to provide a description for a movie scene with three characters. GPT-4V describes that
David and Elise sit at a table, ignoring Charlie standing. Gemini-pro only gives a generic caption
for the test image without recognizing characters’ identities. In contrast, our model gives the most
reasonable description of the scene. We present more qualitative examples in Appendix E.

5.3   A BLATION S TUDIES

Effect of Dual-stage instruction tuning. We report the separate effect of each instruction tuning
stage in Table 5. When the second stage of tuning is removed, there is a significant drop in per-
formance, suggesting that the second stage has a more substantial impact than the first. During the
second stage, the ID images are independent of the test images, which enhances the quality of data
for model learning. When the first and second stages of tuning are combined, our model achieves its
optimal performance. It is worth noting that the accuracy of ‘Matching’ gets lower when adding the
first stage tuning, because the first stage tuning data can’t improve matching ability.


                Table 5: The ablation study about separate stage instruction tuning.1
                       Model              Matching Location Q&A Caption
               w/o first stage tuning          0.746       0.813      5.43       5.08
              w/o second stage tuning            –         0.715      4.08       3.86
                        Ours                   0.716       0.821      5.80       5.19


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                      Instruction: Leizi is
                                                                      <img0>, Meiqin is ...
                                                                      Heizi is ... Chuchun is ...
                                                                      In the image: <img1>
                                                                      Identify Leizi with
                                                                      grounding.

                <img0>                           <img1>                                                                GPT-4V                      Qwen-VL-Chat                          Ours



                                                                                                                                                Instruction: Cobb is <img0>, Ariadne is
                                                                                                                                                <img1>. In the image <img2>, who is
                                                                                                                                                walking in front?

               <img0>                                         <img1>                                         <img2>

 GPT-4V: In the image provided, Cobb is the character who is walking in front.                         Gemini-pro: Cobb is walking in front.                  Ours: Ariadne is walking in front.


                                                                                                                                                 Instruction: Charlie is <img0>, David is
                                                                                                                                                 <img1>, Elise is <img2>. In the image
                                                                                                                                                 <img3>, give a description.

          <img0>                               <img1>                              <img2>                               <img3>
 GPT-4V: In the image, David is sitting at a table on the left with a woman presumed to be Elise, based on the context provided. They are in a restaurant setting, potentially engaged in a conversation
 or a meal together.

 Gemini-pro: The image shows three people sitting at a table outside a restaurant. There are two men and one woman. The woman is sitting between the two men. The man on the left is wearing a blue
 suit and tie. The man on the right is wearing a gray suit and tie. The woman is wearing a black dress. They are all looking at the man in the gray suit.


 Ours: Charlie is standing and appears to be conversing with David, who is seated at a table. Elise is seated across the table facing David. They are at an outdoor dining area with other patrons around.


Figure 6: We present visualizations of selected samples from MM-ID, corresponding to location,
Q&A and caption sub-tasks. We showcase results of some representative models and ours (IDA-
VLM). The detailed prompts for other models to complete instructions are shown in Appendix D.


                                               Table 6: The ablation study about ID-Former.
                                             Model       Matching Location Q&A Caption
                                     w/o ID-Former                               0.701                     0.803                  5.44                  5.13
                                          Ours                                   0.716                     0.821                  5.71                  5.15

Effect of ID-Former. We use ID-Former to project visual features of ID images and test images
to the semantic space of LLM. As depicted in Table 6, substituting the ID-Former with a standard
query former leads to a reduction in all sub-task metrics. The ID-Former enhances the interaction
between features of ID images and test images, thereby activating ID information within the test
images.
The ablation study for the mixing rate of LLaVA and ShareGPT4V instruction tuning data are de-
picted in Appendix B.


6      C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we focus on the capability to recognize and link instances across various scenes,
which is significant for understanding complex visual narratives, such as movies. We propose visual
instruction tuning with ID reference, which unleashes the potential of LVLM in ID recognition and
develop an ID-aware LVLM, IDA-VLM. The model memorizes the name and appearance of each
character in ID reference, then recognizes them across disparate scenes correctly, and understands
visual narrative in an end-to-end manner. To thoroughly assess ID awareness of LVLMs, a novel
benchmark named MM-ID has been introduced, which consists of four sub-tasks. Our model can
serve as a reference and inspirational baseline, which achieves best performance among previous
models and closed-source APIs. Conclusively, this research contributes to broadening the horizons
for future AI systems to efficiently understand multi-identity visual content.

   1
     Because the sample of the first stage tuning has only one text image, we present the ‘QA’ and ‘caption’
results on a sub-set of MM-ID, which has one test image in each sample.


                                                                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partly supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China
(No. 2024YFB2808903) , the research fund of Tsinghua University - Tencent Joint Laboratory
for Internet Innovation Technology. This paper is partially supported by the National Key R&D
Program of China No.2022ZD0161000 and the General Research Fund of Hong Kong No.17200622
and 17209324.

8   L EGAL S TATEMENT

This work utilized the MovieNet dataset, which is publicly available under open-source license for
academic research. For animation images from the internet, we provided web urls of the original
content rather than redistributing the images directly, to respect potential copyright restrictions. The
authors acknowledge full responsibility for the usage of all datasets in this research and have made
best efforts to comply with relevant terms of use and copyright laws. The authors are responsible
for any legal violations of data rights.

R EFERENCES
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza Rutherford,
  Serkan Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne Monteiro, Jacob L. Menick,
  Sebastian Borgeaud, Andy Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Sharifzadeh, Mikolaj Binkowski,
  Ricardo Barreira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Karén Simonyan. Flamingo: a visual
  language model for few-shot learning. In NeurIPS, 2022.

Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang, Sinan Tan, Peng Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang
   Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. Qwen-vl: A frontier large vision-language model with versatile abilities.
   CoRR, abs/2308.12966, 2023.

Mu Cai, Haotian Liu, Siva Karthik Mustikovela, Gregory P. Meyer, Yuning Chai, Dennis Park, and
 Yong Jae Lee. Making large multimodal models understand arbitrary visual prompts. CoRR,
 abs/2312.00784, 2023.

Jun Chen, Deyao Zhu, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, Zechun Liu, Pengchuan Zhang, Raghuraman Krish-
  namoorthi, Vikas Chandra, Yunyang Xiong, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Minigpt-v2: large language
  model as a unified interface for vision-language multi-task learning. CoRR, abs/2310.09478,
  2023a.

Keqin Chen, Zhao Zhang, Weili Zeng, Richong Zhang, Feng Zhu, and Rui Zhao. Shikra: Unleashing
  multimodal llm’s referential dialogue magic. CoRR, abs/2306.15195, 2023b.

Lin Chen, Jinsong Li, Xiaoyi Dong, Pan Zhang, Conghui He, Jiaqi Wang, Feng Zhao, and
  Dahua Lin. Sharegpt4v: Improving large multi-modal models with better captions. CoRR,
  abs/2311.12793, 2023c.

Wenliang Dai, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Junqi Zhao, Weisheng Wang,
 Boyang Li, Pascale Fung, and Steven C. H. Hoi. Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-
 language models with instruction tuning. In NeurIPS, 2023.

Xiaoyi Dong, Pan Zhang, Yuhang Zang, Yuhang Cao, Bin Wang, Linke Ouyang, Xilin Wei,
  Songyang Zhang, Haodong Duan, Maosong Cao, Wenwei Zhang, Yining Li, Hang Yan, Yang
  Gao, Xinyue Zhang, Wei Li, Jingwen Li, Kai Chen, Conghui He, Xingcheng Zhang, Yu Qiao,
  Dahua Lin, and Jiaqi Wang. Internlm-xcomposer2: Mastering free-form text-image composition
  and comprehension in vision-language large model. CoRR, abs/2401.16420, 2024.

Zi-Yi Dou, Yichong Xu, Zhe Gan, Jianfeng Wang, Shuohang Wang, Lijuan Wang, Chenguang Zhu,
  Pengchuan Zhang, Lu Yuan, Nanyun Peng, Zicheng Liu, and Michael Zeng. An empirical study of
  training end-to-end vision-and-language transformers. In CVPR, pp. 18145–18155. IEEE, 2022.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chaoyou Fu, Peixian Chen, Yunhang Shen, Yulei Qin, Mengdan Zhang, Xu Lin, Zhenyu Qiu, Wei
  Lin, Jinrui Yang, Xiawu Zheng, Ke Li, Xing Sun, and Rongrong Ji. MME: A comprehensive
  evaluation benchmark for multimodal large language models. CoRR, abs/2306.13394, 2023.
Yuying Ge, Sijie Zhao, Ziyun Zeng, Yixiao Ge, Chen Li, Xintao Wang, and Ying Shan. Making
  llama SEE and draw with SEED tokenizer. CoRR, abs/2310.01218, 2023.
Google. Google bard. https://bard.google.com/chat/, 2023a.
Google. Gemini-pro. https://www.gemini-ai.org/gemini-pro-1-5/, 2023b.
Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Aishwarya Agrawal, Douglas Summers-Stay, Dhruv Batra, and Devi
  Parikh. Making the V in VQA matter: Elevating the role of image understanding in visual ques-
  tion answering. Int. J. Comput. Vis., 127(4):398–414, 2019.
Wenzhong Guo, Jianwen Wang, and Shiping Wang. Deep multimodal representation learning: A
 survey. IEEE Access, 7:63373–63394, 2019.
Qingqiu Huang, Yu Xiong, Anyi Rao, Jiaze Wang, and Dahua Lin. Movienet: A holistic dataset
  for movie understanding. In ECCV (4), volume 12349 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp.
  709–727. Springer, 2020.
Drew A. Hudson and Christopher D. Manning. GQA: A new dataset for real-world visual reasoning
  and compositional question answering. In CVPR, 2019.
Yatai Ji, Rongcheng Tu, Jie Jiang, Weijie Kong, Chengfei Cai, Wenzhe Zhao, Hongfa Wang, Yujiu
  Yang, and Wei Liu. Seeing what you miss: Vision-language pre-training with semantic comple-
  tion learning. In CVPR, pp. 6789–6798. IEEE, 2023a.
Yatai Ji, Junjie Wang, Yuan Gong, Lin Zhang, Yanru Zhu, Hongfa Wang, Jiaxing Zhang, Tetsuya
  Sakai, and Yujiu Yang. MAP: multimodal uncertainty-aware vision-language pre-training model.
  In CVPR, pp. 23262–23271. IEEE, 2023b.
Bingliang Jiao, Lingqiao Liu, Liying Gao, Ruiqi Wu, Guosheng Lin, Peng Wang, and Yanning
  Zhang. Toward re-identifying any animal. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Sahar Kazemzadeh, Vicente Ordonez, Mark Matten, and Tamara L. Berg. Referitgame: Referring
  to objects in photographs of natural scenes. In EMNLP, pp. 787–798. ACL, 2014.
Jing Yu Koh, Daniel Fried, and Russ Salakhutdinov. Generating images with multimodal language
   models. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Liangyu Chen, Jinghao Wang, Jingkang Yang, and Ziwei Liu. Otter: A
  multi-modal model with in-context instruction tuning. CoRR, abs/2305.03726, 2023a.
Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Dong Guo, Renrui Zhang, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Yanwei Li,
  Ziwei Liu, and Chunyuan Li. Llava-onevision: Easy visual task transfer. CoRR, abs/2408.03326,
  2024.
Bohao Li, Rui Wang, Guangzhi Wang, Yuying Ge, Yixiao Ge, and Ying Shan. Seed-bench: Bench-
  marking multimodal llms with generative comprehension. CoRR, abs/2307.16125, 2023b.
Huayang Li, Siheng Li, Deng Cai, Longyue Wang, Lemao Liu, Taro Watanabe, Yujiu Yang, and
  Shuming Shi. Textbind: Multi-turn interleaved multimodal instruction-following in the wild.
  CoRR, abs/2309.08637, 2023c.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven C. H. Hoi. BLIP-2: bootstrapping language-
  image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In ICML, volume 202
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 19730–19742. PMLR, 2023d.
Yifan Li, Yifan Du, Kun Zhou, Jinpeng Wang, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. Evaluating
  object hallucination in large vision-language models. In EMNLP, pp. 292–305. Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2023e.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Proc. of ECCV,
  2014.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. In NeurIPS,
  2023a.
Yuan Liu, Haodong Duan, Yuanhan Zhang, Bo Li, Songyang Zhang, Wangbo Zhao, Yike Yuan,
  Jiaqi Wang, Conghui He, Ziwei Liu, Kai Chen, and Dahua Lin. Mmbench: Is your multi-modal
  model an all-around player? CoRR, abs/2307.06281, 2023b.
Jiasen Lu, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Stefan Lee. Vilbert: Pretraining task-agnostic visiolin-
   guistic representations for vision-and-language tasks. In NeurIPS, pp. 13–23, 2019.
Jiasen Lu, Christopher Clark, Rowan Zellers, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Aniruddha Kembhavi.
   UNIFIED-IO: A unified model for vision, language, and multi-modal tasks. In ICLR. Open-
   Review.net, 2023.
Meta. Llama-3. https://ai.meta.com/blog/meta-llama-3/, 2024.
OpenAI. Chatgpt. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/, 2023a.
OpenAI. Gpt-4v(ision) system card. https://cdn.openai.com/papers/GPTV System Card.pdf, 2023b.
Bryan A. Plummer, Liwei Wang, Chris M. Cervantes, Juan C. Caicedo, Julia Hockenmaier, and
  Svetlana Lazebnik. Flickr30k entities: Collecting region-to-phrase correspondences for richer
  image-to-sentence models. Int. J. Comput. Vis., 123(1):74–93, 2017.
Hanoona Abdul Rasheed, Muhammad Maaz, Sahal Shaji Mullappilly, Abdelrahman Shaker,
  Salman H. Khan, Hisham Cholakkal, Rao Muhammad Anwer, Erix Xing, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and
  Fahad Shahbaz Khan. Glamm: Pixel grounding large multimodal model. CoRR, abs/2311.03356,
  2023.
Chufan Shi, Cheng Yang, Yaxin Liu, Bo Shui, Junjie Wang, Mohan Jing, Linran Xu, Xinyu Zhu,
  Siheng Li, Yuxiang Zhang, Gongye Liu, Xiaomei Nie, Deng Cai, and Yujiu Yang. Chart-
  mimic: Evaluating lmm’s cross-modal reasoning capability via chart-to-code generation. CoRR,
  abs/2406.09961, 2024.
Quan Sun, Qiying Yu, Yufeng Cui, Fan Zhang, Xiaosong Zhang, Yueze Wang, Hongcheng Gao,
  Jingjing Liu, Tiejun Huang, and Xinlong Wang. Generative pretraining in multimodality. CoRR,
  abs/2307.05222, 2023.
Hao Tan and Mohit Bansal. LXMERT: learning cross-modality encoder representations from trans-
  formers. In EMNLP/IJCNLP (1), pp. 5099–5110. Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2019.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurélien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
  language models. CoRR, abs/2302.13971, 2023.
Rong-Cheng Tu, Yatai Ji, Jie Jiang, Weijie Kong, Chengfei Cai, Wenzhe Zhao, Hongfa Wang, Yujiu
  Yang, and Wei Liu. Global and local semantic completion learning for vision-language pre-
  training. CoRR, abs/2306.07096, 2023.
vicuna.      Vicuna: An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality.
   https://vicuna.lmsys.org/, 2023.
Junjie Wang, Yatai Ji, Jiaqi Sun, Yujiu Yang, and Tetsuya Sakai. MIRTT: learning multimodal
  interaction representations from trilinear transformers for visual question answering. In EMNLP
  (Findings), pp. 2280–2292. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021.
Wenhai Wang, Zhe Chen, Xiaokang Chen, Jiannan Wu, Xizhou Zhu, Gang Zeng, Ping Luo, Tong
 Lu, Jie Zhou, Yu Qiao, and Jifeng Dai. Visionllm: Large language model is also an open-ended
 decoder for vision-centric tasks. In NeurIPS, 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mang Ye, Shuoyi Chen, Chenyue Li, Wei-Shi Zheng, David Crandall, and Bo Du. Transformer for
 object re-identification: A survey. CoRR, abs/2401.06960, 2024.
Weihao Yu, Zhengyuan Yang, Linjie Li, Jianfeng Wang, Kevin Lin, Zicheng Liu, Xinchao Wang,
 and Lijuan Wang. Mm-vet: Evaluating large multimodal models for integrated capabilities. CoRR,
 abs/2308.02490, 2023.
Rowan Zellers, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. From recognition to cognition: Visual
  commonsense reasoning. In CVPR, pp. 6720–6731. Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2019.
Shilong Zhang, Peize Sun, Shoufa Chen, Min Xiao, Wenqi Shao, Wenwei Zhang, Kai Chen,
  and Ping Luo. Gpt4roi: Instruction tuning large language model on region-of-interest. CoRR,
  abs/2307.03601, 2023.
Haozhe Zhao, Zefan Cai, Shuzheng Si, Xiaojian Ma, Kaikai An, Liang Chen, Zixuan Liu, Sheng
  Wang, Wenjuan Han, and Baobao Chang. MMICL: empowering vision-language model with
  multi-modal in-context learning. CoRR, abs/2309.07915, 2023a.
Liang Zhao, En Yu, Zheng Ge, Jinrong Yang, Haoran Wei, Hongyu Zhou, Jianjian Sun, Yuang Peng,
  Runpei Dong, Chunrui Han, and Xiangyu Zhang. Chatspot: Bootstrapping multimodal llms via
  precise referring instruction tuning. CoRR, abs/2307.09474, 2023b.
Deyao Zhu, Jun Chen, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Minigpt-4: Enhancing
  vision-language understanding with advanced large language models. CoRR, abs/2304.10592,
  2023.
Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Michael S. Bernstein, and Li Fei-Fei. Visual7w: Grounded question an-
  swering in images. In CVPR, pp. 4995–5004. IEEE Computer Society, 2016.


                                               14
