Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T IME S UITE : I MPROVING MLLM S FOR L ONG V IDEO
U NDERSTANDING VIA G ROUNDED T UNING
  Xiangyu Zeng1,2 Kunchang Li3,2 Chenting Wang6,2 Xinhao Li1,2 Tianxiang Jiang5,2
  Ziang Yan4,2 Songze Li7,2 Yansong Shi5,2 Zhengrong Yue6,2 Yi Wang2,8
  Yali Wang3,2 Yu Qiao2 Limin Wang1,2,†
  1
    Nanjing University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory                                          3
                                                                                             SIAT, Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Zhejiang University
  5                                                                                       6
    University of Science and Technology of China                                            Shanghai Jiao Tong University 7 Fudan University
  8
    Shanghai Innovation Institute
  XiangyuZeng2001@outlook.com lmwang@nju.edu.cn

                                 MVBench
                                !ℎ#$% &'()# *+
                                                               (Ours)
                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                         !                                       !                             !
                                                                                           !                          !              !

                                                              (Baseline)
                                                                                              !"#$%&'(        00:14            ")$*&'( +$!%#,+$))        00:24             -$'.&'(          Time
VideoMME                                                                                                     4#5"06$) 7608'-&'(                         /0'( 1&-#0 23
8#1- &'()# *+
                                                                                        ! At what time in the video does the                             ! What did the man do after throwing
                                                                 QVHighlights                man dribble the basketball?                                    away the basketball?
                                                                ,'-ℎ.'-ℎ% /)%)0%'#1
                                                                                                                                         !""#"$#%&
                                                                                             The man dribbles the basketball at
                                                                                                                                         '(!")%#%&          The man spoke, he threw the ball.
                                                                                             the 10th second of the video.

                                                                                             The given query happens between                                The given query happens between
                                                                                             10.3 - 15.2 seconds.                                           19.7 - 27.6 seconds.

                                                                                                                                                            After throwing away the basketball,
                                                                                             From 13.5 to 24.9 seconds.
                                                                                                                                                            the man started dancing.

                Egoschema                         Charades-STA                         ! User        VideoChat2           TimeChat        VideoChat-T
                8#1- &'()# *+                    2)34#$5. 6$#71('1-


Figure 1: VideoChat-T demonstrates high performance for both long-form video question answering
and temporal grounding. Our TimeSuite presents a collection of new designs to enhance the long
video understanding capability of MLLMs. It will implicitly endow the MLLM with ability of
correctly attending the visual segments when generating answers, thus relieving the hallucinations.

                                                                                      A BSTRACT
                     Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have demonstrated impressive
                     performance in short video understanding. However, understanding long-form
                     videos still remains challenging for MLLMs. This paper proposes TimeSuite,
                     a collection of new designs to adapt the existing short-form video MLLMs for
                     long video understanding, including a simple yet efficient framework to pro-
                     cess long video sequence, a high-quality video dataset for grounded tuning of
                     MLLMs, and a carefully-designed instruction tuning task to explicitly incorpo-
                     rate the grounding supervision in the traditional QA format. Specifically, based
                     on VideoChat, we propose our long-video MLLM, coined as VideoChat-T, by
                     implementing a token shuffling to compress long video tokens and introducing
                     Temporal Adaptive Position Encoding (TAPE) to enhance the temporal awareness
                     of visual representation. Meanwhile, we introduce the TimePro, a comprehen-
                     sive grounding-centric instruction tuning dataset composed of 9 tasks and 349k
                     high-quality grounded annotations. Notably, we design a new instruction tun-
                     ing task type, called Temporal Grounded Caption, to perform detailed video de-
                     scriptions with the corresponding timestamps prediction. This explicit tempo-
                     ral location prediction will guide MLLM to correctly attend on the visual con-
                     tent when generating description, and thus reduce the hallucination risk caused
                     by the LLMs. Experimental results demonstrate that our TimeSuite provides a
                     successful solution to enhance the long video understanding capability of short-
                     form MLLM, achieving improvement of 5.6% and 6.8% on the benchmarks of
                     Egoschema and VideoMME, respectively. In addition, VideoChat-T exhibits ro-
                     bust zero-shot temporal grounding capabilities, significantly outperforming the
                     existing state-of-the-art MLLMs. After fine-tuning, it performs on par with
                     the traditional supervised expert models. Our code and dataset are available at
                     https://github.com/OpenGVLab/TimeSuite.
        †
            denotes the corresponding author.


                                                                                               1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1   I NTRODUCTION

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have demonstrated impressive video understanding
performance by following the general human instructions to interpret the visual content (Li et al.,
2023b; Zhang et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023a; Jin et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024e). However, these
MLLMs still struggle in long video understanding, as a long video sequence may contain various
dynamic actions and complex temporal relationships, making it difficult for MLLMs to effectively
locate the key segments related to questions. When humans watch long videos, their attention is
consciously focused on prominent segments, which may occur within a few seconds. NExT-GQA
(Xiao et al., 2024) has also verified the relevance of temporal grounding for accurately answering
video QA tasks. Therefore, a natural question arises: Can we enhance long video understanding
by using temporal grounding as a auxiliary task?
Previously, some works have made progress in temporal grounding task by using general MLLMs.
They often enhance the temporal grounding capability of video MLLMs by designing specialized
modules and perform specific supervised fine-tuning (Ren et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024a;b). How-
ever, these overly specialized designs significantly impair the general QA capabilities of video
MLLMs, resulting in great performance drop on the video QA task (as illustrated by TimeChat
in Figure 1). Meanwhile, current research on long video understanding primarily focuses on archi-
tecture design, such as long-context LLMs (Liu et al., 2024a) and token compression (Song et al.,
2024a). They can only capture holistic semantics in videos without the ability of localizing fine-
grained information, leading to poor performance in temporal grounding tasks (as illustrated by
MovieChat in Figure 1). So far, it is still challenging to build a video MLLM that is good at both
tasks of temporal grounding and long video QA. We argue long video understanding could be as-
sisted by explicitly performing temporal grounding, as grounding supervision enables MLLM to
establish the detailed correspondance between the visual segments and fine-grained semantics. This
fine-grained alignment would guide the MLLM to attend correctly video segments when generating
answers and thus relieve the hallucination risk caused by the LLM.
Based on the above analysis, in this paper, we propose TimeSuite, a collection of new designs to
improve the long video understanding capability of the existing short-form MLLMs, with a focus on
incorporating grounding supervision in instruction tuning process. First, to address the high compu-
tational cost caused by the excessive number of visual tokens in long videos, we propose a simple
Token Shuffle scheme to compress visual tokens, allowing the LLM to process more frame inputs.
We also propose TAPE to generate adaptive position encodings, enhancing the temporal awareness
of visual representations. The proposed structure does not introduce overly complex proprietary
designs, which could be efficiently initialized with the parameters of short video MLLMs, with-
out damaging the original performance of pre-trained MLLM. Second, to naturally incorporate the
grounding ability into our MLLMs and yet still to preserve its original general QA capability, we
design a new instruction tuning task, called Temporal Grounded Caption. This new task requires
generating detailed segment-level description with corresponding timestamp prediction. Tuning on
this new task will not only endow the MLLM with the extra grounding ability but also enhance its
original long video QA performance, thanks to the requirement of building correspondence between
grounded segments and detailed captions. Finally, we collect a comprehensive grounding-centric
instruction tuning dataset for post-training our designed MLLMs, which is composed of 349K high-
quality annotations covering 9 tasks. Based on this new dataset, we are able to perform grounded
tuning with detailed captions on our proposed MLLMs (coined as VideoChat-T).
We verify the effectiveness of TimeSuite design through extensive experiments on the tasks of long
video understanding and temporal grounding. VideoChat-T demonstrates a significant improvement
in accuracy over baseline for long video understanding, with a 5.6% increase on Egoschema (Man-
galam et al., 2023) and a 6.8% increase on VideoMME (Fu et al., 2024). Additionally, VideoChat-
T exhibits robust zero-shot temporal localization capabilities on Charades-STA (Gao et al., 2017)
and QVHighlights (Lei et al., 2021a). Our VideoChat-T outperforms the state-of-the-art temporal
grounding MLLM of TimeChat from 50% to 100% for different metrics. After fine-tuning on the
training set of temporal grounding benchmarks, the performance of VideoChat-T is on par with the
state-of-the-art supervised expert models. The experiments demonstrate that our VideoChat-T is the
first end-to-end MLLM that is able to perform well on both temporal grounding and general video
QA. In particular, we show that grounded tuning with explicit location prediction can facilitate the
long video understanding and relieve the hallucination risk.


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     R ELATED W ORK

Video MLLMs. With the advancement of open-sourced LLMs (Chiang et al., 2023; Touvron et al.,
2023; Jiang et al., 2023), video MLLMs have emerged by utilizing projection bridges to link vision
foundation models with LLMs (Li et al., 2023b; 2024b; Zhang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024a). Limited
by the training context length, thought these methods perform well with a small number of frame
inputs, they meet significant challenges when processing long videos. The longer video length
usually implies longer temporal relationships and more redundancies, resulting in the difficulty of
extracting key clues (Zhou et al., 2024). Recently, several methods for long video handling have been
proposed, such as exploiting long context LLM (Liu et al., 2024a; Zhang et al., 2024b; Xue et al.,
2024; Wang et al., 2024d) and token compression (Li et al., 2023d; Song et al., 2024a; Zhang et al.,
2024a) for enabling more visual inputs and agents for task decomposition or retrieval (Fan et al.,
2024; Wang et al., 2024c;h). MovieChat (Song et al., 2024a) supports more frames by applying
short-term and long-term memory to merge similar visual tokens. Yet, studies in learning objectives
for long videos are less explored, making it difficult to alleviate the frequent hallucination of LLMs
in long context reasoning. Our proposed TimeSuite leverages temporally-centric tasks to unlock the
temporal perception potential of MLLMs, anchoring responses to the most relevant video segments.


Temporal Grounding. Temporal grounding is a fundamental capability in video understanding,
associating semantics to specific clips with corresponding timestamps. Typical expert models (Lei
et al., 2021b; Moon et al., 2023a;b; Lin et al., 2023b; Zeng et al., 2024) have been developed by
formulating it into a timestamp regression from visual inputs and user queries. Most existing video
MLLMs fail to address it compared with expert models, while some remedy its temporal grounding
by specifically designed architectures and data (Huang et al., 2024a; Wang et al., 2024f; Li et al.,
2024c; Wang et al., 2024g; Huang et al., 2024b; Qu et al., 2024). Timechat (Ren et al., 2024) binds
visual features of images with timestamps and uses a sliding window to handle variable token length.
From the perspective of training data, an instruction-tuning dataset TimeIT is constructed. Despite
impressive improvements in temporal performance, these MLLMs still lag behind expert models
and compromise general video dialogue capabilities. In this paper, we explore how to enhance the
temporal grounding of MLLMs while preserving their original capabilities.


3     M ETHOD

In this section, we detail the proposed TimeSuite, a new collection of designs for improving short
video MLLMs. Specifically, our TimeSuite includes a long video modeling framework, a high-
quality video dataset for grounded tuning, and a carefully-designed instruction tuning task. With
this new TimeSuite design, we are able to adapt the short-form video MLLM, obtaining significant
performance improvements on two types of long video understanding tasks: traditional long video
QA and temporal video grounding.


3.1   V IDEO C HAT-T

We first describe the architecture of our proposed long video modeling framework. Specifically, built
upon VideoChat2 (Li et al., 2024b), we devise long-video version of VideoChat-T. Our VideoChat-T
is composed of a video backbone for extracting visual representations, a visual-language connector
to compress visual tokens and bridge the visual and languages modalities, a LLM to follow human
instructions to interpret the video content.
The architecture of VideoChat-T is illustrated in Figure 2. Its workflow has three stages. In the first
stage, long videos are evenly segmented into clips and the clips are embedded by the Video Encoder
and Q-Former (Li et al., 2023a). Then, for compressing visual token number and highlighting crucial
ones, token shuffling is employed to merge adjacent tokens, and TAPE is used to add temporal
adaptive positional encodings. Finally, the compressed video token sequence is fed to the LLM to
generate accurate responses that adhere to user requirements.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      !
    !!


                                                                                                  Token Shuffle
                                                                   :#                                             :$


                                    Visual Encoder


                                                                                                                                              Projection
                                                       QFormer
    9.'4!                                                                        ⋯                                          ⋯
                                                                                                                                                           :%


                                                                                                                                                                    LLM
                                                                                                                                !
                                                                        ⋮            !×#!                              ⋮          ×$#!
      ⋮                                                                          ⋯                                          ⋯
                                                                                                                                $

                                                                     *"# +,-./                                         $
                  !
              !
          !
                                                                                                                                         :&
                                                                                                                   %&#'()

    9.'4"                                            The 8-th video clip contains 8 frames
                                                     sampled at 56, 57, 58, … ,63 seconds.
                                                                                                                           TAPE


                                                                                                                                                                    LoRA
                        Temporal Instruction                                                    User Instruction
                                                                 You are given a long video. Please find the visual event described by a sentence in
   Frozen             The video contains 128 frames        &     the video, determining its starting and ending times.
   Trainable          sampled at 0, 1, …, 127 seconds.           The format should be: 'The event happens in the start time - end time'.



Figure 2: Overall Architecture of VideoChat-T. First, long videos are segmented into clips, which
are then transformed into feature embeddings by video encoder and time-aware Qformer. Next, all
visual tokens undergo Token Shuffle to compress overly long tokens, and generate adaptive posi-
tional encodings through TAPE. Finally, the long video tokens are concatenated with the user query,
serving as the input of LLM, thereby generating appropriate responses.


3.1.1             BACKBONE DESIGN
Video clip encoding. For the given long video, we perform uniform sampling (Wang et al., 2019)
to obtain K×T frames. We divide these frames into K video segments in chronological order,
and sample T frames from each segment. Next, we use the video encoder and its visual-linguistic
connector (Q-Former here) to encode each segment into N tokens. After the aforementioned pro-
cessing, the entire video is encoded into a sequence of visual tokens, denoted by Vq ∈ RL×Cq ,
where Cq is the dimension of output token by the Q-Former and L = K×N is the total number of
tokens for the entire video.
Large Language Model. According to previous research, images and visual cues are projected into
the same feature space of the LLM. The LLM acts as an interaction interface in the MLLMs, being
used to process multimodal inputs, parse user instructions, and generate appropriate responses. To
afford the processing of long video sequence, we need to design an efficient compression module
between the visual encoder and LLMs.

3.1.2             VL-C ONNECTOR : T OKEN SHUFFLE
The increased number of sampled frames in long videos leads to a larger number of encoded visual
tokens, causing a significant rise in the computational complexity and memory consumption of
LLMs. Therefore, it is crucial to keep the number of visual tokens within an acceptable range.
Some works have proposed various token compression schemes, such as clustering (Jin et al., 2024)
and pooling (Huang et al., 2024b). However, clustering methods often struggle to maintain the
temporal consistency, and pooling methods usually result in a certain loss of overall performance.
To address this, we propose a simple token shuffling compression scheme that ensures the tempo-
ral consistency of video tokens before and after compression while avoiding excessive performance
loss. Previous methods often used a projector to achieve dimensional conversion. However, pro-
jecting visual encoding vectors from low to high dimensions does not increase information density.
Therefore, we propose to rearrange multiple visual tokens along the channel dimension. Specifi-
cally, for the long video Vq = [vq1 , vq2 , ..., vqL ] ∈ RL×Cq , we concatenate m adjacent tokens along
                                                                                                                                                           L    L
                                                                   1
the channel dimension to obtain the reshaped visual feature Vm = [vm    2
                                                                     , vm , ..., vm
                                                                                  m
                                                                                    ] ∈ R m ×mCq ,
                          i
where each merged token vm  is represented as:
                             i
                            vm = Concat(vq(i−1)∗m+1 , vq(i−1)∗m+2 , ..., vqi∗m ) ∀ i = 1, 2, ..., m
                                                                                                  L
                                                                                                    .


Next, a linear projection layer is applied to the merged visual feature Vm , generating the visual
                          L
token sequences Vl ∈ R m ×Cl as input into the LLM, where Cl represents the token channel di-


                                                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


mension of the LLM. This scheme effectively reuses the projector of base model by replicating the
original linear layer parameters m times along the channel dimension, achieving an initialization
equivalent to mean pooling with a window length of m. This design avoids introducing additional
randomly initialized parameters that might disturb the original model, thus preserving the its original
capabilities. Additionally, compared to directly using pooling, this method offers higher flexibility
for fine-tuning to achieve better results (see ablation study, Table 4).

3.1.3    T EMPORAL A DAPTIVE P OSITION E NCODING
To bind temporal positional information to visual tokens, we propose an adapter called Temporal
Adaptive Position Encoding (TAPE). Inspired by CPVT (Chu et al., 2021), our TAPE uses zero
padding at both ends of the convolution as anchors, and gradually transmits relative positional en-
coding information. Without the need to add any special time tokens, TAPE can automatically
perceive the relative temporal positions of the token sequence and generate temporal embeddings.
Specifically, the long video token sequence Vq is first compressed in the channel dimension by a lin-
ear layer and further compressed in sequence length by a pooling layer. Next, we use a U-Net-like
structure composed of one-dimensional depthwise separable convolutions to progressively down-
sample the sequence, obtaining three one-dimensional temporal feature sequences with different
resolutions. Subsequently, a convolution with a sufficiently long window is applied to the shortest
temporal feature sequence, using zero padding at both ends as anchors to encode the relative tem-
poral position of each token in the sequence (Chu et al., 2021). Then, we progressively upsample
and restore the temporal feature sequences from short to long, using residual connections to retain
temporal features at different scales. Finally, the temporal feature sequences are restored to the same
length as Vl and aligned in the channel dimension by a linear layer, thereby obtaining the temporal
features Vt output by the TAPE. For detailed implementation of TAPE, please refer to Appendix A.
Our proposed TAPE offers a plug-and-play module, which could be easily integrated into the net-
work structure via residual connections, adding temporal position information to video tokens with-
out disrupting the distribution of other trainable parameters. With appropriate training strategies,
TAPE effectively preserves the model’s generalization capabilities and enhances its temporal sensi-
tivity (see ablation study, Table 3), which is important for temporal grounding task.

3.2     T IME P RO : T EMPORAL G ROUNDED I NSTRUCTION DATA

Traditional temporal grounding datasets only contain monotonous ground truth, i.e., the start and end
times of the target period. This data format performs well in training the classic expert models, but
is difficult to unleash the potential of LLMs. Although several temporal grounding-centric datasets
have been released for MLLM fine-tuning (Ren et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024b), they still have
deficiencies in data quantity, data quality, and task diversity. Thus, it is necessary to build a more
comprehensive temporal dataset designed for the tuning of MLLMs.
Based on the criteria of diversity, length, and difficulty, we collect and clean several existing high-
quality grounding-centric datasets (Ren et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024a;b), and create two new
datasets, resulting in the TimePro. Compared to previous temporal grounding-centric datasets,
TimePro offers a larger volume of data, a broader distribution, and a higher task diversity, facili-
tating the learning of more generalizable temporal representations for MLLMs.
As shown in Figure 3(a), TimePro contains 9 task types from 15 datasets that are highly relevant to
temporal grounding, containing approximately 349K high-quality temporal grounding annotations.
The 9 tasks are specified as follows. Temporal Video Grounding involves identifying the start
and end times of video content based on a natural language query (Anne Hendricks et al., 2017;
Oncescu et al., 2021; Zala et al., 2023). Dense Video Captioning requires detecting events within a
video and providing corresponding timestamps and descriptions (Krishna et al., 2017; Huang et al.,
2020; Zhou et al., 2018). Video Summarization focuses on determining key frames or clips in
the form of timestamps rather than semantic summaries (Song et al., 2015; Gygli et al., 2014).
Step Localization aims to segment and describe important steps in a long video (Tang et al., 2019;
Zala et al., 2023). Transcribed Speech Generation predicts speech content and its timestamps
from visual signals (Zellers et al., 2022). Reasoning Temporal Localization combines timestamps
with explanatory answers (Huang et al., 2024b). Multi-format Temporal Grounding includes
single-turn and multi-turn dialogues with diverse question types (Huang et al., 2024a). Highlight


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Reasoning                    Temporal                            Task Definition
                      Temporal                       Video                              Q: What time is <scene title> happen? Please describe in detail the video content during the period.
                     Localization                  Grounding                            A: The given query happens between <start time> - <end time> seconds. <detail caption>

                                                                                       Task Example
      Transcribed
                                                 48,005              Temporal                         "
        Speech                  33,557
                                                                                                                                   "              "
                                                                     Grounded                                              ⋯                                     ⋯
      Generation
                                                                      Caption
                                                                                                                           00:35                               00:49
                       31,190                             93,118
                                                                                        Q: What time is 'Dana Wilson instructs to remove the shower curtain after the rinse cycle' happen?
                                                                                           Please describe in detail the video content during the period.


        Dense        23,795
                                 TimePro                   100,000      Multi-format
                                                                                        A: The given query happens between 35 - 49 seconds.
                                                                                           Dana Wilson, a woman with long hair, stands in front of a door holding a remote control. She
                                                                                           instructs to remove the shower curtain right after the rinse cycle, before the spin cycle begins,
        Video                                                            Temporal          as it should be removed while it's still dripping and soaking wet.
      Captioning                                                         Grounding
                                                     75                                Data Generation
                            10,340
                                         9,485                                           Videos w/ detailed             Video               Caption              Similarity             Human
                                                                                       captions & timestamps           Filtering          Summarizing            Detection              Check

               Highlight                                      Video
                                                                                                                                                                              1:<82.1
                                                           Summarization


                                                                                                                        0'1-.23-
               Detection


                                                                                                                         4-(53ℎ
                                                                                                                                                                  !'3'.5$?
                                        Step                                                                                           %-32:;-1
                                                                                                                                       #2=3:'(<
                                                                                                                                                      78-(-
                                                                                                                                                      9:3;-<
                                                                                                                                                                              .-<-.)-

                                     Localization

                           ! "!#$# %& "'()*+%                                                        , -).!'/# %& ")(0%+!/ 1+%234)4 5!0.'%3


Figure 3: (a) The proposed temporal centric instruction-tuning dataset, TimePro. This dataset con-
                             正文里写得数据处理相关的有些冗余，稍微精
                             简一下，任务定义补一补
tains approximately 349K high-quality and strongly temporally correlated data. (b) The proposed
Temporal Grounded Caption fine-tuning data paradigm. It effectively reducing the occurrence of
hallucinations. We employ a 4-stage processing pipeline to ensure the quality of the generated data.


Detection identifies the most significant moments in a video based on a query (Lei et al., 2021a).
Temporal Grounded Caption uses a brief scene title to output both the time period and fine-grained
description for the scene. More detailed information about TimePro is available in the appendix B.
It should be noted that Temporal Grounded Caption is our newly-designed task that can help our
model to establish fine-grained correspondence between visual segment and linguistic description.

3.3    T EMPORAL G ROUNDED C APTION TASK

Some studies have shown that MLLMs often exhibit severe hallucinations when dealing with fine-
grained perception tasks (Ji et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023; Golkar et al., 2023). Since our
VideoChat-T directly regresses the timestamps corresponding to the text queries using MLLMs,
it is more susceptible to hallucinations compared to methods that use external expert models as de-
coders (Wu et al., 2024). By forcing the video MLLMs to predict the event occurrence time and
simultaneously describe the visual content evidence, we attempt to anchor these queries to the rel-
evant time segments within the video, rather than generating hallucinations originating from LLM
itself. Based on this analysis, we design the Temporal Grounded Caption task.
The top of Figure 3(b) illustrates the definition of Temporal Grounded Caption. We use a brief
scene title of the video segment as the query, requiring the model to simultaneously respond with
the precise start and end times of the video segment and provide a detailed description of that seg-
ment. While the content in the scene title may leak into the detailed caption response, most of the
missing detailed information must be correctly described by attending the corresponding segment.
Moreover, temporal grounding and detailed captioning can serve as regularization task for each
other, preventing caption model from hallucinations from unrelated visual or linguistic contexts and
helping grounding model to regress the timestamp more accurately.
The process for collecting our Temporal Grounded Caption data is described at the bottom of Figure
3(b). In the first stage, we use a detailed caption dataset with timestamps as our data source. We
remove data with target grounding time intervals that are too short or too long and ensure that the
scenes in the video are as diverse as possible. In the second stage, we use a LLM to summarize
scene titles. To prevent excessive semantics of video segments from being leaked from the query to
the MLLM, we try to retain the minimal subset of key features that are sufficient to distinguish the
video segments. In the third stage, to avoid overly similar or identical content appearing at different
temporal intervals in the video, we perform similarity filtering on the data annoations. Based on
the scene titles and video features, we calculate the similarity between different segments of the
same video and remove data with excessively high similarity. In the fourth stage, we randomly
sample the generated data and manually assess its quality. Based on human feedback, we refine
the threshold parameters for data filtering used in the first three stages to yield the final Temporal
Grounded Caption dataset. This new dataset plays an important role in our grounded tuning.


                                                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                              Charades-STA                    QVHighlight
Method                               LLM Size
                                                R@1(IOU =0.3) R@1(IOU =0.5) R@1(IOU =0.7)  mAP         HIT @1
MovieChat (Song et al., 2024a)         7B            8.8           2.9          1.3         11.7         16.1
GroundingGPT (Li et al., 2024c)        7B              -          29.6         11.9           -            -
VTimeLLM (Huang et al., 2024a)         7B            51.0         27.5         11.4           -            -
HawkEye (Wang et al., 2024f)           7B            50.6         31.4         14.5           -            -
TimeChat (Ren et al., 2024)            7B              -          32.2         13.4         14.5         23.9
ChatVTG (Qu et al., 2024)              7B            52.7         33.0         15.9           -            -
VideoChat2 (Li et al., 2024b)          7B            9.6           3.4          1.4         13.4         18.6
VideoChat-T                            7B        69.9 (+60.3) 48.7 (+45.3) 24.0 (+22.6) 26.5 (+13.1) 54.1 (+35.5)
QD-DETR※ (FT) (Moon et al., 2023b)      -              -          57.3         32.6         38.9         64.2
UnLoc-L※ (FT) (Yan et al., 2023)        -              -          60.8         38.4           -            -
HawkEye (FT) (Wang et al., 2024f)      7B            72.5         58.3         28.8           -            -
Timechat (FT) (Ren et al., 2024)       7B              -          46.7         23.7         21.7         37.9
VideoChat-T (FT)                       7B            79.4         67.1         43.0         27.0         55.3

Table 1: Performance of VideoChat-T on temporal grounding and highlight detection tasks.
(FT) indicates the model fine-tuned on training set of the evaluation benchmark, with the respective
text marked in gray. Classic supervised expert models are marked with ※.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Built upon VideoChat2, we use UMT-L (Li et al., 2023c) and Mistral-7B (Jiang et al., 2023) as the
video encoder and LLM, respectively. Except for the TAPE, all components are initialized from the
pre-trained model of VideoChat2-Mistral. For the TAPE, we use random initialization, set the initial
values of the final linear layer to zero, and freeze it during the first epoch of training. We set the
frame count T for each clip to 8, so the number of clips K for a long video is equal to the total frame
count divided by T . We fine-tune the model for 3 epochs using the TimePro with 349K instances
and a general QA task dataset with 82K instances. To ensure the stability of model training, we
use 192-frame input for the first epoch. In the second and third epochs, we unfreeze the TAPE and
adjust the model input to 128 frames. All experiments are conducted on 16 A100 GPUs.

4.2   P ERFORMANCE ON TEMPORAL G ROUNDING

We evaluate our method using two commonly used temporal localization tasks, i.e., Temporal
Grounding and Highlight Detection. The performance comparison between VideoChat-T and other
models is shown in Table 1. Our method’s zero-shot performance surpasses all previous LLM-
based methods and after fine-tuning, VideoChat-T even exceeds some classic expert models on the
temporal grounding task.
Temporal Grounding. This task aims to identify the start and end timestamps of the video content
described by the query sentence, using Charades-STA as the evaluation benchmark. VideoChat-T
achieves an accuracy of 48.7 in the R@1 (IOU=0.5) metric, significantly surpassing the previous
state-of-the-art MLLM method, namely TimeChat, by 16.5 points. Additionally, it outperforms the
fine-tuned version of TimeChat on the training set of the evaluation benchmark by 2.0%. Further-
more, the performance of VideoChat-T fine-tuned on the evaluation benchmark training set reaches
67.1 R@1 at IoU=0.5, surpassing most state-of-the-art classic supervised expert models.
Highlight Detection. We use QVHighlights as the evaluation benchmark. For a given query,
this task requires outputting all timestamps of highlight moments and their corresponding saliency
scores. Since there could be many sparse highlight moments in a video, this task requires finer-
grained video understanding at the frame level. VideoChat-T achieves mAP of 26.5, significantly
surpassing the previous MLLM method of TimeChat by 13.0 points, and also outperforms its fine-
tuned version by 4.8 points. We observe that after fine-tuning on the corresponding training set,
VideoChat-T shows almost no performance improvement. This may be due to the bottleneck in
language representation of LLMs. The Highlight Detection task requires outputting a (timestamp,
saliency score) pair for each highlight moment, and a video may contain dozens of discrete highlight
moments, making it challenging for the model to correctly respond with dozens to hundreds of
numbers in a language format. The precise numerical salience score output is very difficult for
LLMs, and VideoChat-T can only respond well to queries with fewer highlight moments. Due to the


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                  Long Video                    Short Video
 Method                            LLM Size          Egoschema                VideoMME           MVbench
                                                Subset       Full      w/o subs w/o subs (Long)     Avg
 VideoAgent (Wang et al., 2024c)    GPT-4        60.2        54.1          -            -             -
 VideoAgent (Fan et al., 2024)      GPT-4        62.8          -           -            -             -
 TimeChat (Ren et al., 2024)         7B            -         33.0        30.2         26.1          38.5
 LLAMA-Vid (Li et al., 2023d)        7B            -         38.5          -            -           41.9
 MovieChat (Song et al., 2024a)      7B            -         53.5        38.2         33.4          55.1
 MovieChat+ (Song et al., 2024b)     7B            -         56.4          -            -             -
 Chat-UniVi (Jin et al., 2024)       7B            -           -         40.6         35.8            -
 VideoChat2 (Li et al., 2024b)       7B          63.6        54.4        39.5         33.2          60.4
 VideoChat-T                         7B       68.4 (+4.8) 60.0 (+5.6) 46.3 (+6.8)  41.9 (+8.7)   59.9 (-0.5)

Table 2: Performance of VideoChat-T and other methods on video question answering tasks.
By upgrading VideoChat2 with TimeSuite, VideoChat-T demonstrates significant improvements
across multiple long video benchmarks.

specific architectural design, classic supervised expert models have a natural advantage in handling
such tasks, and VideoChat-T still has a performance gap compared to expert models.

4.3   P ERFORMANCE ON G ENERAL V IDEO QA

In addition to test the grounding ability of our VideoChat-T, we also want to verify its general video
question answering performance. According to mainstream evaluation standards, we use both long
video and short video QA to assess the general video understanding capability of VideoChat-T. Table
2 shows the performance of VideoChat-T on the video QA evaluation benchmarks.
Long Video QA. We use Egoschema (Mangalam et al., 2023) and VideoMME (Fu et al., 2024) to
evaluate the long video capabilities of VideoChat-T. In conjunction with our proposed architectural
improvements, we incremental fine-tune VideoChat2 using only 432K data points. VideoChat-T
demonstrates outstanding performance on the Egoschema, achieving an accuracy of 68.4% on the
test subset and 60.0% on the entire test set. Compared to VideoChat2, VideoChat-T obtains im-
provements of 4.8% and 5.6% on the subset and the full test set, respectively. Additionally, for
the VideoMME benchmark, VideoChat-T achieves an accuracy of 46.3% by solely analyzing the
visual content without using subtitles, representing a 6.8% improvement over VideoChat2. On the
long video data division of VideoMME, VideoChat-T achieves an accuracy of 41.9%, which is an
8.7% improvement compared to VideoChat2. The upgraded VideoChat-T demonstrated significant
performance improvements on long video QA benchmarks. This indicates the potential of leverag-
ing grounding-centric video tasks to enhance the temporal awareness of MLLMs, thereby further
improving long video understanding capabilities.
Short Video QA. We use MVBench (Li et al., 2024b) to evaluate the general short video under-
standing capabilities of VideoChat-T. VideoChat-T achieves an overall average accuracy of 59.9%
on MVBench, which is a 0.5% decrease compared to VideoChat2. It is important to note that achiev-
ing minimal performance loss is a challenging task. According to previous experiences in the field
of incremental learning (Van de Ven et al., 2022), models inevitably forget old knowledge while
learning new knowledge. VideoChat2 is fine-tuned with 2M data, whereas VideoChat-T is fine-
tuned with only 432K data, where 349K annotations are temporal grounding centric, resulting in
only a 0.5% accuracy loss. Previous temporal MLLMs like TimeChat (Ren et al., 2024), although
achieving strong temporal localization capabilities, yield much weaker general video QA capability,
with an accuracy of only 38.5% on MVBench. This demonstrates that the design of our TimeSuite
enhances new capabilities for the model while still preserving the original general video understand-
ing capabilities. For a detailed analysis of the performance degradation of MVBench, please refer
to Appendix F.2.

4.4   Q UALITATIVE ANALYSIS

Figure 4 presents a qualitative comparison between our model and other methods. In the example on
the left, VideoChat-T is capable of answering more complex long video reasoning questions. Our
model accurately identifies the temporal location of the “light a cigarette” event and determines the
correct key clue “the person in a white coat” based on the video content. This leads to the inference


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                   02:48          02:51        Time                00:10         00:15          00:50         00:52                      Time
𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑙 𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔                                                                                        𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑙 𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔

     When in the video is the man in a white suit lighting a cigarette by the piano?                           When in the video do black men and white women hug each other?

     The given query happens between 38.6 – 42.3 seconds.                                                      The given query happens between 14.9 - 17.6 seconds.

     From 168.0 to 171.0 seconds.                                                                              From 10.0 - 15.0 seconds.

𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔 𝑉𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑜 𝑄𝐴                                                                                             𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔 𝑉𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑜 𝑄𝐴

      Why are the strings in the video hot enough to light a cigarette?                                        What are the two men in the video putting in the briefcase in the car?

     The strings in the video are hot enough to light a cigarette because they are made of a
                                                                                                               The two men in the video are putting a gun in the briefcase in the car.
     flammable material.

      The strings are hot because the man in the white coat is playing the piano very fast and
                                                                                                               Money.
      pressing the keys very hard.

    User           VideoChat2            TimeChat             VideoChat-T



Figure 4: Qualitative comparison between VideoChat-T and other methods. VideoChat-T not only
possesses temporal fine-grained perception capabilities but also can perform accurate long video
reasoning. Green text indicates correct answers, while red text indicates inappropriate answers.
                   Egoschema VideoMME Charades-STA QVHighlights                                                             Egoschema VideoMME Charades-STA QVHighlights
Model                                                                                                     Model
                      Full    w/o subs R@1 IOU=0.5   Hit@1                                                                     Full    w/o subs R@1 IOU=0.5   Hit@1
VideoChat-T (Ours)    60.0      46.3      48.7        54.1                                                VideoChat-T(Ours)    60.0      46.3      48.7        54.1
w/o TAPE              59.1      45.9      47.1        50.4                                                r/w pooling          59.8      44.8      40.3        47.3
w/o frz               59.0      45.2      52.4        53.7                                                r/w cluetering       59.5      45.0      39.8        40.1
                                                                                                          w/o init             57.4      43.4      42.0        53.9
Table 3: Performance results of the ablation
study on the TAPE. Here, w/o adapter refers                                                               Table 4: Performance results of the ablation
to removing our proposed TAPE, and w/o frz                                                                study on the Token Shuffle. Here, r/w refers to
refers to not using the training method where the                                                         replacing Token Shuffle with the other compo-
TAPE is frozen during the first epoch.                                                                    nent, and w/o init refers to removing the effi-
                                                                                                          cient initialization.

that “playing the piano very fast and pressing the keys very hard” are the true reasons. The example
on the right demonstrates our model’s fine-grained perception ability. The appearance of “money
in the briefcase” is very brief, and most models easily overlook this detail. Thanks to its strong
fine-grained perception ability, our model precisely captures this visual content.

4.5        A BLATION S TUDY

Role of TAPE. To verify the performance improvement brought by TAPE, ablation experiments
were conducted. Table 3 lists the performance results of the conducted adapter-related ablation
experiments. It can be observed that when the TAPE is removed, the model’s performance on long
video understanding and temporal grounding benchmarks decreases. TAPE can adaptively embed
positional encodings into video tokens, and the absence of TAPE leads to a certain loss in temporal
awareness capability. When we unfroze the TAPE in the first epoch, the performance improved on
the temporal grounding task but declined on the long video QA task. This is because the TAPE is
highly suited for tasks with strong temporal dependencies. If unfrozen too early, the model may
become biased towards fitting temporal grounding tasks. Freezing the TAPE during the first epoch
allows the model to first optimize and learn a relatively generalized feature representation, thereby
balancing the performance across different tasks.
Effectiveness of Token Shuffle. To verify the effectiveness of token shuffle, we conducted ablation
experiments. Table 4 presents the results of these ablation experiments. We compared token shuffle
with conventional methods such as pooling and clustering, and also observed the results after re-
moving efficient initialization. When we replaced token shuffle with pooling or clustering methods,
the model’s performance declined. This is because the efficient initialization of the linear layer in
token shuffle makes the initial values of the module equivalent to average pooling, which gradually
optimizes better solutions during training. Therefore, our method is inherently superior to pooling.
On the other hand, clustering often fails to maintain the spatial/temporal consistency of the video,
leading to temporal confusion. When we removed the efficient initialization of the linear layer, the
negative impact of random initialization severely damaged the model’s original performance.
Effect of TimePro. We conducted ablation studies to evaluate the effectiveness of the TimePro data
components. As shown in Table 5, by gradually adding subsets of TimePro, we observed the model’s
performance changes across various temporal grounding-centric instruction-tuning data. As we pro-


                                                                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Egoschema VideoMME Charades-STA QVHighlights
      Normal TimeIT TGC HD MTG RTL
                                                Full    w/o subs R@1 IOU=0.5   Hit@1
        ✓                                       56.6      42.6       8.0        24.4
        ✓        ✓                              57.8      43.6      32.2        25.2
        ✓        ✓      ✓                       58.3      44.0      39.1        33.9
        ✓        ✓      ✓    ✓                  59.8      44.9      41.9        43.8
        ✓        ✓      ✓    ✓    ✓             60.0      45.1      45.8        48.3
        ✓        ✓      ✓    ✓    ✓     ✓       60.0      46.3      48.7        54.1

Table 5: Performance results of the ablation study on different components of TimePro. We use 82K
normal training data as the baseline. TimeIT refers to the training data with five task types from Ren
et al. (2024), TGC refers to Temporal Grounded Caption, HD refers to Highlight Detection, MTG
refers to Multi-format Temporal Grounding, and RTL refers to Reasoning Temporal Localization.


Figure 5: Performance of VideoChat-T with varying input frame numbers. As the number of input
frames increases, the performance of VideoChat-T shows an upward trend in both long video QA
and temporal grounding tasks. Due to the over low temporal grounding performance of VideoChat2,
its curve is omitted.

gressively added subsets of TimePro, not only did the model’s performance on temporal grounding
tasks show a stable and significant improvement, but we also observed a noticeable upward trend in
performance on long video benchmarks. This to some extent corroborates that temporal grounding
centric tasks have a positive impact on long video understanding.
Impact of frames. To investigate the impact of input frame count on model performance, we con-
ducted an ablation study. Figure 5 illustrates the scalability of our model’s performance with respect
to input frame count. VideoChat-T demonstrates good stability as the input frame count varies, and
its performance in long video QA and temporal grounding tasks improves with an increase in frame
count. In contrast, the baseline model, VideoChat2, exhibited catastrophic performance degradation
when the frame count was significantly increased. As the input frame count increases, the number of
visual encoding tokens grows linearly. Excessive visual token input imposes an additional computa-
tional burden on the temporal modeling of the LLM. TimeSuite mitigates this by employing Token
Shuffle to reduce the number of tokens, ensuring the stable operation of the model.

5   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have introduced TimeSuite, a collection of new designs from perspectives of ef-
ficient architecture, high-quality data, and new instruction tuning task, to achieve long video un-
derstanding by fine-tuning short video MLLMs with temporal grounding-centric data. We address
the computational challenges of processing long videos by introducing token shuffle to compress
visual tokens. We also propose the TAPE for adaptive position encoding, enhancing the temporal
awareness of visual representation. Additionally, our designed Temporal Grounded Caption train-
ing task ensure MLLMs to build correspondence between grounded segments and detailed caption,
while the TimePro dataset provide comprehensive instruction tuning data for learning more effective
temporal perception capability. Experimental results demonstrate that VideoChat-T significantly im-
proves long video understanding, with notable performance gains on Egoschema and VideoMME.
Furthermore, VideoChat-T exhibits strong zero-shot temporal grounding capabilities, significantly
outperforming the previous MLLMs on temporal grounding. Overall, our TimeSuite provides effec-
tive designs for short MLLMs to enhance their performance on temporal grounding and long video
QA. We hope our TimeSuite could yield some insights on designing long video MLLMs.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2022ZD0160900), the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. 020214380119), Jiangsu Frontier
Technology Research and Development Program (No. BF2024076), and the Collaborative Innova-
tion Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization.

R EFERENCES
Lisa Anne Hendricks, Oliver Wang, Eli Shechtman, Josef Sivic, Trevor Darrell, and Bryan Russell.
  Localizing moments in video with natural language. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 5803–5812, 2017.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang, Sinan Tan, Peng Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang
   Zhou, and Jingren Zhou. Qwen-vl: A frontier large vision-language model with versatile abilities.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12966, 2023.
Lin Chen, Xilin Wei, Jinsong Li, Xiaoyi Dong, Pan Zhang, Yuhang Zang, Zehui Chen, Haodong
  Duan, Bin Lin, Zhenyu Tang, et al. Sharegpt4video: Improving video understanding and genera-
  tion with better captions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04325, 2024.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E Gonzalez, et al. Vicuna: An open-source chatbot
 impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality. See https://vicuna. lmsys. org (accessed 14 April
 2023), 2(3):6, 2023.
Xiangxiang Chu, Zhi Tian, Bo Zhang, Xinlong Wang, and Chunhua Shen. Conditional positional
  encodings for vision transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.10882, 2021.
Yue Fan, Xiaojian Ma, Rujie Wu, Yuntao Du, Jiaqi Li, Zhi Gao, and Qing Li. Videoagent: A
  memory-augmented multimodal agent for video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11481,
  2024.
Chaoyou Fu, Yuhan Dai, Yondong Luo, Lei Li, Shuhuai Ren, Renrui Zhang, Zihan Wang, Chenyu
  Zhou, Yunhang Shen, Mengdan Zhang, et al. Video-mme: The first-ever comprehensive evalua-
  tion benchmark of multi-modal llms in video analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.21075, 2024.
Jiyang Gao, Chen Sun, Zhenheng Yang, and Ram Nevatia. Tall: Temporal activity localization via
   language query. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
   5267–5275, 2017.
Siavash Golkar, Mariel Pettee, Michael Eickenberg, Alberto Bietti, Miles Cranmer, Geraud
  Krawezik, Francois Lanusse, Michael McCabe, Ruben Ohana, Liam Parker, et al. xval: A con-
  tinuous number encoding for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02989, 2023.
Michael Gygli, Helmut Grabner, Hayko Riemenschneider, and Luc Van Gool. Creating summaries
 from user videos. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzer-
 land, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings, Part VII 13, pp. 505–520. Springer, 2014.
Bin Huang, Xin Wang, Hong Chen, Zihan Song, and Wenwu Zhu. Vtimellm: Empower llm to grasp
  video moments. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 14271–14280, 2024a.
De-An Huang, Shijia Liao, Subhashree Radhakrishnan, Hongxu Yin, Pavlo Molchanov, Zhiding
  Yu, and Jan Kautz. Lita: Language instructed temporal-localization assistant. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.19046, 2024b.
Gabriel Huang, Bo Pang, Zhenhai Zhu, Clara Rivera, and Radu Soricut. Multimodal pretraining for
  dense video captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.11760, 2020.
Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong
  Chen, Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, et al. A survey on hallucination in large language
  models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.05232,
  2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang,
  Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–38, 2023.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.
Peng Jin, Ryuichi Takanobu, Wancai Zhang, Xiaochun Cao, and Li Yuan. Chat-univi: Unified visual
  representation empowers large language models with image and video understanding. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13700–
  13710, 2024.
Ranjay Krishna, Kenji Hata, Frederic Ren, Li Fei-Fei, and Juan Carlos Niebles. Dense-captioning
  events in videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
  706–715, 2017.
Jie Lei, Tamara L Berg, and Mohit Bansal. Detecting moments and highlights in videos via natural
   language queries. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:11846–11858, 2021a.
Jie Lei, Tamara L Berg, and Mohit Bansal. Detecting moments and highlights in videos via natural
   language queries. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:11846–11858, 2021b.
Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Dong Guo, Renrui Zhang, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Peiyuan
  Zhang, Yanwei Li, Ziwei Liu, et al. Llava-onevision: Easy visual task transfer. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.03326, 2024a.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 19730–19742. PMLR, 2023a.
KunChang Li, Yinan He, Yi Wang, Yizhuo Li, Wenhai Wang, Ping Luo, Yali Wang, Limin Wang,
  and Yu Qiao. Videochat: Chat-centric video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06355,
  2023b.
Kunchang Li, Yali Wang, Yizhuo Li, Yi Wang, Yinan He, Limin Wang, and Yu Qiao. Unmasked
  teacher: Towards training-efficient video foundation models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 19948–19960, 2023c.
Kunchang Li, Yali Wang, Yinan He, Yizhuo Li, Yi Wang, Yi Liu, Zun Wang, Jilan Xu, Guo Chen,
  Ping Luo, et al. Mvbench: A comprehensive multi-modal video understanding benchmark. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  22195–22206, 2024b.
Yanwei Li, Chengyao Wang, and Jiaya Jia. Llama-vid: An image is worth 2 tokens in large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17043, 2023d.
Zhaowei Li, Qi Xu, Dong Zhang, Hang Song, Yiqing Cai, Qi Qi, Ran Zhou, Junting Pan, Zefeng
  Li, Van Tu Vu, et al. Groundinggpt: Language enhanced multi-modal grounding model. CoRR,
  2024c.
Bin Lin, Bin Zhu, Yang Ye, Munan Ning, Peng Jin, and Li Yuan. Video-llava: Learning united
  visual representation by alignment before projection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10122, 2023a.
Kevin Qinghong Lin, Pengchuan Zhang, Joya Chen, Shraman Pramanick, Difei Gao, Alex Jin-
  peng Wang, Rui Yan, and Mike Zheng Shou. Univtg: Towards unified video-language temporal
  grounding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  2794–2804, 2023b.
Hao Liu, Wilson Yan, Matei Zaharia, and Pieter Abbeel. World model on million-length video and
  language with ringattention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08268, 2024a.
Ruyang Liu, Chen Li, Haoran Tang, Yixiao Ge, Ying Shan, and Ge Li. St-llm: Large language
  models are effective temporal learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00308, 2024b.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Muhammad Maaz, Hanoona Rasheed, Salman Khan, and Fahad Shahbaz Khan. Video-chatgpt:
 Towards detailed video understanding via large vision and language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2306.05424, 2023.
Karttikeya Mangalam, Raiymbek Akshulakov, and Jitendra Malik. Egoschema: A diagnostic bench-
  mark for very long-form video language understanding. Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, 36, 2023.
WonJun Moon, Sangeek Hyun, SuBeen Lee, and Jae-Pil Heo. Correlation-guided query-
 dependency calibration in video representation learning for temporal grounding. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2311.08835, 2023a.
WonJun Moon, Sangeek Hyun, SangUk Park, Dongchan Park, and Jae-Pil Heo. Query-dependent
 video representation for moment retrieval and highlight detection. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 23023–23033, 2023b.
Andreea-Maria Oncescu, Joao F Henriques, Yang Liu, Andrew Zisserman, and Samuel Albanie.
  Queryd: A video dataset with high-quality text and audio narrations. In ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE
  International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 2265–2269.
  IEEE, 2021.
Mengxue Qu, Xiaodong Chen, Wu Liu, Alicia Li, and Yao Zhao. Chatvtg: Video temporal ground-
 ing via chat with video dialogue large language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
 ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1847–1856, 2024.
Shuhuai Ren, Linli Yao, Shicheng Li, Xu Sun, and Lu Hou. Timechat: A time-sensitive multimodal
  large language model for long video understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14313–14323, 2024.
Share. Sharegemini: Scaling up video caption data for multimodal large language models, June
  2024. URL https://github.com/Share14/ShareGemini.
Enxin Song, Wenhao Chai, Guanhong Wang, Yucheng Zhang, Haoyang Zhou, Feiyang Wu, Haozhe
  Chi, Xun Guo, Tian Ye, Yanting Zhang, et al. Moviechat: From dense token to sparse memory
  for long video understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18221–18232, 2024a.
Enxin Song, Wenhao Chai, Tian Ye, Jenq-Neng Hwang, Xi Li, and Gaoang Wang.
  Moviechat+: Question-aware sparse memory for long video question answering. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.17176, 2024b.
Yale Song, Jordi Vallmitjana, Amanda Stent, and Alejandro Jaimes. Tvsum: Summarizing web
  videos using titles. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recog-
  nition, pp. 5179–5187, 2015.
Yansong Tang, Dajun Ding, Yongming Rao, Yu Zheng, Danyang Zhang, Lili Zhao, Jiwen Lu, and Jie
  Zhou. Coin: A large-scale dataset for comprehensive instructional video analysis. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1207–1216, 2019.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Gido M Van de Ven, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Andreas S Tolias. Three types of incremental learning.
  Nature Machine Intelligence, 4(12):1185–1197, 2022.
Limin Wang, Yuanjun Xiong, Zhe Wang, Yu Qiao, Dahua Lin, Xiaoou Tang, and Luc Van Gool.
  Temporal segment networks for action recognition in videos. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
  Intell., 41(11):2740–2755, 2019.
Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shijie Wang, Zhihao Fan, Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu,
  Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, et al. Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s perception of the
  world at any resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191, 2024a.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wenhai Wang, Zhe Chen, Xiaokang Chen, Jiannan Wu, Xizhou Zhu, Gang Zeng, Ping Luo, Tong
 Lu, Jie Zhou, Yu Qiao, et al. Visionllm: Large language model is also an open-ended decoder for
 vision-centric tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024b.
Xiaohan Wang, Yuhui Zhang, Orr Zohar, and Serena Yeung-Levy. Videoagent: Long-form video
  understanding with large language model as agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10517, 2024c.
Xidong Wang, Dingjie Song, Shunian Chen, Chen Zhang, and Benyou Wang. Longllava:
  Scaling multi-modal llms to 1000 images efficiently via hybrid architecture. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2409.02889, 2024d.
Yi Wang, Kunchang Li, Xinhao Li, Jiashuo Yu, Yinan He, Guo Chen, Baoqi Pei, Rongkun Zheng,
  Jilan Xu, Zun Wang, et al. Internvideo2: Scaling video foundation models for multimodal video
  understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.15377, 2024e.
Yueqian Wang, Xiaojun Meng, Jianxin Liang, Yuxuan Wang, Qun Liu, and Dongyan Zhao. Hawk-
  eye: Training video-text llms for grounding text in videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10228,
  2024f.
Yuxuan Wang, Yueqian Wang, Pengfei Wu, Jianxin Liang, Dongyan Zhao, Yang Liu, and Zilong
  Zheng. Efficient temporal extrapolation of multimodal large language models with temporal
  grounding bridge. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 9972–9987, 2024g.
Ziyang Wang, Shoubin Yu, Elias Stengel-Eskin, Jaehong Yoon, Feng Cheng, Gedas Bertasius, and
  Mohit Bansal. Videotree: Adaptive tree-based video representation for llm reasoning on long
  videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.19209, 2024h.
Jiannan Wu, Muyan Zhong, Sen Xing, Zeqiang Lai, Zhaoyang Liu, Wenhai Wang, Zhe Chen,
   Xizhou Zhu, Lewei Lu, Tong Lu, et al. Visionllm v2: An end-to-end generalist multimodal
   large language model for hundreds of vision-language tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08394,
   2024.
Junbin Xiao, Angela Yao, Yicong Li, and Tat-Seng Chua. Can i trust your answer? visually grounded
  video question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 13204–13214, 2024.
Fuzhao Xue, Yukang Chen, Dacheng Li, Qinghao Hu, Ligeng Zhu, Xiuyu Li, Yunhao Fang, Haotian
  Tang, Shang Yang, Zhijian Liu, et al. Longvila: Scaling long-context visual language models for
  long videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.10188, 2024.
Shen Yan, Xuehan Xiong, Arsha Nagrani, Anurag Arnab, Zhonghao Wang, Weina Ge, David Ross,
  and Cordelia Schmid. Unloc: A unified framework for video localization tasks. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 13623–13633, 2023.
En Yu, Liang Zhao, Yana Wei, Jinrong Yang, Dongming Wu, Lingyu Kong, Haoran Wei, Tiancai
  Wang, Zheng Ge, Xiangyu Zhang, et al. Merlin: Empowering multimodal llms with foresight
  minds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00589, 2023.
Abhay Zala, Jaemin Cho, Satwik Kottur, Xilun Chen, Barlas Oguz, Yashar Mehdad, and Mo-
  hit Bansal. Hierarchical video-moment retrieval and step-captioning. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 23056–23065, 2023.
Rowan Zellers, Jiasen Lu, Ximing Lu, Youngjae Yu, Yanpeng Zhao, Mohammadreza Salehi, Aditya
  Kusupati, Jack Hessel, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. Merlot reserve: Neural script knowledge
  through vision and language and sound. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16375–16387, 2022.
Xiangyu Zeng, Mingzhu Xu, Yijun Hu, Haoyu Tang, Yupeng Hu, and Liqiang Nie. Adaptive edge-
  aware semantic interaction network for salient object detection in optical remote sensing images.
  IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 2023.
Yingsen Zeng, Yujie Zhong, Chengjian Feng, and Lin Ma. Unimd: Towards unifying moment
  retrieval and temporal action detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04933, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hang Zhang, Xin Li, and Lidong Bing. Video-llama: An instruction-tuned audio-visual language
  model for video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02858, 2023.
Haoji Zhang, Yiqin Wang, Yansong Tang, Yong Liu, Jiashi Feng, Jifeng Dai, and Xiaojie Jin.
  Flash-vstream: Memory-based real-time understanding for long video streams. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.08085, 2024a.
Peiyuan Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Bo Li, Guangtao Zeng, Jingkang Yang, Yuanhan Zhang, Ziyue
  Wang, Haoran Tan, Chunyuan Li, and Ziwei Liu. Long context transfer from language to vision.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.16852, 2024b.
Junjie Zhou, Yan Shu, Bo Zhao, Boya Wu, Shitao Xiao, Xi Yang, Yongping Xiong, Bo Zhang,
  Tiejun Huang, and Zheng Liu. Mlvu: A comprehensive benchmark for multi-task long video
  understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04264, 2024.
Luowei Zhou, Chenliang Xu, and Jason Corso. Towards automatic learning of procedures from web
  instructional videos. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32,
  2018.


A    I MPLEMENTATION OF TAPE

Algorithm 1 PyTorch snippet of TAPE.
    Initialize related package
    class TemporalAdapter(nn.Module):
        def __init__(self, merge_len, clip_num, input_dim, mid_dim, output_dim, sample_rate):
            super().__init__()
            self.AvgPool = nn.AvgPool1d(merge_len, stride = merge_len)
            self.upsample = nn.Upsample(scale_factor = sample_rate)
            self.linear_input = nn.Linear(input_dim, mid_dim)
            self.linear_output = nn.Linear(mid_dim, output_dim)
            nn.init.constant_(self.linear_output.weight, 0)
            nn.init.constant_(self.linear_output.bias, 0)
            self.Downsample_Depthwise_Separable_Conv1 = nn.Sequential(
                nn.Conv1d(mid_dim, mid_dim, merge_len*2+1, stride=sample_rate, padding=merge_len, groups=
                      mid_dim),
                nn.Conv1d(mid_dim, mid_dim, 1),
                TransposeLayerNorm(mid_dim),
                nn.GELU(),
            )
            self.Downsample_Depthwise_Separable_Conv2 = nn.Sequential(
                nn.Conv1d(mid_dim, mid_dim, merge_len*2+1, stride=sample_rate, padding=merge_len, groups=
                      mid_dim),
                nn.Conv1d(mid_dim, mid_dim, 1),
                TransposeLayerNorm(mid_dim),
                nn.GELU(),
            )
            self.fc = nn.Sequential(
                nn.Conv1d(mid_dim, mid_dim, clip_num+1, stride=1, padding=clip_num//2),
                TransposeLayerNorm(mid_dim),
                nn.GELU(),
            )
            self.Conv2 = nn.Sequential(
                nn.Conv1d(mid_dim, mid_dim, merge_len+1, stride=1, padding=merge_len//2, groups=mid_dim),
                nn.Conv1d(mid_dim, mid_dim, 1),
                TransposeLayerNorm(mid_dim),
                nn.GELU(),
            )
            self.Conv1 = nn.Sequential(
                nn.Conv1d(mid_dim, mid_dim, merge_len+1, stride=1, padding=merge_len//2, groups=mid_dim),
                nn.Conv1d(mid_dim, mid_dim, 1),
                TransposeLayerNorm(mid_dim),
                nn.GELU(),
            )
        def forward(self, input_tokens):
            time_ad = self.linear_input(input_tokens).transpose(1, 2)
            time_ad1 = self.AvgPool(time_ad)
            time_ad2 = self.Downsample_Depthwise_Separable_Conv1(time_ad1)
            time_ad3 = self.Downsample_Depthwise_Separable_Conv2(time_ad2)
            time_ad3 = self.fc(time_ad3)
            time_ad2 = self.upsample(time_ad3)+ time_ad2
            time_ad2 = self.Conv2(time_ad2)
            time_ad1 = self.upsample(time_ad2)+ time_ad1
            time_ad1 = self.Conv1(time_ad1)
            time_ad_out = self.linear_output(time_ad1.transpose(1, 2))
            return time_ad_out


Algorithm 1 details the implementation process of TAPE in code form. Specifically, the long video
token sequence input tokens is first compressed in the channel dimension by a linear layer to obtain
time ad, and the sequence length is compressed through a pooling layer. Next, we use a U-Net-like
structure composed of one-dimensional depthwise separable convolutions to progressively down-
sample the sequence, obtaining three one-dimensional temporal feature sequences with different


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


time resolutions, namely time ad1, time ad2, and time ad3. Subsequently, a convolution with a
sufficiently long window is applied to the shortest temporal feature sequence time ad3, using zero
padding at both ends as anchors to encode the relative temporal position of each token in the se-
quence. Then, we progressively upsample the temporal feature sequences from short to long, using
residual connections to preserve temporal features at different scales. Finally, the temporal feature
sequence time ad out is restored to the same length as the video features after token shuffling and
aligned in the channel dimension through a linear layer.


B    I NSTRUCTION - TUNING DATA

We fine-tuned VideoChat-T using 432K data, which includes 349K instances from TimePro and 82K
instances from normal data. All videos were sampled from existing open-source video datasets, with
specific information about the relevant data provided in Table 6.

            Set       Task                           Sourse               Instance Num
                                                     DideMo                      32,944
                    Temporal Video Grounding         QueryD                      14,602
                                                     HiREST-grounding               459
                                                     ActivityNet-Captions        10,009
                    Dense Video Captioning           ViTT                         5,086
                                                     Youcook2                     8,700
                                                     TVSum                           50
                    Video Summarization
            TimePro                                  SumMe                           25
                                                     COIN                         9,026
                    Step Localization and Captioning
                                                     HiREST-step                    459
                    Transcribed Speech Generation    YT-Temporal                 31,190
                    Reasoning Temporal Localization ActivityNet-RTL              33,557
                    Multi-format Temporal Grounding InternVid-VTime             100,000
                    Highlight Detection              ActivityNet-HL              10,340
                    Temporal Grounded Caption        CosMo-TGC                   93,118
                                                     VideoChatGPT                13,303
                    Conversation
                                                     VideoChat                   13,884
                                                     EgoQA                        7,813
            Normal Video QA
                                                     MovieChat-QA                   808
                    Reasoning                        STAR                        45,731
                    Caption                          MovieChat-Caption              808

Table 6: The complete instruction fine-tuning data used for training. We utilized a total of approxi-
mately 432K data points, which can be divided into 349K instances of TimePro and 82K instances
of regular video data, covering 13 tasks across 21 datasets.

We evaluate the quality of the data from three perspectives: diversity, length, and difficulty. We strive
to include different datasets for various tasks, and the distribution of videos in the datasets is as broad
as possible. The length of the videos should be controlled within an appropriate range, as excessively
long or short videos may pose challenges for training. Each query should clearly describe the video
content of the target time segment and avoid corresponding to multiple time segments in the video.
Based on these principles, we have screened and integrated existing high-quality datasets, which
significantly contribute to enhancing the model’s temporal awareness capabilities.
TimePro encompasses a series of open-source temporal grounding datasets that we have integrated,
cleaned, and refined, such as TimeIT (Ren et al., 2024), ANet-RTL (Huang et al., 2024b), and
InternVid-VTime (Huang et al., 2024a). These high-quality open-source datasets have been experi-
mentally validated by us. We also added two new self-made datasets, ANet-HL and CosMo-TGC.
Temporal Video Grounding. This task involves providing a natural language query and requires
outputting the corresponding video’s start and end times. The datasets include DiDeMo (Anne Hen-


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


dricks et al., 2017), QuerYD (Oncescu et al., 2021), and HiREST-grounding (Zala et al., 2023),
aiming to achieve precise temporal localization during user interaction with natural language.
Dense Video Captioning. This task requires the model to detect a series of events occurring in a
given video and output the corresponding timestamps and coarse-grained descriptions. The datasets
for this part include ActivityNet-Caption (Krishna et al., 2017), ViTT Huang et al. (2020), and
YouCook2 (Zhou et al., 2018), which help the model learn the temporal relationships between dif-
ferent events within the video.
Video Summarization. The goal of this task is not to summarize at the semantic level of natural
language, but to determine a set of compressed frames or clips in the form of timestamps, repre-
senting the most informative content in a given video. Our datasets include TVSum (Song et al.,
2015) and SumMe (Gygli et al., 2014), which effectively combine the model’s temporal perception
capabilities with its semantic content inference abilities.
Step Localization and Captioning. This task differs from dense video captioning as it is designed
to segment and describe the important steps within a long video. We have integrated two datasets,
COIN (Tang et al., 2019) and HiREST-step (Zala et al., 2023), which can help the model learn the
procedural temporal logic relationships of different steps within a single event.
Transcribed Speech Generation. The purpose of this task is to predict speech content and its corre-
sponding start and end timestamps based on visual signals in the video. Including the YT-Temporal
(Zellers et al., 2022) dataset, this task can be viewed as a weakly supervised event localization and
description task.
Reasoning Temporal Localization. The answers to the questions in this task include both times-
tamps and explanations. We used the ANet-RTL (Huang et al., 2024b) dataset as training data for
this task. By combining temporal localization and reasoning, we can more specifically enhance the
model’s temporal perception capabilities.
Multi-format Temporal Grounding. This task includes both single-turn and multi-turn dialogues,
with a variety of question types. We use the InternVid-VTime (Huang et al., 2024a) dataset for
training this task. The broader range of task types and more diverse output formats can effectively
enhance the model’s temporal generalization capabilities.
Highlight Detection. Unlike video summarization, this task identifies only the most salient mo-
ments of a video in response to a natural language query, without covering the entire scope of the
original video (Lei et al., 2021a). We used a custom dataset, ANet-HL, derived from temporal local-
ization data. We extract video segments between the start and end times of the target’s appearance
and use CLIP to calculate the similarity between each frame’s scene and the target. This is converted
into discrete saliency levels ranging from 1 to 5, at intervals of 0.5. This task effectively enhances
the model’s temporal perception capabilities for specific events.
Temporal Grounded Caption. This task involves using scene titles as queries, requiring the model
to output both the time segments when the scenes appear and the fine-grained subtitles for those
segments. We used our custom dataset, CosMo-TGC. This task format, which combines tempo-
ral localization and semantic understanding, can effectively prevent large language models from
focusing on irrelevant video segments, thereby improving the quality of the model’s responses to
questions.
We also used normal data comprising four tasks and six different data sources. These general data
help prevent the model from overfitting to temporal grounding-related tasks during training, thereby
preserving the model’s original capabilities.


C    C OMPUTATIONAL E FFICIENCY

By applying Token Shuffle, we further reduced the computational cost of VideoChat-T, giving it
a significant computational advantage over high-performance models like LLaVA-OneVision (Li
et al., 2024a) and Qwen2-VL (Wang et al., 2024a). Under the same settings, VideoChat-T uses only
3 tokens per frame, with flops consumption at just 5.1% of LLaVA-OneVision. Its inference time
on single A100 is only 0.63 seconds, reaching real-time response levels, making it highly suitable
for applications requiring rapid response, such as online video understanding.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Token num      flops           Inference Time        Charades-STA   QVHighlight   MVBench   Egoschema   VideoMME
 Method
                                      per frame   128 frames   128f & on single A100 GPU      IOU0.5        mAP           Avg        Full       Vision
 Qwen2-VL (Wang et al., 2024a)           138        929.8 T          Out Of Memory             15.0          13.0        67.0        66.7        63.3
 LLaVA-OneVision (Li et al., 2024a)      196        693.7 T               4.95 s                7.3         14.98        56.7        60.1        58.2
 VideoChat-T (Ours)                        3        35.5 T                0.63 s               48.7          26.5        59.9        60.0        46.3


Table 7: Comparison of the computational efficiency and performance of VideoChat-T with other
methods. Our approach achieves relatively impressive performance with extremely low computa-
tional cost.


In terms of performance, VideoChat-T significantly outperforms LLaVA-OneVision in temporal
grounding tasks. It has a slight advantage on MVBench; both perform comparably on Egoschema;
but VideoChat-T performs worse on VideoMME. Given the substantial savings in computational
resources with VideoChat-T, we consider the disadvantages on some datasets to be acceptable.
Moreover, our model’s ability to maintain reasonable performance under high compression ratios
suggests that the token embedding spaces of contemporary models may be characterized by con-
siderable feature redundancy. This observation presents a promising avenue for future research,
as efficient techniques for compressing or discarding redundant features could substantially reduce
computational costs without sacrificing model performance, enabling longer context reasoning.

D       D ETAILS OF H YPERPARAMETERS

                                           config                                    epoch1      epoch2&3
                                           input frame                                 192            128
                                           max text length                            1536           1024
                                           freeze TAPE                                True          False
                                           learning rate                              2e-5          1.5e-5
                                           input resolution                                    224
                                           clip frame                                            8
                                           merge lenth                                           4
                                           QFormer token (per clip)                             96
                                           lora rank                                            16
                                           lora alpha                                           32
                                           lora dropout                                         0.1
                                           batch size (per GPU)                                  2
                                           optimizer                                         AdamW
                                           optimizer momentum                               0.9, 0.999
                                           weight decay                                        0.02
                                           learning rate schedule                          cosine decay

               Table 8: Hyper-parameter Settings During the Training Process of VideoChat-T.

Table 8 lists the hyperparameters used during different epochs of the training process. In the first
epoch, we used a larger number of input frames and froze the TAPE. At the beginning of the second
epoch, we unfroze the TAPE and fixed the model’s input frames to 128. Following the settings of
VideoChat2, we integrated the lora module into the LLM and applied flash attention to accelerate
the training process.

E      F ULL PERFORMANCES

Model                           LLM Avg AS AP AA FA UA OE OI OS MD AL ST AC MC MA SC FP CO EN ER CI
VideoChatGPT (Maaz et al., 2023) 7B 32.7 23.5 26.0 62.0 22.5 26.5 54.0 28.0 40.0 23.0 20.0 31.0 30.5 25.5 39.5 48.5 29.0 33.0 29.5 26.0 35.5
VideoLLaMA (Zhang et al., 2023) 7B 34.1 27.5 25.5 51.0 29.0 39.0 48.0 40.5 38.0 22.5 22.5 43.0 34.0 22.5 32.5 45.5 32.5 40.0 30.0 21.0 37.0
VideoChat (Li et al., 2023b)     7B 35.5 33.5 26.5 56.0 33.5 40.5 53.0 40.5 30.0 25.5 27.0 48.5 35.0 20.5 42.5 46.0 26.5 41.0 23.5 23.5 36.0
ST-LLM (Liu et al., 2024b)       7B 54.9 66.0 53.5 84.0 44.0 58.5 80.5 73.5 38.5 42.5 31.0 86.5 36.5 56.5 78.5 43.0 44.5 46.5 34.5 41.5 58.5
VideoChat2 (Li et al., 2024b)    7B 60.4 75.5 58.0 83.5 50.5 60.5 87.5 74.5 45.0 47.5 44.0 82.5 37.0 64.5 87.5 51.0 66.5 47.0 35.0 37.0 72.5
VideoChat-T                      7B 59.9 83.5 68.5 80.5 44.0 61.0 71.0 84.0 35.5 48.0 56.5 87.0 46.0 56.5 78.0 49.5 59.0 46.0 37.0 40.0 66.5

Table 9: The full performance of VideoChat-T on MVBench. VideoChat-T still demonstrates strong
performance, effectively prevents catastrophic forgetting caused by incremental fine-tuning.

                                                                              18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The performance of VideoChat-T on MVBench is shown in Table 9. Compared to VideoChat2,
VideoChat-T only experienced a 0.5% accuracy loss. This indicates that our method effectively pre-
serves the capabilities of the base model, preventing catastrophic forgetting caused by incremental
fine-tuning. For a detailed analysis of the performance degradation of MVBench, please refer to
Appendix F.2. For the Action Localization (AL) task, which requires the model to determine the
coarse-grained temporal position of events, the test accuracy improved from 44.0% to 56.5%. This
indirectly confirms that our method significantly enhances the model’s temporal awareness capabil-
ities.

                                                   Overall (%)   Short Video (%) Medium Video (%) Long Video (%)
 Model                                LLM size
                                                 w/o subs w subs w/o subs w subs w/o subs w subs w/o subs w subs
 ST-LLM (Liu et al., 2024b)             7B         37.9     42.3   45.7    48.4    36.8    41.4    31.3    36.9
 Video-LLaVA (Lin et al., 2023a)        7B         39.9     41.6   45.3    46.1    38.0    40.7    36.2    38.1
 ShareGPT4Video (Chen et al., 2024)     8B         39.9     43.6   48.3    53.6    36.3    39.3    35.0    37.9
 Chat-UniVi-v1.5 (Jin et al., 2024)     7B         40.6     45.9   45.7    51.2    40.3    44.6    35.8    41.8
 Qwen-VL-Chat (Bai et al., 2023)        7B         41.1     41.9   46.9    47.3    38.7    40.4    37.8    37.9
 ShareGemini (Share, 2024)              7B         43.2     47.9   49.1    52.8    41.3    47.3    39.1    43.4
 VideoChat2 (Li et al., 2024b)          7B         39.5     43.8   48.3    52.8    37.0    39.4    33.2    39.2
 VideoChat-T                            7B         46.3     55.8   53.3    59.9    43.8    54.0    41.9    53.4
Table 10: The full performance of VideoChat-T on VideoMME. VideoChat-T achieved significant
performance improvements, particularly in the long video subset.
The overall performance of our model on VideoMME is presented in Table 10. VideoChat-T
achieved significant improvements on both evaluation benchmarks of VideoMME, which include
watching videos only and videos with subtitles. The improvements are particularly notable in the
long video subset.

F     E XTRA ABLATION
F.1    D OMAIN CORRELATION OF DATA

                          Model            Charades-STA(R@1 IOU=0.5)       MVBench(avg)
                          VideoChat-T                  48.7                    59.9
                          w/o STAR                  47.5 (-1.2)             59.4 (-0.5)

Table 11: The performance changes of the model after removing STAR. Although the video sources
of STAR may have some domain correlation with those of Charades-STA and MVBench, the per-
formance of our model is minimally affected by STAR.

We found that the video sources in the STAR dataset might have some domain correlation with the
video sources in MVBench and Charades-STA. Therefore, we removed STAR from the training set
while keeping other training settings consistent with the original. The performance on benchmarks
where the video sources might have domain correlation is shown in Table 11. The model’s accuracy
on Charades-STA (R@1 IOU=0.5) decreased by 1.2%, and the average accuracy on MVBench de-
creased by 0.5%. This indicates that the domain correlation of video sources did not significantly
impact performance for our model. Notably, after removing STAR, our normal data volume was
reduced to approximately 36K. This implies that, with sufficiently parameter-efficient initialization
and appropriate training strategies, using only a small amount of high-quality normal data is suffi-
cient to retain the model’s original capabilities.

F.2    D EEPER INVESTIGATION OF THE PERFORMANCE DROP ON MV BENCH

We conducted a deeper investigation into the performance decline on MVBench. Through additional
ablation experiments (as shown in Tabel 12) , we identified two main factors contributing to the
performance drop.
Architectural Discrepancy: The original VideoChat2 model was designed to process only 16 frames,
leading to a mismatch in the learned feature distribution compared to the architecture of VideoChat-
T. As shown in the first two rows of the table, increasing the input frame number for VideoChat2


                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Method                      post ft data              data size   frame num   token num (per frame)    MVBench(AVG)

 VideoChat2                  -                                -        16               12                   60.4
 VideoChat2                  -                                -       128               12                   42.1
 VideoChat-T (Common Init)   -                                -       128                3                   25.3
 VideoChat-T (Ours)          -                                -       128                3                   48.6
 VideoChat-T (Ours)          TimePro+Normal (Ours)         0.43M      128               3                    59.9
 VideoChat-T (Ours)          TimePro+FullVideoChat2         2M        128               3                    62.9

  Table 12: Performance of VideoChat2 and VideoChat-T on MVBench under different settings.


resulted in a significant performance drop (from 60.4 to 42.1). When initializing VideoChat-T with
VideoChat2, performance was close to random (25.3) due to the newly introduced randomly ini-
tialized layers. By applying efficient initialization to these new layers, we partially recovered the
original capabilities of the model, bringing the MVBench performance of the un-trained VideoChat-
T back to 48.6, representing an improvement of 6.5 compared to the 128-frame VideoChat2. After
further fine-tuning, the short-video processing capability of VideoChat-T improved significantly,
reaching 59.9.
Fine-tuning Data Discrepancy: We fine-tuned VideoChat-T using only 432K data, significantly less
than the 2M non-grounded regular data used for training VideoChat2. The fine-tuning data for
VideoChat2 primarily consisted of short videos of around ten seconds, which closely matched the
length distribution of the MVBench evaluation videos, playing a crucial role in improving MVBench
performance. To validate our hypothesis, we conducted additional experiments by training our
VideoChat-T model using the TimePro and full VideoChat2 training data. It can be observed that
VideoChat-T showed a slight improvement in performance on the MVBench dataset, achieving an
accuracy of 62.9, which is an increase of 2.5 compared to the original VideoChat2.
Based on the above, we can conclude the fundamental reasons affecting the model’s foundational
generalization capabilities. When a model undergoes adjustments, the learned original distribution
may not perfectly match the new architecture, making the efficient initialization of new layers cru-
cial. The features learned from the original dataset might be forgotten due to changes in various
parameters. Utilizing a more comprehensive and diverse dataset for fine-tuning can restore and even
further enhance performance.

F.3   A SSOCIATION BETWEEN P ERFORMANCE AND M ODEL D ESIGN

                                            Charades-STA     QVHighlight    MVBench   Egoschema        VideoMME
       Method            FT Data
                                               IOU0.5          mAP            Avg        Full           w/o subs
       TimeChat       TimeIT+Valley             32.2            14.5         38.5        33.0             30.2
       TimeChat      TimePro+Normal             34.2            16.3         41.6        38.9             33.4
       VideoChat-T   TimePro+Normal             48.7            26.5         59.9        60.0             46.3

Table 13: Comparison of other model architectures trained on our dataset with our method, demon-
strating the impact of the overall model structure design.

To eliminate the influence of training data and auxiliary tasks, and to more clearly evaluate the asso-
ciation between performance and model design, we fine-tuned TimeChat using the full set of fine-
tuning data and auxiliary tasks from VideoChat-T. Table 13 presents the performance of TimeChat,
fine-tuned with our data, across five datasets. It can be observed that TimeChat, fine-tuned with our
data, shows improvements across all benchmarks. However, its performance still lags significantly
behind VideoChat-T. This indicates that an efficient fine-tuning architecture design and high-quality,
diverse datasets are both essential and complementary.

F.4   VALIDATION OF T RANSFERABILITY

To verify the robustness of our TimeSuite for other MLLMs, we transferred our method to Llava-
OneVision (Li et al., 2024a). Table 14 shows the performance changes of Llava-OneVision after
applying our TimeSuite. It can be seen that when we apply the full set of methods in TimeSuite
to Llava-OneVision, the model’s performance on two different long-video evaluation benchmarks


                                                            20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Charades-STA      QVHighlight    VideoMME      MLVU      MVBench
      Method
                                       IOU0.5           mAP           w/o subs      Avg        Avg
      Llava-OneVision (baseline)         7.3             15.0           58.2        64.7      56.7
      Llava-OneVision-T (Ours)          42.5             21.7           61.4        69.4      56.1

Table 14: Performance comparison of TimeSuite migration to other MLLMs. The application of our
method shows a certain improvement in long video comprehension, demonstrating the transferability
of our approach.


improves (+3.2 on VideoMME and +4.7 on MLVU), effectively demonstrating the robustness of our
TimeSuite for different MLLMs.

F.5   E XPLORATIONS OF DATA C ONFIGRATIONS OF T IME P RO

                                            MVBench   Egoschema   VideoMME    Charades-STA   QVHighlight
      Method
                                              Avg        Full      w/o subs     IOU=0.5        mAP
      TimePro615K+Normal82K (old version)    60.0        61.0        46.3         45.4          25.7
      TimePro349K+Normal82K (Ours)           59.9        60.0        46.3         48.7          26.5

Table 15: Comparison of different versions of our proposed TimePro. More data does not necessarily
lead to higher overall performance, highlighting the importance of data quality.

In the early version of TimePro, we employed datasets comprising 309K Multi-format Temporal
Grounding instances, 150K Temporal Grounded Caption instances and other data. Through exten-
sive experimentation (as shown in Tabel 15), we discovered that removing low-quality data while
retaining high-quality instances could significantly reduce training time without compromising per-
formance. Consequently, we pruned these two part datasets to 100K and 93K instances, respectively.
The data distribution presented in the paper represents the optimized and relatively balanced config-
uration we arrived at.

G     D ISCUSSION

G.1   C AN THE OVERALL PERFORMANCE OF MLLM S BE ENHANCED BY CONTINUOUSLY
      INTEGRATING EXPERT TASKS ?

By appropriately fine-tuning the Multimodal Large Language Model (MLLM), we have developed a
general MLLM with powerful zero-shot temporal grounding capabilities. Its performance, after fine-
tuning on the training set of evaluation benchmarks, can rival the current state-of-the-art supervised
expert models. Based on these results, we can boldly speculate whether it is possible to internalize
the capabilities of expert models such as spatial grounding, tracking and detection (Zeng et al., 2023)
into the MLLM itself, without using any external expert decoders, to enhance the comprehensive
understanding performance of the MLLM and achieve a unified generalist MLLM for multiple tasks.
Merlin (Yu et al., 2023) and VisionLLM (Wang et al., 2024b) have already attempted something
similar, but its performance is limited by the reasoning capabilities and language representation
bottlenecks of the LLM. There is still a significant gap between its performance and that of ex-
pert models for various tasks. We observed similar phenomena in our experiments. The temporal
grounding task only requires outputting two timestamps, and the task format is relatively simple, so
our model achieved good results. However, the highlight detection task requires outputting multiple
discrete timestamps and their corresponding saliency scores. The model needs to accurately predict
dozens of numbers in language form to answer the question correctly. Our model performed well
only on data with fewer timestamps. Therefore, how to simplify the complex output format of ex-
pert tasks into the language representation of LLMs, or to design special processing procedures to
simplify complex expert tasks, is a question worth exploring.
Moreover, designing diverse data formats is also crucial for enhancing the expert capabilities of
MLLMs. Compared to classic expert models, MLLMs have a natural advantage in task type diversity
and can enhance their performance through various different variants tasks of a single capability.


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For temporal grounding tasks, we found that enhancing task diversity has a significant effect on
improving the model’s temporal perception generalization ability. We can boldly speculate that if
there are sufficiently diverse training data task types, most tasks with relatively simple output formats
can achieve results comparable to expert models through appropriate instruction fine-tuning.
Through the integration of diverse expert tasks and the optimization of language representations,
MLLMs can achieve substantial improvements in their overall capabilities. This allows them to
effectively comprehend and address complex tasks, rivaling or even exceeding the performance of
specialized expert models within specific domains. Looking ahead, MLLMs have the potential to
evolve into highly versatile AI models, transcending traditional conversational and QA capabilities.
They will be equipped to handle a wide range of complex expert tasks across various domains, such
as vision, language, and reasoning.


G.2    W HY DOES TEMPORAL GROUNDING DATA LEAD TO ACCURACY LOSS IN SHORT- TERM
       VIDEOS ?


We conducted ablation experiments using different combinations of temporal grounding data and
regular data. The accuracy of VideoChat-T on MVBench after fine-tuning with various data combi-
nations is shown in Table 16.


                            FT Data                       MVBench (AVG)
                            TimeIT                            54.7
                            TimeIT+Normal                     55.3
                            Normal                            56.1
                            TimePro                           57.4
                            TimePro+Normal (Ours)             59.9

    Table 16: Performance VideoChat-T on MVBench under different fine-tuning data settings.


The diversity of grounding data formats in the past has often been limited, which can lead to over-
fitting on Temporal Grounding tasks and cause the model to lose its general question-answering
capability. We compared the TimeIT dataset proposed in TimeChat (Ren et al., 2024) with our
TimePro dataset on MVBench. As shown in the Table 16, fine-tuning with only TimeIT resulted in
the lowest accuracy, and the combined use of TimeIT+Normal also performed slightly worse than
using Normal alone. This indicates that monotonous grounding data indeed damages the model’s
original performance (as shown in Figure 1 at the beginning of the paper, TimeChat loses some of
its general question-answering capability after fine-tuning, where it outputs localization times for
general questions).
In contrast, our TimePro dataset includes diverse data, encompassing 9 different task types from
15 datasets, which helps mitigate the generalization loss caused by homogeneous grounding data
types. Additionally, our dataset integrates Grounding with various general tasks. For instance,
Grounded Caption requires detailed descriptions of corresponding video segments, while Reasoning
Temporal Localization demands the model to reason about questions. This approach significantly
enhances the model’s generalization ability and minimizes the impact on its original capability (e.g.,
short video accuracy). As demonstrated in the Table 16, the performance of using only TimePro
exceeds that of using Normal alone, and the combined use of TimePro and Normal far surpasses all
other combinations. This also confirms that our TimePro effectively preserves the model’s original
performance.
Overall, using a single type of expert task training data can easily lead to model overfitting, resulting
in significant loss of the model’s original capabilities. To preserve the model’s foundational gener-
alization abilities, it is essential to use diversified training data. Additionally, incorporating data of
various types and distributions, such as text, images, and videos, can further enhance the model’s
generalization capabilities.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.3    C OULD TRAINING THE MODEL ON BOTH TEMPORAL AND NON - TEMPORAL GROUNDING
       DATA MITIGATE PERFORMANCE LOSS IN SHORT- TERM VIDEOS ?

To address this question, we conducted additional ablation experiments. By training VideoChat-T
with different combinations of temporal and non-temporal grounding data, we were able to clearly
observe the effects of both types of data on the model’s performance. The results of the experiments
are shown in the Table 17.

                                           MVBench        VideoMME         Charades-STA
            FT Data
                                             Avg           w/o subs          R1@0.5
            Normal                          56.1             42.6               8.0
            TimePro                         57.4             46.0              45.6
            TimePro+Normal (Ours)           59.9             46.3              48.7

Table 17: Performance comparison of VideoChat-T using different combinations of temporal
grounding and non-temporal grounding data.

It can be observed that the combined use of TimePro+Normal for VideoChat-T achieves the highest
performance in short video QA, long video QA, and temporal grounding tasks. This not only demon-
strates that using both temporal grounding and non-temporal grounding data can reduce performance
loss in short videos, but also reveals that the effects of temporal and non-temporal grounding data
are complementary across various tasks. The distinct differences between temporal grounding and
non-temporal grounding tasks can respectively compensate for the model’s shortcomings in dif-
ferent task perspectives and feature distributions. The simultaneous use of both types of data can
effectively enhance the model’s overall capabilities.

H     C ASE STUDY

H.1    MORE QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS

To further qualitatively analyze our model, we supplemented it with three types of examples. These
examples are about long video QA, short video QA, and captioning tasks, all of which include
temporal grounding.
More qualitative comparisons about long video QA are shown in Figure 6. VideoChat-T effectively
handles various questions across different domains. By better perceiving the temporal relationships
of different events occurring in long videos, it can more accurately and deeply understand the de-
tailed content of the entire video.
More qualitative comparisons about short video QA are shown in Figure 7. VideoChat-T effectively
retains the original capabilities of the base model. Through parameter-efficient initialization meth-
ods and appropriate training strategies, we minimize the damage to the base model’s capabilities
caused by new architectures and data.
More qualitative comparisons about captioning are shown in Figure 8. Although VideoChat2 de-
scribes more local details in some scenarios compared to VideoChat-T, VideoChat-T focuses more
on a series of temporal events, which aligns better with how humans typically describe videos.

H.2    S HORTCOMINGS

We also conducted a qualitative analysis of the shortcomings of VideoChat-T through examples.
As shown in Figure 9, VideoChat-T performs poorly on examples with complex logic. In the left
example, although VideoChat-T accurately identified the timing of the event, it failed to fully explain
the motivation behind the man opening the isolation door, which was ”to fight the hijackers of the
space elevator, seize the controller, and thus save the people in the entire space elevator.” In the right
example, VideoChat-T correctly identified the event where Mr. Bean reached out to touch his desk
mate’s table, but it incorrectly explained the true reason for this action, which was ”to cover up the
fact that he was copying his desk mate’s exam by pretending to wipe dust off the desk.”


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        00:13                       00:16         03:11                     Time                   00:07                      00:12          00:18                   00:30       Time
𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑙 𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔                                                                                      𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑙 𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔
     When in the video did the player wearing the white jersey, No. 15, make a successful
                                                                                                             When did the person in the video walk up the stairs?
     throw?

     The given query happens between 36.8 – 54.2 seconds.                                                    The given query happens between 22.6 – 24.2 seconds.

     From 13.2 to 16.2 seconds.                                                                              From 7.6 to 11.6 seconds.
𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔 𝑉𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑜 𝑄𝐴                                                                                           𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔 𝑉𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑜 𝑄𝐴

     According to the ending of the game, what color clothes did the losing women's
                                                                                                             What did the person in the video walk up the stairs and grab?
     basketball team wear?

     The video does not show what color clothes did the losing women's basketball team wear.                 The person in the video grabbed a tape measure.

     The losing women's basketball team wore white clothes.                                                  The person in the video walked up the stairs and grabbed a toolbox.


           00:20                      00:23                       00:36                     Time                                                             03:25         03:30                 Time
𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑙 𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔                                                                                      𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑙 𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔

     At what time in the video does the man open the cupboard?                                               When in the video a lady holds a microphone and sings against a green background?


     The given query happens between 15.4 – 21.0 seconds.                                                    The given query happens between 131.2– 147.0 seconds.

     From 20.0 to 23.0 seconds                                                                               From 205.0 to 210.0 seconds.
𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔 𝑉𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑜 𝑄𝐴                                                                                           𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔 𝑉𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑜 𝑄𝐴

     What did the man put into the bowl first?                                                               What feel of the song is the lady singing in the video?


     The man put the chocolate chips into the bowl first.                                                    The lady in the video is singing a sad song.

     The man put the cereal into the bowl first.                                                             The song is born to be alive.



                   Figure 6: More qualitative comparisons in temporal grounding & long video QA.



                                                    00:13                       00:23       Time                                               00:04                       00:08                 Time
𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑙 𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔                                                                                      𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑙 𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔

     When did the sun and the bird appear in the painting in the video?                                      When did the person in the video put the meat into the pot?


     The given query happens between 5.7 – 10.9 seconds.                                                    The given query happens between 5.2 – 8.6 seconds.

     The sun and the bird appeared in the painting from 13.0 to 23.9 seconds.                               From 4.0 to 7.2 seconds.
𝑉𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑜 𝑄𝐴                                                                                                𝑉𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑜 𝑄𝐴

     What does the man use to paint in the video?                                                           What did the man do in the video?


     The man in the video uses a paintbrush to paint.                                                       The man in the video added chicken to the pan.

     The man in the video uses his finger to paint on the sand.                                             The man in the video added oil and chicken to a pan.



                   Figure 7: More qualitative comparisons in temporal grounding & short video QA.


Due to the preponderance of single-turn, perceptual questions in our training data and the lack of
multi-step reasoning data with complex logic, our model struggles to handle more challenging sce-
narios that demand intricate logical reasoning. To address this limitation, we propose constructing
data in a chain-of-thought format to guide the model through multi-step reasoning, enabling it to
delve deeper into the underlying motivations and causal relationships within a video.


                                                                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                     00:38                                       00:59           00:10                          00:13
𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑙 𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔                                                                                       𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑙 𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔

     When does the close-up of this woman's face appear?                                                      At what time in the video the rocket ignite and launch?


     The given query happens between 35.4 – 51.0 seconds.                                                     The given query happens between 11.3 – 17.0 seconds.

     From 37.8 to 59.9 seconds.                                                                               From 10.0 to 13.0 seconds.
𝑉𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑜 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔                                                                                         𝑉𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑜 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔

      Describe this video in detail.                                                                           Describe this video in detail.

     The video starts with a woman walking down the street in the rain. She is wearing a black                The video shows a rocket launching into space. The rocket is carrying a satellite into space.
     coat and carrying a black bag. The camera follows her as she walks down the street. The                  The satellite is shown in orbit around the Earth. The video also shows the Earth from
     woman is wearing sunglasses and has long black hair. The street is wet and there are                     space.
     buildings on either side of the road. The woman continues to walk down the street while
     the camera follows her. The video ends with the woman still walking down the street.                     The video shows a rocket launching from a building and then a space station docking
                                                                                                              with the international space station. The rocket is white and red with a red star on it.
     A woman is seen walking down a street in the rain while wearing sunglasses and a                         The space station is white and gray with solar panels. The video is in Chinese and there
     leather jacket. She continues walking down the street and looking off into the distance.                 are no people in the video.



                     Figure 8: More qualitative comparisons in temporal grounding & captioning.


                                                  02:07          02:10                    Time                                                                              01:12          01:17      Time
𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑙 𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔                                                                                         𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑙 𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔

     At what moment in the picture did the person in the red life jacket and camouflage                         At what point does the man in the brown suit extend his hand to his deskmate?
     uniform open the isolation door?


     127.0 - 130.0 seconds.                                                                                     72.0 - 77.0 seconds.

𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔 𝑉𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑜 𝑄𝐴                                                                                              𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔 𝑉𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑜 𝑄𝐴

     Why did the person in the red life jacket and camouflage uniform in the picture                            Why did the man in the brown suit extend his hand to his deskmate?
     open the isolation door?

                                                                                                                The man in the brown suit extended his hand to his deskmate to give him a piece of
     To save the people inside.
                                                                                                                paper.



Figure 9: Examples of poor performance by VideoChat-T. While it accurately identifies the time of
events, it struggles to answer questions that involve more complex logic.


                                                                                                    25
