Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


HARDM ATH : A B ENCHMARK DATASET FOR
C HALLENGING P ROBLEMS IN A PPLIED M ATHEMATICS
 Jingxuan Fan∗, Sarah Martinson∗, Erik Y. Wang∗, Kaylie Hausknecht∗,
 Jonah Brenner, Danxian Liu, Nianli Peng, Corey Wang, Michael P. Brenner
 School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University



                                             A BSTRACT

          Advanced applied mathematics problems are underrepresented in existing Large
          Language Model (LLM) benchmark datasets. To address this, we introduce
          HARDM ATH, a dataset inspired by a graduate course on asymptotic methods,
          featuring challenging applied mathematics problems that require analytical ap-
          proximation techniques. These problems demand a combination of mathematical
          reasoning, computational tools, and subjective judgment, making them difficult for
          LLMs. Our framework auto-generates a large number of problems with solutions
          validated against numerical ground truths. We evaluate both open- and closed-
          source LLMs on HARDM ATH - MINI, a sub-sampled test set of 366 problems, as
          well as on 40 word problems formulated in applied science contexts. Even leading
          closed-source models like GPT-4 achieve only 43.8% overall accuracy with few-
          shot Chain-of-Thought prompting, and all models demonstrate significantly lower
          performance compared to results on existing mathematics benchmark datasets. We
          additionally conduct a detailed error analysis to gain insights into the failure cases
          of LLMs. These results demonstrate limitations of current LLM performance on
          advanced graduate-level applied math problems and underscore the importance of
          datasets like HARDM ATH to advance mathematical abilities of LLMs.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Many mathematical equations that arise in practical scientific and engineering problems cannot be
solved analytically. Traditional mathematics courses tend to focus on equations with exact, analytical
solutions, teaching only a limited set of techniques for solving them. Similarly, the mathematical
reasoning datasets used to benchmark large language models (LLMs) are predominantly restricted to
problems of this nature. However, many real-world mathematics problems involve integrals, ordinary
differential equations (ODEs), and partial differential equations (PDEs) that do not have closed-form
solutions and must be approached with a different set of techniques. While numerical solutions offer
valuable insights, they often fail to provide intuition behind solutions behavior. A key approach in
applied mathematics involves finding approximate analytical solutions to complex problems using
asymptotic and applied analysis techniques—methods that are largely underrepresented in existing
LLM benchmark datasets. To address this gap, we introduce HARDM ATH, a dataset specifically
designed to focus on asymptotic reasoning in mathematics. This dataset captures a fundamentally
different type of mathematical reasoning compared to other benchmarks and can be useful for
evaluating LLMs’ abilities to make research-relevant approximations.
HARDM ATH consists of 1,466 problems inspired by a graduate-level course on asymptotic methods.
These problems cover algebraic equations, ODEs, and integrals commonly encountered in real-
world scientific and engineering contexts, where exact solutions often do not exist. Instead, various
asymptotic reasoning techniques are employed to find approximate but accurate solutions to these
complex mathematical problems.
A primary motivation for developing HARDM ATH is the lack of benchmark datasets targeting
the mathematical approximation methods required in many applications. While some recent works
    * Equal contribution

    Dataset: https://github.com/sarahmart/HARDMath


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


have begun to include university-level problems (Liu et al., 2024), most datasets focus on grade
school- to high school-level mathematics problems (Amini et al., 2019; Hendrycks et al., 2021;
Cobbe et al., 2021) whose solution methods only involve direct, ‘clean’ calculations. In contrast,
HARDM ATH targets applied mathematics problems that require approximate analytical solutions;
an equally important yet underrepresented aspect of mathematical reasoning. Solving such problems
can be challenging even for individuals with highmathematical proficiency, as it requires advanced
techniques from calculus, differential equations, and complex analysis. Additionally, computational
tools are often needed to analyze the behavior of different terms in each equation and to derive
numerical solutions that can serve as benchmarks for the approximations. Given the difficulty of these
problems and their prevalence across science and engineering—where researchers may not always
have a strong background in advanced mathematics—this level of difficulty and style of mathematics
should be included in LLM evaluations.
Rather than relying on the typical approach of collecting problems from textbooks, standardized tests,
or competitions, as seen in most existing datasets, we developed algorithms to automatically generate
problems and their step-by-step solutions. We implemented a comprehensive testing methodology
to evaluate the mathematical reasoning abilities of leading LLMs in the domain of approximation
methods. Our dataset includes a larger set HARDM ATH that can be used for model developments
(e.g. novel prompting techniques or fine-tuning), as well as two test sets - HARDM ATH - MINI and
WORD - PROBLEMS -HARDM ATH , which are used to assess LLM performance. We present an
evaluation accuracy summary and error mode analyses. Our results demonstrate that the performance
of current LLMs on these problems is poor, highlighting significant room for their improvement on
these challenging asymptotics problems.

2     R ELATED WORK
2.1   M ATHEMATICAL DATASETS

LLMs have shown promising capabilities in mathematics. However, evaluating and expanding the
full extent of these abilities requires diverse datasets with problems that go beyond basic arithmetic
or elementary word problems. Existing benchmarks often focus on these simpler domains, with a
gap in addressing graduate-level applied mathematics problems that demand a deeper understanding
and diverse, multi-modal analytical skills. Most mathematics datasets for evaluating or training
LLMs contain samples that either present the problem directly or within a constructed narrative
context. Notable examples of these datasets include MATH (12,500 high school competition-style
problems) (Hendrycks et al., 2021), GSM8K (8,500 multistep grade-school problems) (Cobbe et al.,
2021), M ATH QA (37,000 GRE/GMAT-level multiple-choice problems) (Amini et al., 2019), and
O DYSSEY-M ATH (387 hand-curated problems across various difficulty levels) (Netmind.AI, 2024).
While these existing datasets are valuable for assessing LLM math performance in certain areas, most
are limited in scope and complexity.
Recent efforts target more advanced problems that are most often manually-sourced. Relevant works
include JEEB ENCH (Arora et al., 2023) and a subset of the M ATH B ENCH dataset (Liu et al.,
2024), both of which cover some college-level topics including simple ODEs and multivariable
calculus. More advanced-level problems are presented in GHOSTS, which contains a G RAD -
T EXT subset—a collection of 130 exercises from graduate-level mathematics textbooks in functional
analysis, topology, and probability theory (Frieder et al., 2024)—and in ARB, which features a
small set of university-level formal mathematics problems from prior qualifying examinations in the
mathematics departments at Harvard University and the University of California, Berkeley (Sawada
et al., 2023). However, these datasets are limited by their size and scalability; datasets created by
scraping textbooks or similar resources are generally quite small and difficult to broaden easily. Most
of these challenging datasets also focus on abstract, formal mathematics and exclude other forms
of mathematical reasoning. Finally, textbook problems are often protected by copyright, which can
complicate their public use.
Existing datasets (summarized in Table 1) thus lack the scale and specific focus needed to evalu-
ate LLMs on advanced mathematical problems that may be highly useful for scientific research.
HARDM ATH aims to address these limitations by offering a large collection of challenging applied
mathematics problems inspired by a graduate-level course on asymptotic methods. It emphasizes
problems that require diverse mathematical approaches, numerical calculations, and subjective judg-


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparison of HARDM ATH with related datasets. Note that for all the datasets excluding
MATH and GSM8K, we report the number of relevant problems at a comparable difficulty to
our dataset (e.g., T HEORY-K NOWLEDGE -C OLLEGE in M ATH B ENCH, and G RAD -T EXT and
H OLES - IN -P ROOFS from GHOSTS.) HARDM ATH is the largest graduate-level dataset.

              Dataset                                 Size      Problem Sourcing         Difficulty
              MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021)      12.5K    Manual          High School
              GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021)         8.5K     Manual         Grade School
              M ATH B ENCH -T (Liu et al., 2024) 632 Manual, Algorithmic Undergraduate
              JEEB ENCH (Arora et al., 2023)      236     Manual          High School
              GHOSTS (Frieder et al., 2024)       190     Manual           Graduate
              ARB (Sawada et al., 2023)            34     Manual           Graduate
              HARDM ATH (Ours)                        1.4K         Algorithmic           Graduate



ment, mirroring the complexity of problems faced by researchers in a variety of domains. Code for
auto-generating the problems in HARDM ATH can be used to generate any number of additional
problems, which is a unique and powerful feature for scaling LLM benchmarking and model develop-
ments like novel prompting techniques or fine-tuning. A key area of interest in current LLM research
is developing models that can effectively use external tools. The problems in our dataset are unique
because they involve approximate solutions that cannot be formalized using tools like Lean or similar
software. To excel in this benchmark, LLMs must integrate tool use with sophisticated reasoning.
This makes HARDM ATH particularly valuable for benchmarking and developing LLMs capable of
effective tool use, setting it apart from other mathematical datasets.

2.2     R ECENT INTEREST IN ADVANCED MATHEMATICAL REASONING

As LLMs continue to improve, there has been growing interest in developing more challenging
benchmarks, especially in mathematics. A notable example is the recent open challenge, Humanity’s
Last Exam, which aims to create the world’s most difficult public AI benchmark, requesting questions
that "only exceptional individuals can answer correctly," do not involve "straightforward calculation/-
computation," and are written by individuals with PhD-level academic training (Hendrycks & Wang,
2024). Similarly, frontier models have been advancing quickly, and many are explicitly focused on
quantitative and scientific reasoning, such as OpenAI’s recent o1 series. In line with our motivation
for developing HARDM ATH to better track the progress of LLMs, OpenAI argues that "recent
frontier models do so well on MATH and GSM8K that these benchmarks are no longer effective at
differentiating models" (OpenAI, 2024).

3     DATASETS

3.1     HARDM ATH DESIGN CHOICES

Here, we detail the HARDM ATH dataset, which contains problems on polynomial nondimension-
alization, polynomial root-finding, ODEs, integrals, and word problems that contextualize each of
these. A sample of a HARDM ATH integral problem is shown in Box 1. HARDM ATH contains
four problem classes with seven distinct problem types, as well as 40 handwritten word problems
contextualizing the problem types. The main HARDM ATH dataset, which can be used for model
developments like fine-tuning, contains 1,060 problems, and the evaluation dataset HARDM ATH -
MINI , which we use in this paper to benchmark LLM performance, contains 366 problems. Figure 1
provides a detailed breakdown of these datasets.

      Box 1: Sample Integral Problem and Solution

      Problem:                      R 56.00                    1
      Consider the integral I(ϵ) = 0        ϵ+2.0x6.0 +2.0x9.0 +5.0x11.0 +5.0x13.0
                                                                                   dx. Develop analytical formu-
      las that approximate I(ϵ) for different regimes of ϵ.


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             (a) HARDM ATH - MINI dataset                                   (b) HARDM ATH dataset

 Figure 1: Breakdowns of the HARDM ATH - MINI (left) and the HARDM ATH (right) datasets.


                                                        R 56
      Solution: The integral is of the form I(ϵ) = 0 ϵ+P1 (x) dx where P (x) is a polynomial. Thus, its
      value can be estimated as the product between a height and a width.
      Since the integrand is maximized at x = 0, the height can be set to 1ϵ .
      For small ϵ, we define the width as the point where the integrand becomes half of its maximum height.
      This corresponds to solving for x given P (x) = ϵ. Applying dominant balance, considering the term
                                                                             1
                                                                                  1/6.0
      in P (x) with the smallest degree, the width is approximated as 2.0∗ϵ             . Therefore, the analytical
      approximation of the integral for small ϵ is I(ϵ) = ϵ0.8909
                                                              0.8333 .
      For an intermediate regime where ϵ is large, we also define the width based on the term with the
                                                          1
                                                              1/13.0
      largest degree. The width is approximated as 5.0∗ϵ             . Therefore, the analytical approximation of
                                          0.7647
      the integral for large ϵ is I(ϵ) = ϵ0.8333 .
      If the width of the integral exceeds the range of integration, we consider one more regime for very large
      ϵ. The width is then just the range of integration, so in this regime, the integral can be approximated as
      L
       ϵ
         . Therefore, the analytical approximation of the integral for very large ϵ is I(ϵ) = 56  ϵ
                                                                                                    .
                                                                         0.89 0.76 56
      Altogether, the solutions at small, large, and very large ϵ are 0.83 , 0.83 , .
                                                                        ϵ      ϵ        ϵ

One key commonality between all HARDM ATH problems is the use of the Method of Dominant
Balance in calculating solutions. This reduces an equation to only the terms that ‘dominate’ the
behavior of the solution and can significantly simplify the equation (Bender & Orszag, 2013).
In addition to the Method of Dominant Balance, our problems also involve other sophisticated
mathematical techniques, such as checks for self-consistency and the use of numerical methods. The
combination of these tools captures several key aspects of mathematical modeling, including the
combined use of computational and analytical techniques. Additionally, subjective choices about the
regimes of solution space to consider, the number of terms to include in approximate expressions,
and the approximation methods themselves must be made on a case-by-case basis with rigorous
mathematical justification. Both of these aspects are potentially difficult tasks for existing LLMs. In
Box 1, we highlight the methods and regimes relevant to solving a sample integral problem.

3.2     DATASET GENERATION AND VERIFICATION

The dataset generation procedure is outlined in Fig. 2. Code for data generation uses SymPy (Meurer
et al., 2017), a library for symbolic mathematics, and SciPy, a library for scientific computing
(Virtanen et al., 2020), to implement the mathematical procedures required for obtaining approximate,
analytical solutions. Problems are generated by combining randomly selected coefficients, functional
forms, and initial conditions uniquely defined for each problem (described in Appendix A)—no
duplicate problems are included. Solutions are generated by navigating through a set of possible cases
during the algorithmic problem-solving strategy. Each mathematical step is embedded in explanatory
text so HARDM ATH solutions match the style and rigor of traditional problem set solutions. The
main results for all problems are included in boxed environments in the solution explanations to


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


distinguish them from the rest of the text. This follows the formatting convention used in other
mathematics datasets designed for LLM benchmarking, such as MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021).


      Figure 2: Flowchart detailing the data generation procedure for HARDM ATH problems.

For each problem type, the dataset includes: 1) LATEX-formatted problem statements with prompts, 2)
LATEX-formatted solution steps and final analytical answer(s), 3) demonstration of the accuracy of the
analytical results by comparing with numerical solutions, and 4) metadata descriptors of the problem
and solution types. For every problem type, we select evaluation points in each solution regime and
calculate the relative error between the analytical solution and the numerical solution at these points.
Problems were included in HARDM ATH only if their approximate solutions had less than 10% error
from the numerically calculated ground-truths. For the polynomial root correction problems, we
also confirm that the corrections improve the original approximation. While manually verifying each
solution step-by-step is impractical for a dataset of this size, our validation process ensures a high
level of confidence in the accuracy of the solutions provided. Verification of HARDM ATH - MINI
is performed by plotting analytical solutions against numerical ground truths for a range of values
in each regime (see example in Appendix A.1). This semi-automated step provides an easy means
for visual human-verification—plots will directly reveal whether analytical and numerical solutions
correspond in the correct solution regimes.

3.3     P ROBLEM TYPES

For all problem types discussed in this section, details regarding parameters used to generate problems
and mathematical solution techniques are provided in Appendix A.2.

3.3.1    N ONDIMENSIONALIZATION OF POLYNOMIALS
Nondimensionalization is a technique to simplify equations by reducing the number of parameters
(Evans, 1972). In HARDM ATH, the first type of polynomial used for nondimensionalization
demonstration contains symbolic coefficients and is of the form
                                a1 xn1 + a2 xn2 + a3 , n1 > n2 > 0.                                 (1)
Nondimensionalization converts this to the form ϵy n1 + y n2 + 1. The second type contains numerical
coefficients and is of the form
                                  ±a1 xn1 ± a2 xn2 ± a3 , n1 > n2
which can be simplified to ϵy n1 ± y n2 ± 1 given a specific numerical value of ϵ.

3.3.2    P OLYNOMIAL ROOT- FINDING
Exact formulas exist for quadratic, cubic, and quartic equations, but deriving them for quintic or
higher-order polynomials is not possible (Stewart, 2015). HARDM ATH includes approximate
root-finding examples for higher order polynomials of the form ϵxn1 ± xn2 ± 1 (example in Appendix
A.2.2). The goal is to solve for roots in terms of ϵ using the method of dominant balance for small
and large positive ϵ regimes.

3.3.3    P OLYNOMIAL ROOT CORRECTION TERMS
The use of two-term dominant balances—such as in the previous problem type—neglects terms and
introduces an error. We can calculate a correction term δ to reduce this error. Suppose the true roots


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


x∗ of a polynomial are given by x∗ (ϵ) = x(ϵ) + δ, where x is our approximation to the root and δ is
the error term. Plugging the roots x∗ (ϵ) = x(ϵ) + δ into the polynomial allows one to use a Taylor
expansion of δ around x to solve for the correction δ. Appendix A.2.3 shows a full worked solution.

3.3.4      N ONLINEAR ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
We generate nonlinear third-order ODEs for which there do no exist exact analytical solutions and
provide approximate formulae for small and large x regimes, where the small x regime is near
x = 0 and the large x regime typically involves the solution diverging (example in Appendix A.2.4).
The method is robust for higher-order problems, but for simplicity HARDM ATH includes only
third-order ODEs.

3.3.5      T RADITIONAL INTEGRALS
                                            Ra
We consider integrals of the form I(ϵ) = 0 ϵ+P1 (x) dx, where P (x) is an arbitrary polynomial.
HARDM ATH provides approximations of each integral in three regimes: small, intermediate, and
large ϵ. A full example is in Appendix A.2.5.

3.3.6      L APLACE INTEGRALS
                                              Rb
We consider integrals of the form I(x) = a g(t)e±xf (t) dt, which can be approximated using
Laplace’s Method when x is very large because the integral’s value is dominated by the region around
t0 (Bender & Orszag, 2013). Depending on where the minimum is, the approximation is either
                                         s
                               ±xf (t0 )      2π                     g(t0 )e±xf (t0 )
                I(x) ≈ g(t0 )e                ′′
                                                      or I(x) ≈                       .
                                           x|f (t0 )|                  x|f ′′ (t0 )|
See and Appendix A.2.6 for examples of a Laplace integral problem with solutions.

3.4     W ORD PROBLEMS IN CONTEXT

One motivation for creating HARDM ATH is to help LLMs recognize and solve problems where
approximation techniques are needed. To evaluate how LLMs perform on such problems in realistic
scenarios, we develop a smaller dataset of 40 manually-generated word problems (example in Box 2).
Although this dataset is smaller than our hand-verified evaluation set, it is large enough to evaluate
the effect of additional context in the problem statement on LLM accuracy.
      Box 2. Sample Word Problem with Context

      The density of fish at different points along a certain path in a lake can be modeled as (ϵ + x2 + x5 )−1 ,
      where x represents the distance from the shore in kilometers (ranging from 0 to 100 km), and ϵ represents
      environmental factors that affect the fish density. To study the total presence of fish along the path,
      develop an approximate analytical formula for I(ϵ) given below:
                                                    Z 100
                                                                 1
                                            I(ϵ) =                        dx.
                                                      0     ϵ + x2 + x5


3.5     AUTOMATIC GENERATION OF CONTEXT FOR WORD PROBLEMS

Recognizing that manual context crafting for these problems is labor-intensive and lacks scalability,
we conduct preliminary experiments on automatically generating contexts for word problems using a
powerful closed-source LLM, such as GPT-4o. The generation process involves two steps: (1) We
create a foundational set of mathematical problems and solutions following the methodology in Fig.
2. These problems serve as a starting point, capturing essential mathematical formulation without
context. 2) We then prompt the LLM to generate real-world contexts to embed these problems and
solutions based on a specified domain seed (e.g., physics). To ensure physical plausibility, a secondary
verification LLM checks parameter ranges (e.g., energy must be non-negative) and assigns a 0-1
plausibility score. A score around 0.5 indicates that while no hard violations were found, the verifier
cannot fully assess violations of less stringent domain priors. Only plausibity scores >0.5 are thus


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


considered. Example prompts for both generator and verifier are available in Appendix A.2.7, Table
3. Using ODEs as a demonstration, we batch generate 30 problems with {domain_seed} physics.
Appendix A.2.8 shows an example of the original vs. context-embedded problem side by side, and
Appendix A.2.9 6a demonstrates the set of generated problems has good context diversity, covering
different sub-fields in physics. Moreover, most problems’ plausibility scores >0.5 , indicating queried
math equations make good sense under generated contexts (A.2.9 6b).
While we recognize limitations in capturing more subtle, domain-specific priors, this approach offers
a promising step toward automating the generation of applied math problems in real scientific contexts.
We plan to refine these methods in future work.


4     E VALUATION

4.1   E VALUATION PROTOCOLS

We conduct evaluations of various LLMs on HARDM ATH - MINI, a carefully curated subset of 366
problems that matches the statistical composition of HARDM ATH (Fig. 1). This smaller dataset
is designed to optimize computational resources while retaining a sufficient number of questions
to ensure consistent and reliable testing outcomes, thus maintaining the integrity of our evaluation.
The evaluation focuses on four distinct problem types: 1) Nondim includes nondimensionalization
in symbolic and numerical form; 2) Roots includes polynomial root-finding; 3) ODEs includes
nonlinear ODEs; and 4) Integrals includes traditional and Laplace integrals. The input prompt
for each problem contains the essential problem setup and a detailed description of the question.
Additionally, hints specific to each problem type are provided to guide the format of the answer.
When few-shot prompting is used, it adds a fixed set of paired problem-solution examples from the
corresponding problem types. Example prompts can be found in Appendix A.3.1, Table 7.
We evaluate model-generated responses by scoring them for accuracy using a combined protocol of
automatic final answer assessment and procedural LLM-based grading. The automatic assessment
follows methodology from Hendrycks et al. (2021), where models are prompted to enclose their
final answers using the LATEX\boxed{} command (Table 7). Evaluation then compares the model’s
output within the \boxed{} command to the dataset solution. To handle different mathematical
expression formats, we implement both SymPy-based equivalence checks and numerical evaluations.
In addition to the standard automatic assessment of final answers, we develop a novel procedural
grading approach leveraging LLMs, tailored to the unique evaluation challenges of our dataset: 1)
Some problem types require complex, multi-step solution procedures (e.g. determining critical point
in Laplace integral approximation) where a single cut-off criterion at the final answer cannot capture
the full spectrum of model performance. Thus, grading intermediate steps in the solution procedure
is necessary for comprehensive assessment. 2) HARDM ATH targets the models’ ability to make
human-like abstraction and approximation judgments. Some problem types allow a narrow range of
solutions rather than a single exact one, as long as the reasoning is self-consistent and the final result
falls within certain threshold to numerical ground truth.
Inspired by LLMs’ ability to generate consistent ratings for response content and style (Hackl et al.,
2023), we employ GPT-4o as a procedural grader. The model is prompted with a ground truth answer
key and grading rubrics adapted from course grading guidelines for each problem type (example
grading prompts in Appendix A.3.2 Table 5). We manually verify a subset of grading responses and
found that LLM-based grading is closely aligned with human grading. Average score adjustment
for each model and problem type is summarized in Appendix A.3.3 Table 6. We implement this
procedural grading alongside automatic answer assessment for the problem types Roots, ODEs, and
Integrals.

4.2   M ODEL CHOICE

We compare the performance of several closed- and open-source models on HARDM ATH in zero-
and few-shot settings with the Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2023) prompting. Closed-source
LLMs include GPT-3.5 (Radford et al., 2018; 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022), GPT-4 (Achiam et al.,
2023) and o1-mini (OpenAI, 2024a), open-source LLMs include Llama3 (AI, 2024) and CodeLlama


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(Meta, 2023). We believe this subset of models to be representative of current LLM capabilities. We
provide the prompts and hyper-parameters for LLMs evaluations in Appendix A.3.4 Table 7.

4.3     Q UANTITATIVE RESULTS

We present the accuracy of the models and prompting settings for each problem type and the combined
evaluation set (Table 2, Figure 7). Few-shot CoT prompting significantly boosts performance for
all models, with o1-mini and GPT-4 showing the greatest improvement, consistent with (Wei et al.,
2023) (Figure 7a). Interestingly, although the o1-mini official prompting guide recommends simple
prompting over CoT (OpenAI, 2024b), we observe fairly large performance increase for all problem
types at 5 shot CoT compared to 0 shot. Performance increase with prompting behavior also shows
problem type-specific patterns: Figure 8 demonstrates that performance saturates quickly for harder
problem types like ODEs. The varying performance increases among different problem types may be
due to different error modes in model answers, which we discuss in the following section. It’s notable
that o1-mini, though with much smaller parameter size, shows considerably better performance at all
tested shot levels, confirming its optimized ability for STEM reasoning (OpenAI, 2024a).
Among closed-source models, o1-mini with 5-shot CoT prompting achieves the highest overall
accuracy of 62.3%. GPT-4 at 5-shot CoT scores only 43.8%. Among open-source models, Llama3-
8b with 5-shot CoT prompting achieves the highest overall accuracy of 20.2%. We discuss the
performance of these representative models—o1-mini, GPT-4 and Llama3—on HARDM ATH -
MINI in comparison with established datasets, including GSM-8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), MATH
(Hendrycks et al., 2021), and more advanced mathematics datasets like GHOSTS (Frieder et al.,
2024).
Llama3-8b achieves a test accuracy of 30.0% on the MATH dataset with 4-shot CoT and 79.6% on the
GSM-8K dataset with 8-shot CoT prompting (AI, 2024). Testing Llama3-8b on HARDM ATH - MINI
results in an overall accuracy of 20.2% with 5-shot CoT prompting. GPT-4 (gpt-4-turbo-2024-04-09)
is reported to achieve 72.2% accuracy on the MATH dataset with 0-shot CoT prompting (OpenAI,
2024) and 92.0% on the GSM-8K dataset with 5-shot CoT prompting (Achiam et al., 2023). On
theMINI GHOSTS dataset, which also covers graduate-level mathematics, GPT-4 reaches an average
score of 4.15 out of 5. We test GPT-4 on our HARDM ATH - MINI dataset and obtained an overall
accuracy of 43.8% with 5-shot CoT prompting.
Finally, we include results on OpenAI’s new o1-mini, which is reported to achieve 90.0% accuracy on
MATH-500 with 0-shot CoT (OpenAI, 2024a). Testing o1-mini on HARDM ATH - MINI reveals a
significant performance increase compared to results on other models on some (e.g. Nondim) but not
all problem types. Overall accuracy with 5 shot CoT reaches 62.3%, substantially lower compared to
performance on existing mathematics benchmarks. This indicates that the HARDM ATH benchmark
consists of problems that are still challenging and unfamiliar to even the most performant LLMs
developed specifically for advanced reasoning.

4.3.1    E XTENSIONS TO WORD PROBLEMS
To assess LLM’s ability to solve similar applied math problems in real science and engineering
contexts, we also test GPT-4 (best performing model with a stable version) on a set of 40 hand-crafted
word problems that included a mixture of Nondim, Roots, ODEs, and Integrals. We avoided additional
prompt engineering, omitting the problem-specific hints listed in Table 4. This evaluation resulted in
an overall accuracy of 28.1%. We plan to leverage the automated generation method as a basis to
expand the number of word problems for future work.

4.4     F INE - GRAINED RESULTS

In addition to reporting the summarized test accuracy, we study the detailed breakdown of model
responses at different correctness levels and summarize specific error modes of LLMs solving these
challenging applied mathematics questions. This analysis helps us compare performance nuances
and understand reasoning paths by model, prompting technique and question type.
We first break down model performance by percentage of correct, partial and incorrect responses
(Figure 3). This analysis reveals how few-shot prompting enhances model performance across varying
problem types but through different strategies. Overall quantitative results already show that ODEs


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Table 2: Evaluation Accuracy (percentage) on the HARDM ATH evaluation set.

                  Model                           ALL        Nondim   Roots   ODEs    Integrals
                  Closed-source models
                  GPT-3.5 (0 shot)                6.04        5.05    17.2    1.39      3.33
                  GPT-3.5 (1 shot CoT)            14.2        6.11    29.3    6.94      18.2
                  GPT-3.5 (5 shot CoT)            24.6        24.3    35.0    16.2      23.1
                  GPT-4 (0 shot)                  14.0        6.04    33.7    7.87      14.9
                  GPT-4 (1 shot CoT)              37.6        36.5    52.8    15.9      40.5
                  GPT-4 (5 shot CoT)              43.8        48.6    57.3    21.7      41.4
                  o1-mini (0 shot CoT)            29.8        38.1    24.3    10.2      32.5
                  o1-mini (5 shot CoT)            62.3        84.5    62.1    30.6      46.5
                  Open-source models
                  Llama3-8b (0 shot)              3.67        0.50    11.5    4.63      2.52
                  Llama3-8b (5 shot CoT)          20.2        17.9    17.1    12.0      28.1
                  CodeLlama-13b (0 shot)          1.94        0.00    8.73    1.85      0.50
                  CodeLlama-13b (5 shot CoT)      9.79        8.41    13.1     9.7      9.57


Figure 3: Percentage of correct, partial, and incorrect responses for o1-mini, GPT-4 and Llama3,
prompting conditions, and problem types.


are comparatively harder for all models while Nondim problems appear to be the easiest (Figure 7b).
For hard problems like ODEs, full correctness is rare. Correctness level analysis shows that models
tend to increase partial credit responses with CoT prompting, as they struggle to solve the problems
entirely but manage to partially address them—in this case, starting with the easier small x regime
solutions. In contrast, for simpler problems like Roots, advanced models like o1-mini and GPT-4 get
more fully correct responses with increasing CoT shot number, demonstrating the models’ ability to
understand the approximation reasoning procedure fully (Fig. 3).
Second, we summarize the error modes of partial and incorrect responses to better understand the
model’s reasoning pitfalls. Specifically, we want to dissect how CoT changes model performance
on the level of detailed errors. Figure 4 uses GPT-4’s responses at 0 vs. 5 shots on problem type
Roots as an analysis example. This illustrates how 5 shot CoT prompting significantly alters the
error structure compared to 0 shot. The most common error mode—incorrectly setting up dominant
balance by considering only the leading term—diminishes substantially. Instead, errors shift to more
nuanced issues: 1) setting up correct dominant balances but missing certain cases, or 2) failing to
calculate complex roots (examples of those error modes included in Box 3 and Appendix A.4.2). This
shift indicates that CoT prompting improves the model’s understanding and application of dominant
balance techniques, enabling it to move beyond intuitive yet incorrect simplifications. We are
particularly curious to compare o1-mini’s error modes with existing models, given its specialization
in STEM reasoning. However, in the current evaluation, o1-mini sometimes returns only the final
answer without showing intermediate steps, making it difficult to trace the source of errors. We
therefore leave this exploration for future work.

    3. Grading Response: Roots

    Question: Consider the polynomial P (x) = ϵx8 + x4 − 1. Find approximate expressions for all roots
    of the polynomials in the limit of small positive ϵ and large positive ϵ. Only a single term approximation
    to the root is required.



                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Figure 4: GPT-4 error modes for problem type Roots at 0 vs. 5 shot CoT prompting



    Grading for Small Positive ϵ:
    Model Response: For small ϵ : [1, −1, i, −i]
    Ground Truth:
                                    " r          r      r     r                 #
                                       4     1 4 1      4 1 4 1
              For small positive ϵ : − − ,        − , −i − , i − , −1, 1, −i, i
                                             ϵ     ϵ      ϵ     ϵ

    The response only includes the roots from the balance B + C = 0 and completely misses the roots
    from the balance A + B = 0. Therefore, score for small positive ϵ is 0.5



5    C ONCLUSION

We introduce HARDM ATH, a new dataset covering several problem types from an advanced
applied mathematics course that can be used to benchmark LLMs’ mathematical capabilities and
perform model developments, including fine-tuning. This dataset consists of 1060 examples, and we
additionally include 366 human-verified examples in HARDM ATH - MINI and 40 human-verified
‘problems in context’ that we use to evaluate various leading LLMs. HARDM ATH is unique
in several ways. First, there do not exist large-scale mathematical datasets covering problems of
similar difficulty from applied mathematics. Second, HARDM ATH’s problems and solutions are
algorithmically generated, with automatic numeric validity checks and an easy visual means for
human-verification, meaning that one could produce datasets of arbitrary size using our framework.
This feature of HARDM ATH is especially unique, since most existing mathematical datasets require
manual problem-setting or curation from existing sources (many of which are not publicly accessible).
Our evaluation highlights that while few-shot CoT prompting significantly improves model perfor-
mance, especially for models like o1-mini and GPT-4, the overall accuracy on HARDM ATH - MINI
problems remains much lower compared to other existing benchmarks. This suggests that our dataset
poses unique and challenging tasks that go beyond the boundaries of current LLM capabilities,
particularly in approximation-oriented mathematical reasoning. These findings emphasize the need
for further improvement in LLMs to address hard math problems.
Our evaluation results use HARDM ATH - MINI as a comprehensive test set; however, future work
will fine-tune LLMs on the larger HARDM ATH to improve performance. Additionally, while we
have evaluated several frontier models, we plan to extend our evaluations to even more LLMs as they
become available. This expanded evaluation should provide more detailed insights into performance
disparities across different models, further advancing our understanding of LLMs’ capabilities in
handling complex mathematical reasoning.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the students who participated in the initial stages of the Fall 2023 AM 201 final project.
Thanks also to the Harvard Medical School Research Computing Consultant Group for their consult-
ing services, which facilitated the computational analyses detailed in this paper.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
  Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Meta AI. Meta llama 3, 2024. URL https://ai.meta.com/blog/meta-llama-3/. Ac-
 cessed: 2024-06-03.
Aida Amini, Saadia Gabriel, Shanchuan Lin, Rik Koncel-Kedziorski, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh
  Hajishirzi. Mathqa: Towards interpretable math word problem solving with operation-based
  formalisms. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pp. 2357–2367, 2019.
Daman Arora, Himanshu Singh, et al. Have llms advanced enough? a challenging problem solving
  benchmark for large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7527–7543, 2023.
Carl M Bender and Steven A Orszag. Advanced mathematical methods for scientists and engineers I:
  Asymptotic methods and perturbation theory. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher
  Hesse, and John Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.14168, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2110.14168v1.
John H Evans. Dimensional analysis and the buckingham pi theorem. American Journal of Physics,
  40(12):1815–1822, 1972.
Simon Frieder, Luca Pinchetti, Ryan-Rhys Griffiths, Tommaso Salvatori, Thomas Lukasiewicz,
  Philipp Petersen, and Julius Berner. Mathematical capabilities of chatgpt. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Veronika Hackl, Alexandra Elena Müller, Michael Granitzer, and Maximilian Sailer. Is gpt-4 a
  reliable rater? evaluating consistency in gpt-4’s text ratings. Frontiers in Education, 8, December
  2023. ISSN 2504-284X. doi: 10.3389/feduc.2023.1272229. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
  3389/feduc.2023.1272229.
Dan Hendrycks and Alexandr Wang. Submit your toughest questions for humanity’s last exam, 2024.
  URL https://www.safe.ai/blog/humanitys-last-exam. Accessed: 2024-10-01.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song,
  and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. In 35th
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021) Track on Datasets and
  Benchmarks. NeurIPS, 2021.
Hongwei Liu, Zilong Zheng, Yuxuan Qiao, Haodong Duan, Zhiwei Fei, Fengzhe Zhou, Wenwei
  Zhang, Songyang Zhang, Dahua Lin, and Kai Chen. Mathbench: Evaluating the theory and
  application proficiency of llms with a hierarchical mathematics benchmark. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.12209, 2024.
Meta. Code llama: Ai for coding, 2023. URL https://about.fb.com/news/2023/08/
 code-llama-ai-for-coding/. Accessed: 2024-06-03.
Aaron Meurer, Christopher P. Smith, Mateusz Paprocki, Ondřej Čertík, Sergey B. Kirpichev, Matthew
  Rocklin, AMiT Kumar, Sergiu Ivanov, Jason K. Moore, Sartaj Singh, Thilina Rathnayake, Sean
  Vig, Brian E. Granger, Richard P. Muller, Francesco Bonazzi, Harsh Gupta, Shivam Vats, Fredrik
  Johansson, Fabian Pedregosa, Matthew J. Curry, Andy R. Terrel, Štěpán Roučka, Ashutosh


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Saboo, Isuru Fernando, Sumith Kulal, Robert Cimrman, and Anthony Scopatz. Sympy: symbolic
  computing in python. PeerJ Computer Science, 3:e103, January 2017. ISSN 2376-5992. doi:
  10.7717/peerj-cs.103. URL https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj-cs.103.
Netmind.AI. Odyssey-math. https://github.com/protagolabs/odyssey-math/
  tree/main, 2024. Accessed: April 22, 2024.
OpenAI.     Simple evals.     https://github.com/openai/simple-evals?tab=
  readme-ov-file#user-content-fn-1-43aa11412dfb93b343474c8d56f8882f,
  2024. Accessed: 2024-06-03.
OpenAI. Introducing openai o1-preview, 2024. URL https://openai.com/index/
  introducing-openai-o1-preview/. Accessed: 2024-10-01.
OpenAI.         Openai o1-mini, 2024a. URL https://openai.com/index/
  openai-o1-mini-advancing-cost-efficient-reasoning/. Accessed: Septem-
  ber 30, 2024.
OpenAI. Reasoning models, 2024b. URL https://platform.openai.com/docs/
  guides/reasoning/how-reasoning-works. Accessed: Oct. 1, 2024.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton,
  Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and
  Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, 2022.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language under-
  standing by generative pre-training. 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:160025533.
Tomohiro Sawada, Daniel Paleka, Alexander Havrilla, Pranav Tadepalli, Paula Vidas, Alexander
  Kranias, John J Nay, Kshitij Gupta, and Aran Komatsuzaki. Arb: Advanced reasoning benchmark
  for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13692, 2023.
Ian Stewart. Galois Theory. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton, FL, 4th edition, 2015.
  ISBN 978-1-4822-4583-7. Version Date: 20150112.
Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Cournapeau,
  Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, et al. Scipy 1.0: fundamental
  algorithms for scientific computing in python. Nature methods, 17(3):261–272, 2020.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le,
  and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
A.1     S EMI - AUTOMATED SOLUTION VERIFICATION

Figure 5 provides a visual comparison of the numerical and approximate solutions for the Laplace
Integral example in Appendix A.2.6 over a large domain. This allows for semi-automated human
verification that analytical solutions correspond well with numerical ground truths, a method used to
verify the problems in HARDM ATH - MINI.


Figure 5: Visual comparison of numerical and approximate analytical solutions to a sample Laplace
integral problem for solution verification.


A.2     I MPLEMENTATION AND METHOD DETAILS FOR DATA GENERATION

The following subsections detail the process used to generate the problems and solutions for each
problem type.

A.2.1    N ONDIMENSIONALIZATION OF POLYNOMIALS
The first nondimensionalization sub-type is generalized by varying the integer values for the degrees
n1 and n2 within the range 0 < n2 < n1 < 10, while keeping a1 , a2 , a3 > 0 symbolic. Solutions to
these problems express the dimensionless parameter ϵ in terms of these three coefficients.

    Sample Symbolic Nondimensionalization Problem and Full Solution

    Problem: Nondimensionalize the polynomial
                                          a1 x10 + a2 x9 + a3
    into one of the form ϵy 10 + y 9 + 1. Express ϵ as a function of a1 , a2 , and a3 .

    Solution: We begin with the substitution
                                                     r
                                                       a3
                                                  x=y9
                                                       a2
    This gives the expression
                                                 10
                                         10 a3 9
                                   a1 y             + a3 y 9 + a3
                                            a2
    Divide by the coefficient remaining in front of the constant, leaving us with the nondimen-
    sionalized polynomial with coefficients in terms of a1 , a2 , and a3 :
                                                             10
                                                             9
                                                      a3
                                       a1 y 10        a2
                                                                  + y 9 + 1.
                                                 a3



                                                           13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    By inspection, we can see that
                                                                  10
                                                                  9
                                                           a3
                                                  a1       a2
                                             ϵ=                        .
                                                       a3

The second subtype implements integer numerical values for the coefficients a1 , a2 , a3 that are are
randomly chosen from [−10, 10].
    Sample Numeric Nondimensionalization Problem and Full Solution

    Problem: Nondimensionalize the polynomial
                                       P (x) = 2x7 + 8x2 + 5
    into a polynomial of the form ϵy 7 ± y 2 ± 1. Solve for ϵ.

    Solution: For now, we ignore the numeric values of the coefficients and instead call them
    a1 , a2 , a3 . Our polynomial is then:
                                          a1 x7 + a2 x2 + a3 .
    Use the substitution                               r
                                                            a3
                                                 x=y           ,
                                                            a2
   which gives the expression
                                                7
                                         7  a3 2
                                   a1 y           + a3 y 2 + a3 .
                                            a2
    Divide all terms by the coefficient remaining in front of the constant term, giving us the
    nondimensionalized polynomial with coefficients in terms of a1 , a2 , a3 :
                                                72
                                      a1 y 7 aa32
                                                   + y2 + 1
                                            a3
    Substituting in the known numeric values for a1 , a2 , a3 (using their absolute values as we
    have already accounted for sign), we get:
                                          √
                                        25 10y 7
                                                 + y2 + 1
                                          1024
    From inspection of this nondimensionalized equation, we can now identify ϵ:
                                         √
                                       25 10
                                  ϵ=           =⇒ ϵ ≈ 0.08.
                                        1024

A.2.2    P OLYNOMIAL ROOT- FINDING
As with the nondimensionalization problems, degrees in the polynomial are randomly generated with
maximum order ten and 0 < n2 < n1 . See a full problem and solution below.
    Sample Polynomial Root-finding Problem and Full Solution

    Problem: Consider the polynomial
                                        P (x) = ϵx6 − x5 + 1.
    Find first order approximations for all roots of the polynomials in the limit of small positive ϵ
    and large positive ϵ.


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Solution: We begin by equating the polynomial to zero to solve for the roots: P (x) = 0.
   This problem can be rewritten in the form A + B + C = 0, where: A = ϵx6 ; B = −x5 ;
   C = 1.
   This problem has no analytical solutions, so we find approximate solutions to the roots by
   considering the three possible dominant balances. For each dominant balance, we find the
   roots of the resulting equation and evaluate whether each balance is self-consistent for small
   or large positive ϵ.

   We start with the balance A + B = 0, assuming that |C| is negligible when compared to |A|
   and |B|. Solving this for x in terms of ϵ then gives us 1 non-zero root:
                                            ϵx6 − x5 = 0

                                                      1
                                           =⇒ x =        .
                                                      ϵ
   To verify that these roots are consistent with the assumption that |A|, |B| ≫ |C|, we substitute
   these found roots back into the terms A, B, and C and compare their magnitudes. Using this
   method, we find that it is true that these roots are valid for small ϵ, while validity for large ϵ
   is false.
   Therefore, these roots are valid in the limit of small positive ϵ only.

   Next we examine the balance B + C = 0, assuming that |A| is negligible when compared to
   |B| and |C|. Solving this for x in terms of ϵ gives us 5 non-zero roots:
                                1 − x5 = 0
                          √    p √              √     p        √
                       1    5 i 2 5 + 10     1    5     −10 − 2 5
               x =1, − +     −           , − +      +             ,
            =⇒         4   4 p     4         4   4 p       4       .
                     √               √     √                 √
                       5 1 i 10 − 2 5        5 1 i 10 − 2 5
                  −      − −           , −     − +
                      4   4      4          4   4        4
   To verify that these roots are consistent with the assumption that |B|, |C| ≫ |A|, we substitute
   these found roots back into A, B, and C and compare their magnitudes. Using this method,
   we find that it is true that these roots are valid for small ϵ, while validity for large ϵ is false.
   Therefore, these roots are valid in the limit of small positive ϵ only.

   Finally, we examine the balance A + C = 0, assuming that |B| is negligible when compared
   to |A| and |C|. Solving this for x in terms of ϵ gives us 6 non-zero roots:
                                     ϵx6 + 1 = 0
                     r               q             √
                                        6
                                          − 1ϵ −1 − 3i
                                r
                        6   1   6  1
                x = − − , − ,                          ,
                            ϵ      ϵ             2
             =⇒     q             √   q             √   q           √   .
                     6
                       − 1ϵ −1 + 3i       6
                                            − 1ϵ 1 − 3i   6
                                                            − 1ϵ 1 + 3i
                                      ,                 ,               
                              2                   2              2

   To verify that these roots are consistent with the assumption that |A|, |C| ≫ |B|, we substitute
   these found roots back into A, B, and C and compare their magnitudes. Using this method,
   we find that it is false that these roots are valid for small ϵ, while validity for large ϵ is true.
   Therefore, these roots are valid in the limit of large positive ϵ only.

   By the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, a polynomial of degree 6.0 has exactly 6.0 roots.We
   have found 6.0 roots that are valid in the limit of small positive ϵ and 6.0 roots valid in the
   limit of large positive ϵ. Our method therefore provides a complete solution to the problem,
   finding the correct number of roots in each ϵ regime.



                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    The roots of P (x) for large positive ϵ are
                                         q             √
                                           6
                                             − 1ϵ −1 − 3i
                        r        r
                        6    1 6 1
                     − − , − ,                             ,
                             ϵ       ϵ             2
                     q             √   6 1   q         √   q           √
                     6
                       − 1ϵ −1 + 3i            − ϵ 1 − 3i    6
                                                               − 1ϵ 1 + 3i
                                          ,                ,
                               2                     2              2
    and the roots of P (x) for small positive ϵ are
                                √      p √                  √     p        √
                 1        1       5 i 2 5 + 10          1     5     −10 − 2 5
                   , 1, − +        −                 , − +      +             ,
                 ϵ        4      4p          4          4    4p        4
                     √                      √       √                √
                       5 1 i 10 − 2 5                 5 1 i 10 − 2 5
                  −      − −                    , −    − +
                      4     4          4             4    4       4


A.2.3    P OLYNOMIAL ROOT CORRECTION TERMS
The true roots x∗ of a polynomial are given by x∗ (ϵ) = x(ϵ)+δ, where x is our existing approximation
to the root as found in Appendix A.3 and δ is the error term. This requires us to solve
                                   ϵ(x + δ)n1 ± (x + δ)n2 ± 1 = 0
for δ by equating coefficients of ϵ terms of the same order, as detailed in the worked solution below.
    Sample Numeric Nondimensionalization Problem and Full Solution

    Problem: Consider the polynomial
                                         P (x) = ϵx3 − x + 1.
    Find approximate expressions for all roots of the polynomial in the limit of small positive ϵ
    and large positive ϵ. Use a series expansion to calculate improved formulae for these roots to
    order 1 i.e. calculate O(1) corrections for each root.

    Solution: Note: The root calculation in this problem follow the same method as those
    demonstrated in the A.3, so they has been omitted here. We include only correction term
    calculations for the sake of brevity.

   We now need to calculate correction terms for these roots to give us better approximations.
   We consider the ansatz that the root is given by x + δ, where the correction term δ is the sum
   of higher order terms of ϵ that we initially neglected in our approximation x. By definition,
   δ < x. We plug this ansatz into the polynomial and perform a series expansion in δ. We keep
   terms only up to O(1) in δ. Then, we set the expression equal to 0 and solve for δ.

    Regime 1: valid for small ϵ
             q
    Root 1: − 1ϵ
                                                      r
                                                          1
                                        x+δ =−              +δ
                                                          ϵ
    Substitute this into P (x) for x and equate to 0:
                                              r !3 r
                                                 1      1
                                −δ + ϵ δ −            +   + 1 = 0.
                                                 ϵ      ϵ
   We then expand this expression to get
                                   r                 23 r
                         3      2    1            1       1
                        δ ϵ − 3δ ϵ      + 2δ − ϵ       +    +1=0
                                      ϵ           ϵ       ϵ



                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   and represent it as a series of O(1) in δ, discarding higher order δ terms
                                              32 r
                                            1          1
                                   2δ − ϵ         +       + 1 ≈ 0.
                                            ϵ           ϵ
   We can then solve the expression for the correction δ to O(1), and get
                                                     q
                                                3       1
                                          ϵ 1ϵ 2        ϵ   1
                                      δ≈           −      − .
                                             2        2     2
           q
   Root 2: 1ϵ
                                                   r
                                                     1
                                          x+δ =        +δ
                                                     ϵ
   Substitute this into P (x) for x and equate to 0:
                                             r !3 r
                                                1         1
                               −δ + ϵ δ +            −      + 1 = 0.
                                                ϵ         ϵ
   We then expand this expression to get
                                       r                23 r
                                         1           1       1
                        δ 3 ϵ + 3δ 2 ϵ     + 2δ + ϵ       −    +1=0
                                         ϵ           ϵ       ϵ
   and represent it as a series of O(1) in δ, discarding higher order δ terms
                                              32 r
                                            1          1
                                   2δ + ϵ         −       + 1 ≈ 0.
                                            ϵ           ϵ
   We can then solve the expression for the correction δ to O(1), and get
                                                     q
                                                3       1
                                          ϵ 1ϵ 2        ϵ    1
                                  δ≈−             +       − .
                                             2        2      2
   Regime 2: valid for small ϵ
   Root 1: 1
                                           x+δ =1+δ
   Substitute this into P (x) for x and equate to 0:
                                                       3
                                       −δ + ϵ (δ + 1) = 0.
   We then expand this expression to get
                                  δ 3 ϵ + 3δ 2 ϵ + 3δϵ − δ + ϵ = 0
   and represent it as a series of O(1) in δ, discarding higher order δ terms
                                        δ (3ϵ − 1) + ϵ ≈ 0.
   We can then solve the expression for the correction δ to O(1), and get
                                                    ϵ
                                           δ≈−          .
                                                 3ϵ − 1
   Regime 3: valid for large ϵ
           q
   Root 1: 3 − 1ϵ
                                                 r
                                                  3    1
                                        x+δ =         − +δ
                                                       ϵ



                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Substitute this into P (x) for x and equate to 0:
                                           r      !3 r
                                           3    1     3 1
                             −δ + ϵ δ + −            − − + 1 = 0.
                                                ϵ       ϵ

   We then expand this expression to get
                                 r            2    r
                       3       2 3    1    1 3     3 1
                      δ ϵ + 3δ ϵ − + 3δϵ −      −δ− − =0
                                      ϵ    ϵ         ϵ
   and represent it as a series of O(1) in δ, discarding higher order δ terms
                                              2      ! r
                                           1 3            3   1
                                 δ 3ϵ −          − 1 − − ≈ 0.
                                           ϵ                  ϵ

   We can then solve the expression for the correction δ to O(1), and get
                                                q
                                                3
                                                  − 1ϵ
                                      δ≈            2      .
                                           3ϵ − 1ϵ 3 − 1
             √
             3
                          √
                 − 1ϵ (−1− 3i)
   Root 2:             2
                                           q          √
                                           3
                                             − 1ϵ −1 − 3i
                                 x+δ =                          +δ
                                                      2
   Substitute this into P (x) for x and equate to 0:
                             q            √   3 q              √
                               3
                                 − 1ϵ −1 − 3i         3
                                                        − 1ϵ −1 − 3i
              −δ + ϵ δ +                          −                + 1 = 0.
                                       2                      2

   We then expand this expression to get
                                  q          √       q
                                                                        2
                            3δ 2 ϵ 3 − 1ϵ   3 3iδ 2 ϵ 3 − 1ϵ   3δϵ − 1ϵ 3
                       3
                      δ ϵ−                −                  −
                                  2               2                2
                          √             2
                                                q
                                                       1
                                                             √ q
                         3 3iδϵ − ϵ  1 3         3
                                                    −ϵ        3i − 1ϵ
                                                                3

                       +                   −δ+           +             =0
                                 2                  2           2
   and represent it as a series of O(1) in δ, discarding higher order δ terms
                             2      √           2      q            √ q
                     3ϵ − 1ϵ 3      3 3iϵ − 1ϵ 3
                                                             3
                                                               − 1ϵ      3i 3 − 1ϵ
             δ −                +                 − 1 +           +              ≈ 0.
                          2               2                    2            2

   We can then solve the expression for the correction δ to O(1), and get
                                          q           √
                                           3
                                             − 1ϵ 1 + 3i
                             δ≈            2      √          2     .
                                  3ϵ − 1ϵ 3 − 3 3iϵ − 1ϵ 3 + 2
             √
             3
                          √
                 − 1ϵ (−1+ 3i)
   Root 3:             2
                                           q          √
                                           3
                                             − 1ϵ −1 + 3i
                                 x+δ =                          +δ
                                                      2



                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Substitute this into P (x) for x and equate to 0:
                              q            √   3 q              √
                                3
                                  − 1ϵ −1 + 3i         3
                                                         − 1ϵ −1 + 3i
               −δ + ϵ δ +                          −                + 1 = 0.
                                        2                      2

    We then expand this expression to get
                                   q           √       q
                                                                            2
                             3δ 2 ϵ 3 − 1ϵ    3 3iδ 2 ϵ 3 − 1ϵ    3δϵ − 1ϵ 3
                        3
                       δ ϵ−                 +                  −
                                   2                2              q 2
                           √               2
                                                  q
                                                         1
                                                               √
                          3 3iδϵ − 1ϵ 3
                                                   3
                                                      −ϵ         3i 3 − 1ϵ

                        −                    −δ+           −               =0
                                  2                   2             2
    and represent it as a series of O(1) in δ, discarding higher order δ terms
                              2      √           2      q
                                                                  1
                                                                       √ q
                      3ϵ − ϵ 1 3
                                     3 3iϵ − ϵ 1 3            3
                                                                − ϵ       3i 3 − 1ϵ
              δ −
                                 −                 −1 +           −               ≈ 0.
                           2               2                    2            2

    We can then solve the expression for the correction δ to O(1), and get
                                           q           √
                                            3
                                              − 1ϵ 1 − 3i
                              δ≈            2      √          2     .
                                   3ϵ − 1ϵ 3 + 3 3iϵ − 1ϵ 3 + 2


A.2.4    ODE S
We generate third-order ordinary differential equations of the form
                         y ′′′ = f1 (x)(y ′′ )a + f2 (x)(y ′ )b + f3 (x)y c + f4 (x),
where f1 (x), f2 (x), f3 (x), f4 (x) are rational functions with integer coefficients. The initial condi-
tions are randomly selected integers from [0, 3]. The dataset excludes problems with a function of x
as a dominant term because of the difficulty of deriving power law expressions in these cases.
Approximate solutions at small x can be derived using a Taylor series expansion (up to the third
order) around x = 0. Solving ODEs in the large x regime involves determining the two largest terms,
assuming a divergence at some large x∗ , and solving the dominant balance between these terms to
create a power law approximation of the form
                                           y(x) = A(x∗ − x)p .

    ODE Problem and Solution
    Problem: Consider the following third-order ordinary differential equation:
                            y                              y ′′                     1
          y ′′′ = −                     + y ′2 −                        −
                      24x4 + 6x2 + 3               5x3 − 2x2 − x + 2        12x2 − cos (x) + 11
    with initial conditions at x = 0:
                                                   y(0) = 1.00
                                               y ′ (0) = 0.00
                                               y ′′ (0) = 0.00
    Find analytical expressions that approximate the solution of y(x) at small and large x.

    Solution:



                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   The dominant balance in the large x regime is given by
                                                       2
                                        d3

                                                   d
                                           y=        y .
                                       dx3        dx
   We recognize that the solution of this ODE will diverge at finite x and that divergences
   typically follow a power law of the form
                                          y = α(x − x∗ )p ,
   where x∗ is the divergence point. The divergence point can be determined by estimated by
   examining the numerical solution generated by code.
   Plugging in the dominant terms we found previously yields the following equation:
                                                   p−3                       2p−2
                   αp (p − 2) (p − 1) (x − 11.45)        = α2 p2 (x − 11.45)        .
   After substituting the derivatives, the equation is reorganized to collect terms with respect
   to (x − x∗ ). This leads to an equation where the coefficients and powers of (x − x∗ ) are
   equated on both sides. Simplifying the equation gives us two separate equations, one for the
   coefficients and another for the powers of (x − x∗ ). There is now a system of equations,
   where the coefficients’ equation is
                                     αp (p − 2) (p − 1) = α2 p2
    and the powers’ equation is:
                                          p − 3 = 2p − 2.
    Solving this system of equations provides the values of α and p. A valid solution is identified
    if α and p are both nonzero. Here, the solution for α and p is found to be:
                                         α = −6,       p = −1
   With these values, the analytical approximation for the solution at large x (near the divergence
   point) is given by
                                       y = −6(x − 11.45)−1 .
   The approximate solution at small x can also be solved used dominant balance, but one can
   take advantage of the initial conditions and form a Taylor series instead around x = 0, which
   is given by
                                                     y ′′ (0) 2 y ′′′ (0) 3
                          y(x) ≈ y(0) + y ′ (0)x +           x +         x .
                                                        2!          3!
   Plugging in the initial conditions, we get the following expression at small x:
                                                       13 3
                                         y(x) = 1 −       x
                                                      180
   Thus, with rounding for clarity, the solution is given by

                                          13 3
                            y(x) = 1 −       x , y = −6(x − 11.45)−1 .
                                         180


A.2.5    I NTEGRALS
The polynomial P (x) is randomly generated to consist of up to ten terms, where each term is a power
function of x with an integer power randomly sampled from 1 and 20 and an integer coefficient
sampled from 1 to 10. The integration bound a ∈ [0, 100] is also randomly selected. This form
ensures that the integral does not oscillate.
The height is approximated as the maximum value of the integrand, which is 1ϵ , and the width can be
estimated as the distance over which the integrand decreases from its maximum value by a factor of
2, which implies that the width x obeys the equation
                                       1         1
                                              =     ⇒ P (x) = ϵ.
                                   ϵ + P (x)    2ϵ

                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In the regime of small ϵ, the term with the smallest degree and ϵ are the dominant terms, and in the
regime of intermediate ϵ, the term with the largest degree and ϵ are dominant. There exists one more
solution regime when the width of the integral exceeds the limits of integration, or when ϵ is "very
large." In this case, the integral is approximated by L/ϵ, where L is the integration range.
See a full sample of a traditional integral problem in Box 1.

A.2.6    L APLACE INTEGRALS
                                    Rb
Laplace integrals of the form I(x) = a g(t)e±xf (t) dt assume that f (t) > 0, is never a constant, and
has an absolute minimum at a point t0 either in the interior of or on the bounds of the interval [a, b].
The set of possible Laplace integrals I(x) in our dataset are parameterized by four parameters:
the bounds [a, b], g(t), f (t), and the sign in front of x. To generate the dataset, the bounds for
each problem were randomly sampled from the [−1, −0.9, . . . 0.9, 1], and the sign was uniformly
sampled from {−1, 1}. The functions f (t) and g(t) were generated by randomly selecting a linear
combination of polynomials up to fifth order and basic trigonometric functions.
Our solution uses SymPy under the hood to find the minima of f (t) (or the dual annealing algorithm
if SymPy fails to return the minima).
    Sample Laplace Integral Problem and Solution

    Problem: Consider the integral
                      Z 0.3
                                                                 4     3     2
              I(x) =        (−1.6t2 − 0.5 sin (t) − 1.9)e+x(−2.5t −0.8t +1.4t ) dt                              (2)
                              −0.9
    Develop an analytical formula for I(x) that is accurate as x                                        →       ∞.

    Solution:
    The integral is of the form
                                                     Z b
                                            I(x) =            g(t)e+xf (t) dt                                   (3)
                                                      a
   where a = −0.9, b = 0.3, g(t) = −1.6t2 − 0.5 sin (t) − 1.9, and f (t) = −2.5t4 − 0.8t3 +
   1.4t2 . This means we can use Laplace’s method to develop an analytical approximation in
   the limit that x → ∞. In this limit, the integral will be dominated by the integrand near
   the maximum of f (t) within the bounds [−0.9, 0.3]. So, to simplify the integral, we will
   expand the integrand around this maximum. In this case, we can find the maximum of
   f (t) = −2.5t4 − 0.8t3 + 1.4t2 on the interval analytically. We begin by looking for critical
   point(s) tcrit of f (t) by solving f ′ (t) = −10.0t3 − 2.4t2 + 2.8t = 0 for t. This gives us
   that tcrit = [−0.66, 0]. To find the maximum on this interval, we evaluate f (t) at the critical
   point(s) tcrit and the bounds −0.9 and 0.3. We take the t that gives the largest value. Here,
   this maximum t0 = [−0.66]. Since the integral is dominated by the value of the integrand
   near -0.66, we Taylor expand the integrand around this point.
                 Z b
        I(x) =         (g(−0.66) + (t + 0.66)g ′ (−0.66) + ...)
                  a
                                                                         ′         (t+0.66)2 ′′
                                         ∗ e+x(f (−0.66)+(t+0.66)f (−0.66)+            2    f (−0.66)+...)
                                                                                                             dt (4)
          ′
    But f (−0.66) = 0 by definition, so we can remove this term from the exponent. We can
    then approximate
                           Z b
                                                     (t+0.66)2 ′′
                    I(x) ≈     g(−0.66)e+x(f (−0.66)+ 2 f (−0.66)) dt,                 (5)
                                     a

   which equals
                                                      Z b
                                                                      (t+0.66)2 ′′
                             g(−0.66)e+xf (−0.66)              e+x(       2    f (−0.66))
                                                                                            dt                  (6)
                                                          a


                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                       q
                                                            ′′
   We perform the change of variables u =               x |f (−0.66)|
                                                               2      (t + 0.66), rewriting the integral as
                                            q
                                                    |f ′′ (−0.66)|
                                                                              s
                                        Z       x                  (b+0.66)
                                                            2                           2              2
              g(−0.66)e   +xf (−0.66)
                                                                                                    e−u dt   (7)
                                                                                  x|f ′′ (−0.66)|
                                        q
                                              |f ′′ (−0.66)|
                                            x         2      (a+0.66)

   Since x → ∞, we approximate this as
                                                       s                          Z ∞
                                                                 2                          2
                       g(−0.66)e   +xf (−0.66)
                                                              ′′
                                                                                        e−u dt               (8)
                                                           x|f (−0.66)|            −∞

   Solving the integral and evaluating, we find that
                                                    r
                                                      π 0.37x
                                        I(x) ≈ −1.21    e                                                    (9)
                                                      x


                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2.7   W ORD PROBLEM AUTOMATIC GENERATION SETUP

   Table 3: Prompts for generating problem and solution contexts and plausibility verification.

           Task              Task instruction
           Question con-     Rewrite this {question_type} problem by embed-
           textualization    ding it within a plausible real-world {domain_seed}
                             problem scenario, without changing the mathematical
                             question at the end.
           Solution con-     We provide above a real-world {domain_seed} ques-
           textualization    tion, and its mathematical solution. Generate a single
                             introductory sentence before the solution that can connect
                             the solution to the real-world {domain_seed} context
                             provided in the question.
           Verification      We provide above a real-world {domain_seed} ques-
                             tion. Review and verify its plausibility within the context
                             of parameter ranges of this domain (e.g. energy value
                             cannot be negative). Identify any inconsistencies or areas
                             needing clarification to ensure the problem is realistic for
                             this domain. Return a single float number as plausibility
                             score (0-1) in LaTeX boxed format \boxed{} at the end.


A.2.8   W ORD PROBLEM AUTOMATIC GENERATION EXAMPLE

   Original vs. physics context augmented problem (ODEs)

   Original Mathematical Problem: Consider the following third-order ordinary differential
   equation:
                              y                       y ′′         1
                y ′′′ = 4       3
                                     + (y ′ 4
                                           )  +         2
                                                            + 4
                       3x − 4x − 2              4 · (4x + 1) 5x + sin(x) − 8
   with initial conditions at x = 0:

                                             y(0) = 1.00
                                            y ′ (0) = 0.00
                                          y ′′ (0) = 0.00
   Find analytical expressions that approximate the solution of y(x) in the small x and large x
   regimes.

   Real-World Context Problem: In a study of the dynamics of a newly discovered type of
   fluid, researchers are investigating the behavior of a fluid flow through a porous medium.
   The flow is described by a third-order ordinary differential equation that models the velocity
   profile of the fluid, denoted by y(x), as it moves through the medium. The equation takes
   into account various factors such as the porosity of the medium, the viscosity of the fluid, and
   external forces acting on the fluid.
   The governing equation for the velocity profile is given by:
                              y                          y ′′               1
                y ′′′ = 4        3
                                        + (y ′ 4
                                              )  +         2
                                                                + 4
                       3x − 4x − 2                 4 · (4x + 1) 5x + sin(x) − 8
   The initial conditions at the entry point of the medium, x = 0, are specified as follows:

                                             y(0) = 1.00
                                            y ′ (0) = 0.00
                                           y ′′ (0) = 0.00



                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   The researchers are interested in finding analytical expressions that approximate the solution
   of y(x) in the small x and large x regimes. These approximations will help in understanding
   the initial behavior of the fluid as it enters the medium and its asymptotic behavior as it travels
   further through the medium.


A.2.9   W ORD PROBLEM AUTOMATIC GENERATION QUALITY EVALUATION


  (a) Diversity of context subdomains within the
  broader physics domain for auto-generated word        (b) Plausibility scores distribution of automatically
  problems.                                             generated word problems.

Figure 6: Diversity and quality assessment of automatically generated word problems. Only problems
above a plausibility score threshold are included.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3     E VALUATION SETUP

A.3.1    P ROMPTS FOR RESPONSE GENERATION

                Table 4: Problem type specific hints by Question and Answer Type

   Question         Answer Type      Task instruction
   Type
   Nondim-          SymPy            Please answer the question requiring an answer in a
   symbolic                          SymPy convertible formula containing variables and math
                                     operation expressions and provide the final answer, e.g.,
                                     x3 , xy inside a Latex boxed format \boxed{}.
   Nondim-          Float (2)        Please answer the question requiring a floating-point num-
   numerical                         ber with two decimal places and provide the final value,
                                     e.g., 0.80, 3.12, inside a Latex box \boxed{}.
   Polynomial       SymPy List       Please answer the question requiring a Python list contain-
   Roots                             ing SymPy convertible formulas of variable ϵ and math
                                     operation expressions and provide the final list, e.g., [ϵ3 ,
                                     1
                                      ϵ ] inside a Latex boxed format \boxed{}.
   ODEs             SymPy List       Please answer the question requiring a Python list contain-
                                     ing SymPy convertible formula of y = f (x) and provide
                                     the final list, e.g., [y = 1 − x3 , y = −6/(x − 5)], inside a
                                     Latex boxed format \boxed{}.
   Integrals        SymPy           Please answer the question requiring an answer in a
                                    SymPy convertible formula containing formulas of vari-
                                    able x and math operation expressions and provide
                                    the final answer, e.g., x3 inside a Latex boxed format
                                    \boxed{}.


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3.2   P ROMPTS FOR GRADING

               Table 5: LLM-based grading prompts by Question and Answer Type

   Question          Answer type    Task instruction
   type
   Polynomial        SymPy List     Please take this response {response} and this answer
   Roots                            key {answer key} and grade the response based on
                                    the following criteria: 1) Check both the small and large
                                    ϵ solutions. 2) For each solution, give full credit if it
                                    completely matches the elements in the answer key; give
                                    partial credit proportional to the number of matching roots
                                    between the response and the answer key; give no credit
                                    if it is completely wrong. 3) For both partial and no credit
                                    briefly state the error reason. 4) Average the scores for the
                                    small and large epsilon solutions to obtain a final score
                                    between 0 and 1. 5) Give the final grading as a float in
                                    Latex boxed format \boxed{}.
   ODEs              SymPy List    Please take this response {response} and this solution
                                   {answer key} and grade the response based on the
                                   following criteria: 1) Check both the small and large ϵ
                                   solutions. 2) For small regime solution, only give full
                                   credit if it matches the formula in the answer key exactly;
                                   give no credit if it is doesn’t match the form. For large
                                   regime solution, give full credit if it matches the formula
                                   in the answer key exactly; give partial credit if it doesn’t
                                   match but the numerical evaluation is not far from solution
                                   at this regime; give no credit if neither satisfies 3) Average
                                   the scores for the small and large epsilon solutions to
                                   obtain a final score between 0 and 1. 4) Give the final
                                   grading as a float in Latex boxed format \boxed{}.
   Integrals (tra-   SymPy List    Please take this response {response} and this solu-
   ditional)                       tion {answer key} and grade the response based on
                                   the following criteria: 1) Check both the small and large
                                   ϵ solutions. 2) For each solution, give full credit if it
                                   matches the formula in the answer key; give no credit
                                   if it is completely wrong and briefly state the reason for
                                   the error. 3) Average the scores for the small and large
                                   epsilon solutions to obtain a final score between 0 and 1.
                                   4) Give the final grading as a float in Latex boxed format
                                   \boxed{}.
   Integrals         SymPy         Please take this response {response} and this solution
   (Laplace)                       {answer key} and grade the response based on the
                                   following criteria: 1) Check the large x final solution. 2)
                                   Give full credit if it matches the formula in the answer key;
                                   give half credit if the {response} get to the checkpoint
                                   where it correctly identifies t0 where f attains its maxi-
                                   mum and attempt performing Taylor’s expansion around
                                   it but the final answer is wrong; give no credit if it is com-
                                   pletely wrong. 3) For both partial and no credit briefly
                                   state the error reason. 4) Give the final grading as a float
                                   in Latex boxed format \boxed{}.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3.3    GPT GRADING HUMAN VERIFICATION

                       Model                   Roots   ODEs    Integrals
                       GPT3.5 (0)                0       0         0
                       GPT3.5 (1)                0     -0.09     -0.02
                       GPT3.5 (5)              +0.02   +0.07     +0.02
                       GPT4 (0)                  0     -0.02       0
                       GPT4 (1)                  0     -0.04     -0.02
                       GPT4 (5)                +0.07   -0.07     -0.15
                       o1-mini (0)             +0.04   +0.05       0
                       o1-mini (5)             +0.05   +0.05       0
                       Llama3-8b (0)             0       0       -0.02
                       Llama3-8b (5)           -0.07   -0.02     -0.02
                       Codellama3-14b (0)        0     -0.02       0
                       Codellama3-14b (5)        0     -0.02       0

Table 6: Average adjusted points using human judgment from GPT-based grading. Rows with score
adjustments of 0.1 or more are highlighted in pink.


A.3.4    M ODEL HYPER - PARAMETERS

                       Table 7: Generating parameters for various LLMs.

 Model         Generation Setup
 GPT-3.5       model = gpt-3.5-turbo, temperature = 0, max_tokens = 4000
 GPT-4         model = gpt-4-turbo, temperature = 0, max_tokens = 4000
 o1-mini       model = o1-mini, temperature = 0, max_tokens = 4000
 Llama3        model = llama3:8b, temperature = 0
 CodeLlama     model = codellama:13b, temperature = 0


A.3.5    C OMPUTING RESOURCE
Evaluations of open-source models on HARDM ATH are conducted on a high-performance compute
cluster with a single Tesla V100 GPU (16GB vram). Evaluation on one problem type typically takes
less than 1 hour.


                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4     E XTENDED EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

A.4.1    E XTENDED EVALUATION RESULTS


                                                         (b) Model accuracy breakdown by problem sub-
      (a) Model accuracy increases with shot numbers.    types for all models with 5-shot CoT prompting.

Figure 7: Model evaluation accuracy breakdown by shot number and problem sub-types. (a)
evaluation accuracy for all models increases with shot numbers for CoT prompting with o1-mini and
GPT-4 showing the most obvious improvements; (b) evaluation accuracy breakdown for all models
on all problem sub-types under the 5-shot CoT condition.


Figure 8: Model performance scaling upon few-shot prompting (0, 1, 5, 10) for problem type Nondim
and ODEs



                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Percentage of correct, partial, and incorrect responses for GPT-3.5 and CodeLlama using
CoT.


A.4.2   E XTENDED ERROR MODE ANALYSIS

   Problem 136 Grading Response: Roots (error mode: incorrect dominant balance setup)

   Question: Consider the polynomial P (x) = ϵx6 + x4 − 1. Find approximate expressions
   for all roots of the polynomials in the limit of small positive ϵ and large positive ϵ . Only a
   single term approximation to the root is required.
   Grading for Large Positive ϵ:
   Model Response: For large ϵ When ϵ is large, the term ϵx6 dominates the polynomial for
   most x , except for potentially small x where x4 might still be relevant. However, focusing
   on the dominant term gives: P (x) ≈ ϵx6 . Setting this equal to zero for an approximation
   (acknowledging that we’re looking for non-trivial roots of the overall polynomial, but focusing
   on dominance to guide our approximation), suggests that we don’t get meaningful roots from
   this term alone since x6 = 0 doesn’t provide roots that satisfy the original polynomial’s
   requirement for non-zero roots.
   Reference Solution: Finally, we examine the balance A + C = 0 , assuming that |B| is
   negligible when compared to |A| and |C| . Solving this for x in terms of ϵ gives us 6 non-zero
                                                √  q              √  q          r r 
                                          −1 ± 3i 6 1ϵ 1 ± 3i 6 1ϵ               6 1    6 1
   roots: ϵx6 − 1 = 0 implies x =                          ,                 ,−      ,      . To
                                                  2                  2              ϵ     ϵ

   verify the roots found for consistency with our initial assumption, we check that |A|, |C| >>
   |B| holds for this root by substituting our found root expression for x back into A , B , and
   C and comparing their magnitudes. Using this method, we find that validity for small ϵ is
   False and validity for large ϵ is True.
   Grading: The response wrongly sets up the dominant balance as A = 0 and does not provide
   a concrete list of roots for large ϵ. Therefore, score for large positive ϵ is 0.0


   Problem 133 Grading Response: Roots (error mode: drop imaginary roots)

   Question: Consider the polynomial P (x) = ϵx3 + x2 − 1. Find approximate expressions
   for all roots of the polynomials in the limit of small positive ϵ and large positive ϵ . Only a
   single term approximation to the root is required.
   Grading for Large Positive ϵ:
   Model Response: To find the approximate expressions for all roots of the polynomial
   P (x) = ϵx3 + x2 − 1 in the limits of small and large ϵ , we will consider the two cases
   separately. For Large ϵ When ϵ is large, the term ϵx3 dominates the polynomial. Thus, the
   polynomial can be approximated by ignoring the x2 term, leading to ϵx3 − 1 ≈ 0 . Solving
                                                             1
   for x gives us an approximation for the root: x ≈ 1ϵ 3 . The other roots in this limit are
   complex and given the scope, we’ll focus on this real root approximation.
   Reference Solution: Finally, we examine the balance A+C = 0 , assuming that |B| is negligi-
   ble when compared to |A| and |C| . Solving this for x in terms of ϵ gives us 3 non-zero roots:



                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           √  q                  √  q       r 
                                     −1 −    3i 3 1ϵ       −1 +     3i 3 1ϵ 3 1
   ϵx3 − 1 = 0 implies x =                            ,                   ,     . To verify the
                                            2                     2           ϵ

   roots found for consistency with our initial assumption, we check that |A|, |C| >> |B| holds
   for this root by substituting our found root expression for x back into A , B , and C and com-
   paring their magnitudes. Using this method, we find that validity for small ϵ is False and va-
   lidity for large ϵ is True. Therefore, these roots are valid in the limit of large positive ϵ only.
   Grading: The response makes additional assumptions to drop the two other complex roots
   for large ϵ regime without the question asking it to do so. Therefore, score for large positive ϵ
   is 0.5



A.4.3   E XTENDED EXAMPLE GPT-4 O GRADING RESPONSES


   Grading Response: ODEs (incorrect)

   To grade the response, we will compare the provided solutions in the response with the ground
   truth solutions in both the small x and large x regimes.

   S MALL x R EGIME
   Response: y(x) = 1 − 5e−x
                                   3
   Ground Truth: y(x) = 1 − 5x6
   The response and the ground truth solution for small x are significantly different. The ground
   truth solution is a polynomial in x, while the response includes an exponential term. They do
   not match at all, so the solution for the small x regime is completely wrong.

   L ARGE x R EGIME
   Response: y(x) = "Assumed
                          √          rapid growth form due to y ′4 term."
                           3                1
   Ground Truth: y = 30(x − 2.68) 3 + (1.84)
   The response does not provide a specific analytical expression for the large x regime, while
   the ground truth does provide a specific form. The response mentions rapid growth due to
   y ′4 , but without a clear analytical form, this response doesn’t match the ground truth solution.
   This indicates that the solution for the large x regime is also completely wrong.
   Given the evaluation criteria, both solutions do not match or are incomplete compared to the
   ground truth. Therefore, each solution gets no credit.
   The final grading is 0.0 .



           Box 3: Example grading response for a ODEs problem that gets zero point.


   Grading Response: Integrals (correct)

                                                                       1 −3/4
   The model response approximates the integral for small ϵ as             ϵ  and for large ϵ as
                                                                      61/4
      1 −17/18
          ϵ      .
    81/18
   Now, let’s compare these results with the ground truth solutions:



                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                  0.64
   For small ϵ: - The ground truth solution is I(ϵ) =                   . - The model’s result is
                                                                  ϵ0.75
     1 −3/4
         ϵ      .
    61/4
   Both results for small ϵ are essentially the same, with:
                                              1
                                                    ≈ 0.64
                                            61/4
                                                                  0.89
   For large ϵ: - The ground truth solution is I(ϵ) =                   . - The model’s result is
                                                                  ϵ0.94
      1 −17/18
          ϵ        .
    81/18
   Both results for large ϵ are essentially the same, with:
                                              1
                                                    ≈ 0.89
                                            81/18
   Since the model’s response closely matches the ground truth solutions in both regimes (small
   and large ϵ) and provides essentially the same approximations, I would give full credit 1.0


Box 4: Example grading response for a Integrals sub-type simple integral problem that gets full
points.


   Grading Response: Integrals (partial)

   Answer Key
   1. Setup and Formulation: it 1) correctly identifies the integral form; 2) uses Laplace’s
   method; 3) identifies critical points and uses Taylor expansion around the point of interest; 4)
   performs a change of variables to simplify the integral.
   2. Key Steps and Approximations: it 1) expands the integrand around the minimum of f (t);
   2) approximates the integral by focusing on the dominant exponential term; 3) provides a
   final analytical approximation for I(x) as x → ∞.
   3. Final Result:

                                                    0.004e0.89x
                                       I(x) ≈ −
                                                         x
   Model Answer
   1. Setup and Formulation: it 1) correctly identifies the integral form; 2) recognizes that the
   exponential term will dominate for large x; 3) focuses on the region where the integrand is
   most significant (near t = 0.7).
   2. Key Steps and Approximations: it 1) uses the method of steepest descents heuristically
   without detailed Taylor expansion; 2) approximates by evaluating the polynomial part at
   t = 0.7 and considering the exponential decay; 3) recognizes the dominant behavior of the
   exponential term but does not perform a detailed variable change or expansion.
   3. Final Result:
                                                                  3
                                    I(x) ≈ −0.017 · ex·2.6·0.7
   Comparison
   1. Similarities: 1) understanding of dominance: both the answer key and the student correctly
   identify that the behavior of the integral for large x is dominated by the exponential term;
   2) identifying significant points: both recognize that t = 0.7 is the critical point where
   the integrand contributes significantly; 3) approximate behavior: Bbth solutions focus on



                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   approximating the behavior of the integral for large x, emphasizing the exponential term’s
   dominance.
   2. Differences: 1) mathematical rigor: the answer key employs a more rigorous mathematical
   approach, including Taylor expansion and change of variables, providing a more precise
   and detailed solution; 2) heuristic approach: the student takes a more heuristic approach,
   focusing on the dominant exponential term without detailed mathematical expansions or
   variable changes; 3) accuracy of final expression: the answer key provides a more accurate
   final expression with specific constants derived from the detailed process, while the student’s
   result, though on the right track, has a different coefficient due to the heuristic method. I
   would give partial credit 0.5


Box 5: Example grading response for a Integrals sub-type Laplace integral problem highlighting the
error of failing to develop Taylor’s expansion.


A.5   M OTIVATION FOR INCLUDING NONDIMENSIONALIZATION PROBLEMS

   GPT-4 response on solving a dimensionalized polynomial root finding problem

   Problem: Find approximate analytical expressions for the roots of the polynomial:
                                         a0 x5 − a1 x + a2 = 0
   at different regimes of the coefficients a0 , a1 , and a2 .

   Model Solution:
   Regime 1: |a0 | ≫ |a1 |, |a2 | (Dominance of the x5 -term) In this regime, the polynomial sim-
   plifies to:
                                             a0 x5 ≈ 0
   Hence, the dominant contribution to the roots arises from balancing a0 x5 with the constant
   term a2 :
                                                                  1/5
                                   5                          a2
                              a0 x + a2 ≈ 0 =⇒ x ≈ −                   .
                                                              a0
   This gives five distinct roots corresponding to the 5th roots of unity:
                                          1/5
                                      a2
                            xk = −            ei2πk/5 , k = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4.
                                      a0
   Regime 2: |a1 | ≫ |a0 |, |a2 | (Dominance of the linear term) Here, the polynomial reduces to:
                                               −a1 x ≈ 0
   and the root is approximately:
                                            x ≈ 0.
   Including the next dominant term, we balance −a1 x with a2 :
                                                           a2
                                 −a1 x + a2 ≈ 0 =⇒ x ≈ .
                                                           a1
   Regime 3: |a2 | ≫ |a0 |, |a1 | (Dominance of the constant term) In this regime, the constant
   term dominates, and the polynomial becomes inconsistent unless a2 = 0, which contradicts
   the assumption |a2 | =
                        ̸ 0. Thus, there are no real roots in this regime.
   Regime 4: General Balance of Terms When all terms are of comparable magnitude, we con-
   sider approximate solutions based on the magnitude of x:
         1. For large x: The x5 -term dominates. Balancing a0 x5 with −a1 x:
                                                                   1/4
                                                                   a1
                                    a0 x5 − a1 x ≈ 0 =⇒ x ≈                .
                                                                   a0


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         2. For small x: The linear term −a1 x dominates over the other terms. Balancing
            −a1 x with a2 :
                                                            a2
                                    −a1 x + a2 = 0 =⇒ x ≈ .
                                                            a1
         3. For intermediate x: All terms contribute, and the roots must be found numerically
            or using perturbative methods.

   Reference Solution:
   Nondimensionalization We begin with the quintic polynomial:
                                       a0 x5 − a1 x + a2 = 0.
   To explore how the solution depends on the parameters a0 , a1 , and a2 , let us write:
                                                a2
                                           x = y,
                                                a1
   and substitute this into the polynomial. This substitution yields:
                                         5
                                       a2
                                   a0        y 5 − a2 (y − 1) = 0.
                                       a1
   Dividing through by a2 , the equation becomes:
                                          5
                                   a0 a2
                                              y 5 − y + 1 = 0.
                                   a2 a1
   Now define the parameter:
                                                  a0 a42
                                             ϵ=          ,
                                                   a51
   which simplifies the equation to:
                                         ϵx5 − x + 1 = 0.
   We examine the roots of the equation:
                                         ϵx5 − x + 1 = 0
   in two asymptotic limits: ϵ → 0 and ϵ → ∞. The aim is to match the expressions for the
   roots in the intermediate regime.
   Consider the limit ϵ → 0. The equation involves three terms: ϵx5 , −x, and 1. For the
   equation to be satisfied, these terms must sum to zero. In the limit ϵ → 0, typically two of
   these terms dominate, forming a distinguished balance.
   To discover approximate formulas for the roots, we analyze each possible balance and
   determine consistency.
   Balancing −x ≈ 1
   The first possibility is to balance the terms −x and 1. This implies, to a first approximation:
                                               x ≈ 1.
   For this balance to be self-consistent, the neglected term ϵx5 must satisfy:
                                             ϵx5 ≪ 1.
   Since x ≈ 1, this condition reduces to ϵ ≪ 1, which is satisfied as ϵ → 0. Hence, this balance
   is consistent.
   Balancing x5 ∼ −1
   Consider the balance ϵx5 ∼ −1. This implies:
                                                     1/5
                                                  1
                                          x∼ −           .
                                                  ϵ



                                                  33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   For this balance to be consistent, the neglected term x ∼ ϵ−1/5 must be smaller than the
   terms we have kept. However, this is not the case. In the limit ϵ → 0, the neglected term
   grows unbounded, while the retained terms remain order unity. Therefore, this balance is not
   consistent.
   Balancing x5 ∼ x
   The only other possible balance is ϵx5 ∼ x. This balance leads to four roots:
                                                 1/4
                                                1
                                          x∼           .
                                                ϵ
   In this case, the size of the neglected term 1 is much smaller than the size of the retained
   terms, which are of order O(ϵ−1/4 ). Thus, this balance is self-consistent.
   Final Solution for the Quintic Roots
   The quintic equation:
                                       a0 x5 − a1 x + a2 = 0
   has the following approximate roots depending on the coefficient regime, summarized below:

                      Root 1: x ≈ 1,
                                                      1/4
                                             a51

                                                              2πk
                      Roots 2–5: x ≈                        ei 4 ,   k = 0, 1, 2, 3.
                                            a0 a42


                                                     34
