Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E FFICIENTLY L EARNING AT T EST-T IME :
ACTIVE F INE -T UNING OF LLM S
 Jonas Hübotter∗, Sascha Bongni, Ido Hakimi, Andreas Krause
 ETH Zürich, Switzerland

                                             A BSTRACT
            Recent efforts in fine-tuning language models often rely on automatic data
            selection, commonly using Nearest Neighbors retrieval from large datasets.
            However, we theoretically show that this approach tends to select redundant
            data, limiting its effectiveness or even hurting performance. To address this, we
            introduce SIFT, a data selection algorithm designed to reduce uncertainty about
            the model’s response given a prompt, which unifies ideas from retrieval and active
            learning. Whereas Nearest Neighbor retrieval typically fails in the presence of
            information duplication, SIFT accounts for information duplication and optimizes
            the overall information gain of the selected examples. We focus our evaluations
            on fine-tuning at test-time for prompt-specific language modeling on the Pile
            dataset, and show that SIFT consistently outperforms Nearest Neighbor retrieval,
            with minimal computational overhead. Moreover, we show that our uncertainty
            estimates can predict the performance gain of test-time fine-tuning, and use this
            to develop an adaptive algorithm that invests test-time compute proportional to
            realized performance gains. We provide the activeft (Active Fine-Tuning)
            library which can be used as a drop-in replacement for Nearest Neighbor retrieval.

1       I NTRODUCTION
The standard paradigm of machine learning separates             1.6
                                                                Bits per Byte (↓ better)


                                                                        Nearest Neighbor
training and testing. Training aims to learn a model by                 with duplication
inductively extracting general rules from data, and testing     1.4
applies this model to new, unseen data. We investigate
an alternative transductive paradigm where the model            1.2
                                                                                         Nearest Neighbor
is fine-tuned at test-time specifically to the given task.                              without duplication
Variations of this paradigm have been studied since the         1.0
inception of machine learning as a field. Early examples              SIFT (ours)
are local learning (Cleveland, 1979; Cleveland & Devlin,        0.8
1988; Atkeson et al., 1997) and local fine-tuning (Bottou           0              20              40
& Vapnik, 1992). More recently, with the advent of large                    Test-Time Iterations
pre-trained models which have good representations
and are strong foundations for fine-tuning, the idea of Figure 1: Selecting fine-tuning data
test-time fine-tuning has re-gained attention (Krause using SIFT (red) robustly outperforms
et al., 2018; 2019; Sun et al., 2020). Hardt & Sun (2024) Nearest Neighbor retrieval (black) and
show that fine-tuning on data related to the prompt to a avoids the failure-mode of Nearest
large language model (LLM) can significantly improve Neighbor retrieval where the same data
performance. Also, test-time fine-tuning is the central is selected repeatedly, which is a com-
component of state-of-the-art approaches to the ARC chal- mon result of information duplication.
lenge (Chollet, 2019; Cole & Osman, 2023; Akyürek et al., 2024), a non-saturated benchmark which
is intended to test reasoning capabilities based on “core knowledge” rather than mere memorization.
Active Fine-Tuning: Effective data selection for fine-tuning LLMs Test-time fine-tuning
demands automatic data selection since manually selecting data for each test instance is infeasible.
Moreover, the sample efficiency of test-time fine-tuning is a central bottleneck as the number
of gradient steps is directly proportional to inference time. Previous works on data selection for
fine-tuning LLMs have fundamentally relied on Nearest Neighbor retrieval within some embedding
space (Hardt & Sun, 2024; Xia et al., 2024). We show theoretically and empirically that Nearest
    ∗
        Correspondence to jonas.huebotter@inf.ethz.ch


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Neighbor retrieval is insufficient for fine-tuning LLMs since it can lead to the selection of redundant
data. Notably, recent works using influence functions for data selection such as Xia et al. (2024)
have pointed out this limitation. In contrast, a large body of work on (inductive) active learning
has studied non-redundant data selection (e.g., Sener & Savarese, 2017; Ash et al., 2020; Yehuda
et al., 2021; Kirsch et al., 2018) that covers the data manifold well (cf. Figure 2). Retrieval and active
learning can be seen as two extreme ends of a spectrum: retrieval selects relevant but potentially
redundant data, while active learning selects diverse but potentially irrelevant data.
We bridge this gap by unifying ideas from retrieval and
active learning in SIFT, an algorithm based on emerging
literature on transductive active learning (Hübotter et al.,
2024) that Selects Informative data for Fine-Tuning as
illustrated in Figure 2. Our results show that SIFT leads
to substantial improvements in performance and efficiency.
Concretely, we show the following:

1. Nearest Neighbor retrieval is insufficient (§2): We
   prove that selecting the top-N highest scoring points
   from a large dataset according to a fixed scoring            Figure 2: We consider a scenario where
   function leads to the selection of redundant data.           we have a pre-trained language model
2. SIFT estimates uncertainty about responses (§3):             capturing a latent manifold (red) in the
   We develop the notion of uncertainty about the               large sequence space (white). We aim
   response to the prompt, and derive an anytime high           to improve the models performance on
   probability bound to the total variation distance            a given prompt (blue) by efficiently fine-
   between the model’s distribution over responses and          tuning the model on few relevant and
   the ground truth which is governed by this uncertainty.      diverse data points (black) at test-time.
3. SIFT provably reduces uncertainty (§4): We propose SIFT, an algorithm that selects data
   which reduces uncertainty about the response to the prompt. We prove statistical rates for the
   uncertainty reduction (§4.1) and show that SIFT is compute-efficient, with minimal overhead
   compared to Nearest Neighbor retrieval (§4.2).
4. SIFT performs better and is more robust than Nearest Neighbor retrieval (§5): We find that
   fine-tuning an LLM on data selected by SIFT consistently and robustly improves performance,
   which is not the case with Nearest Neighbor retrieval. Moreover, our results suggest that at test-
   time, an LLM might be able to learn more effectively through fine-tuning than from its context.
5. SIFT can invest test-time compute proportionally to performance gains (§6): We observe
   that our uncertainty estimates can accurately predict the performance gain of test-time fine-tuning.
   Motivated by this, we dynamically adapt compute to the expected performance gain.

2    T EST-T IME F INE -T UNING
We define test-time fine-tuning of LLMs (Hardt & Sun, 2024) as follows. We consider a domain X
of token sequences and assume that we have access to a large dataset of examples D ⊆ X which we
call the data space. We further assume that we have access to a pre-trained autoregressive language
model that maps token sequences X to probability distributions over the next token from a vocabulary
of size V . Our work addresses the central question:

              Given a prompt x⋆ ∈ X , how can we effectively select fine-tuning data
       from the large dataset D such that the fine-tuned model performs well on the prompt?

We then fine-tune the model for a single gradient step on each selected sequence.
Locally adjusting a model at test-time has gained popularity with few-shot in-context learning (Brown
et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022b; Bubeck et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2024) and retrieval augmented
generation (RAG, Lewis et al., 2019; Guu et al., 2020; Borgeaud et al., 2022). In contrast to this
approach, test-time fine-tuning works by fine-tuning the parameters of a pre-trained model at test-time
specifically to each prompt. Notably, test-time fine-tuning takes time linear in the number of tokens
whereas in-context learning with a transformer has quadratic complexity (Vaswani et al., 2017).
Next to this, Hardt & Sun (2024) and other works have found (test-time) fine-tuning to perform


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


substantially better than in-context learning (Hu et al., 2022; Mosbach et al., 2023). This work further
improves the performance of test-time fine-tuning. Prior work has also studied how one can explicitly
meta-learn the ability to perform test-time fine-tuning (Finn et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2024), though
we find this capability to emerge even from models that are not explicitly trained in this way.
The central question studied in this work also arises when fine-tuning LLMs during post-training. For
example, in targeted instruction tuning, the goal is to fine-tune a model to obtain desired capabilities,
which are commonly embodied by a set of examples x⋆ (Xia et al., 2024). The extension of our
work to such a “batched” setting is straightforward.

2.1   N EAREST N EIGHBOR R ETRIEVAL IS I NSUFFICIENT

Prior work on data selection for fine-tuning
has relied on Nearest Neighbor retrieval. The      Prompt: What is the age of Michael Jordan
idea of making predictions on x depending on
                                 ⋆                 and how many kids does he have?
its nearest neighbors has been around as long      Nearest Neighbor:
as machine learning itself (Fix & Hodges Jr., 1. The age of Michael Jordan is 61 years.
1951; Cover & Hart, 1967). Bottou & Vapnik
                                                   2. Michael Jordan was born on February 17, 1963.
(1992) were the first to apply this idea to the
fine-tuning of convolutional neural networks by    SIFT (ours):
selecting the nearest neighbors of a test image    1. The age of Michael Jordan is 61 years.
in pixel-space. More recently, due to advances
in representation learning (Devlin et al., 2018;   2. Michael Jordan has five children.
Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) and efficiency (e.g.,
Johnson et al., 2019), Nearest Neighbor retrieval Figure 3: We retrieve two data points to answer the
has regained attention and been applied to prompt. Nearest Neighbor selects redundant data,
test-time fine-tuning (Hardt & Sun, 2024).        while SIFT yields maximal information (cf. §L).
Xia et al. (2024) use influence functions (Cook, 1977; Koh & Liang, 2017; Pruthi et al., 2019) to
select data for fine-tuning LLMs. This line of work aims to select data that reduces a first-order
Taylor approximation to the test loss after fine-tuning, an approach that corresponds to Nearest
Neighbor retrieval in a certain embedding space. They highlight two main limitations of the use
of influence functions and Nearest Neighbor retrieval for data selection:
• Nearest Neighbor retrieval leads to the selection of redundant data. Figure 3 illustrates this
  limitation with a qualitative example. We formalize this limitation in Proposition K.1, which we
  summarize here informally:
  Informal Proposition 2.1. Selecting the top-N nearest neighbors from the data space (according
  to cosine similarity or Euclidean distance) may not reduce the uncertainty about the response to
  the prompt beyond fine-tuning on the closest neighbor. Every additional passage may be redundant.
• Nearest Neighbor retrieval selects data with high positive cosine similarity to the prompt. Yet, data
  with high negative cosine similarity can be equally informative as data with high positive cosine
  similarity (Xia et al., 2024, Appendix K.2), but is ignored by standard Nearest Neighbor retrieval.
In this work, we propose SIFT and show that it naturally addresses both limitations. SIFT unifies
work on retrieval, which finds relevant but redundant data, and active learning (AL), which finds non-
redundant but irrelevant data. In §B, we discuss how SIFT relates to prior work in retrieval and AL.

3     P RELIMINARIES : U NCERTAINTY E STIMATION FOR F INE -T UNING
We suppose the assigned probability that y ∈ [V ] is theP   class label of an input x ∈ X is given by
                                                              V
sy (f ⋆ (x)), where sy is the softmax sy (f ) =
                                              ˙ exp(fy )/( i=1 exp(fi )). That is, f ⋆ (x) denotes the
“ground truth” logits for a given input x. In the context of language modeling, V is the number of
tokens in the vocabulary, and y denotes the index of the next token. We defer all proofs to Appendix K.
We use a surrogate model to quantify the informativeness of data, which we define next.
Assumption 3.1 (Surrogate model: Linear model class within a known latent space). We assume
f ⋆ (x) = W ⋆ ϕ(x) with unknown W ⋆ ∈ RV ×d and where ϕ(·) ∈ Rd denotes known embeddings.
The surrogate model uses the latent space induced by the pre-trained model to describe the data
manifold. We emphasize that while SIFT relies on this surrogate model for data selection, it still fine-


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tunes the full pre-trained model, including latent features. Surrogate dense embedding models of this
kind have been used extensively for data selection via Nearest Neighbor retrieval (e.g., Lewis et al.,
2019; Karpukhin et al., 2020; Borgeaud et al., 2022; Xia et al., 2024), and to understand the training
dynamics and generalization of large neural networks (e.g., Jacot et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2018; Malladi
et al., 2023; Templeton et al., 2024; Park et al., 2024). Furthermore, a surrogate model that assumes
linearity in some fixed latent space may be a reasonable approximation for test-time fine-tuning since
the latent space of the unfrozen model is not expected to change substantially by a few gradient steps.
In this work, we explore a scenario where we have a pre-trained model f pre (x) = W pre ϕ(x). We
let f (x; W ) =˙ W ϕ(x) and denote by L(W ; D) the negative log-likelihood    loss of f (·; W ) on a
dataset D of inputs x with corresponding class labels y: L(W ; D) =
                                                                     P
                                                                  ˙ − (x,y)∈D log sy (f (x; W )).
Uncertainty Estimation Our first intermediate goal is to estimate the uncertainty about the response
to a given prompt x⋆ after having fine-tuned on selected data Dn of size n. To this end, we
generalize prior work on confidence sets under categorical feedback (i.e., class feedback, Amani &
Thrampoulidis, 2020; Zhang & Sugiyama, 2023) to our fine-tuning setting. We consider the function
class WB = ˙ {W ∈ RV ×d | ∥W − W pre ∥F ≤ B} where ∥·∥F denotes the Frobenius norm and with
B a constant such that W ⋆ ∈ WB . Then given data Dn , we can refine the prior estimate W pre
of W ⋆ by minimizing the regularized negative log-likelihood loss
                                                         λ               2
                          Lλ (W ; Dn ) =˙ L(W ; Dn ) + ∥W − W pre ∥F                             (1)
                                                         2
with regularization coefficient λ > 0. We write its minimizer as Wn =
                                                                    ˙ arg minW ∈WB Lλ (W ; Dn ).
We will further denote the ground truth probability distribution over the response to x by
s⋆ (x) =˙ s(f ⋆ (x)) and our approximation after selection of n samples by sn (x) = ˙ s(f (x; Wn )).
We construct confidence sets of the form [sn (x) ± βn (δ)σn (x)] centered around this prediction,
and show their uniform anytime validity. The width of these sets is characterized by our central
quantity σn (x) which we define next. We consider the inner-product kernel k(x, x′ ) =
                                                                                     ˙ ϕ(x)⊤ ϕ(x′ )
and define for a set of inputs X = {x1 , . . . , xn } ⊆ D:
                         2
                        σX     ˙ k(x, x) − k⊤
                           (x) =            X (x)(KX + λκI n )
                                                              −1
                                                                 kX (x)                              (2)
where kX (x) = (k(x1 , x), . . . , k(xn , x)) ∈ R , KX ∈ R
                                                    n             n×n
                                                                        is the kernel matrix satisfying
(KX )i,j = k(xi , xj ), and κ =  ˙ supx∈X ,W ∈WB 1/λmin (A(x; W )). Here, A(x; W ) ∈ RV ×V is
the matrix satisfying (A(x; W ))i,j =  ˙ si (x; W )(1{i = j} − sj (x; W )) which is the proper gener-
alization of the derivative of the sigmoid function, standard in the analysis of binary feedback (Faury
et al., 2020; Pásztor et al., 2024). We write σn2 (x) =˙ σX2
                                                              n
                                                                (x) where Xn ⊆ D ⊆ X are the inputs
in Dn . With this we are ready to state our first result, namely that for careful choice of βn (δ), the
confidence sets contain s⋆ (x) simultaneously for all x ∈ X and n ≥ 1 with probability at least 1 − δ.
Theorem 3.2 (Confidence Sets). Let Assumption 3.1 hold and W ⋆ ∈ WB . Let δ ∈ (0, 1) and set
                                              LV 3/2 d
                                                             r
                        p                                    2        n
            βn (δ) =˙ 2 V (1 + 2B) B +                 log        1+         ∈ O(log(n/δ))           (3)
                                                 λ           δ       dλ
where L =
        ˙ supx∈X ,W ∈WB λmax (A(x; W )). Then
                 P(∀n ≥ 1, x ∈ X : dTV (sn (x), s⋆ (x)) ≤ βn (δ)σn (x)) ≥ 1 − δ
where dTV (s, s′ ) =
                   ˙ 21 i |si − s′i | is the total variation distance.
                       P

We use σn (x) as a proxy to the uncertainty about the response to x after having fine-tuned on
the selected data Dn , since it directly governs the size of the confidence sets around our current
estimate of response probabilities. This uncertainty is a key quantity not just in classification: In
Appendix K.5, we state analogous confidence sets for regression with the standard squared error
loss, building on results by Abbasi-Yadkori (2013) and Chowdhury & Gopalan (2017).
The Close Relationship of Regularized Loss Minimization and Test-Time Fine-Tuning Recall
that test-time fine-tuning does not solve the regularized objective of Equation (1), but instead takes a
single gradient step. So why do we expect the surrogate model f (·; Wn ) be closely related to the
fine-tuned f pre ? To answer this question, we contrast two alternative models:

       • Wλ =
            ˙ arg minW Lλ (W ),                                         (minimizer of regularized loss)


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • W  ˙ W pre − η∇L(W pre ) with any step size η > 0, (single gradient-step fine-tuning)
         cη =

where we keep the dataset D fixed and omit the dependency on D. Our following proposition shows
that both models are close if the loss landscape is relatively smooth and for careful choice of λ ≈ η1 .
                                       cη ∥F ≤ η ∥∇L(W1/η ) − ∇L(W pre )∥F .
Proposition 3.3. It holds that ∥W1/η − W
Recent works have also observed W1/η ≈ W      cη empirically (Ali et al., 2019; 2020). Intuitively,
                         cη is farther away from W pre , and hence corresponds to the regularized
with a larger step size, W
estimate with less regularization. This connection between regularized loss minimization and
test-time fine-tuning is closely linked to the tight connection between regularization and early
stopping (Morgan & Bourlard, 1989; Yao et al., 2007; Li et al., 2020). We will use this connection
in the following to derive SIFT in the context of fine-tuning.

4     SIFT: E FFICIENTLY R EDUCING U NCERTAINTY ABOUT THE R ESPONSE
We introduce SIFT, an algorithm for selecting data for fine-tuning that effectively reduces the uncer-
tainty about the response to the prompt x⋆ ∈ X . Note that we can compute the uncertainty σX (x⋆ )
about the response to the prompt x⋆ for any selected data X ⊆ D in closed-form, since its definition
(cf. Equation (2)) depends only on the selected inputs X. SIFT minimizes this uncertainty about x⋆ :
 xn+1 =          2
      ˙ arg min σX n ∪{x}
                          (x⋆ ) = arg max k⊤         ⋆              ′
                                           Xn ∪{x} (x )(KXn ∪{x} + λ I n+1 )
                                                                             −1
                                                                                kXn ∪{x} (x⋆ ).
            x∈D                         x∈D
                                                                                           (SIFT(λ′ ))
SIFT selects data that minimizes a bound on the approximation error of the surrogate model, and then
fine-tunes the full LLM using this data. We discuss the design choices, including the choice of embed-
dings, that make SIFT efficient in §4.2. In §C.1, we illustrate with an example of how SIFT balances
relevance and diversity, where we also see that the free parameter λ′ = λκ controls this trade-off.
Larger λ′ emphasize relevance of selected data, while smaller λ′ emphasize diversity. Probabilistically,
SIFT can be interpreted as maximizing the information gain of the selected data Xn on the response
to the prompt x⋆ in a tractable model. We formally introduce this interpretation of SIFT in §G.

4.1   U NCERTAINTY P ROVABLY VANISHES

We prove that unlike with Nearest Neighbor retrieval, the uncertainty about the response to the prompt
vanishes if SIFT is used to select data for fine-tuning. We give an informal overview here, and defer
the formal treatment to §C.2. Our theoretical analysis shows that test-time fine-tuning can fully
reduce uncertainty only if the data space contains sufficient information to determine the correct
response. If the data space does not contain all relevant information, the remaining uncertainty is
quantified by the limiting uncertainty after seeing “all data in the data space infinitely often”, which
we call the irreducible uncertainty and denote by σ∞ (x⋆ ). We provide the formal definition in §C.2,
but intuitively, the irreducible uncertainty is the largest quantity satisfying σX (x⋆ ) ≥ σ∞ (x⋆ ) for all
X ⊆ D. We then specialize the result of Hübotter      et al. (2024) to show that the uncertainty about the
                                              e √n) until it reaches the irreducible uncertainty:
response to the prompt shrinks at the rate O(1/
Informal Theorem 4.1 (Convergence Guarantee). Fix any λ′ > 0 and let SIFT(λ′ ) select Xn from
the data space D. Then for all n ≥ 1 and x⋆ ∈ X ,
                                                             O(λ′ log n)
                                   σn2 (x⋆ ) − σ∞2
                                                   (x⋆ ) ≤       √       .
                                                                   n

Naturally, convergence is slower with a larger regularization parameter / smaller step size. Notably,
the irreducible uncertainty depends on the data space. With a large and diverse data space, the
irreducible uncertainty is typically negligible. This statistical guarantee is a key property of SIFT.
As we show in Proposition K.1, Nearest Neighbor retrieval fails to satisfy a guarantee of this kind.

4.2   C OMPUTE -E FFICIENT DATA S ELECTION

We have established how to select informative data for fine-tuning. Next to good statistical efficiency,
good computational efficiency is key for selecting data at test-time. In the following, we describe
design choices such that SIFT has negligible overhead compared to Nearest Neighbor retrieval.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sequence-Level Selection In the self-supervised paradigm, each sequence of tokens x ∈ D
corresponds to a dataset of next-token predictions x1:k 7→ xk+1 . Rather than selecting individual
next-token predictions from the data space of all sub-sequences x1:k , we select full sequences x from
the significantly smaller data space D, then fine-tune for a single gradient step on each sub-sequence
within x. This is a common practice in prior works that use Nearest Neighbor retrieval for data
selection (e.g., Xia et al., 2024; Hardt & Sun, 2024).
Surrogate Sequence Embedders We use a surrogate sequence embedding model to generate
embeddings of the data space and prompts. We use the same embedding model as Hardt & Sun
(2024) which is a large Roberta model (Liu, 2019) with 355M parameters that was fine-tuned for
one pass on the Pile training set. The embedding dimension is 1024. Unlike Hardt & Sun (2024),
we additionally normalize the embeddings to unit length, the reasons for which we discuss in §D.
We obtain decent performance with this surrogate model. Nevertheless, our theoretical results
indicate that using embeddings extracted from the LLM to be fine-tuned could further improve the
performance of SIFT. Empirical neural tangent embeddings (Wei et al., 2022a; Holzmüller et al.,
2023) and influence function embeddings (Xia et al., 2024) can be implemented efficiently and offer
alternative latent spaces capturing the pre-trained model. We hypothesize that the decent performance
of the surrogate model is explained by the similarity of emergent latent spaces of language models
that were trained on similar data.
Efficient Implementation of SIFT In our experiments,



                                                                 Compute Overhead
                                                                               Retrieval + Training
we pre-select 200 candidates via Nearest Neighbor                 1.6×         Retrieval
retrieval with Faiss (Johnson et al., 2019) and then apply
                                                                  1.4×
SIFT to select 50 sequences from this smaller data space.
On the Pile dataset, we find that performance can be              1.2×
increased further by pre-selecting more candidates (cf. Fig-
ure 18 in §H) but the marginal gains diminish. The precise        1.0×
performance benefit of pre-selecting more candidates may                50       200         1 000   6 000
differ on other datasets. We describe in §H how SIFT can                 Size of Pre-Selected Data Space
be solved iteratively without computing the inverse in ev-
                                                              Figure 4: The (multiplicative) compu-
ery iteration. When a matrix of the size of the pre-selected
                                                              tational overhead of SIFT compared to
data space fits in GPU memory, we find that SIFT has
                                                              Nearest Neighbor retrieval is minimal.
a negligible computational overhead compared to Nearest
                                                              The compute overhead with a 1k data
Neighbor retrieval. We report results with an NVIDIA
                                                              space is less than 1.05×.
RTX 4090 GPU in Figure 4.1 While our main implemen-
tation of SIFT is fast if the data space is small, it does not scale linearly with the size of the data
space K. In §H, we show that a priority queue can be used to achieve an almost-linear runtime in K.

5       R ESULTS
We focus on language modeling with causal language models. Following Hardt & Sun (2024), we
fine-tune a pre-trained LLM for a single gradient step each on N = 50 selected data points in the
order that they are selected, most to least relevant. We use the Pile dataset (Gao et al., 2020) for
evaluation, restricting our use to data which is obtained and used in compliance with the terms of
service of the data host. This version of the Pile contains a diverse set of 17 high-quality sub-datasets,
ranging from Q&A to code, scientific publications, math, and more. Concretely, we use the Pile
training set containing 210M sequences of total size 1.3TB as data space for data selection, and we
evaluate on the Pile test set.2 We report the bits per byte metric as recommended by Gao et al. (2020),
which is proportional to the negative log-likelihood loss normalized by a dataset-specific constant.
Error bars correspond to 90% confidence intervals computed via bootstrapping with 1‘000 samples.
Base Models and Baselines We evaluate the GPT-2 model (Radford et al., 2019) with 124M param-
eters also evaluated by Hardt & Sun (2024), with the default learning rate of the transformers
library (Wolf et al., 2020). We obtain analogous results with GPT-2-large (774M parameters) and
the state-of-the-art Phi-3 (3.8B, Abdin et al., 2024).3 With Phi-3, we use low-rank adaptation (LoRA,
Hu et al., 2022), fine-tuning slightly less than 1% of the model’s total parameters. We compare SIFT
    1
      We use the client-server architecture described by Hardt & Sun (2024) with CPU-only servers.
    2
      We evaluate on 1% of the test set (0.1% with Phi-3), corresponding to 1‘812 sequences.
    3
      We detail hyperparameter choices for larger models in §I.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                     100                                                       90


Bits per Byte in %
                             US                                                            SIFT (ours)
                             NN                                                85          NN
                      90     SIFT (ours)
                                                                               80
                      80
                                                                               75

                      70                                                       70
                           GPT-2 (124M)    GPT-2-large (774M)   Phi-3 (3.8B)        10−4         10−1    102
                                                                                                  λ′
Figure 5: Bits per byte (in % relative to the base model, ↓ better) after 50 test-time iterations.
Left: Performance gains of SIFT are consistent across models. The failure-mode of Nearest
Neighbor consistently performs worse than the base model. Tables 4 and 5 in §F detail our results
with GPT-2-large and Phi-3 analogously to Table 1. Right: Most choices of λ′ lead to comparable
performance. With λ′ → ∞, SIFT(λ′ ) repeatedly selects the nearest neighbor.


with λ′ = 0.01 to Nearest Neighbor retrieval (NN) and the failure mode of Nearest Neighbor retrieval
that repeatedly selects the closest neighbor. The failure mode of Nearest Neighbor retrieval (NN-F)
corresponds to an extreme case of redundancy in the data space which we suspect to be a realistic
scenario in larger or less curated datasets. Finally, we compare to Uncertainty Sampling (US), which
is a widely used active learning strategy (Lewis, 1995; Settles, 2009) that selects the data with the
highest uncertainty in the model’s response by selecting according to xn+1 = arg maxx∈D σn2 (x).
We compare to the heuristic that uses US to choose from the 200 nearest neighbors, in which case
US can be understood as finding a diverse cover of this pre-selected data space (see, e.g., Holzmüller
et al., 2023; Kirsch et al., 2018). In contrast, SIFT minimizes the uncertainty in the model’s response
to the prompt x⋆ , leading to a “denser” cover close to x⋆ and a “coarser” cover further away from x⋆ .
Insight 1: SIFT consistently se-
                                                           US         NN        NN-F        SIFT           ∆
lects better data for fine-tuning than
Nearest Neighbor retrieval.              NIH Grants      93.1 (1.1) 84.9 (2.1) 91.6 (16.7) 53.8 (8.9) ↓ 31.1
We show in Figure 1 that SIFT out- US Patents            85.6 (1.5) 80.3 (1.9) 108.8 (6.6) 62.9 (3.5) ↓ 17.4
performs NN and avoids its failure GitHub                45.6 (2.2) 42.1 (2.0) 53.2 (4.0) 30.0 (2.2) ↓ 12.1
mode where the same data point is Enron Emails 68.6 (9.8) 64.4 (10.1) 91.6 (20.6) 53.1 (11.4) ↓ 11.3
selected repeatedly. In Figure 5 (left), Wikipedia       67.5 (1.9) 66.3 (2.0) 121.2 (3.5) 62.7 (2.1)  ↓ 3.6
we show that the performance gains Common Crawl 92.6 (0.4) 90.4 (0.5) 148.8 (1.5) 87.5 (0.7) ↓ 2.9
of SIFT are consistent across models.
                                         PubMed Abstr. 88.9 (0.3) 87.2 (0.4) 162.6 (1.3) 84.4 (0.6)    ↓ 2.8
Table 1 compares the performance of
                                         ArXiv           85.4 (1.2) 85.0 (1.6) 166.8 (6.4) 82.5 (1.4)  ↓ 2.5
SIFT against NN across all datasets of
the Pile, using GPT-2 as base model.     PubMed  Central 81.7 (2.6) 81.7 (2.6) 155.6 (5.1) 79.5 (2.6)  ↓ 2.2
Overall, we find that SIFT improves Stack Exchange 78.6 (0.7) 78.2 (0.7) 141.9 (1.5) 76.7 (0.7) ↓ 1.5
performance both on datasets where Hacker News 80.4 (2.5) 79.2 (2.8) 133.1 (6.3) 78.4 (2.8) ↓ 0.8
NN already performs well, such as FreeLaw                63.9 (4.1) 64.1 (4.0) 122.4 (7.1) 64.0 (4.1)  ↑ 0.1
GitHub, and on datasets where NN DeepMind Math 69.4 (2.1) 69.6 (2.1) 121.8 (3.1) 69.7 (2.1) ↑ 0.3
performs poorly, such as NIH Grants. All                 80.2 (0.5) 78.3 (0.5) 133.3 (1.2) 73.5 (0.6)  ↓ 4.8
On all datasets of the Pile, SIFT per-
forms at least as well as the strongest
                                         Table 1: Bits per byte (in % relative to the base model, ↓)
baseline (within margin of error), sug-
                                         after 50 test-time iterations on individual datasets of the Pile.
gesting that it is a robust method for
                                         We only include datasets with at least 10 examples in our test
data selection. We observe the trend
                                         set. Bold numbers denote the best performing selected subset.
that relative performance gains of
                                         Numbers in parentheses are standard errors. ∆ denotes the
SIFT over Nearest Neighbor retrieval
                                         performance gain of SIFT over the strongest baseline.
increase with model capability. That
is, with stronger base models, informativeness of selected data appears to become more important.
Insight 2: SIFT is robust to the choice of λ′ . We evaluate SIFT with varying choices of λ′ , and
summarize the results in Figure 5 (right). We include extended results in Table 11 of §J, showing that
for all evaluated λ′ between 1e−8 and 10, SIFT performs at least on-par with Nearest Neighbor re-
trieval on all datasets of the Pile, often outperforming it. This suggests that SIFT is robust to the choice
of λ′ . Nevertheless, there may be an advantage to adaptively tuning λ′ (e.g., via cross-validation).
In particular, choosing the best λ′ for each dataset, SIFT outperforms all baselines on every dataset.


                                                                7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                1.25                                                         Base             Context      Fine-Tuning


Bits per Byte   1.00

                0.75

                0.50

                               GPT-2 (124M)      GPT-2-large (774M)       Phi-3 (3.8B)        Phi-3 (14B) Gemma-2 (27B)

Figure 7: Bits per byte (↓ better), comparing fine-tuning and in-context learning with 50 test-time
examples selected by SIFT. We find that fine-tuning systematically outperforms or performs on-par
with in-context learning, even when fine-tuning only a LoRA adapter as with Phi-3. Test-time
fine-tuning with Phi-3 (3.8B) surpasses the performance of the more than 3× larger Phi-3 (14B)
and the 7× larger Gemma-2 (27B).

Insight 3: SIFT selects data the “right” number of times. Nearest Neighbor retrieval implicitly
relies on non-redundancy within the data space to not select duplicate information, as illustrated in
the example of Figure 3. This is almost never the case in practice, and in the extreme case of duplicate
data, Nearest Neighbor selects the same data point repeatedly. SIFT does not rely on excluding
previously selected data points. Instead, SIFT may select the same data point any number of times,
adaptively taking more than one gradient step on it, if beneficial. To ensure that the selected data is
maximally informative, SIFT takes into account the redundancy of data points explicitly. This makes
SIFT robust to information duplication by design.                                    #=1       # ≥ 25
                                                                                               overall
We illustrate this in Figure 6 where we evaluate the            100%
performance gain of SIFT over Nearest Neighbor and its
                                                                              Bits per Byte

failure mode. As expected, we find that on all test prompts
where SIFT selects many unique points, SIFT outper-              50%
forms repeatedly selecting the closest neighbor by a large
margin. Interestingly, we also find that on all test prompts              over NN
                                                                          over NN-F  Nearest Neighbor
where SIFT selects only a single point, SIFT outperforms          0%
Nearest Neighbor by a large margin. This suggests that in
some cases repeatedly taking gradient steps on the closest Figure 6: Bits per byte (in % relative
neighbor is beneficial, and SIFT identifies these cases.     to NN / NN-F, ↓ better) after 50 test-
Insight 4: Test-time fine-tuning can significantly time iterations. Error bars correspond to
improve language modeling ability. Our results from standard errors. The left bars measure
Figure 7 indicate that test-time fine-tuning improves the the performance gain over all of the Pile.
performance of the base LLM substantially, surprisingly, The middle and right bars measure the
even with a state-of-the-art model such as Phi-3. Our Phi-3 performance gain for all prompts where
with test-time fine-tuning and SIFT achieves 0.595 bits SIFT selects # unique points.
per byte, outperforming the previous leader in the Pile language modeling benchmark, a 30× larger
model.4 We also evaluate the recent Llama-3.2 family of models (Dubey et al., 2024), and with
Llama-3.2 (3B) as base model we achieve 0.557 bits per byte, a significant improvement upon the
previous state-of-the-art. We compare test-time fine-tuning to the common in-context learning, where
we include as much of the data as possible into the context window of the test instance, in addition
to its original context, by concatenating text in order of selection. While in-context learning tends to
improve the performance of the base model, we find that fine-tuning at test-time tends to outperform
or perform on-par with in-context learning. Furthermore, the compute cost of in-context learning
grows quadratically with the context window size, meaning that including long texts within large
context windows is expensive. Remarkably, test-time fine-tuning consistently outperforms in-context
learning by more than 25% on math and coding, tasks that require more complex reasoning (§F).
Further Insights In §D, we discuss additional findings on active fine-tuning such as that the per-
formance gains of SIFT over Nearest Neighbor retrieval grow with dataset size, and that normalizing
embeddings is important for the effectiveness of data selection. In §E, we discuss additional findings
on test-time fine-tuning, for example, the trend that larger models learn faster at test-time.


                4
                    We compare to prior work in the Pile language modeling benchmark in Table 2 of §A.


                                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                A DAPTIVE SIFT
                100                                     1.5                                    100%             SIFT

Bits per Byte

                                                        1.0                                    50%


                                                        0.5                                     0%
                         10  −1                                    0.2       0.4      0.6             0         20      40
                      Uncertainty Estimate σ̂n (x⋆ )          Uncertainty Estimate σ̂n (x⋆ )              Test-Time Compute

                                                        Compute-Performance Ratio α
                           0.15          0.2           0.25           0.35          0.5          0.75          1.0           2.0

Figure 8: Left: We visualize the empirical density of the uncertainty estimates σ̂n wrt. the bits per
byte bpbn . Brighter colors indicate higher density on a logarithmic scale. We observe a strong linear
relationship between uncertainty estimates and bits per byte. Middle: We construct a “reliability
diagram” of uncertainty estimates. Notably, since we evaluate with respect to bits per byte rather
than an accuracy, canonical calibration plots are not applicable. In particular, it is well known that
bits per byte do not go to zero for perfect models due to irreducible aleatoric uncertainty, which is
not captured by our epistemic uncertainty estimates. Nevertheless, we observe that our epistemic
uncertainty estimates are predictive of the model’s performance. The red line indicates a linear fit.
Right: We visualize the bits per byte (in % relative to the base model, ↓ better) of all prompts whose
model is fine-tuned at a given iteration. We find that by adaptively stopping with respect to the known
uncertainties σn , we can spend test-time compute proportional to realized performance gains (see
also Figure 26 in §J). Remarks: Results are with GPT-2. In the left and middle plots, we remove the
lowest and highest 0.25% of uncertainty estimates (i.e., the outliers) for better visualization. In the
left plot, we additionally remove the lowest and highest 0.25% of bits per byte.


 6               C OMPUTE -P ROPORTIONAL T EST-T IME F INE -T UNING
We have shown that test-time fine-tuning can improve language modeling ability and that SIFT
is a robust method for data selection, outperforming Nearest Neighbor retrieval. However, a key
shortcoming of previous approaches to test-time fine-tuning is that they spend a fixed amount of
test-time compute, regardless of the nature of the prompt, the available data, or the model. This is not
computationally scalable in many practical applications, since a fixed test-time compute budget leads
to non-proportionate performance gains. For example, for the prompt “Hello” to a chatbot we would
not like to spend any test-time compute, while for a more complex prompt we would like to spend
more compute. In this section, we evaluate whether uncertainty estimates can be used to adaptively
stop test-time fine-tuning such that the realized performance gain is proportional to the compute used.
Insight 5: The response uncertainty can predict performance gain. We find that σn (x⋆ ) is mono-
tonically and linearly correlated at coefficient ≈ 0.4 with the model error after n test-time iterations,
i.e., the bits per byte bpbn (x⋆ ). This is remarkable because σn contains information only from the
surrogate embedding model, and is normalized such that σ0 (x⋆ ) = 1. To determine the importance of
the base model, we also evaluate the denormalized uncertainty estimate σ̂n (x⋆ ) =˙ σn (x⋆ )·bpb0 (x⋆ ),
which unlike σn cannot be evaluated at test-time. We multiply σn by bpb0 to ensure that the uncer-
tainty measure is in the same units as the performance metric, correcting for the use of normalized
surrogate embeddings. We find that σ̂n (x⋆ ) is strongly correlated at coefficient ⪆ 0.5 with the bits
per byte. We summarize correlations in Table 12 of §J and visualize the predictive capability of σ̂n in
Figure 8 (left) and Figure 8 (middle). Our findings indicate that approximations of the base model’s
uncertainty, before test-time fine-tuning, can be beneficial. In future work, we intend to determine
whether generating embeddings from the base model can provide such scale-correction.
Recall that SIFT minimizes the response uncertainty σn to the given prompt. The predictive ability
of uncertainty estimates provides an intuitive explanation for the effectiveness of SIFT.
Compute-Proportional Performance Gains: Early stopping at the “right” time. Motivated by
the predictive power of uncertainty estimates, we evaluate whether they can be used to adaptively


                                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


stop test-time fine-tuning such that the realized performance gain is proportional to the compute used.
In the following, we propose a such a stopping criterion for SIFT. Using the approximation of the
error via uncertainty estimates discussed above and that σ0 (x⋆ ) = 1:
                                               bpb0 (x⋆ )   σ0 (x⋆ )       1
                         performance gain =            ⋆
                                                          ≈      ⋆
                                                                     =           .                  (4)
                                              bpbn (x )     σn (x )     σn (x⋆ )
We would like to stop fine-tuning when further test-time compute does not yield proportional
performance gain, i.e., when “performance gain < α · n” with n approximating the compute of n
iterations and α a constant comparing the units of compute and performance. Plugging in our above
approximation of the performance gain, we propose to stop test-time fine-tuning before iteration n if
                                           σn (x⋆ ) > (αn)−1 .                      (A DAPTIVE SIFT)
Intuitively, this stops fine-tuning the LLM when its progress in crafting a better response stalls. For
complex prompts that benefit from fine-tuning, A DAPTIVE SIFT spends more test-time compute,
whereas for prompts where the model is already strong or where the data space is not informative,
A DAPTIVE SIFT spends less test-time compute. Figure 8 (right) shows that the performance gains of
this approach are proportional to the compute used.
Towards Scaling Laws of Test-Time Fine-Tuning Interestingly, our results bear resemblance
to scaling laws of LLM pre-training (Kaplan et al., 2020; Henighan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al.,
2022). These scaling laws express the performance of a model as a function of the compute used
for pre-training (e.g., the number of parameters or training tokens). Such scaling laws are crucial for
determining how to optimally spend a fixed amount of compute. Recently, scaling laws for “test-time
inference” have gained attention, where test-time compute is usually spent on search (e.g., beam
search) with a variable number of forward passes of a few-shot prompted base LLM (Brown et al.,
2024; Snell et al., 2025). Our results suggest that similar scaling laws exist for test-time fine-tuning,
expressing the performance of a model as a function of the compute used for fine-tuning at test-time.
Such scaling laws can be an important tool to determine how to spend test-time compute. There
are many open questions in this direction, which we do not address in this work. For example, how
does model size affect the scaling laws of test-time fine-tuning? Or, can a model be fine-tuned at
test-time to build reasoning chains? Based on our results and previous evaluations of fine-tuning and
in-context learning (e.g., Hu et al., 2022; Mosbach et al., 2023; Hardt & Sun, 2024), we conjecture
that test-time fine-tuning may lead to a more efficient use of compute than repeatedly prompting
a base LLM. We believe that these open questions are exciting directions for future work.

7    D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK
We propose a data selection algorithm, SIFT, unifying ideas from retrieval and active learning. SIFT
estimates the uncertainty about the response to a given prompt after having been fine-tuned on some
data (§3), and then selects the data that minimizes this uncertainty (§4). This addresses the limitations
of Nearest Neighbor retrieval (§2). SIFT can be seen as a generalization of Nearest Neighbor
retrieval from a search method to a learning method, which ensures explicitly that the retrieved data
is maximally informative. We show on the Pile dataset that SIFT consistently outperforms Nearest
Neighbor retrieval in prompt-specific fine-tuning at test-time and that this kind of local learning
can be more effective than locally learning from examples in-context (§5). Finally, we observe that
our uncertainty estimates can predict the performance gain of test-time fine-tuning, and use this to
develop an adaptive algorithm which achieves compute-proportional performance gains (§6).
Test-time fine-tuning addresses a fundamental limitation of in-context learning, namely that in-context
learning is typically limited to a fixed and finite context window. In contrast, test-time fine-tuning
allows the LLM to dynamically and effectively access a potentially unbounded non-parametric
memory. By improving the effectiveness of test-time fine-tuning, this work opens up several exciting
directions for future research. Test-time fine-tuning may be used to ground the model on a trusted
dataset, mitigate biases against under-represented groups in the training data, or to dynamically
include private data depending on user privileges. Particularly interesting would be a broad evaluation
on non-perplexity tasks such as code generation or in the life sciences with large-scale medical or
protein data. Unlike few-shot in-context learning which is limited in scope to autoregressive models,
test-time fine-tuning and SIFT may be extended to other model classes such as diffusion models.
Furthermore, SIFT may be used effectively in other settings that require automatic data selection,
such as targeted instruction tuning during post-training of LLMs. Finally, our results suggest scaling
laws for test-time fine-tuning and we outline several exciting open questions (§6).


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONTRIBUTIONS
JH conceived and led the project, being involved in all its components and leading the theory,
implementation of the SIFT algorithm, design of experiments, and writing. SB set up and ran the
first experiments validating the approach, and contributed to running the final ablation studies. IH
ran additional experiments, especially those with larger models, and optimized the code. AK advised.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Armin Lederer, Vignesh Ram Somnath, Bhavya Sukhija, Scott Sussex, and
Lenart Treven for feedback on early versions of the paper. This project was supported in part by
the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
Innovation Program Grant agreement no. 815943, and the Swiss National Science Foundation under
NCCR Automation, grant agreement 51NF40 180545. Ido Hakimi was supported by an ETH AI
Center Postdoctoral fellowship.

R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori. Online learning for linearly parametrized control problems. PhD thesis,
  University of Alberta, 2013.
Marah Abdin, Sam Ade Jacobs, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Jyoti Aneja, Ahmed Awadallah, Hany
 Awadalla, Nguyen Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Harkirat Behl, et al. Phi-3 technical report:
 A highly capable language model locally on your phone. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14219, 2024.
Ekin Akyürek, Mehul Damani, Linlu Qiu, Han Guo, Yoon Kim, and Jacob Andreas. The surprising
  effectiveness of test-time training for abstract reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.07279, 2024.
Alnur Ali, J Zico Kolter, and Ryan J Tibshirani. A continuous-time view of early stopping for least
  squares regression. In AISTATS, 2019.
Alnur Ali, Edgar Dobriban, and Ryan Tibshirani. The implicit regularization of stochastic gradient
  flow for least squares. In ICML, 2020.
Sanae Amani and Christos Thrampoulidis. Ucb-based algorithms for multinomial logistic regression
  bandits. NeurIPS, 2020.
Sanjeev Arora, Yuanzhi Li, Yingyu Liang, Tengyu Ma, and Andrej Risteski. A latent variable model
  approach to pmi-based word embeddings. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 4, 2016.
Jordan T Ash, Chicheng Zhang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, John Langford, and Alekh Agarwal. Deep
  batch active learning by diverse, uncertain gradient lower bounds. In ICLR, 2020.
Christopher G Atkeson, Andrew W Moore, and Stefan Schaal. Locally weighted learning. Lazy
  learning, 1997.
Martin Aumüller, Erik Bernhardsson, and Alexander Faithfull. Ann-benchmarks: A benchmarking
 tool for approximate nearest neighbor algorithms. Information Systems, 87, 2020.
Marco Bagatella, Jonas Hübotter, Georg Martius, and Andreas Krause. Active fine-tuning of generalist
 policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05026, 2024.
Soumya Basu, Ankit Singh Rawat, and Manzil Zaheer. A statistical perspective on retrieval-based
  models. In ICML, 2023.
Aman Bhargava, Cameron Witkowski, Manav Shah, and Matt Thomson. What’s the magic word? a
 control theory of llm prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04444, 2023.
Satwik Bhattamishra, Arkil Patel, Phil Blunsom, and Varun Kanade. Understanding in-context
  learning in transformers and llms by learning to learn discrete functions. In ICLR, 2024.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Freddie Bickford Smith, Andreas Kirsch, Sebastian Farquhar, Yarin Gal, Adam Foster, and Tom
  Rainforth. Prediction-oriented bayesian active learning. In AISTATS, 2023.
Ilija Bogunovic, Jonathan Scarlett, Andreas Krause, and Volkan Cevher. Truncated variance reduction:
   A unified approach to bayesian optimization and level-set estimation. In NeurIPS, 2015.
Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Millican,
  George Bm Van Den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, et al.
  Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In ICML, 2022.
Léon Bottou and Vladimir Vapnik. Local learning algorithms. Neural computation, 4(6), 1992.
Bradley Brown, Jordan Juravsky, Ryan Ehrlich, Ronald Clark, Quoc V Le, Christopher Ré, and
  Azalia Mirhoseini. Large language monkeys: Scaling inference compute with repeated sampling.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21787, 2024.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. arXiv preprint ArXiv:2005.14165, 2020.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
   Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
   Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Kathryn Chaloner and Isabella Verdinelli. Bayesian experimental design: A review. Statistical
  science, 1995.
Tianqi Chen, Bing Xu, Chiyuan Zhang, and Carlos Guestrin. Training deep nets with sublinear
  memory cost. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.06174, 2016.
François Chollet. On the measure of intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.01547, 2019.
Sayak Ray Chowdhury and Aditya Gopalan. On kernelized multi-armed bandits. In ICML, 2017.
William S Cleveland. Robust locally weighted regression and smoothing scatterplots. Journal of the
 American statistical association, 74(368), 1979.
William S Cleveland and Susan J Devlin. Locally weighted regression: an approach to regression
 analysis by local fitting. Journal of the American statistical association, 83(403), 1988.
Jack Cole and Mohamed Osman. Dataset-induced meta-learning (and other tricks): Improving model
  efficiency on arc. https://lab42.global/community-model-efficiency/, 2023.
  [Accessed 22-08-2024].
R Dennis Cook. Detection of influential observation in linear regression. Technometrics, 19(1), 1977.
Thomas Cover and Peter Hart. Nearest neighbor pattern classification. IEEE transactions on
  information theory, 13(1), 1967.
Thomas M Cover. Elements of information theory. John Wiley & Sons, 1999.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In NAACL, 2018.
Matthijs Douze, Alexandr Guzhva, Chengqi Deng, Jeff Johnson, Gergely Szilvasy, Pierre-Emmanuel
 Mazaré, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, and Hervé Jégou. The faiss library. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2401.08281, 2024.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, et al. Toy models of superposition.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10652, 2022.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Louis Faury, Marc Abeille, Clément Calauzènes, and Olivier Fercoq. Improved optimistic algorithms
  for logistic bandits. In ICML, 2020.

Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
  deep networks. In ICML, 2017.

Evelyn Fix and Joseph Lawson Hodges Jr. Discriminatory analysis: nonparametric discrimination,
  consistency properties, volume 1. USAF school of Aviation Medicine, 1951.

Yossi Gandelsman, Yu Sun, Xinlei Chen, and Alexei Efros. Test-time training with masked autoen-
  coders. In NeurIPS, 2021.

Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason Phang,
  Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, et al. The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for
  language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027, 2020.

Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster,
  Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Alain Le Noac’h, et al. A framework for few-shot language model
  evaluation, 2024.

Robert Geirhos, Priyank Jaini, Austin Stone, Sourabh Medapati, Xi Yi, George Toderici, Abhijit
  Ogale, and Jonathon Shlens. Towards flexible perception with visual memory. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.08172, 2024.

Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Mingwei Chang. Retrieval augmented
  language model pre-training. In ICML, 2020.

Kelvin Guu, Albert Webson, Ellie Pavlick, Lucas Dixon, Ian Tenney, and Tolga Bolukbasi. Simfluence:
  Modeling the influence of individual training examples by simulating training runs. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.08114, 2023.

Moritz Hardt and Yu Sun. Test-time training on nearest neighbors for large language models. In
 ICLR, 2024.

Tom Henighan, Jared Kaplan, Mor Katz, Mark Chen, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Jackson, Heewoo
  Jun, Tom B Brown, Prafulla Dhariwal, Scott Gray, et al. Scaling laws for autoregressive generative
  modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14701, 2020.

Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
  Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.

David Holzmüller, Viktor Zaverkin, Johannes Kästner, and Ingo Steinwart. A framework and
  benchmark for deep batch active learning for regression. JMLR, 2023.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In ICLR, 2022.

Jonas Hübotter, Bhavya Sukhija, Lenart Treven, Yarden As, and Andreas Krause. Transductive active
  learning: Theory and applications. In NeurIPS, 2024.

Andrew Ilyas, Sung Min Park, Logan Engstrom, Guillaume Leclerc, and Aleksander Madry. Data-
  models: Predicting predictions from training data. In ICML, 2022.

Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and
  generalization in neural networks. NeurIPS, 2017.

Vidit Jain and Erik Learned-Miller. Online domain adaptation of a pre-trained cascade of classifiers.
  In CVPR, 2011.

Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. Billion-scale similarity search with gpus. IEEE
  Transactions on Big Data, 7(3), 2019.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
   Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oğuz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi
  Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In EMNLP,
  2020.
Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, Dan Jurafsky, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Generalization
  through memorization: Nearest neighbor language models. In ICLR, 2020.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy L Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2014.
Andreas Kirsch, Joost Van Amersfoort, and Yarin Gal. Batchbald: Efficient and diverse batch
  acquisition for deep bayesian active learning. In NeurIPS, 2018.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In
  ICML, 2017.
Germain Kolossov, Andrea Montanari, and Pulkit Tandon. Towards a statistical theory of data
  selection under weak supervision. In ICLR, 2024.
Jannik Kossen, Yarin Gal, and Tom Rainforth. In-context learning learns label relationships but is not
  conventional learning. In ICLR, 2024.
Suraj Kothawade, Nathan Beck, Krishnateja Killamsetty, and Rishabh Iyer. Similar: Submodular
  information measures based active learning in realistic scenarios. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Suraj Kothawade, Vishal Kaushal, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, Jeff Bilmes, and Rishabh Iyer. Prism: A
  rich class of parameterized submodular information measures for guided data subset selection. In
  AAAI, 2022.
Ben Krause, Emmanuel Kahembwe, Iain Murray, and Steve Renals. Dynamic evaluation of neural
  sequence models. In ICML, 2018.
Ben Krause, Emmanuel Kahembwe, Iain Murray, and Steve Renals. Dynamic evaluation of trans-
  former language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.08378, 2019.
Jaehoon Lee, Lechao Xiao, Samuel Schoenholz, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Jascha Sohl-
  Dickstein, and Jeffrey Pennington. Wide neural networks of any depth evolve as linear models
  under gradient descent. NeurIPS, 2018.
David D Lewis. A sequential algorithm for training text classifiers: Corrigendum and additional data.
  In ACM Sigir Forum, volume 29, 1995.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented genera-
  tion for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Mingchen Li, Mahdi Soltanolkotabi, and Samet Oymak. Gradient descent with early stopping is
 provably robust to label noise for overparameterized neural networks. In AISTATS, 2020.
Xiaoqing Li, Jiajun Zhang, and Chengqing Zong. One sentence one model for neural machine
  translation. In LREC, 2018.
Opher Lieber, Or Sharir, Barak Lenz, and Yoav Shoham. Jurassic-1: Technical details and evaluation.
  Technical report, AI21 Labs, 2021.
Yinhan Liu. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach.                  arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
Xuan Luo, Jia-Bin Huang, Richard Szeliski, Kevin Matzen, and Johannes Kopf. Consistent video
  depth estimation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 2020.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


David JC MacKay. Information-based objective functions for active data selection. Neural computa-
  tion, 4(4), 1992.
Sadhika Malladi, Alexander Wettig, Dingli Yu, Danqi Chen, and Sanjeev Arora. A kernel-based view
  of language model fine-tuning. In ICML, 2023.
Tomáš Mikolov, Wen-tau Yih, and Geoffrey Zweig. Linguistic regularities in continuous space word
  representations. In NAACL, 2013.
Michel Minoux. Accelerated greedy algorithms for maximizing submodular set functions. Optimiza-
 tion Techniques, 7, 1978.
Nelson Morgan and Hervé Bourlard. Generalization and parameter estimation in feedforward nets:
  Some experiments. NeurIPS, 1989.
Marius Mosbach, Tiago Pimentel, Shauli Ravfogel, Dietrich Klakow, and Yanai Elazar. Few-shot
 fine-tuning vs. in-context learning: A fair comparison and evaluation. In ACL, 2023.
Kevin P Murphy. Probabilistic machine learning: Advanced topics. MIT press, 2023.
Elizbar A Nadaraya. On estimating regression. Theory of Probability & Its Applications, 9(1), 1964.
George L Nemhauser, Laurence A Wolsey, and Marshall L Fisher. An analysis of approximations for
  maximizing submodular set functions—i. Mathematical programming, 14, 1978.
OpenAI. Learning to reason with llms. OpenAI blog, 2024.
Kiho Park, Yo Joong Choe, and Victor Veitch. The linear representation hypothesis and the geometry
  of large language models. In ICML, 2024.
Barna Pásztor, Parnian Kassraie, and Andreas Krause. Bandits with preference feedback: A stackel-
  berg game perspective. In NeurIPS, 2024.
Jay M. Ponte and W. Bruce Croft. A language modeling approach to information retrieval. In SIGIR.
  Association for Computing Machinery, 1998.
Garima Pruthi, Frederick Liu, Satyen Kale, and Mukund Sundararajan. Estimating training data
  influence by tracing gradient descent. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.
  In IJCNLP, 2019.
Stephen Robertson, Hugo Zaragoza, et al. The probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25 and beyond.
  Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval, 3(4), 2009.
Ozan Sener and Silvio Savarese. Active learning for convolutional neural networks: A core-set
  approach. In ICLR, 2017.
Sambu Seo, Marko Wallat, Thore Graepel, and Klaus Obermayer. Gaussian process regression:
  Active data selection and test point rejection. In Mustererkennung. Springer, 2000.
Burr Settles. Active learning literature survey. Technical report, University of Wisconsin-Madison
  Department of Computer Sciences, 2009.
Jack Sherman and Winifred J Morrison. Adjustment of an inverse matrix corresponding to a change
  in one element of a given matrix. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 21(1), 1950.
Assaf Shocher, Nadav Cohen, and Michal Irani. “zero-shot” super-resolution using deep internal
  learning. In CVPR, 2018.
Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling llm test-time compute optimally
  can be more effective than scaling model parameters. In ICLR, 2025.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Karen Sparck Jones. A statistical interpretation of term specificity and its application in retrieval.
 Journal of documentation, 28(1), 1972.
Niranjan Srinivas, Andreas Krause, Sham M Kakade, and Matthias Seeger. Gaussian process
  optimization in the bandit setting: No regret and experimental design. In ICML, 2009.
Yu Sun, Xiaolong Wang, Zhuang Liu, John Miller, Alexei Efros, and Moritz Hardt. Test-time training
  with self-supervision for generalization under distribution shifts. In ICML, 2020.
Yu Sun, Xinhao Li, Karan Dalal, Jiarui Xu, Arjun Vikram, Genghan Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xinlei
  Chen, Xiaolong Wang, Sanmi Koyejo, et al. Learning to (learn at test time): Rnns with expressive
  hidden states. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04620, 2024.
Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya
  Bhupatiraju, Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, et al.
  Gemma 2: Improving open language models at a practical size. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00118,
  2024.
Adly Templeton, Tom Conerly, Jonathan Marcus, Jack Lindsey, Trenton Bricken, Brian Chen, Adam
  Pearce, Craig Citro, Emmanuel Ameisen, Andy Jones, et al. Scaling monosemanticity: Extracting
  interpretable features from claude 3 sonnet. Transformer Circuits Thread, Anthropic, 2024.
Vladimir Vapnik. The nature of statistical learning theory. Springer science & business media, 2013.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS, 2017.
Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordvintsev,
  Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent. In
  ICML, 2023.
Chaoqi Wang, Shengyang Sun, and Roger Grosse. Beyond marginal uncertainty: How accurately can
  bayesian regression models estimate posterior predictive correlations? In AISTATS, 2021a.
Dequan Wang, Evan Shelhamer, Shaoteng Liu, Bruno Olshausen, and Trevor Darrell. Tent: Fully
  test-time adaptation by entropy minimization. In ICLR, 2021b.
Xinyi Wang, Wanrong Zhu, Michael Saxon, Mark Steyvers, and William Yang Wang. Large language
  models are latent variable models: Explaining and finding good demonstrations for in-context
  learning. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Geoffrey S Watson. Smooth regression analysis. Sankhyā: The Indian Journal of Statistics, Series A,
 1964.
Alexander Wei, Wei Hu, and Jacob Steinhardt. More than a toy: Random matrix models predict how
  real-world neural representations generalize. In ICML, 2022a.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In NeurIPS,
  2022b.
Christopher KI Williams and Carl Edward Rasmussen. Gaussian processes for machine learning,
  volume 2. MIT press, 2006.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Huggingface’s transformers:
  State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2020.
Henry P Wynn. The sequential generation of d-optimum experimental designs. The Annals of
 Mathematical Statistics, 1970.
Mengzhou Xia, Sadhika Malladi, Suchin Gururangan, Sanjeev Arora, and Danqi Chen. Less:
 Selecting influential data for targeted instruction tuning. In ICML, 2024.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Minjie Xu and Gary Kazantsev. Understanding goal-oriented active learning via influence functions.
 In NeurIPS Workshop on Machine Learning with Guarantees, 2019.
Yuan Yao, Lorenzo Rosasco, and Andrea Caponnetto. On early stopping in gradient descent learning.
  Constructive Approximation, 26(2), 2007.
Jiacheng Ye, Zhiyong Wu, Jiangtao Feng, Tao Yu, and Lingpeng Kong. Compositional exemplars for
   in-context learning. In ICML, 2023.
Ofer Yehuda, Avihu Dekel, Guy Hacohen, and Daphna Weinshall. Active learning through a covering
  lens. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Kai Yu, Jinbo Bi, and Volker Tresp. Active learning via transductive experimental design. In ICML,
  2006.
Aohan Zeng, Xiao Liu, Zhengxiao Du, Zihan Wang, Hanyu Lai, Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Yifan Xu,
 Wendi Zheng, Xiao Xia, et al. Glm-130b: An open bilingual pre-trained model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.02414, 2022.
Yu-Jie Zhang and Masashi Sugiyama. Online (multinomial) logistic bandit: Improved regret and
  constant computation cost. NeurIPS, 2023.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDICES
C ONTENTS

A Comparison to the State-of-the-Art on the Pile Language Modeling Benchmark                         20

B Extended Related Work                                                                              21
    B.1 Learning at Test-Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      21
    B.2 Data Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     22
    B.3 SIFT Unifies Work on Retrieval and Work on Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            23

C Further Details on SIFT                                                                            24
    C.1 How SIFT Balances Relevance and Diversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            24
    C.2 The Uncertainty of SIFT Provably Vanishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          24

D Further Insights on Active Fine-Tuning                                                             26

E Further Insights on Test-Time Fine-Tuning                                                          27

F Extended Results                                                                                   30
    F.1   Active Fine-Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     30
    F.2   Test-Time Fine-Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      30

G SIFT Maximizes Information Gain                                                                    33
    G.1 Preliminaries: Information Theory and Gaussian Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . .           33
    G.2 Probabilistic Observation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        34
    G.3 The Probabilistic Interpretation of SIFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       34
    G.4 How SIFT Balances Relevance and Diversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            35
    G.5 The Perspective of Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      35

H Efficient Computation of SIFT                                                                      36
    H.1 Exact Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       36
    H.2 Fast (Exact) Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        36
    H.3 Pre-Selecting Data via Nearest Neighbor Retrieval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        37
    H.4 Future Work: Improving GPU Utilization of SIFT-FAST . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              37

I   Experiment Details                                                                               40
    I.1   Properties of the Pile Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   41
    I.2   In-Context Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    41
    I.3   Inference Cost with Test-Time Fine-Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        42

J Ablations                                                                                          43


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K Proofs                                                                                          47
   K.1 Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   47
   K.2 Insufficiency of Nearest Neighbor Retrieval (Informal Proposition 2.1) . . . . . . .       47
   K.3 The close relationship of Regularized Loss Minimization and Test-Time Fine-Tuning
       (Proposition 3.3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    48
   K.4 How SIFT Balances Relevance and Diversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          48
   K.5 Confidence Sets for Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     49
   K.6 Confidence Sets for Classification (Theorem 3.2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       50

L Qualitative Examples                                                                            52
   L.1 Balancing Relevance and Diversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      52
   L.2 Examples from the Pile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     52


                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    C OMPARISON TO THE S TATE - OF - THE -A RT ON THE P ILE L ANGUAGE
     M ODELING B ENCHMARK
Table 2 summarizes the state-of-the-art in the Pile language modeling benchmark.

  Model                                         Bits per Byte   Bits per Byte (without Wikipedia)
  Jurassic-1 (178B, Lieber et al., 2021)             n/a                     0.601*
  GLM (130B, Zeng et al., 2022)                      n/a                     0.622*
  GPT-2 (124M, Radford et al., 2019)                1.241
  GPT-2 (774M, Radford et al., 2019)                1.093
  Llama-3.2-Instruct (1B, Dubey et al., 2024)       0.807
  Llama-3.2-Instruct (3B, Dubey et al., 2024)       0.737
  Gemma-2 (2B, Team et al., 2024)                   0.721
  Llama-3.2 (1B, Dubey et al., 2024)                0.697                    0.684
  Phi-3.5 (3.8B, Abdin et al., 2024)                0.690
  Phi-3 (3.8B, Abdin et al., 2024)                  0.679                    0.678
  Phi-3 (7B, Abdin et al., 2024)                    0.678
  Gemma-2 (9B, Team et al., 2024)                   0.670
  GPT-3 (175B, Brown et al., 2020)                 0.666*
  Phi-3.5-MoE (16×3.8B, Abdin et al., 2024)         0.656
  Phi-3 (14B, Abdin et al., 2024)                   0.651
  Llama-3.2 (3B, Dubey et al., 2024)                0.640                    0.627
  Gemma-2 (27B, Team et al., 2024)                  0.629
  Test-Time FT with SIFT + GPT-2 (124M)            0.862
  Test-Time FT with SIFT + GPT-2 (774M)            0.762
  Test-Time FT with SIFT + Llama-3.2 (1B)          0.606                     0.607
  Test-Time FT with SIFT + Phi-3 (3.8B)            0.595                     0.599
  Test-Time FT with SIFT + Llama-3.2 (3B)          0.557                     0.559

Table 2: Evaluation of state-of-the-art models on the Pile language modeling benchmark, without
copyrighted datasets. (*): Results with GPT-3 are from Gao et al. (2020); results with Jurassic-1
and GLM are from Zeng et al. (2022) and do not report on the Wikipedia dataset. For a complete
comparison, we also evaluate our Phi-3 and Llama-3.2 with test-time fine-tuning when excluding
the Wikipedia dataset. Bold numbers denote the best performing model. Underlined numbers denote
a model that is better than the previous state-of-the-art.


Due to our dataset being restricted to the non-copyrighted part of the Pile, the data distribution
changes slightly. To account for this, we take the reported results of prior work and exclude the
datasets that have copyright restrictions from the evaluation. Notably, some prior reported results
of state-of-the-art models miss evaluation of the Wikipedia dataset, which we therefore also exclude
for a direct comparison. To the best of our knowledge, our results with test-time fine-tuning and
SIFT achieve a new state-of-the-art on the Pile benchmark.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK

B.1    L EARNING AT T EST-T IME

The subject of learning at test-time has a rich history in statistics and machine learning. By “learning
at test-time” we refer to models that are constructed specifically for a given test instance, differing
from the model used for other test instances. The following discussion provides a brief overview
with emphasis on the most recent developments.
k-Nearest Neighbors and Kernel Regression (since 1950s) One of the most basic forms of
learning at test-time was developed by Fix & Hodges Jr. (1951) and Cover & Hart (1967). Given
the supervised data D ⊆ X × Y with input domain X ⊆ Rd and labels Y = {0, . . . , K}, the k-NN
algorithm predicts the label of a test instance x⋆ ∈ X by taking the majority vote of the k nearest
neighbors of x⋆ in D according to some distance metric on X such as Euclidean distance. In the
case of regression, Y = R and the prediction is the average of the labels of the k nearest neighbors.
Kernel regression extended upon this idea in the 1960s by weighting neighbors according to their
distance to the test instance (Nadaraya, 1964; Watson, 1964). This is a simple and often effective
method if the inputs are well-structured and low-dimensional, e.g., if X is a learned low-dimensional
manifold (Geirhos et al., 2024). When K is large, as for example when Y is the set of all tokens
in a language modeling task, naive application of k-NNs is difficult, nevertheless they have been
shown to be effective when mixed with parametric language models (Khandelwal et al., 2020).
Local Learning (since 1970s) Local learning is the idea of using data “relevant” to the test in-
stance x⋆ to train a parametric model. Formally, given a test instance x⋆ , conventually a model f is
used to predict f (x⋆ ) where f is trained to minimize the average loss over the training data. Instead,
local learning trains a model fx⋆ specifically for x⋆ and predicts fx⋆ (x⋆ ). Original works train a lin-
ear model by weighting data according to their proximity to x⋆ (Cleveland, 1979; Cleveland & Devlin,
1988; Atkeson et al., 1997). Here, each test instance trains a model from scratch since the optimal
solution of linear regression is independent of initialization. This perspective has regained interest
recently in the context of neural networks, with Sun et al. (2020) naming it “test-time training”.
Transductive Learning (since 1980s) Vladimir Vapnik developed the general principle of trans-
duction which he states in Vapnik (2013) as follows:

         Vladimir Vapnik: “When solving a problem of interest, do not solve a more general
         problem as an intermediate step. Try to get the answer that you really need but not
         a more general one.”

This is perhaps the most general principle behind learning at test-time, and directly opposed to
the principle of induction — extracting the most general rules from data — which has arguably
dominated machine learning research over the last decades. In a way, local learning is pushing
the principle of transduction to the opposite extreme: Each test instance defines its own learning
problem, with the test instance alone being the target of prediction.
Local Fine-Tuning (since 1990s) Bottou & Vapnik (1992) were the first to use local learning in
conjunction with a pre-trained parametric model. They train (i.e., “fine-tune”) the last layer of a con-
volutional neural network for handwritten digit classification based on the nearest neighbors to the test
instance in pixel space. Very recently, Hardt & Sun (2024) applied the same idea to language models,
showing that local fine-tuning can significantly improve the performance of large language models on
standard benchmarks. Previously, this idea has also been evaluated by Li et al. (2018) and Basu et al.
(2023). “Test-time fine-tuning” (as well as “active inference”) has frequently been used to refer to this
approach of locally fine-tuning a pre-trained model. Within the last few years, test-time fine-tuning
has regained substantial interest in the context of self-supervised learning, where the pre-trained model
is fine-tuned on the test instance itself. Notable applications of this approach are in vision (Jain &
Learned-Miller, 2011; Shocher et al., 2018; Luo et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021b) and
in language modeling (Krause et al., 2018; 2019), where it is called dynamic evaluation. As one would
also naively expect, test-time fine-tuning yields the largest improvements when the prompt is not (well-
) represented in the pre-training data, e.g., due to a distribution shift (Gandelsman et al., 2021; Hardt &
Sun, 2024). Notably, test-time fine-tuning is the central component of the state-of-the-art approaches
to the ARC challenge (Chollet, 2019; Cole & Osman, 2023), a non-saturated benchmark which is
intended to test reasoning capabilities based on “core knowledge” rather than mere memorization.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(Few-Shot) In-Context Learning (since 2020s) Very recently, with the advent of large language
models (LLMs), learning at test-time has regained interest. Brown et al. (2020) showed that GPT-3
can learn in-context from input-label pairs that are appended to the prompt, an emergent phenomenon
of LLMs that has been widely studied since (Von Oswald et al., 2023; Kossen et al., 2024;
Bhattamishra et al., 2024). In contrast to standard in-weights learning, in-context learning requires
no parameter updates. Interestingly, in-context learning adopts the same paradigm as local learning
wherein a model is adapted specifically for the test instance x⋆ , here by skewing the autoregressive
distribution towards the data included in the prompt. This is often combined with the automatic
sourcing of nearest neighbors to x⋆ in an external dataset, which is known as “retrieval augmented
generation” (RAG, Lewis et al., 2019; Borgeaud et al., 2022), and is akin to the other methods of
test-time learning discussed above. A crucial difference between test-time fine-tuning and in-context
learning appears to be that learning from context works by changing the test instance (Bhargava et al.,
2023) whereas in-weights learning works by changing the model. With small datasets, in-context
learning is therefore often more computationally efficient than test-time fine-tuning, however this
ceases to be the case when the dataset grows since the complexity of transformers grows quadratically
in the number of context tokens whereas the complexity of test-time fine-tuning grows linearly.

B.2    DATA S ELECTION

Clearly, the choice of data to learn from at test-time is crucial for predictive performance. Selecting
uninformative data can increase inference time or even degrade performance (see, e.g., Kolossov
et al., 2024). Today, datasets for fine-tuning are often hand-designed, however, this is not possible in a
test-time setting. Automatic data selection has a rich history in machine learning, studied extensively
in search, experimental design (Chaloner & Verdinelli, 1995), and active learning (Settles, 2009).
The following attempts to give a brief overview of the most recent developments.
(Document) Retrieval (since 1970s) Retrieval methods aim to search a dataset D for the most
relevant data to a given query/prompt. The most classical methods such as TF-IDF (Sparck Jones,
1972) and BM25 (Robertson et al., 2009) are based on keyword matching, and were developed
alongside the first search engines. Due to their reliance on “bags of words”, i.e., sets of one-hot-
encoded word vectors, they are known as sparse retrievers. An alternative idea is to select the data x
that maximizes the likelihood of the query x⋆ given the data, i.e., arg maxx∈D p(x⋆ | x), known as
query likelihood retrievers (Ponte & Croft, 1998; Wang et al., 2023). Here, the conditional probability
can be a non-parametric term frequency or a parametric language model. More recently, due to
significant advances in representation learning (Devlin et al., 2018; Reimers & Gurevych, 2019),
dense retrievers have become popular (e.g., Lewis et al., 2019; Karpukhin et al., 2020; Borgeaud et al.,
2022). A dense retriever embeds dataset and query into a metric vector space, and retrieves the nearest
neighbors to the query. Standard vector-based search methods use cosine similarity or (equivalently5 )
Euclidean distance. Recent advances in algorithms and implementation mean that (approximate)
nearest neighbor retrieval can be performed efficiently with databases of billions or even trillions of
tokens (e.g., Johnson et al., 2019; Aumüller et al., 2020). The most common metric is cosine distance,
which coincides with Euclidean distance when vectors are normalized to unit length. Nearest neighbor
retrieval has been the de-facto standard for data selection in RAG and local learning.6
Influence Functions (since 1970s) Influence functions measure the change in a model’s prediction
when a single data point is removed from the training data. First proposed by Cook (1977) for linear
regression, they have since been used extensively to interpret predictions (Koh & Liang, 2017; Pruthi
et al., 2019). Very recently, Xia et al. (2024) applied influence functions to select data that leads to
the largest (approximate) reduction in test-loss. Concretely, using a first-order Taylor approximation
of the loss ℓ and if the model at time t is updated via stochastic gradient descent with step size ηt on
data x, the loss reduction can be approximated as
                       ℓ(x⋆ ; θ t+1 ) − ℓ(x⋆ ; θ t ) ≈ −ηt ⟨∇θ ℓ(x; θ t ), ∇θ ℓ(x⋆ ; θ t )⟩.
That is, the data x whose loss gradient is most aligned with the loss gradient of the test instance x⋆ ,
can be expected to lead to the largest loss reduction.7 Note that this simply leads to nearest neighbor
   5
     Here we assume that vectors are normalized to unit length, cf. Appendix K.2.
   6
     There is substantial literature that investigates selection of “informative” data for RAG (e.g., Ye et al., 2023).
   7
     Xia et al. (2024) normalize embeddings before computing the inner product (thus, maximizing cosine
similarity) to account for varying gradient norms depending on sequence lengths.


                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


retrieval in an embedding space informed by the model at time t. A major limitation of using
influence functions for data selection is that they implicitly assume that the influence of selected
data adds linearly (i.e., two equally scored data points are expected to doubly improve the model
performance, Xu & Kazantsev, 2019, Section 3.2). This assumption does quite obviously not hold in
practice as seen, e.g., by simply duplicating data. The same limitation applies to the related approach
of datamodels (Ilyas et al., 2022). A recent line of work aims to address this limitation by designing
simulators that can be probed with datasets to estimate their effect on a prediction requiring less
compute than training the full model (Guu et al., 2023), yet, this does not address the data selection
problem as the space of possible datasets is exponentially large.
Coverage & Inductive Active Learning Next we discuss an orthogonal line of work, which takes
into account the interaction between selected data, but not the interaction of that data with respect
to a test instance. Roughly speaking classical active learning studies how to most effectively select
data from a domain X for learning a model over this domain X . Intuitively, this task can be thought
of as selecting a subset X ⊆ X of fixed size that captures the most “information” about the target
function f . As such, this task is of an inductive nature: we aim to extract general rules from the data
that can be applied to unseen data later, without concrete specification of the unseen data. Approaches
to (inductive) active learning are broadly aiming to select diverse data that covers the data manifold
in X well. Methods include those that maximize the mutual distances between selected data (e.g.,
C ORE S ET (Sener & Savarese, 2017), BADGE (Ash et al., 2020), and P ROB C OVER (Yehuda
et al., 2021)) with respect to a latent distance metric and those “uncertainty sampling” methods
that select data that the model is most uncertain about (e.g., D-optimal design (Wynn, 1970)
and BATCH BALD (Kirsch et al., 2018)).8 Both families of methods can be seen as determining
some decent covering of the data manifold in X . In a probabilistic sense, uncertainty sampling
can be seen to minimize the “posterior predictive entropy” in expectation over the observed data.
Approaches to inductive active learning have frequently been applied to pre-training models, with
image classification as the canonical application (e.g, Holzmüller et al., 2023).

B.3      SIFT U NIFIES W ORK ON R ETRIEVAL AND W ORK ON C OVERAGE

Retrieval and inductive active learning fall on to two extreme ends of a spectrum: Retrieval methods
search for relevant data without ensuring that data is non-redundant. As such, naive application of
search methods is insufficient for a learning task since those generally do not take “distinctiveness”
into account (cf. Section 2.1). In contrast, active learning methods select non-redundant data without
ensuring that data is relevant. Like SIFT, many active learning methods are based on some measure of
“uncertainty”, however how this measure is utilized for data selection differs fundamentally in SIFT:
Transductive Active Learning: Unifying retrieval & coverage Transductive active learning is
motivated from the central observation that learning and prediction requires synthesizing information
that is both relevant and non-redundant. Transductive active learning (Hübotter et al., 2024) bridges
this gap by selecting data that is both relevant and non-redundant. In this work, we propose SIFT,
an approach to test-time transductive active learning (i.e., transductive active learning with a single
prediction target), which extends previously proposed algorithms (MacKay, 1992; Seo et al., 2000;
Yu et al., 2006; Hübotter et al., 2024). Similar algorithmic ideas have recently been evaluated
empirically in a variety of other settings (Kothawade et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021a; Kothawade
et al., 2022; Bickford Smith et al., 2023) such as Bayesian optimization (Hübotter et al., 2024),
multi-task reinforcement learning (Bagatella et al., 2024), and the amortized fine-tuning of neural
networks (Hübotter et al., 2024). SIFT aims to select data that is both relevant and non-redundant
with respect to the already seen data, whereby the hyperparameter λ′ controls the trade-off between
relevance and redundancy. Hübotter et al. (2024) introduce extensions of SIFT to more than one
prediction target, i.e., amortizing learning across multiple prompts. They show that if the prediction
targets include all of X , then the method reduces to a form of inductive active learning.


   8
       Section 5.2 of Holzmüller et al. (2023) provides a comprehensive overview.


                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     F URTHER D ETAILS ON SIFT
C.1   H OW SIFT BALANCES R ELEVANCE AND D IVERSITY

Let us look more closely at the points selected by SIFT. We will assume here for ease of notation
that embeddings have unit length.9 The first point selected by SIFT has the largest (absolute) cosine
similarity to the prompt within the latent space:
                                          (ϕ(x⋆ )⊤ ϕ(x))2                            2
   x1 = arg min σ{x} 2
                       (x⋆ ) = arg max              ′
                                                           = arg max ∡ϕ (x⋆ , x) . (1st point)
            x∈D                   x∈D          1+λ              x∈D     | {z }
                                                                    cosine similarity of ϕ(x⋆ ), ϕ(x)

This recovers the standard approach of Nearest Neighbor retrieval with respect to cosine similarity,
provided cosine similarities are non-negative. However, we show next that selecting more than one
point, SIFT not only considers the relevance with respect to the prompt x⋆ , but also the redundancy
with respect to the already seen data x1 .
                                                         ⊤                         −1
                                           ∡ϕ (x⋆ , x1 )    1 + λ′                      ∡ϕ (x⋆ , x1 )

                 2        ⋆                                            ∡ϕ (x1 , x)
x2 = arg min σ{x1 ,x} (x ) = arg max                                                                   .
        x∈D                       x∈D      ∡ϕ (x⋆ , x)     ∡ϕ (x1 , x)  1 + λ′          ∡ϕ (x⋆ , x)
                                                                                          (2nd point)
To illustrate how SIFT balances relevance and diversity, we compare the value of observing x1 twice
to observing a different x with cosine similarity ∡ϕ (x1 , x) = 0. We show in Appendix K.4 that
SIFT(λ′ ) prefers x over x1 for selecting x2 if and only if
                                                    λ′
                                 ∡ϕ (x⋆ , x)2 >          ∡ϕ (x⋆ , x1 )2
                                                  2 + λ′
The hyperparameter λ′ controls the trade-off between              Parameter          Relation Div.
relevance and diversity: if λ′ = 1 then even if x has one
third the relevance of x1 , it is still preferred. As λ → ∞,
                                                       ′          regularization λ        λ       ↓
SIFT(λ ) performs retrieval by repeatedly selecting the
         ′                                                        step size η           1/η       ↑
same point; and as λ′ → 0, SIFT(λ′ ) aims only to select          noise ρ (cf. §G)       ρ2       ↓
the most diverse points. We observe the same relationship
empirically on the Pile dataset (cf. Figure 9 (left)). Table 3
                                                               Table 3: The effect of λ and its other
summarizes the effect of the regularization parameter λ
                                                               interpretations on diversity of selected
and its interpretations.
                                                               data (as the parameter is increased).
C.2   T HE U NCERTAINTY OF SIFT P ROVABLY VANISHES

We now formally prove that unlike with Nearest Neighbor retrieval, the uncertainty σn2 (x⋆ ) about
the response to the prompt vanishes if SIFT is used to select data for fine-tuning. As discussed
in §4.1, this requires that the data space contains sufficient information to determine the correct
response. In general, there might be an irreducible error remaining. We will denote a basis of the
embeddings {ϕ(x) : x ∈ D} within the data space D by Φ ∈ Rm×d with size m and dimension
d, and we denote by ΠΦ its orthogonal projection onto the orthogonal complement of the span of Φ.
Hübotter et al. (2024) show that for all X ⊆ D,
                                        2                    2
                                       σX (x⋆ ) ≥ ∥ϕ(x⋆ )∥ΠΦ                                            (5)
                √                                                                         2
where ∥v∥A = v ⊤ Av denotes the Mahalanobis distance. We call σ∞      2
                                                                              ˙ ∥ϕ(x⋆ )∥ΠΦ the irre-
                                                                        (x⋆ ) =
ducible uncertainty about x . It can be seen that σ∞ (x ) = 0 for all x ∈ X with ϕ(x ) ∈ span Φ.
                             ⋆                     2   ∥                ∥               ∥

That is, the irreducible uncertainty is zero for points in the span of the data space. In contrast,
for points x⊥ with ϕ(x⊥ ) ∈ (span Φ)⊥ , the irreducible uncertainty equals the initial uncertainty:
σ∞2
    (x⊥ ) = σ02 (x⊥ ). The irreducible uncertainty of any prompt x⋆ can be computed by simple
decomposition of ϕ(x⋆ ) into parallel and orthogonal components. Hence, if the data space is large
and includes all relevant information to answer the prompt, the irreducible uncertainty is negligible.
We will denote the uncertainty reduction about the prompt x⋆ achieved by fine-tuning on X by
ψx⋆ (X) = ˙ σ02 (x⋆ ) − σX
                         2
                           (x⋆ ) and note that SIFT selects xn+1 = arg maxx∈D ψx⋆ (Xn ∪ {x}).
Stating the convergence guarantee of SIFT requires one straightforward assumption.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                     Variance Reduction ψx⋆
                                         Irreducible Uncertainty
                                                                   0.1                                                        1.00
 10 000                                                                               10% of data
     10                                                                               50% of data                             0.97
                                                                   0.06
      1                                                                               100% of data
                                                                                                                              0.95
λ′

    0.1
   0.01                                                            0.03                                                       0.93
 0.0001
                                                                   0.02                                                       0.90
              0      20      40                                           0        20        40                                      0         20        40
              Number of Unique Points                                         Number of Neighbors                                        Test-Time Iterations

Figure 9: Left: The parameter λ′ controls the trade-off between relevance and diversity of the selected
data. As λ′ → ∞, SIFT selects the same point repeatedly whereas as λ′ → 0, SIFT selects a diverse
set of points. Middle: The irreducible uncertainty of test prompts from the Pile given neighbors
selected from fractions of the Pile training dataset in the data space. The irreducible uncertainty
captures how much information is available, and decays quickly. Right: We empirically observe that
ψx⋆ is monotone submodular, i.e., its “marginal gains” decrease as the number of iterations increases.
The shaded region denotes the standard deviation, gray lines are from 10 randomly selected prompts.


Assumption C.1. The uncertainty reduction ψx⋆ (X) is submodular.
Intuitively, Assumption C.1 states that the marginal uncertainty reduction achieved by adding a point
to the selected data (i.e., the ‘marginal gain’) decreases as the size of the selected data increases,
which is a common assumption in prior work.10 Formally Assumption C.1 is satisfied if, for all
x ∈ D and X ′ ⊆ X ⊆ D,
                                                 ∆x⋆ (x | X ′ ) ≥ ∆x⋆ (x | X)                                                                               (6)
where ∆x⋆ (x | X) =
                  ˙ ψx⋆ (X ∪ {x}) − ψx⋆ (X) is the marginal uncertainty reduction of x given X.
Though theoretically this assumption may be violated by some instances (Hübotter et al., 2024,
Example C.8), we observe that it is satisfied in practice (cf. Figure 9 (right)). Under this assumption,
ψx⋆ (Xn ) ≥ (1 − 1/e) maxX⊆D,|X|≤n ψx⋆ (X) due to the seminal result on monotone submodular
function maximization of Nemhauser et al. (1978). That is, the iterative scheme of SIFT achieves
a constant factor approximation of the optimal uncertainty reduction. Moreover, recent work on
transductive active learning of Hübotter et al. (2024) which we restate here shows that the uncertainty
                                                                                    2
of SIFT converges to the irreducible uncertainty. We assume w.l.o.g. that ∥ϕ(x)∥2 ≤ 1 for all x ∈ X .
Theorem C.2 (Convergence Guarantee, formalization of Informal Theorem 4.1). Let Assumption C.1
hold and Xn be selected by SIFT(λ′ ) from the data space D. Then for all n ≥ 1 and x⋆ ∈ X ,
                                                                               d(1 + 2dλ′ λ−1            λ̂n
                                                                                           min ) log(1 + λ′ )
                             σn2 (x⋆ ) ≤ σ∞
                                          2
                                            (x⋆ ) +                                        √
                                                                                              n
where λmin is the smallest eigenvalue of ΦΦ⊤ with Φ ∈ Rm×d a basis of {ϕ(x) : x ∈ D}, and
where λ̂n ≤ O(n) is the largest eigenvalue of Φn Φ⊤
                                                  n.


Proof. Theorem C.2 follows from Theorem 3.2 of Hübotter et al. (2024) noting that

            • The SIFT objective is a special case of VTL (Variance-based Transductive Active Learning)
              with “target space” A = {x⋆ }.
            • Theorem 3.2 of Hübotter et al. (2024) can be extended to finite-dimensional reproducing
              kernel Hilbert spaces (Hübotter et al., 2024, Appendix C.6.4).
            • The “maximum information gain of n iterations”, γn , in the statement of Hübotter et al.
              (2024) is bounded as follows (Srinivas et al., 2009, Appendix C.3): γn ≤ d log(1 + λ̂n /λ′ ).



     9
         See Appendix K.4 for the expressions with non-normalized embeddings.
  10
         Similar assumptions have been made by Bogunovic et al. (2015) and Kothawade et al. (2020).


                                                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    F URTHER I NSIGHTS ON ACTIVE F INE -T UNING
We expand the analysis of our results that we summarized in §5. We analyze aspects of the two key
contributions of our work separately: In the following, we analyze the performance of SIFT in active
fine-tuning, and in §E, we analyze the performance of test-time fine-tuning more generally.
Insight 6: SIFT’s improvement over NN grows with dataset size. As shown in Figure 10, we
find that the relative improvement of SIFT over Nearest Neighbor retrieval grows with dataset size.
We suspect that going from a small-size dataset to a medium-size dataset, the additional performance
stems mainly from the ability of SIFT to adaptively select the same data for multiple gradient steps.
Going from a medium-size dataset to a large-size dataset, we suspect that the additional performance
stems mainly from the ability of SIFT to select more diverse data points.

                                        100.0
                   Bits per Byte in %


                                         97.5

                                         95.0       3%
                                                    33%
                                         92.5
                                                    100%
                                         90.0
                                                0    10      20           30               40   50
                                                           Test-Time Iterations

Figure 10: Bits per byte (in % relative to the Nearest Neighbor retrieval baseline, ↓ better). We
evaluate data selection from 3%, 33%, and 100% of the Pile training dataset. We see a clear trend
that SIFT’s improvement over Nearest Neighbor retrieval grows with dataset size — even from 33%
to 100% with the highly curated Pile dataset.


Insight 7: Points with high negative cosine similarity may help. With the Roberta embedding
model, we find that there are no negative cosine similarities in the data (cf. Figure 21 in §J). Choosing
different embeddings such as influence embeddings can give negative cosine similarities (Xia et al.,
2024, Appendix K.2). Inspection of those points found by Xia et al. (2024) suggests that they can be
equally informative as points with high positive cosine similarity. Our derivation of SIFT naturally
addresses this by selecting points with large absolute
cosine similarity. Geometrically, points with positive or                                Cosine Similarity
negative cosine similarity are both equally “parallel” to
                                                                           Bits per Byte


                                                                   1.2                   Inner Product
the test prompt. Our theoretical results suggest that the
informativeness of a data point is closely related to how
parallel its embedding is to the test prompt. We leave             1.0
further investigation to future work.
Insight 8: Normalizing embeddings helps. We eval-
uate the performance of Nearest Neighbor retrieval and             0          20            40
SIFT with or without explicitly normalized embeddings                   Test-Time  Iterations
in Figure 11. We find that for both selection strategies,
                                                          Figure 11: Data selection via SIFT (red)
normalizing embeddings consistently improves perfor-
                                                          and Nearest Neighbor (black) performs
mance. Previously, Hardt & Sun (2024) minimized the
                                                          best with normalized embeddings.
Euclidean distance between unnormalized embeddings,
which we find to perform identically to maximizing cosine similarity.


                                                              26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    F URTHER I NSIGHTS ON T EST-T IME F INE -T UNING
Insight 9: Scaling pre-training compute may not be all you need. In Table 2 of §A, we compare
state-of-the-art LLMs to our test-time fine-tuned models. We show that our Phi-3 with test-time
fine-tuning outperforms all evaluated base models, from a wide selection of state-of-the-art LLMs,
by a large margin. Notably, we see a clear advantage of using stronger base models, i.e., better
initializations. The leading base model Gemma-2 (27B, Team et al., 2024), which is 7× larger and
more recent than Phi-3, achieves 0.629 bits per byte, whereas our test-time fine-tuned Phi-3 achieves
0.595 bits per byte. This indicates that scaling pre-training compute is not all you need to achieve
state-of-the-art performance, and that test-time fine-tuning can be an effective method for improving
the performance of a base LLM.
Insight 10: Test-time fine-tuning outperforms in-context learning in “hard” tasks. Interestingly,
we observe that across all evaluated models, updating the base model via fine-tuning as opposed
to augmenting the models’ context leads to large improvements on the DeepMind Math, GitHub,
ArXiv, and FreeLaw datasets. We include the per-dataset results in §F.2. These datasets contain
school-level math problems, code, scientific papers, and court opinions, which are often colloquially
understood as tasks that require “understanding” or “reasoning”. In the case of DeepMind Math
and ArXiv, augmenting the models’ context does consistently not improve the performance of the
base model at all, whereas test-time fine-tuning can lead to significant performance improvements.
Insight 11: Test-time fine-tuning yields largest gains                              100



                                                               Bits per Byte in %
at the boundary of the data distribution. In Figure 12,
we plot the improvement of test-time fine-tuning with                                75
SIFT over the base model against the weight of a dataset
in the Pile. We observe the trend that test-time fine-tuning                         50
yields largest performance improvements for datasets that
have a smaller weight in the Pile. We hypothesize that this                          25
trend occurs because the weight of a dataset in the Pile
                                                                                               10−2           10−1
corresponds roughly to the weight of similar data in the
                                                                                          Dataset Weight in Pile
pre-training dataset of GPT-2, in which case the perfor-
mance gains would be largest for prompts that are at the       Figure 12: Improvement of 50 test-time
“boundary” of the data distribution. Notable is the outlier    iterations over the base model (blue;
of the large GitHub dataset where test-time fine-tuning        ↓ better) with SIFT against the percent-
leads to large performance gains. We hypothesize that this     age of bytes occupied by the dataset in
is because coding is relatively dissimilar to other data in    the Pile. Error bars correspond to stan-
the Pile, and therefore the GitHub dataset can be seen as      dard errors. We observe the trend that
“small” relative to the rest of the data.                      test-time fine-tuning benefits prompts at
We make the observation that if the problem domain the “boundary” of the data distribution
is large (like general language modeling), almost every most. The “outlier” GitHub dataset is
sub-task can be seen as at the “boundary” / as an “outlier”. highlighted in red.
We see that datasets closest to the center of mass of the data distribution do not benefit as much from
test-time fine-tuning as datasets that are further away from the center of mass. Therefore, we expect
test-time fine-tuning to benefit those models most that are learning a diverse data distribution as
opposed to models that are learning a very concentrated data distribution.
Insight 12: The order of fine-tuning data does not matter. In Figure 13, we evaluate the
performance of test-time fine-tuning with Nearest Neighbor retrieval when taking gradient steps
in the order of selected data compared to reversed order. We find that the order of gradient steps
does not affect the final performance. This indicates that sequentially fine-tuning on selected data
is not necessary, and that batched gradient steps can be used to further speed up test-time fine-tuning.
We leave a detailed exploration of batched updates to future work.


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                           In Order                                 Reverse Order

                                    1.3                                                   0.98


                                                                      Cosine Similarity
                    Bits per Byte
                                    1.2

                                    1.1                                                   0.97

                                    1.0

                                    0.9                                                   0.96
                                          0         20        40                                                        20       40
                                              Test-Time Iterations                                                     Neighbors

Figure 13: Taking gradient steps in order of selected data compared to reversed order. Data is
selected using Nearest neighbor retrieval. We observe that the order of gradient steps does not affect
the final performance.


Insight 13: Test-time fine-tuning works also when
                                                                                                                     1.4                   Linear Head
fine-tuning only the last linear layer. Motivated by


                                                                                                     Bits per Byte
the linear representation hypothesis (cf. Assumption 3.1)                                                                                  Full Model
                                                                                                                     1.2
which informs SIFT’s surrogate model for data selection,
we evaluate whether we can fine-tune this surrogate model                                                            1.0
directly instead of fine-tuning the full model. Concretely,
we fine-tune only the last linear layer of the LLM, keeping                                                          0.8
its latent space fixed. The gradients for this linear surrogate                                                            0          20          40
model can be computed efficiently at almost no cost. Re-
                                                                                                                               Test-Time Iterations
markably, we find in Figure 14 that large gains of test-time
fine-tuning can already be realized by fine-tuning only      Figure 14: Bits per byte (↓ better)
the last linear layer. Given these preliminary results with  against the number of test-time iterations.
GPT-2 it would be interesting to evaluate the performance    We compare fine-tuning only the linear
gains of fine-tuning the linear head of larger base models.  head to fine-tuning the full model. We
Insight 14: Test-time fine-tuning works also with use learning rate 1e−4 and evaluate on
parameter-efficient fine-tuning. In our experiments 0.1% of the full test set.
with Phi-3, we use Low-Rank Adaptation (Lora, Hu et al., 2022) with a rank of 64. We find that
LoRA converges slower than fine-tuning the full model, and therefore use the learning rate 5e−4,
which is a factor 10 larger than the learning rate used for fine-tuning the full model. In Figure 15,
we evaluate the performance of LoRA compared to fine-tuning the full model. On the smaller GPT-2
and GPT-2-large we use a rank of 32. We generally observe that fine-tuning with LoRA can recover
roughly the same performance as fine-tuning the full model. We expect that with more careful tuning
of the learning rate, learning curves could be made more similar.


                                                          with LoRA                                  without LoRA

                                                                                          1.2
                                    1.2
                    Bits per Byte


                                                                                          1.0
                                    1.0
                                                                                          0.8
                                    0.8
                                          0          20         40                              0                      20       40
                                                               Test-Time Iterations

Figure 15: Bits per byte (↓ better) against the number of test-time iterations. We compare parameter-
efficient fine-tuning with LoRA and fine-tuning the full model. We use 0.1% of the full test set.



                                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                      1.2
Insight 15: Larger models appear to learn faster                                                                     λ′ = 0.1
at test-time. We find that with a larger model (e.g.,


                                                                      Bits per Byte
                                                                                                                     λ′ = 0.01
GPT-2-large vs GPT-2), a smaller λ′ tends to be more                                  1.0
beneficial. For example, keeping the learning rate fixed at
5e−5, using SIFT(0.1) is the best choice for GPT-2, but
leads to slight overfitting at later iterations for GPT-2-large                       0.8
as shown in Figure 16. Recall that a smaller λ′ leads
to more diverse sampling of the data space. Thus, this                                      0              20            40
observed trend indicates that larger models learn faster,                                             Test-Time Iterations
and therefore benefit more from less redundant training
data. The same trend can also be observed from the                      Figure 16: Bits per byte (↓ better) with
behavior of NN-F from Figure 17: GPT-2-large overfits                   GPT-2-large and varying λ′ . A larger λ′
much faster with NN-F than GPT-2. This offers a potential               can lead to overfitting in later iterations.
explanation why the advantage of SIFT over Nearest                      We use 0.1% of the full test set.
Neighbor retrieval grows with larger models (cf. §F.1).


                                  SIFT (ours)                NN                         Failure-mode of NN

                          GPT-2                           GPT-2-large                                            Phi-3
                                           1.2                                                  0.8
                1.2
Bits per Byte


                                           1.0                                                  0.7
                1.0
                                           0.8                                                  0.6
                0.8
                      0   20       40            0          20          40                            0         20           40
                                                     Test-Time Iterations

Figure 17: Bits per byte (↓ better) against the number of test-time iterations with various base models.


                                                          29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     E XTENDED R ESULTS
This section includes additional per-dataset results to support our findings on active fine-tuning and
test-time fine-tuning.

F.1   ACTIVE F INE -T UNING

We compare SIFT against the data selection baselines Uncertainty Sampling (US), Nearest Neighbor
retrieval (NN), and the failure-mode of Nearest Neighbor retrieval (with information duplication) that
repeatedly retrieves the same point (NN-F). Our results with GPT-2 as base model are summarized in
the main text in Table 1.
       • In Table 4, we include the comparison with GPT-2-large.
       • In Table 5, we include the comparison with Phi-3.
We find that our results on GPT-2 are consistent across all models. In particular, test-time fine-
tuning with SIFT improves the base model on all datasets of the Pile, often significantly. SIFT
outperforms Uncertainty Sampling and Nearest Neighbor retrieval consistently. Notably, we find
that the improvement of SIFT over Nearest Neighbor retrieval is larger with stronger base models,
indicating that informativeness of data becomes more important the stronger the base model.

F.2   T EST-T IME F INE -T UNING

We compare the in-context baseline against test-time fine-tuning.
       • In Table 6, we include the comparison with GPT-2.
       • In Table 7, we include the comparison with GPT-2-large.
       • In Table 8, we include the comparison with Phi-3.
We find that test-time fine-tuning consistently outperforms in-context learning with GPT-2 and GPT-
2-large. With Phi-3, in-context learning and test-time fine-tuning have roughly matching performance,
though test-time fine-tuning is more computationally efficient (cf. Figure 7). Interestingly, we observe
that test-time fine-tuning leads to large gains on math (“DeepMind Math”) and coding (“GitHub”) on
all models, two tasks that require more complex reasoning.

                                      US        NN         NN-F        SIFT           ∆
                NIH Grants     96.6 (1.6) 77.9 (4.8) 107.6 (19.8) 51.9 (9.3)      ↓ 26.0
                US Patents     86.8 (2.3) 78.9 (2.6) 129.1 (7.7) 64.7 (3.8)       ↓ 14.2
                Enron Emails   73.9 (12.3) 68.6 (13.6) 102.9 (23.1) 55.5 (12.2)   ↓ 13.1
                GitHub         45.2 (2.4) 42.8 (2.2) 62.0 (4.5) 31.0 (2.2)        ↓ 11.8
                Wikipedia      71.0 (2.0) 71.5 (2.0) 141.3 (3.5) 64.4 (2.2)        ↓ 6.6
                PubMed Abstr. 94.5 (0.4) 93.7 (0.6) 202.6 (1.6) 87.8 (0.7)         ↓ 5.9
                ArXiv          90.6 (1.8) 90.2 (2.0) 175.8 (5.7) 84.8 (2.1)        ↓ 5.4
                Hacker News    79.4 (2.6) 79.0 (2.9) 138.7 (4.4) 75.6 (3.6)        ↓ 3.4
                Stack Exchange 84.1 (0.7) 84.6 (0.8) 165.2 (1.8) 80.7 (0.9)        ↓ 3.4
                Common Crawl 93.7 (0.6) 89.9 (0.7) 163.6 (2.1) 87.1 (1.0)          ↓ 2.8
                PubMed Central 87.9 (2.7) 87.6 (2.7) 157.8 (4.6) 85.4 (3.1)        ↓ 2.2
                FreeLaw        66.8 (4.2) 67.4 (4.1) 132.0 (6.4) 68.3 (4.2)        ↑ 1.5
                DeepMind Math 71.2 (2.2) 72.2 (2.0) 186.1 (4.1) 74.2 (2.3)         ↑ 3.0
                All                82.6 (0.6) 80.6 (0.6) 153.3 (1.4) 74.9 (0.7)    ↓ 5.7

Table 4: Results with GPT-2-large. Bits per byte (in % relative to the base model, ↓) after 50 test-time
iterations on individual datasets of the Pile. We only include datasets with at least 10 examples in
our test set. Bold numbers denote the best performing selected subset. Numbers in parentheses are
standard errors. ∆ denotes the performance gain of SIFT over the strongest baseline.


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     US        NN        NN-F           SIFT            ∆
               GitHub               80.6       80.8       105.2         46.5     ↓ 34.1
               US Patents           95.4       94.2       274.6         83.7     ↓ 10.5
               Enron Emails        113.6       86.6       319.9         78.7      ↓ 7.9
               Wikipedia            84.6       85.5       263.2         79.2      ↓ 5.4
               PubMed Abstr.        93.5       93.3       301.8         89.5      ↓ 3.8
               NIH Grants          100.4      100.1       327.6         98.6      ↓ 1.5
               ArXiv                95.5       96.5       282.4         94.3      ↓ 1.2
               Common Crawl         95.3       94.9       257.0         93.7      ↓ 1.2
               PubMed Central       80.3       82.1       204.9         79.7      ↓ 0.6
               DeepMind Math        76.4       75.5       221.4         75.3      ↓ 0.2
               Hacker News          95.1       94.8       243.8         95.0      ↑ 0.2
               FreeLaw              66.9       67.8       178.0         67.2      ↑ 0.3
               Stack Exchange       99.7       98.7       309.9         99.4      ↑ 0.7
               All                92.0 (1.1) 91.6 (1.1) 256.6 (7.1) 85.7 (2.0)       ↓ 5.9

Table 5: Results with Phi-3. Bits per byte (in % relative to the base model, ↓) after 50 test-time
iterations on individual datasets of the Pile. Bold numbers denote the best performing selected subset.
Numbers in parentheses are standard errors. ∆ denotes the performance gain of SIFT over the
strongest baseline.


                                            Context Fine-Tuning                  ∆
                        GitHub         74.5 (2.5)         28.6 (2.2)      ↓ 45.9
                        DeepMind Math 100.4 (0.1)         70.1 (2.1)      ↓ 30.3
                        US Patents     86.8 (2.5)         62.2 (3.6)      ↓ 24.6
                        Enron Emails   73.3 (9.8)         52.4 (11.8)     ↓ 20.9
                        FreeLaw        85.5 (4.0)         65.5 (4.2)      ↓ 20.0
                        Stack Exchange 96.7 (0.3)         77.0 (0.7)      ↓ 19.7
                        ArXiv          99.2 (1.4)         81.6 (1.9)      ↓ 17.6
                        Wikipedia      77.4 (2.1)         63.7 (2.1)      ↓ 13.7
                        PubMed Central 92.8 (3.1)         80.6 (2.7)      ↓ 12.2
                        Hacker News    89.0 (3.8)         77.8 (3.5)      ↓ 11.2
                        NIH Grants     63.7 (9.5)         52.9 (9.0)      ↓ 10.8
                        Common Crawl 93.4 (0.7)           86.1 (0.9)       ↓ 7.3
                        PubMed Abstr. 91.8 (0.6)          84.8 (0.7)       ↓ 7.0
                        All                 89.3 (0.5)     73.2 (0.7)     ↓ 16.1

Table 6: Comparison between the in-context baseline and test-time fine-tuning with GPT-2. Bits per
byte (in % relative to the base model, ↓) after 50 test-time iterations on individual datasets of the
Pile. We only include datasets with at least 10 examples in our test set. Bold numbers denote the best
performing selected subset. Numbers in parentheses are standard errors. ∆ denotes the performance
gain of test-time fine-tuning over in-context learning.


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Context Fine-Tuning             ∆
                         GitHub         74.6 (2.5)        31.0 (2.2)    ↓ 43.6
                         DeepMind Math 100.2 (0.7)        74.2 (2.3)    ↓ 26.0
                         US Patents     87.4 (2.5)        64.7 (3.8)    ↓ 22.7
                         FreeLaw        87.2 (3.6)        68.3 (4.2)    ↓ 18.9
                         Hacker News    92.6 (2.7)        75.6 (3.6)    ↓ 17.0
                         Stack Exchange 97.2 (0.4)        80.7 (0.9)    ↓ 16.5
                         NIH Grants     67.7 (9.4)        51.9 (9.3)    ↓ 15.8
                         Enron Emails   71.9 (10.2)       55.5 (12.2)   ↓ 15.5
                         ArXiv          98.8 (1.8)        84.8 (2.1)    ↓ 14.0
                         Wikipedia      76.6 (2.1)        64.4 (2.2)    ↓ 12.2
                         PubMed Central 92.3 (3.3)        85.4 (3.1)     ↓ 6.9
                         Common Crawl 93.5 (0.7)          87.1 (1.0)     ↓ 6.4
                         PubMed Abstr. 91.6 (0.6)         87.8 (0.7)     ↓ 3.8
                         All                 89.4 (0.5)    74.9 (0.7)   ↓ 14.5

Table 7: Comparison between the in-context baseline and test-time fine-tuning with GPT-2-large.
Bits per byte (in % relative to the base model, ↓) after 50 test-time iterations on individual datasets of
the Pile. We only include datasets with at least 10 examples in our test set. Bold numbers denote
the best performing selected subset. Numbers in parentheses are standard errors. ∆ denotes the
performance gain of test-time fine-tuning over in-context learning.


                                            Context Fine-Tuning             ∆
                         DeepMind Math        100.8         75.3        ↓ 25.5
                         GitHub                71.3         46.5        ↓ 24.8
                         FreeLaw               78.2         67.2        ↓ 11.0
                         ArXiv                101.0         94.3         ↓ 6.4
                         Enron Emails          81.8         78.7         ↓ 3.1
                         Hacker News           97.6         95.0         ↓ 2.6
                         Stack Exchange       100.9         99.4         ↓ 1.4
                         PubMed Central        79.9         79.7         ↓ 0.2
                         US Patents            83.3         83.7         ↑ 0.4
                         Wikipedia             77.1         79.2         ↑ 2.1
                         NIH Grants            95.1         98.6         ↑ 3.5
                         Common Crawl          89.9         93.7         ↑ 3.8
                         PubMed Abstr.         85.7         89.5         ↑ 3.8
                         All                87.1 (1.7)    85.7 (2.0)     ↓ 1.4

Table 8: Comparison between the in-context baseline and test-time fine-tuning with Phi-3. Bits per
byte (in % relative to the base model, ↓) after 50 test-time iterations on individual datasets of the
Pile. Bold numbers denote the best performing selected subset. Numbers in parentheses are standard
errors. ∆ denotes the performance gain of test-time fine-tuning over in-context learning.


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G     SIFT M AXIMIZES I NFORMATION G AIN

We discuss here briefly that SIFT can be interpreted as maximizing the information gain of data Xn
on the response to the prompt x⋆ .
This probabilistic interpretation takes the perspective that the sequence model predicting the next
token is a probabilistic model with a prior belief over its state W which induces an epistemic
prior belief over what might be the next token.11 Our main text describes a closed loop where this
sequence model interacts with a non-parametric memory (i.e., the data space) to update its epistemic
beliefs about W , obtaining posterior beliefs W | D conditional on the selected data D. Again, these
posterior epistemic beliefs induce an epistemic uncertainty over what might be the next token. We
discuss in the following how SIFT can be interpreted probabilistically; as the model interacting with
the non-parametric memory with the goal of reducing its posterior uncertainty about the next token.
Our brief overview will proceed as follows:

       • We establish fundamentals from information theory and Gaussian processes, which are a
         tractable probabilistic model (§G.1).
       • We define the prior belief and probabilistic observation model and derive the posterior
         belief (§G.2).
       • We show that, in this probabilistic model, SIFT can be interpreted as maximizing the
         information gain of the data about the response to the prompt x⋆ (§G.3).
       • We show that balancing relevance and diversity of data is a natural consequence of maximiz-
         ing information gain (§G.4).

SIFT uses relatively simple probabilistic surrogate models that are tractable, and which remarkably
lead to strong empirical performance. Hübotter et al. (2024) cover the probabilistic interpretation
in greater detail.

G.1    P RELIMINARIES : I NFORMATION T HEORY AND G AUSSIAN P ROCESSES

Information Theory We briefly recap several important concepts from information theory. The
(differential) entropy H[f ] = ˙ Ep(f ) [− log p(f )] of a random vector f is one possible measure of
uncertainty about f . Here, − log p(f ) is also called the suprisal about an event with density p(f ).
The entropy can be interpreted as the expected suprisal about f upon realization. The conditional
entropy H[f | y] =  ˙ Ep(f ,y) [− log p(f | y)] is the (expected) posterior uncertainty about f after
observing the random vector y. The information gain I(f ; y) = H[f ] − H[f | y] measures the
(expected) reduction in uncertainty about f due to y. Refer to Cover (1999) for more details.
Gaussian Processes The stochastic process f is a Gaussian process (GP, Williams & Rasmussen
(2006)), denoted f ∼ GP(µ, k), with mean function µ and kernel k if for any finite subset
X = {x1 , . . . , xn } ⊆ X , fX ∼ N (µX , KX ) is jointly Gaussian with mean vector (µX )i = µ(xi )
and covariance matrix (KX )i,j = k(xi , xj ). A Gaussian process can be interpreted as capturing
an epistemic functional belief, i.e., a belief over functions. Our linear surrogate model from
Assumption 3.1 leads to a Gaussian process with the linear kernel described in the main text. That
is, our surrogate model assumption can be interpreted as the prior belief that the ground truth
function predicting the next token is a logit-linear function in a latent representation space. This
is closely linked to the hypothesis that LLMs learn linear representations of high-level concepts,
which is widely known as the “linear representation hypothesis” (e.g., Park et al., 2024; Mikolov
et al., 2013; Arora et al., 2016; Elhage et al., 2022). There are two lenses through which to view
such linear Gaussian processes: the weight-space view which considers a belief about weights W ,
or the function-space view which directly considers the belief about functions f . Both views are
equivalent, and we will focus on the function-space view in the following.
For Gaussian random vectors f and y, the entropy is H[f ] = d2 log(2πe) + 21 log det Var(f ) and
the information gain is I(f ; y) = 21 (log det Var(f ) − log det Var(f | y)).
  11
     This epistemic uncertainty is distinct from the irreducible aleatoric uncertainty of natural language, such as
uncertainty about the continuation of “I love . . . ”.


                                                        33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.2      P ROBABILISTIC O BSERVATION M ODEL

We will focus in the following on the case of regression, which we introduced in Appendix K.5. We
suppose that observations of f follow the probabilistic model
                                                  yx = fx + εx ,
where we make the following assumptions about the prior distribution of f and the noise εx :
Assumption G.1 (Gaussian prior). We assume that f ∼ GP(µ, k) with known mean function µ and
kernel k.
Assumption G.2 (Gaussian noise). We assume that the noise εx is mutually independent and
zero-mean Gaussian with known variance ρ2 > 0.

Under Assumptions G.1 and G.2, the posterior distribution of f after observing points X with
values yX is GP(µn , kn ) with
                             µn (x) = µ(x) + k⊤            2 −1
                                              X (x)(KXX + ρ I)  (yX − µX ),
                          kn (x, x′ ) = k(x, x′ ) − k⊤            2 −1
                                                     X (x)(KXX + ρ I)  kX (x′ ),
                             σn2 (x) = kn (x, x).

G.3      T HE P ROBABILISTIC I NTERPRETATION OF SIFT

Observe that the above definition of σn2 matches the definition from Equation (2).12 That is, under the
above probabilistic model,
                                           σn2 (x) = Var(f (x) | y1:n ).
As such, SIFT(ρ2 ) is minimizing the variance of the response to the prompt x⋆ after observing the
data Xn :
               xn+1 = arg min Var(f (x⋆ ) | y1:n , y(x)).
                            x∈D

By simple algebraic manipulation this can be seen to be equivalent to maximizing the information
gain of the data on the response to the prompt x⋆ :
                              1
            xn+1 = arg max        log Var(f (x⋆ ) | y1:n ) − log Var(f (x⋆ ) | y1:n , y(x))
                        x∈D   2 |           {z          }
                                                  const
                      = arg max I(f (x⋆ ); y(x) | y1:n ) .                                                      (7)
                            x∈D


Discussion The above offers a very intuitive probabilistic interpretation of SIFT(ρ2 ). In this prob-
abilistic interpretation, the regularization parameter λ′ of SIFT is equal to the observation noise ρ2 .
Intuitively, larger observation noise leads to slower convergence of the estimate of f , analogously
to our discussion of larger regularization parameter and smaller step size in Proposition 3.3.
The reason why SIFT(ρ2 ) can be interpreted both as minimizing the variance and as minimizing the
entropy of the response to the prompt x⋆ is that for Gaussians, variance is proportional to the entropy
of the response to the prompt x⋆ . As observed by Hübotter et al. (2024), if learning is amortized with
respect to multiple prompts {x⋆1 , . . . , x⋆m } = A, this ceases to be the case and the two objectives lead
to different data selection schemes. It appears to be a special property of non-amortized transductive
active learning that measures of uncertainty and resulting data selection schemes are interchangeable.
A quick remark is in order. SIFT does not only maximize the marginal information gain as
shown in Equation (7), if Assumption C.1 is satisfied, it also maximizes the joint information
gain I(f (x⋆ ); y1:n ). That is, in this case the “entropy reduction” of data Xn selected by SIFT
achieves a constant factor approximation of the maximum possible joint information gain
maxX⊆D,|X|≤n I(f (x⋆ ); y(X)) due to the seminal result on monotone submodular function
maximization of Nemhauser et al. (1978).
  12
       Notably, it can also be shown that µn is the closed-form solution to the regularized loss from Equation (10).


                                                          34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.4      H OW SIFT BALANCES R ELEVANCE AND D IVERSITY

In §C.1, we discussed how SIFT chooses data that is both relevant and diverse. The probabilistic inter-
pretation offers a simple explanation for how this behavior naturally emerges from selecting the most
informative data. To this end, observe that the information gain from Equation (7) can be expressed as
                       I(f (x⋆ ); y(x) | y1:n ) = I(f (x⋆ ); y(x)) − I(f (x⋆ ); y(x); y1:n )         (8)
                                                  |     {z       } |            {z        }
                                                        relevance             redundancy

where I(f ; x; y) =˙ I(f ; x) − I(f ; x | y) = I(f ; x) + I(f ; y) − I(f ; x, y) denotes the multivariate
information gain (Murphy, 2023). The multivariate information gain is a measure of the redundancy
of x and y in predicting f , and is therefore often called simply “redundancy” (which is the opposite
of “synergy”). Equation (8) shows that the balancing of relevance and non-redundancy (i.e., diversity)
arises naturally from maximizing the information gain. Note that the tradeoff between relevance
and diversity is governed by the noise parameter ρ2 ≈ λ′ of the probabilistic model.

G.5      T HE P ERSPECTIVE OF C LASSIFICATION

The above interpretation takes the perspective of regression. However, the above interpretation
can be extended to classification. We will focus here on the case of binary classification for
notational convenience, but the same argument can be made for multi-class classification (Williams
& Rasmussen, 2006, Section 3.5).
In (binary) Gaussian Process Classification the logit f ∼ GP(µ, k) is modeled as a Gaussian process,
and the likelihood follows the model introduced in Section 3: y(x) ∼ Bern(s(f (x))) where we
have Bernoulli rather than categorical feedback and use the logistic function s(a) = ˙ 1/(1 + e−a )
rather than the softmax by virtue of restricting to binary classification.
The standard approach (Williams & Rasmussen, 2006, Section 3.4) is to approximate the poste-
rior distribution of the latent function f given observations y1:n by a Gaussian using Laplace’s
                                                            −1
method. This Gaussian can be shown to have covariance (KX     n
                                                                + W )−1 with W ⪰ κ−1 I n where
κ=  ˙ supa≤B 1/ṡ(a) and ṡ(a) = s(a)(1 − s(a)) denotes the derivative of the logistic function.13 It
is then straightforward to derive that
                        σn2 (x⋆ ) = k(x⋆ , x⋆ ) − k⊤    ⋆
                                                   Xn (x )(KXn + W
                                                                   −1 −1
                                                                     ) kXn (x⋆ )
                                 ≤ k(x⋆ , x⋆ ) − k⊤    ⋆
                                                  Xn (x )(KXn + κI n )
                                                                      −1
                                                                         kXn (x⋆ )
Thus, SIFT minimizes a tight upper bound to the (approximate) posterior variance of the latent
function f at the prompt x⋆ . The same relationship to maximizing information gain that was
discussed above applies.


  13
       In the binary case, this is equal to the more general κ from the main text.


                                                         35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H     E FFICIENT C OMPUTATION OF SIFT
In the following, we show how to select data via SIFT at low computational cost. Our implementation
extends the Faiss library (Johnson et al., 2019; Douze et al., 2024) for Nearest Neighbor retrieval. We
open-source the activeft (Active Fine-Tuning) library which can be used as a drop-in replacement
for Nearest Neighbor retrieval.
In our runtime analysis, we will denote by K the size of the data space D, and by N the number of
points to be selected. We describe two implementations of SIFT:
      1. The first exact implementation has sequential computation cost O K 2 N , however, compu-

          tation can be effectively parallelized on a GPU.
      2. The second “fast” implementation        assumes submodularity (i.e., Assumption C.1) and
          has computation cost O  e K + N 3 where O(·) e suppresses log-factors. This cost is only
          marginally above the cost of Nearest Neighbor retrieval.
Both implementations achieve virtually identical performance gains (cf. Figure 19 (right)), which is
further evidence that Assumption C.1 is satisfied in our language modeling setting.

H.1    E XACT I MPLEMENTATION

The central object of the first implementation is the conditional kernel matrix of the data space given
the selected points Xn :
                            Kn =  ˙ KD − KD,Xn (KXn + λ′ I n )−1 KXn ,D .
The entries kn (x, x′ ) of this matrix can be updated efficiently via the following relation (Chowdhury
& Gopalan, 2017, Appendix F) arising from properties of the Schur complement:
                                                     kn−1 (x, xn )kn−1 (xn , x′ )
                       kn (x, x′ ) = kn−1 (x, x′ ) −                              .                  (9)
                                                         kn−1 (xn , xn ) + λ′
The implementation is detailed in Algorithm 1. The computation of the objective value in line 4
and the kernel matrix update in line 5 can be parallelized on a GPU. Thus, the main bottleneck of
this implementation is the requirement that the kernel matrix of size K × K fits onto a GPU. In
case this is not possible, such as with large data spaces, the following two sections detail methods
to reduce the computational cost.

Algorithm 1 SIFT(λ′ )
 1: Input: prompt x⋆ , data space D, (initial) kernel matrix k0 (x, x′ ) = ϕ(x)⊤ ϕ(x′ ), x, x′ ∈ D,
    number of points to select N
 2: Output: set of selected points {x1 , . . . , xN }
 3: for n from 1 to N do     2
                            kn−1 (x⋆ ,x)
 4:   xn ← arg maxx∈D kn−1     (x,x)+λ′                                        {Select next point}
 5:   for each x, x ∈ D do
                    ′
                                                      (x,xn )kn−1 (xn ,x′ )
 6:      Update kn (x, x′ ) ← kn−1 (x, x′ ) − kn−1kn−1   (xn ,xn )+λ′       {Update kernel matrix}
 7:   end for
 8: end for


H.2    FAST (E XACT ) I MPLEMENTATION

The following “fast” implementation of SIFT rests on the assumption that the objective function
optimized by SIFT is submodular (cf. Assumption C.1). Recall that this objective function can be
expressed as xn+1 = arg maxx∈D ψx⋆ (Xn ∪ {x}) where ψx⋆ (X) = σ02 (x⋆ ) − σX      2
                                                                                    (x⋆ ) denotes
the uncertainty reduction about x upon fine-tuning the model on data X.
                                 ⋆

The “trick” of the fast implementation is to use a max-heap (with O(1) lookup and O(log K)
insertion) to keep track of upper bounds of ψx⋆ (Xn ∪ {x}) for each x ∈ D. The upper bounds come
directly from the submodularity assumption:
                             ψx⋆ (Xi ∪ {x}) ≥ ψx⋆ (Xj ∪ {x}) ∀j ≥ i.


                                                  36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


At iteration n, we evaluate ψx⋆ (Xn−1 ∪ {x}) for x in max-heap order. As soon as we find a x
whose re-computed upper bound is smaller than a previously re-computed upper bound, we stop
the evaluation. In the worst case, one might iterate through all K points in each iteration, but in
practice, it can sometimes be reasonable to assume that one only needs to consider O(1) points
per iteration. This algorithm is known as the “lazy greedy algorithm” in submodular function
maximization (Minoux, 1978) where it is typically seen to result in large speed-ups.
We summarize the fast implementation in Algorithm 2. The kernel matrix K tracks the conditional
kernel matrix of the prompt x⋆ and the previously selected data Xn−1 . Λ tracks the (regularized)
inverse of the kernel matrix of the previously selected data Xn−1 . Whenever necessary, the cached
kernel matrix and cached inverse are updated. We denote by Φ ∈ R(n−1)×d the matrix of embeddings
of previously selected points and by Φ̃ ∈ Rn×d the same matrix extended by ϕ(x⋆ ) as the first row.
Initializing the max-heap takes time O(K)
                                     e      and is analogous to standard Nearest Neighbor retrieval.
Additionally,  SIFT-F AST performs a data selection loop for
                                                            N iterations where each operation takes
O N 2 time requiring persistent memory of size O N 2 . Notably, only the kernel matrix of the

prompt and the previously selected data is kept in memory.

Algorithm 2 SIFT-FAST(λ′ )
 1: Input: prompt x⋆ , data space D, number of points to select N
 2: Output: set of selected points {x1 , . . . , xN }
      {Initializing max-heap (“Nearest Neighbor retrieval”)}
 3: for x ∈ D do
                 ⋆ ⊤
                  ) ϕ(x))2
 4:   αx ← (ϕ(x
              ∥ϕ(x)∥2 +λ′2
 5:   Insert (x, αx ) into max-heap
 6: end for
      {Data selection}
 7: Initialize K = ∥ϕ(x⋆ )∥22 and Λ as an empty square matrix

 8: for n from 1 to N do
 9:    Initialize lower bound α⋆ ← −∞
10:    for each popped (x, α) in max-heap order do
11:       if α = α⋆ then
12:          xn ← x                                    {x maximizes the SIFT(λ′ ) objective}
13:          break
14:       end if
15:       αx , Λ, K ′ ← R ECOMPUTE(x, K, Λ)                    {Recompute objective value}
16:       α⋆ ← max{α⋆ , αx }
17:       Insert (x, αx ) into max-heap
18:    end for
19:    K ← U PDATE S TATE(xn , K ′ )                          {Update cached kernel matrix}
20: end for


H.3     P RE -S ELECTING DATA VIA N EAREST N EIGHBOR R ETRIEVAL

The reason for SIFT-FAST being so efficient is that it effectively “discards” all points in D that are
completely irrelevant to the prompt. Whereas SIFT recomputes the objective value of every point in
D at each iteration, SIFT-FAST only reevaluates points that are potentially relevant. An alternative to
make SIFT fast is therefore simply to preemptively discard irrelevant points. In our experiments we do
so by pre-selecting a subset of size K = 200 via Nearest Neighbor retrieval within D (cf. Appendix I
for more details). This step aims to eliminate all points from the data space that SIFT would not end
up picking anyway while retaining a diverse set of relevant points. Figure 18 shows the effect of K
on statistical performance and Figure 4 shows the effect on computational performance.

H.4     F UTURE W ORK : I MPROVING GPU U TILIZATION OF SIFT-FAST

In our experiments on the Pile dataset, we find that SIFT-FAST is less efficient than SIFT (cf. Fig-
ure 19 (left)). We attribute this to the fact that for any given prompt, the closest neighbors in the


                                                  37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3 SIFT-FAST(λ′ ): R ECOMPUTE
 1: Input: prompt x⋆ , current iteration n, candidate x, cached kernel matrix K, cached inverse Λ
 2: Output: objective value αx , updated cached inverse Λ, expanded kernel matrix K
      {Expand cached kernel matrix K (if required)}
 3: if x is has not been selected yet then
 4:    {Update Λ with the Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury formula (Sherman & Morrison, 1950)}
 5:    Let i denote the size of Λ
 6:    if i < n − 1 then
 7:       A ← Φi Φ⊤  i+1:n−1
 8:       B ← Φi+1:n−1 Φ⊤
                        i+1:n−1
 9:       C ←  (B − A⊤ ΛA)−1
                Λ + ΛACA⊤ Λ −ΛAC

10:       Λ←
                   −CA⊤ Λ       C
11:     end if
      {Expand kernel matrix K}
12:   A ← I − Φ⊤ ΛΦ
13:   k ← Φ̃Aϕ(x)

             K        k
14:   K← ⊤                2
            k     ∥ϕ(x)∥A
15: end if
             k2 (x⋆ ,x)
16: αx ← k(x,x)+λ′                                      {Compute objective value using the relation from Equation (9)}


Algorithm 4 SIFT-FAST(λ′ ): U PDATE S TATE
 1: Input: selected point xn , expanded kernel matrix K ′
 2: Output: new conditional kernel matrix K
      {Update kernel matrix using the relation from Equation (9)}
 3: for each x, x′ ∈ {x⋆ } ∪ Xn do
                                                            k′ (x,xn )k′ (xn ,x′ )
 4:   Update k(x, x′ ) ← k ′ (x, x′ ) −                        k′ (xn ,xn )+λ′
 5: end for


                                                   90
                                                                 SIFT (ours)
                              Bits per Byte in %


                                                   85            NN

                                                   80

                                                   75

                                                   70
                                                          50       200          1 000   6 000
                                                                            K

Figure 18: We run SIFT (λ′ = 1) with various values of K and report the bits per byte (↓ better)
after 50 test-time iterations. We find that performance on the Pile plateaus after K = 1‘000. Even at
K = 50, which equals the number of points selected, SIFT outperforms Nearest Neighbor retrieval
due to being able to select the same points multiple times.



                                                                       38
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Compute Overhead
                                 Training + Retrieval                                                                                      SIFT-FAST
                                                                                          1.2


                                                                          Bits per Byte
                                 Only Retrieval                                                                                            SIFT
                   101
                                                                                          1.0


                   100                                                                    0.8
                         50         200         1 000        6 000                                 0                10        20      30      40       50
                              Size of Pre-Selected Data Space                                                            Test-Time Iterations

 Figure 19: Left: Computational overhead of SIFT-FAST over Nearest Neighbor retrieval. This
 overhead is larger than the overhead of SIFT over Nearest Neighbor retrieval (cf. Figure 4).
 Right: SIFT-FAST achieves identical statistical performance to SIFT, which is further evidence
 that Assumption C.1 is satisfied in our language modeling setting.


 data space are all relatively similar to the prompt (cf. Figure 20), meaning that each iteration of
 SIFT-FAST has to loop (sequentially) over the entire priority queue. In contrast, SIFT performs this
 operation in parallel on a GPU.
We believe that a promising computational approach is to      1.000
combine the advantages of the SIFT and SIFT-FAST im-

                                                                                                Cosine Similarity
plementations. This could be achieved by keeping a large      0.975
sub-selected kernel matrix on the GPU (akin to the SIFT       0.950
implementation) and selectively using the SIFT-FAST im-                     Pile
plementation if points on the priority queue that are not     0.925
                                                                            Indiv. Datasets
in the sub-selected kernel matrix may be selected. This       0.900
would allow for a more efficient use of the GPU mem-
                                                                    100      101        102     103
ory of SIFT-FAST, which we expect to yield comparable                          Neighbors
computational performance to the SIFT implementation
in most cases, while still being able to handle large data Figure 20: Average cosine similarities of
spaces.                                                    test prompts to closest 1‘000 neighbors
                                                           in the data space of the Pile; with the
                                                           Roberta embedding model.


                                                                     39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I   E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
We fine-tune the pre-trained model for a single gradient step each on N = 50 selected data points.
We evaluate the performance on 1% of the test instances of the Pile. We use the Pile training dataset
as data space for data selection, which notably does not include data from the validation and test sets.
Evaluation We use the standard implementation of the lm-evaluation-harness li-
brary (Gao et al., 2024) for computing the bits per byte. This implementation computes the
log-likelihood of a document using a rolling-window approach, which ensures that the model’s
maximum context window is fully utilized.
Truncation of Long Sequences Analogously to Hardt & Sun (2024), to generate embeddings,
we naively truncate long sequences to the maximum sequence length of the embedding model, that
is, we only consider the prefixes of long sequences for data selection.
Learning Rate and Optimizer Following Hardt & Sun (2024), we use the Adam optimizer
(Kingma & Ba, 2014) with ϵ-value 1e−8. We use the default learning rate 5e−5 of the
transformers library (Wolf et al., 2020) unless noted otherwise. Hardt & Sun (2024) used
a learning rate of 2e−5 for their experiments. We show in Figure 24 that 5e−5 leads to strictly
better performance of the Nearest Neighbor baseline. In our ablation study over metrics for Nearest
Neighbor retrieval (cf. Figure 11), which was conducted concurrently, we still used learning rate
2e−5 of Hardt & Sun (2024).
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) We use LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) for fine-tuning Phi-3, and also eval-
uate the performance of LoRA with GPT-2 and GPT-2-large (cf. §E). We use LoRAs with rank 64, out-
put scaling 16, without dropout and bias. When fine-tuning with LoRA, we use the learning rate 5e−4.
Gradient Checkpointing We additionally use gradient checkpointing (Chen et al., 2016) for
fine-tuning Phi-3 to reduce memory footprint and allow fine-tuning on our hardware.
Uncopyrighted Pile Dataset We use only those datasets of the Pile where our use is in compliance
with the terms of service of the data host (Gao et al., 2020). This excludes the Books3, BookCorpus2,
OpenSubtitles, YTSubtitles, and OWT2 datasets.
We provide an overview of all hyperparameters of test-time fine-tuning in Table 9.

                 Model family                          GPT-2     Phi-3    Llama-3.2
                   ′
                 λ                                      0.01     0.01        0.01
                 Learning rate                          5e−5     5e−4        1e−4
                 Adam’s ϵ-value                         1e−8     1e−8        1e−8
                 Max. sequence length (in tokens)       1024     4096        4096
                 LoRA                                    no       yes         yes
                 Gradient checkpointing                  no       yes         yes

          Table 9: Hyperparameters during test-time fine-tuning, unless noted otherwise.


                                                  40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I.1   P ROPERTIES OF THE P ILE DATASET

Figure 21 shows the average cosine similarities of test prompts to neighbors in the data space of the
Pile. Table 10 shows the weight of each dataset in the Pile.

                                        1.0



                    Cosine Similarity
                                        0.5
                                                      Pile
                                                      Indiv. Datasets
                                        0.0
                                              0.0           0.5          1.0        1.5
                                                                   Neighbors              ×108

Figure 21: Average cosine similarities of test prompts to neighbors in the data space of the Pile; with
the Roberta embedding model.


                                                                           Weight
                                                    Common Crawl           24.14%
                                                    PubMed Central         19.19%
                                                    ArXiv                  11.94%
                                                    GitHub                 10.12%
                                                    FreeLaw                 8.18%
                                                    Stack Exchange          6.84%
                                                    US Patents              4.87%
                                                    PubMed Abstracts        4.09%
                                                    Project Gutenberg       2.89%
                                                    Wikipedia               2.04%
                                                    DeepMind Math           1.65%
                                                    Ubuntu IRC              1.17%
                                                    EuroParl                0.97%
                                                    Hacker News             0.83%
                                                    PhilPapers              0.51%
                                                    NIH ExPorter Grants     0.40%
                                                    Enron Emails            0.19%

Table 10: Overview of datasets in the (uncopyrighted) Pile. Weight is the percentage of bytes in the
final dataset occupied by each dataset. Numbers are taken from Gao et al. (2020) and renormalized.


I.2   I N -C ONTEXT BASELINE

In our evaluation of in-context learning, we use the following format to insert the selected data into the
context of the model: We separate all retrieved token sequences with the string "\n\n" which can be
seen as a paragraph separator, and additionally add this string between the data string and the prompt.
Notably, our results with in-context learning on GPT-2-large outperform the results previously
reported by Hardt & Sun (2024). We suspect that this is due to a combination of a more reasonable
evaluation and using SIFT as opposed to Nearest Neighbor retrieval for data selection.
Evaluation of Inference Cost of In-Context Baseline We estimate the inference cost of in-context
learning as follows. We evaluate the time it takes compute the rolling log-likelihood of the test
instance with context included and subtract the time it takes to compute the rolling log-likelihood of


                                                                   41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the test instance without context. This is a lower-bound of the inference cost of in-context learning,
as unlike autoregressive generation, computing the log-likelihood is partially parallelized.
To compute the token throughput of the in-context baseline, we divide the total compute time by the
number of tokens added to the context.

 I.3                          I NFERENCE C OST WITH T EST-T IME F INE -T UNING

Figure 22 evaluates the inference cost of test-time fine-tuning on all the Pile and the largest datasets.

                                                                               GPT-2 (124M)

                               100


                              10−1


                                                                             GPT-2-large (774M)

                               100


                              10−1
Test-Time Compute (seconds)


                                                                                   Phi-3 (3.8B)

                               100


                              10−1


                                                                               Llama-3.2 (1B)

                               100


                              10−1


                                                                               Llama-3.2 (3B)

                               100


                              10−1


                                     All       iv
                                                       eLa
                                                          w      Hu
                                                                     b             l
                                                                                                              tral                   e              ts         edi
                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                            ArX     Fre       Git             raw           acts                                 ang          Pat
                                                                                                                                                  en         ip
                                                                         onC            bstr               Cen                xch        US              Wik
                                                                      mm          dA                  ed                  E
                                                                    Co          Me                 ubM           S   tack
                                                                             Pub               P


                               Figure 22: Cost of taking a single gradient step. Results are with an NVIDIA GH200.



                                                                                   42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J   A BLATIONS
This section summarizes ablations that we conducted to investigate test-time fine-tuning and SIFT.

      • Hyperparameter λ′ : Table 11
      • Learning Curves for Individual Datasets of the Pile: Figure 23
      • Learning Rate: Figure 24
      • Uncertainty Estimation:
           – Summary of correlations (Table 12)
           – Visualization of σn (Figure 25)
      • Compute-proportional Performance Gain:
           – Details on A DAPTIVE SIFT (Figure 26)


                                               43
                                      1e−12       1e−8       1e−4        0.01         0.1           1           10          100       10‘000          NN         NN-F            ∆
                     NIH Grants     123.9 (6.9) 79.0 (6.4) 70.2 (6.7) 53.8 (8.9) 52.9 (9.0) 53.3 (9.1) 54.2 (9.1) 64.5 (10.9) 93.5 (16.9)          84.9 (2.1) 91.6 (16.7)    ↓ 32.0
                     US Patents     119.9 (3.9) 82.9 (2.7) 70.2 (3.1) 62.9 (3.5) 62.2 (3.6) 62.7 (3.7) 63.2 (3.7) 72.9 (4.2) 105.4 (6.4)           80.3 (1.9) 108.8 (6.6)    ↓ 18.1
                     GitHub         54.6 (3.1) 41.4 (2.2) 35.9 (2.3) 30.0 (2.2) 28.6 (2.2) 28.6 (2.2) 29.2 (2.2) 36.1 (2.6) 51.3 (4.0)             42.1 (2.0) 53.2 (4.0)     ↓ 13.5
                     Enron Emails   87.1 (16.5) 68.6 (9.4) 63.1 (9.1) 53.1 (11.4) 52.4 (11.8) 53.8 (12.2) 54.1 (12.2) 59.6 (13.4) 89.4 (20.4)      64.4 (10.1) 91.6 (20.6)   ↓ 12.0
                     Common Crawl 117.9 (1.3) 91.0 (0.5) 90.7 (0.5) 87.5 (0.7) 86.1 (0.9) 87.8 (0.9) 88.3 (0.9) 99.3 (1.0) 146.2 (1.6)             90.4 (0.5) 148.8 (1.5)     ↓ 4.3
                     ArXiv          145.9 (7.0) 83.5 (1.3) 83.6 (1.3) 82.5 (1.4) 81.6 (1.9) 81.2 (1.8) 82.8 (1.9) 94.6 (2.8) 158.0 (6.1)           85.0 (1.6) 166.8 (6.4)     ↓ 3.8
                     Wikipedia      104.2 (3.0) 64.9 (2.1) 63.9 (2.2) 62.7 (2.1) 63.7 (2.1) 64.8 (2.2) 65.6 (2.3) 77.5 (2.5) 118.1 (3.7)           66.3 (2.0) 121.2 (3.5)     ↓ 3.6
                                                                                                                                                                                      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     PubMed Abstr. 132.3 (1.6) 87.0 (0.4) 87.0 (0.4) 84.4 (0.6) 84.8 (0.7) 86.4 (0.7) 86.7 (0.7) 102.0 (0.9) 158.9 (1.4)           87.2 (0.4) 162.6 (1.3)     ↓ 2.8
                     PubMed Central 131.9 (4.9) 80.5 (2.5) 80.0 (2.7) 79.5 (2.6) 80.6 (2.7) 82.0 (2.7) 83.8 (2.9) 98.6 (3.7) 151.6 (5.5)           81.7 (2.6) 155.6 (5.1)     ↓ 2.2


44
                     Stack Exchange 118.0 (1.7) 77.6 (0.7) 77.6 (0.7) 76.7 (0.7) 77.0 (0.7) 77.8 (0.7) 78.1 (0.7) 85.9 (0.9) 136.9 (1.6)           78.2 (0.7) 141.9 (1.5)     ↓ 1.5
                     Hacker News    113.9 (7.2) 78.8 (2.7) 78.9 (2.7) 78.4 (2.8) 77.8 (3.5) 78.1 (3.6) 78.4 (3.6) 86.2 (3.3) 131.3 (6.2)           79.2 (2.8) 133.1 (6.3)     ↓ 1.4
                     DeepMind Math 104.7 (6.2) 69.3 (2.1) 69.1 (2.1) 69.7 (2.1) 70.1 (2.1) 69.0 (2.0) 70.1 (2.1) 71.9 (2.2) 103.5 (5.6)            69.6 (2.1) 121.8 (3.1)     ↓ 0.6
                     FreeLaw        102.5 (6.3) 64.0 (3.9) 63.5 (4.0) 64.0 (4.1) 65.5 (4.2) 65.7 (4.1) 67.0 (4.2) 80.3 (5.0) 114.1 (7.1)           64.1 (4.0) 122.4 (7.1)     ↓ 0.6
                     All            112.9 (0.9) 78.5 (0.6) 76.7 (0.6) 73.5 (0.6)   73.2 (0.7)   74.3 (0.7)   74.9 (0.7)   85.6 (0.8) 129.8 (1.2)   78.3 (0.5) 133.3 (1.2)     ↓ 5.4

     Table 11: Percentage of bits per byte after 50 test-time iterations for varying λ′ , relative to the bits per byte of the base model. We only include datasets with at
     least 10 examples in our test set. Bold numbers denote the best performing selected subset. Underlined numbers denote better or on-par performance with Nearest
     Neighbor retrieval. ∆ denotes the performance gain of SIFT with the strongest λ′ per dataset over Nearest Neighbor retrieval. Numbers in partentheses are standard
     errors. We remark that λ′ is on a logarithmic scale. For any choice of λ′ ∈ [1e−8, 10], SIFT always performs at least on-par with Nearest Neighbor retrieval.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                        SIFT (ours)                      NN               Failure-mode of NN

                          NIH Grants                                     US Patents                     GitHub                    Enron Emails
                1.0                                                                         1.5
Bits per Byte

                                                         1.00                                                           1.5

                                                         0.75                               1.0
                                                                                                                        1.0
                0.5
                                                         0.50                               0.5
                                                                                                                        0.5
                      0      25                    50           0           25         50         0       25       50         0       25         50
                                                                                 Test-Time Iterations

Figure 23: Performance in some of the datasets of the Pile, with GPT-2 as base model. Error bars
correspond to standard errors.


                                                             η = 1e−6                    η = 2e−5                η = 1e−4
                                                             η = 5e−6                    η = 5e−5                η = 5e−4


                1.2
Bits per Byte


                1.0



                      0                                 10                       20                  30                    40                    50
                                                                                  Test-Time Iterations


Figure 24: Ablation of the learning rate with data selected by Nearest Neighbor retrieval. We find that
the default learning rate 5e−5 of the transformers library (Wolf et al., 2020) works best, and
conduct our other experiments with this learning rate unless noted otherwise. Hardt & Sun (2024)
had previously used 2e−5 which we find to be suboptimal.


                                                                                             1.25
                                                  100
                                  Bits per Byte


                                                                                             1.00

                                                                                             0.75

                                                                                             0.50
                                                              10    −1                               0.1     0.2    0.3
                                                        Uncertainty Estimate σn (x⋆ )             Uncertainty Estimate σn (x⋆ )

Figure 25: We visualize the predictive ability of the uncertainty estimates σn analogously to Figure 8.


                                                                                       45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                Spearman Pearson
                                                   all steps         0.485          0.421
                                         σn
                                                   final step        0.496          0.443
                                                   all steps         0.722          0.581
                                         σ̂n
                                                   final step        0.682          0.482
                                                   all steps         0.485          0.468
                                         log σn
                                                   final step        0.496          0.466
                                                   all steps         0.722          0.618
                                         log σ̂n
                                                   final step        0.682          0.526

Table 12: We find a strong / moderate correlation between the uncertainty estimates σ̂n / σn and bits
per byte. We further consider the correlation at all test-time iterations (from 0 to 50) as well as only
at the final iteration. We report both the Spearman and Pearson correlation coefficients, measuring
monotonic and linear relationships, respectively. Before determining the Pearson correlation, we
exclude the 0.25% of the data points with the lowest and highest uncertainty estimates to avoid the
influence of outliers. The p-value of all correlations is below 1e−5 due to the large sample size.


                                                                              2.0
                                                                              1.0
          Bits per Byte


                                                                             0.75
                                                                              0.5
                                                                         α


                          100                                                0.35
                                                                             0.25
                                      A DAPTIVE SIFT
                                                                              0.2
                                      SIFT
                                                                             0.15

                                100               101                                 0         20     40
                                        Test Time Compute                                 Test-Time Compute


Figure 26: We evaluate A DAPTIVE SIFT with the same choices of α as in Figure 8 (right). Left: Bits
per byte of A DAPTIVE SIFT (↓ better) against test-time compute. Every marker corresponds to
the performance of A DAPTIVE SIFT with a given α, where the associated test-time compute is the
average number of test-time iterations on prompts. We compare A DAPTIVE SIFT to SIFT, where we
spend the same test-time compute on every prompt. We see a slight advantage of A DAPTIVE SIFT
over SIFT, due to adaptively stopping depending on the prompt. Our current experiment exhibits
a bias as test-time compute approaches 50, since we force-stop the compute at 50 iterations. This
biases A DAPTIVE SIFT to perform similarly to SIFT. We hypothesize that the initial advantage of
A DAPTIVE SIFT over SIFT may grow with more test-time compute if compute is not force-stopped
at 50 iterations. Right: Frequency of stopping at a given iteration for given values of α.


                                                                46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K         P ROOFS

This section provides the formal proofs of the results presented in the main text.

            • §K.2 proves the insufficiency of Nearest Neighbor retrieval (Informal Proposition 2.1).
            • §K.3 shows the close relationship of regularized loss minimization and test-time fine-
              tuning (Proposition 3.3).
            • §K.4 details how SIFT balances relevance and diversity (§C.1).
            • §K.5 states confidence sets for fine-tuning regression models that are analogous to the
              confidence sets for classification from the main text.
            • §K.6 derives the confidence sets from the main text (Theorem 3.2).

K.1         N OTATION

Throughout this work, log denotes the natural logarithm. Unless noted otherwise {. . .} denotes a
multiset. We define the feature map Φn = ˙ (ϕ(x1 ), . . . , ϕ(xn )) ∈ Rn×d , which gives rise to the
                                 ⊤
kernel matrix Kn =˙ KXn = Φn Φn ∈ R     n×n
                                             and the covariance operator Σn =   ˙ Φ⊤n Φn ∈ R
                                                                                               d×d
                                                                                                   .

K.2         I NSUFFICIENCY OF N EAREST N EIGHBOR R ETRIEVAL (I NFORMAL P ROPOSITION 2.1)

We refer to §C.2 for the formal definition of the irreducible uncertainty σ∞ (x⋆ ; D).
We remark that if embeddings are of unit length, the cosine similarity scoring function is equivalent
to the (negative) Euclidean distance scoring function:

             ∥x⋆ − x∥2 = (x⋆ − x)⊤ (x⋆ − x) = ∥x⋆ ∥2 + ∥x∥2 − 2x⋆ ⊤ x = 2 − 2 cos(x⋆ , x).
                        2                                      2   2


We henceforth consider the Euclidean distance scoring function.
Proposition K.1 (Insufficiency of Nearest Neighbor Retrieval). Suppose w.l.o.g. that ϕ(x) = x.
                               Sd
Consider the data space D = i=1 Di where Di = {ei | j ∈ N} with ei the i-th basis vector
of Rd .14 Let x⋆ = √ 1      (2, 1, 1, . . . , 1) ∈ Rd .
                            4+(d−1)

Then, for all n ≥ 1:

           1. If Xn are the n nearest neighbors of x⋆ in D, σn2 (x⋆ ) ≥ σ∞
                                                                         2
                                                                           (x⋆ ; D1 ) ≫ 0.
                                                      n→∞
           2. If Xn is selected by SIFT, σn2 (x⋆ ) −→ σ∞
                                                       2
                                                         (x⋆ ; D) = 0.

Proof.

                                    2                 2
           1. Clearly, ∥x⋆ − e1 ∥2 < ∥x⋆ − ei ∥2 for all i > 1. Hence, Xn = {e1 | i ∈ [n]} ⊂ D1 . This
              is as if the data space was restricted to D1 , and hence σn2 (x⋆ ) ≥ σ∞
                                                                                    2
                                                                                      (x⋆ ; D1 ).
           2. This follows readily from Theorem C.2 and noting that span D = Rd , implying
               2
              σ∞ (x⋆ ; D) = 0.


Discussion The setting examined in Proposition K.1 is an extreme case (where data exists with
exact duplication), yet we deem that it illustrates a realistic scenario. Particularly nowadays that
similar information is accessible from many sources in different forms, it is crucial to explicitly
select diverse data for fine-tuning. We show here theoretically and in Appendix L.1 qualitatively
that SIFT does not have this limitation.
    14
         We remark that {. . .} denotes a multiset.


                                                          47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K.3    T HE CLOSE RELATIONSHIP OF R EGULARIZED L OSS M INIMIZATION AND T EST-T IME
       F INE -T UNING (P ROPOSITION 3.3)

Proof. We note that the regularized negative log-likelihood loss Lλ from Equation (1),
                                     X                        λ              2
                 Lλ (W ; D) = −            log sy (W ϕ(x)) + ∥W − W pre ∥F ,
                                                              2
                                   (x,y)∈D
                                |            {z           }
                                           L(W ;D)

is strictly convex in W and has a unique minimizer Wλ which satisfies
                      ∇Lλ (Wλ ; D) = ∇L(Wλ ; D) + λ(Wλ − W pre ) = 0.
It follows that Wλ = W pre − λ1 ∇L(Wλ ; D).
                     c η = W pre − η∇L(W pre ; D). We obtain
Finally, recall that W
                            cη ∥F = ∥η∇L(W pre ; D) − η∇L(W1/η ; D)∥F
                    ∥W1/η − W
                                      = η∥∇L(W pre ; D) − ∇L(W1/η ; D)∥F .



K.4    H OW SIFT BALANCES R ELEVANCE AND D IVERSITY

1st point For non-unit length embeddings, the first selected point can be expressed as follows:
                                  (ϕ(x⋆ )⊤ ϕ(x))2                  ∡ϕ (x⋆ , x)2       as λ′ → 0

              2     ⋆
x1 = arg min σ{x} (x ) = arg max                     = arg max
        x∈D                 x∈D
                                           2
                                   ∥ϕ(x)∥2 + λ′           x∈D      (ϕ(x ) ϕ(x)) as λ′ → ∞.
                                                                        ⋆  ⊤      2


2nd point Next, we consider the second selected point. We derive the results in terms of the
dot product kernel k(x, x′ ) = ϕ(x)⊤ x′ which is such that k(x, x′ ) = ∡ϕ (x, x′ ) for unit length
embeddings. Let x be such that k(x1 , x) = 0. We have
                                          ⊤                    −1
                              k(x⋆ , x1 )    1 + λ′                k(x⋆ , x1 )

                                                          1
         ψx⋆ ({x1 , x1 }) =
                              k(x⋆ , x1 )       1      1 + λ′      k(x⋆ , x1 )
                                                          ⊤
                                              k(x⋆ , x1 )    1 + λ′             k(x⋆ , x1 )

                                   1                                   −1
                          =                       ⋆
                             (1 + λ′ )2 − 1 k(x , x1 )         −1    1 + λ′ k(x⋆ , x1 )
                             2λ′ k(x⋆ , x1 )2
                           =
                             (1 + λ′ )2 − 1
                             2k(x⋆ , x1 )2
                           =               .
                                2 + λ′
For x, we have
                                           ⊤                     −1
                               k(x⋆ , x1 )    1 + λ′                 k(x⋆ , x1 )

                                                            0
             ψx⋆ ({x1 , x}) =
                                k(x⋆ , x)         0      1 + λ′       k(x⋆ , x)
                                                       ⊤
                                           k(x⋆ , x1 )     1 + λ′             k(x⋆ , x1 )

                                  1                                   0
                            =                  ⋆
                              (1 + λ′ )2 k(x , x)             0    1 + λ′ k(x⋆ , x)
                               k(x⋆ , x1 )2 + k(x⋆ , x)2
                            =                            .
                                        1 + λ′
We see that x is preferred over x⋆ if and only if
       k(x⋆ , x1 )2 + k(x⋆ , x)2   2k(x⋆ , x1 )2                               λ′
                      ′
                                 >                      ⇐⇒    k(x⋆ , x)2 >          k(x⋆ , x1 )2 .
                1+λ                  2 + λ′                                  2 + λ′
                                                                             | {z }
                                                                              c(λ′ )

As λ′ → ∞, c(λ′ ) → 1; whereas as λ′ → 0, c(λ′ ) → 0.
We interpret the expressions extensively in Section 4.


                                                   48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K.5   C ONFIDENCE S ETS FOR R EGRESSION

Before moving on to deriving confidence sets for the setting with categorical feedback, we state
analogous results for the regression setting under the following standard assumptions. For ease of
notation, we consider the scalar case.
Assumption K.2 (Linear function in a known latent space). We assume f ⋆ (x) = ϕ(x)⊤ w⋆ with
w⋆ ∈ Rd and where ϕ(·) ∈ Rd denotes known embeddings. We assume that w⋆ has bounded norm,
i.e., ∥w⋆ − wpre ∥2 ≤ B for some finite B ∈ R.
Assumption K.3 (Sub-Gaussian Noise). We assume that the data follows

                                         yn = f ⋆ (xn ) + εn

where each εn from the noise sequence {εn }∞
                                           n=1 is conditionally zero-mean ρ-sub-Gaussian with
known constant ρ > 0. Formally,
                                                                  2 2
                                            λϵn                   λ ρ
                      ∀n ≥ 1, λ ∈ R : E e        Dn−1 ≤ exp
                                                                   2

where Dn−1 corresponds to the σ-algebra generated by the random variables {xi , ϵi }n−1
                                                                                    i=1 and xn .

We consider the standard squared loss L(w; D) = ˙ 12 (x,y)∈D (f (x; w) − y)2 where we write
                                                    P

         ˙ ϕ(w)⊤ w. The regularized loss with minimizer wn is then
f (x; w) =
                                                          λ            2
                            Lλ (w; Dn ) =
                                        ˙ L(w; Dn ) +       ∥f − wpre ∥2                         (10)
                                                          2
where λ > 0 is the regularization parameter. In the following, we write fn (x) =   ˙ f (x; wn ) and
          ˙ f (x; wpre ). The closed-form solution to the optimization problem from Equation (10) is
f pre (x) =
well-known (see, e.g., Williams & Rasmussen, 2006, Section 6.2.2) to be

                     fn (x) = f pre (x) + k⊤
                                           Xn (x)(KXn + λI n )
                                                              −1
                                                                 (y n − f pre
                                                                          n )

where f pre
        n is the vector of predictions of f
                                            pre
                                                at Xn and y n is the vector of observations in Dn .
The below result is an almost immediate consequence of the results of Abbasi-Yadkori (2013) and
Chowdhury & Gopalan (2017).
Theorem K.4 (Confidence Sets for Regression). Pick δ ∈ (0, 1) and let Assumptions K.2 and K.3
hold. Let
                                         p
                         βn (δ) =˙ B + ρ 2(γn + 1 + log(1/δ))

where γn =
         ˙ maxx1 ,...,xn 21 log det (I n + λ−1 K Xn ). Then

                  P(∀n ≥ 1, x ∈ X : |f ⋆ (x) − fn (x)| ≤ βn (δ)σn (x)) ≥ 1 − δ.


Proof. Let us define the residual of the ground truth and pre-trained model as
f˜⋆ (x) =
        ˙ f ⋆ (x) − f pre (x) with corresponding weight vector w̃. Analogously, let ỹn = f˜⋆ (xn )+εn
be the observed error. We have that w̃⋆ =     ˙ w⋆ − wpre ∈ Rd with norm ∥w⋆ − wpre ∥k . The
unbiased estimate of the remaining error is

                                 f˜n = k⊤
                                        Xn (x)(KXn + λI n )
                                                           −1
                                                              ỹ n .

By Theorem 2 of Chowdhury & Gopalan (2017), for all x ∈ X and n ≥ 1, jointly with probability at
least 1 − δ, |f˜⋆ (x) − f˜n (x)| ≤ βn (δ)σn (x). It remains now only to observe that

                               |f˜⋆ (x) − f˜n (x)| = |f ⋆ (x) − fn (x)|.


                                                  49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K.6     C ONFIDENCE S ETS FOR C LASSIFICATION (T HEOREM 3.2)

We begin by re-stating Corollary 1 of Amani & Thrampoulidis (2020). Analogous results can be
obtained from Theorem 1 of Zhang & Sugiyama (2023). Substantial work has studied the special
case of binary feedback, K = 2 Faury et al. (2020); Pásztor et al. (2024).
                                                           ˙ si (x; W )(1{i = j} − sj (x; W )).
Let A(x; W ) ∈ RK×K be the matrix satisfying (A(x; W ))i,j =
Equivalently, A(x; W ) = diag{s(x; W )} − s(x; W )s(x; W )⊤ . Based on this matrix, we define
L= ˙ supx∈X ,W ∈WB λmax (A(x; W )) and κ =  ˙ supx∈X ,W ∈WB 1/λmin (A(x; W )).
Lemma K.5 (Corollary 1 of Amani & Thrampoulidis (2020)). Assume W ⋆ ∈ WB and W pre = 0.
Let δ ∈ (0, 1) and set
                              √             2K 3/2 d
                                                           r
                                     1                    2      n
                            ˙ λ B+ √
                    β̃n (δ) =            + √         log      1+      .            (11)
                                   2 K           λ        δ      dλ
Then,
                                                      p
      P ∀n ≥ 1, x ∈ X : ∥sn (x) − s⋆ (x)∥2 ≤ 2Lβ̃n (δ) κ(1 + 2B) ∥ϕ(x)∥V −1
                                                                         n
                                                                              ≥ 1 − δ,
where V n =
          ˙ Σn + κλI d .

Our result follows from two auxiliary lemmas.
                                                    √
Lemma K.6. For any s, s′ ∈ RK , dTV (s, s′ ) ≤         2 ∥s − s ∥2 .
                                                       K       ′


Proof. We have
                                                                            √
                                                         v
                                   K                     uK
               ′   1      ′     1 X
                                             ′     1 √   uX                   K
      dTV (s, s ) = ∥s − s ∥1 =       |si − si | ≤     K t            ′  2
                                                               (si − si ) =     ∥s − s′ ∥2
                   2            2 i=1              2       i=1
                                                                             2

where the inequality follows from Cauchy-Schwarz.

The following lemma is a standard result in the literature (Srinivas et al., 2009; Chowdhury &
Gopalan, 2017; Pásztor et al., 2024), which we include here for completeness.
                                                         √
Lemma K.7. Let σn be as defined in Equation (2). Then, κλ ∥ϕ(x)∥V n−1 = σn (x) for any x ∈ X .

Proof. Note that (Σn + κλI d )Φ⊤    ⊤
                               n = Φn (Kn + κλI n ) which implies

                               (Σn + κλI d )−1 Φ⊤    ⊤
                                                n = Φn (Kn + κλI n )
                                                                    −1
                                                                       .                     (12)
Further, by definition of kn , kn (x) = Φn ϕ(x) which permits writing
                               (Σn + κλI d )ϕ(x) = Φ⊤
                                                    n kn (x) + κλϕ(x)
and implies
                  ϕ(x) = (Σn + κλI d )−1 Φ⊤
                                          n kn (x) + κλ(Σn + κλI d )
                                                                    −1
                                                                       ϕ(x)
                        (12)
                        = Φ⊤
                           n (Kn + κλI n )
                                           −1
                                              kn (x) + κλ(Σn + κλI d )−1 ϕ(x)                (13)
We have
           k(x, x) = ϕ(x)⊤ ϕ(x)
                   (13)
                                                                              ⊤
                    = Φ⊤  n (Kn + κλI n )−1
                                            k n (x) + κλ(Σ n + κλI d )−1
                                                                         ϕ(x)   ϕ(x)
                   = kn (x)⊤ (Kn + κλI n )−1 kn (x) + κλϕ(x)⊤ (Σn + κλI d )−1 ϕ(x)
                   = kn (x)⊤ (Kn + κλI n )−1 kn (x) + κλϕ(x)⊤ V n−1 ϕ(x).
Reordering this equation, we obtain
              2
 κλ ∥ϕ(x)∥V n−1 = κλϕ(x)⊤ V n−1 ϕ(x) = k(x, x) − kn (x)⊤ (Kn + κλI n )−1 kn (x) = σn2 (x),
concluding the proof.


                                                  50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We now proceed to prove a version of Theorem 3.2 with W pre = 0.
Theorem K.8. Assume W ⋆ ∈ WB and W pre = 0. Let δ ∈ (0, 1) and βn (δ) as in Equation (3).
Then
                 P(∀n ≥ 1, x ∈ X : dTV (sn (x), s⋆ (x)) ≤ βn (δ) · σn (x)) ≥ 1 − δ.

Proof. We have
                                      √
                              ⋆          K
             dTV (sn (x), s (x)) ≤         ∥sn (x) − s⋆ (x)∥2                          (Lemma K.6)
                                         2
                                  w.h.p.      p
                                   ≤ Lβ̃n (δ) Kκ(1 + 2B) ∥ϕ(x)∥V n−1                   (Lemma K.5)
                                             r
                                                K(1 + 2B)
                                   = Lβ̃n (δ)              σn (x).                     (Lemma K.7)
                                                    λ
It remains to note that
          r                                                 √
                                                     2LK 2 d 1 + 2B
                                                                          r
            K(1 + 2B)      p                1                            2       n
 Lβ̃n (δ)               = L K(1 + 2B) B + √       +                 log       1+
                 λ                         2 K              λ            δ       dλ
                                             3/2
                                                        r
                           p              LK d         2       n
                        ≤ 2 K(1 + 2B) B +         log      1+       = βn (δ).
                                             λ         δ      dλ



With this we are ready to prove Theorem 3.2.

Proof of Theorem 3.2. We will proceed analogously to the proof of Theorem K.4. That is, our
objective will be to bound the deviation of our biased model, which we refer to as Wn =
arg minW ∈WB Lλ (W ; Dn ), to W ⋆ . Let
                   X                                                                          λ    2
L̃(W ′ ; D) =
            ˙ −             log sy ((W ′ + W pre )ϕ(x)) and   L̃λ (W ′ ; D) =
                                                                            ˙ L̃(W ′ ; D) +     W′ F
                                                                                              2
                  (x,y)∈D

with
   ⋆
     minimizer Wn′ =˙ arg minW ′ :∥W ′ ∥F ≤B L̃λ (W ′ ; Dn ). We further define the residual weights
          ⋆     pre
W̃ = ˙ W −W .
Next, we make the following observation: In their proof of Lemma K.5, Amani & Thrampoulidis
(2020) bound
                                        ⋆                       ⋆
         ∥s(f (x; Wn′ )) − s(f (x; W̃ ))∥2 ≤ const · ∥vec(W̃ ) − vec(Wn′ )∥G̃(W̃ ⋆ ,W ′ )       (14)
                                                                                         n

                                                                     ⋆
where const is independent of W ⋆ , W pre , Wn′ and the matrix G̃(W̃ , Wn′ ) is invariant to a change
                         ⋆
of variables, i.e., G̃(W̃ , Wn′ ) = G(W ⋆ , Wn′ + W pre ) with G̃ defined with respect to the
loss L̃λ and G defined with respect to the loss Lλ . Theorem K.8 applies to s(f (x; Wn′ )) and
s(f (x;
    ⋆
        W ⋆ − W pre )) since the regularization of L̃λ is unbiased and the residual weights satisfy
∥W̃ ∥F = ∥W ⋆ − W pre ∥F ≤ B by assumption.
         ⋆
Since W̃ − Wn′ = W ⋆ − (Wn′ + W pre ), the bounds of Equation (14) as well as Theorem K.8
then also apply to s(f (x; Wn′ + W pre )), s(f (x; W ⋆ )). Observing that Wn = Wn′ + W pre as a
direct consequence of the change of variables completes the proof.


                                                 51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L     Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES
L.1   BALANCING R ELEVANCE AND D IVERSITY

The following details the data space and prompt used in the qualitative example of Figure 3. We
evaluate SIFT with λ′ = 1e−4 and normalized embeddings, using the same embedding model as in
our main experiments.

      Prompt
      What is the age of Michael Jordan and how many kids does he have?

      Data space
 1    Michael Jordan was born on February 17, 1963, in Brooklyn, New York.
 2    The age of Michael Jordan is 61 years.
 3    Michael Jordan has five children.
 4    Michael Jordan has 5 kids.

             Table 13: Query and information about Michael Jordan within data space

L.2   E XAMPLES FROM THE P ILE

The following provides examples of the data selected by SIFT for some queries from the Pile dataset.
 DeepMind Math
 Query
 Find the second derivative of -222966*l*s**2 + 152*l*s - 8111*l + s**2 + 2 wrt s.
 -445932*l + 2
 What is the third derivative of 175*s**5 - 5*s**4 - 6106*s**3 + 53*s**2 + 169*s - 1753?
 10500*s**2 - 120*s - 36636
 What is the third derivative of 23679631*b**5 - 2*b**3 + 8*b**2 + 2*b - 6771326 wrt b?
 1420777860*b**2 - 12
 Find the second derivative of 3263785*m**4 + 141*m + 11251.
 39165420*m**2
 What is the second derivative of -47089*k*z**3 - 30997*k*z + 59*z**2 + 295*z wrt z?
 ...
 1st example
 What is the second derivative of 333510825*p**3 - 292254*p + 96 wrt p?
 2001064950*p
 What is the third derivative of -2862429*f**5 - 5*f**2 + 439*f - 557?
 -171745740*f**2
 What is the derivative of 32081*i**4 + 10*i**3 - 2*i - 9371139?
 128324*i**3 + 30*i**2 - 2
 Find the third derivative of -439900344*z**5 - 675051939*z**2 wrt z.
 -26394020640*z**2
 ...
 2nd example
 What is the third derivative of 2322809*k**3 + 38*k**2 + 105*k + 236 wrt k?
 13936854
 What is the third derivative of 1242810*p**4 - 5*p**3 + 8382*p**2 + 491*p wrt p?
 29827440*p - 30
 Differentiate -23915071*o**4 + 25970708.
 -95660284*o**3
 Find the first derivative of -73333026*k - 218757639 wrt k.
 -73333026


                                                52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 What is the second derivative of -9350*n**4 + 2047*n**2 - n - 42762066?
 -112200*n**2 + 4094
 ...

 Enron Emails
 Query
 Patti,

 What do I do with this now? How do I get the $50? Can I wait and get a
 series of months reimbursed later or do I have to go through this every month?

 Fletch Sturm
 1st example
 Lucy,

 Here is a rentroll for this week.

 What is the outstanding balance on #1. It looks like 190 + 110(this week)=
 300. I don’t think we should make him pay late fees if can’t communicate
 clearly.

 #2 still owe deposit?

 #9 What day will she pay and is she going to pay monthly or biweekly.

 Have a good weekend. I will talk to you next week.

 In about two weeks we should know for sure if these buyers are going to buy
 the property. I will keep you informed.

 Phillip

 2nd example
 Kim,

 I am getting parking deducted twice from my pay check. Who do I contact to
 straighten that out?

 Thanx

 Chris

 FreeLaw
 Query
 In the United States Court of Federal Claims
 OFFICE OF SPECIAL MASTERS
 No. 15-349V
 Filed: August 20, 2015
 Unpublished

 ***************************
 ARIKA BROWNE, *
 *
 Petitioner, * Ruling on Entitlement; Concession;
 * Influenza; Shoulder Injury (“SIRVA”)


                                                53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 * Special Processing Unit (“SPU”)
 SECRETARY OF HEALTH *
 AND HUMAN SERVICES, *
 *
 Respondent. *
 *
 ***************************
 Andrew Downing, Van Cott & Talamante, PLLC, Phoenix, AZ, for petitioner.
 Claudia Barnes Gangi, U.S. Department of Justice, Washington, DC, for respondent.

 RULING ON ENTITLEMENT 1

 Vowell, Chief Special Master:

 On April 7, 2015, Arika Browne filed a petition for compensation under the
 National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program, 42 U.S.C. §300aa-10, et seq., 2 [the
 “Vaccine Act” or “Program”]. Petitioner alleges that she suffered a left shoulder injury as
 a result of the administration of an influenza vaccine. Petition at 1. The case was
 assigned to the Special Processing Unit of the Office of Special Masters.

 On August 20, 2015, respondent filed her Rule 4(c) report in which she concedes
 ...
 1st example
 In the United States Court of Federal Claims
 OFFICE OF SPECIAL MASTERS
 No. 15-349V
 Filed: October 5, 2015
 Unpublished

 ***************************
 ARIKA BROWNE, *
 *
 Petitioner, * Damages Decision Based on Proffer;
 * Influenza; Shoulder Injury (“SIRVA”)
 * Special Processing Unit (“SPU”)
 SECRETARY OF HEALTH *
 AND HUMAN SERVICES, *
 *
 Respondent. *
 *
 ***************************
 Andrew Downing, Van Cott & Talamante, PLLC, Phoenix, AZ, for petitioner.
 Claudia Barnes Gangi, U.S. Department of Justice, Washington, DC for respondent.

 DECISION AWARDING DAMAGES 1

 Dorsey, Chief Special Master:

 On April 7, 2015, Arika Browne filed a petition for compensation under the
 National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program, 42 U.S.C. §300aa-10, et seq., 2 [the
 “Vaccine Act” or “Program”]. Petitioner alleges that she suffered a left shoulder injury as
 a result of the administration of an influenza vaccine. Petition at 1. The case was
 assigned to the Special Processing Unit of the Office of Special Masters.

 On August 20, 2015, a ruling on entitlement was issued, finding petitioner entitled
 ...
 2nd example


                                                 54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 In the United States Court of Federal Claims
 OFFICE OF SPECIAL MASTERS
 No. 15-936V
 Filed: November 23, 2015
 Unpublished

 ***************************
 JENNIFER SIEKIERSKI, *
 *
 Petitioner, * Ruling on Entitlement; Concession;
 * Influenza;
 * Shoulder Injury (“SIRVA”);
 SECRETARY OF HEALTH * Special Processing Unit (“SPU”)
 AND HUMAN SERVICES, *
 *
 Respondent. *
 *
 ***************************
 Katheryn Lee Bruns, Faraci Lange, LLP, Rochester, NY, for petitioner.
 Julia Wernett McInerny, U.S. Department of Justice, Washington, DC, for respondent.

 RULING ON ENTITLEMENT 1

 Dorsey, Chief Special Master:

 On August 26, 2015, Petitioner filed a petition for compensation under the
 National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program, 42 U.S.C. §300aa-10, et seq., 2 [the
 “Vaccine Act” or “Program”]. Petitioner alleges that she experienced a shoulder injury
 related to vaccine administration (“SIRVA”) as a result of her receipt of an influenza
 vaccine on November 4, 2014. Petition at 1. The case was assigned to the Special
 Processing Unit of the Office of Special Masters.

 On November 23, 2015, respondent filed her Rule 4(c) report in which she
 ...

 GitHub
 Query
 <?php

 /*
 * This file is part of PHPExifTool.
 *
 * (c) 2012 Romain Neutron ¡imprec@gmail.com¿
 *
 * For the full copyright and license information, please view the LICENSE
 * file that was distributed with this source code.
 */

 namespace PHPExiftool
 Driver
 Tag
 QuickTime;

 use JMS
 Serializer
 Annotation
 ExclusionPolicy;


                                                55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 use PHPExiftool
 Driver
 AbstractTag;

 /**
 * @ExclusionPolicy(”all”)
 */
 class UserDataDji extends AbstractTag
 {

 protected $Id = ’xa9dji’;

 protected $Name = ’UserData dji’;

 protected $FullName = ’QuickTime::UserData’;

 protected $GroupName = ’QuickTime’;

 protected $g0 = ’QuickTime’;

 protected $g1 = ’QuickTime’;

 protected $g2 = ’Video’;

 protected $Type = ’undef’;

 protected $Writable = false;

 protected $Description = ’User Data dji’;

 protected $flag Binary = true;
 }


 1st example
 <?php

 /*
 * This file is part of PHPExifTool.
 *
 * (c) 2012 Romain Neutron ¡imprec@gmail.com¿
 *
 * For the full copyright and license information, please view the LICENSE
 * file that was distributed with this source code.
 */

 namespace PHPExiftool
 Driver
 Tag
 QuickTime;

 use JMS
 Serializer
 Annotation
 ExclusionPolicy;
 use PHPExiftool
 Driver
 AbstractTag;


                                               56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 /**
 * @ExclusionPolicy(”all”)
 */
 class UserDataUid extends AbstractTag
 {

 protected $Id = ’xa9uid’;

 protected $Name = ’UserData uid’;

 protected $FullName = ’QuickTime::UserData’;

 protected $GroupName = ’QuickTime’;

 protected $g0 = ’QuickTime’;

 protected $g1 = ’QuickTime’;

 protected $g2 = ’Video’;

 protected $Type = ’undef’;

 protected $Writable = false;

 protected $Description = ’User Data uid’;

 protected $flag Binary = true;
 }

 2nd example
 <?php

 /*
 * This file is part of PHPExifTool.
 *
 * (c) 2012 Romain Neutron ¡imprec@gmail.com¿
 *
 * For the full copyright and license information, please view the LICENSE
 * file that was distributed with this source code.
 */

 namespace PHPExiftool
 Driver
 Tag
 QuickTime;

 use JMS
 Serializer
 Annotation
 ExclusionPolicy;
 use PHPExiftool
 Driver
 AbstractTag;

 /**
 * @ExclusionPolicy(”all”)
 */


                                               57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 class MovieData extends AbstractTag
 {

 protected $Id = ’mdat’;

 protected $Name = ’MovieData’;

 protected $FullName = ’QuickTime::Main’;

 protected $GroupName = ’QuickTime’;

 protected $g0 = ’QuickTime’;

 protected $g1 = ’QuickTime’;

 protected $g2 = ’Video’;

 protected $Type = ’?’;

 protected $Writable = false;

 protected $Description = ’Movie Data’;

 protected $flag Binary = true;
 }


                                               58
